=============================================================
Night-time confinement and the practice of realistic medicine
=============================================================



Lindsay Thomson

:Correspondence: Lindsay Thomson
(l.d.g.thomson@ed.ac.uk)

:date: 2019-2

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Summary
      :name: sec_a1

   Night-time confinement is the practice of routinely locking patients
   in their rooms at night unless there is a contrary clinical
   indication. It is used in high-secure psychiatric hospitals. This
   article argues in favour of this practice on the basis of realistic
   medicine, an individual human rights based approach, the principles
   of mental health legislation in Scotland and England and cost
   effectiveness. This is not an academic debate. There is a real danger
   that those advocating against night-time confinement, if successful,
   will at best make little difference to the lives of our patients as
   they sleep, and at worst may hugely impoverish their lives because of
   reduced daytime activities.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a2

   L.T. is Medical Director at The State Hospital. Night-time
   confinement is used within this setting.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

I am not in favour of night-time confinement (NTC), but I am in favour
of maximising the benefit to patients, and of efficiency and equity, as
set out in the principles of mental health legislation throughout the
UK; and I am for optimising our patients' opportunities for care,
treatment and rehabilitation, and for ‘realistic medicine’.1 Realistic
medicine places the patient at the centre of decision-making, and aims
to reduce harm and waste, tackle unwarranted variation in care, manage
clinical risk and innovate to improve so as to ensure a well-functioning
and sustainable National Health Service (NHS). I am therefore not
against NTC, the practice of routinely locking patients in their rooms
at night unless there is a contrary clinical indication. This approach
to NTC is used within the high-secure hospital (The State Hospital,
Carstairs, Scotland) where I work.

The State Hospital is the high-secure psychiatric hospital for Scotland
and Northern Ireland. In one capacity or another, I have worked there
intermittently since 1992. Throughout this period we have always
utilised NTC, but it is important to note that whether then or now, all
patients who have need of an open door at night will have this; for
example, because of poor mental or physical health, distress over a
recent or pending event or risk of self-harm.

The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) visited the State Hospital in
2003. It highlighted the poor accommodation for patients but the issue
of NTC was never raised, although it was raised at Rampton Hospital in
1994. In September 2011, we moved to a purpose-built new hospital within
the same site. Our previous estate could accommodate up to 250 patients
within ten wards. In our old hospital some patients had an open door.
This literally meant an open door. There was no door-locking mechanism
for patients that could be overridden by staff. An unofficial quota
operated within each ward. The wards contained between 24 and 26
patients and at any one time, approximately ten patients could have an
open door. The admissions ward was excluded from this. Some patients did
not want an open door because of their paranoia or legitimate concerns
that other patients would enter their room. Others enjoyed the use of an
open door, particularly as the majority of wards in the hospital at that
time did not have en-suite facilities. This meant that patients could go
to the toilet without having to ring a bell to attract the attention of
staff.

The new hospital consists of four hubs, each with three wards for up to
12 patients. All rooms have en-suite facilities and televisions. The
standard of these facilities is excellent, in fact, so good that a
recent delegation from China asked to book in. The clinical model
developed for the new hospital included the use of NTC for all patients.
I emphasise again that any patient with a clinical need for an open door
will have this. This allows us to use staff therapeutically during the
day when patients are awake, rather than requiring an increased number
of staff at night. Patients, named persons and carers were fully
involved in developing the clinical model, during which time the views
of these groups were considered, in addition to those of staff.
Stakeholders reflected on the benefits of having staff available on
shift during the day to support access to the grounds for escorted walks
and to engage in structured activity.

NTC was also proposed because of the development of the en-suite
facilities, the entertainment systems available in rooms and because the
new hospital would be smoke free. No longer were the major motivating
factors for an open door (the ability to go independently to the toilet
and to get up to have a cigarette) relevant. NTC in its current form has
been in place for almost 7 years. Never has this been the subject of
complaint by a patient, named person or carer, nor raised by the Patient
Partnership Group, the Carers' Group, the Independent Advocacy Service
or the Mental Welfare Commission (MWC). The MWC is tasked under the
Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 20032 with visiting
people, monitoring the legislation, influencing and challenging all
those involved in mental health and protecting the human rights of those
under the care of mental health services.

The State Hospital is not alone in its use of NTC. It is used in all
four high-secure hospitals in the UK. Rampton Hospital3 evaluated its
use of NTC and found that there was minimal change to the experience of
patients and staff following the introduction of NTC, and that NTC did
not affect the patients' quality of life or produce adverse effects;
indeed incidents of self-harm and aggression, and hours in seclusion
reduced during the evaluation. In addition, patients appeared to go to
bed earlier and sleep better, and were therefore better able to utilise
the therapeutic programme during the day. Research with similar findings
was also carried out at Ashworth Hospital.4

In practical terms, removal of NTC within The State Hospital would
potentially have major resource implications in terms of nurse staffing
and costs. Currently at night (21.00–07.40 h) within The State Hospital,
there are 20 nurses for ten wards, with three additional staff members
floating to give extra cover as required, plus the senior nurse in
charge. This is a total of 24 staff members. There are two ‘sides’ to
the shift, so a minimum of 48 staff are required to ensure daily cover.

The model of nursing that would allow the safe opening of all bedroom
doors would require a minimum of 39 nursing staff plus the senior nurse
in charge. This is based on three staff per ward plus eight incident
responders and a duty resuscitation nurse. This a total of 40 nurses, or
16 per night in excess of the NTC model.

To realise the projected staffing model that could support the delivery
of a non-NTC model, significant additional staffing would be required to
be allocated for night duty. As 16 additional staff would be required
for each side of the shift, this equates to 32 staff per week. Forty
additional staff would actually be required when the percentage
allowance is added on for training, leave and other absences.

There would be two options to realise this potential requirement to
increase staffing. One would be to reallocate staffing resources from
day duty to night duty, thus reducing staff availability during daytime
hours by 16 staff per day (or 1.6 staff per ward). This would have an
additional staffing cost for the night shift of £373 000. The other
option would be to employ 40 new nursing staff to bridge the gap that
this model would create.

It would be exceptionally challenging to recruit this number of staff in
one cohort, and there would be a potentially destabilising effect of
having a large influx of new clinical staff into a high-secure
environment. In financial terms, employing 40 new nursing staff would
cost £1.6 million, based on a projected average cost of £40 000 per
post. Given that in 2017–2018 the State Hospitals Board for Scotland
balanced its books with little to spare, and that it is most unlikely
that further funding would be forthcoming for this from Scottish
Government, this could only be paid for by reducing daytime staffing.
This would likely have a direct and immediate detrimental effect on the
care and treatment of patients and is at odds with maximising the use of
our staffing resource to best achieve safe, effective and person-centred
care. As Scotland is moving to enshrine safe and effective staffing as
part of our legislative framework, the current model of NTC could be
argued to support achieving this legislative requirement in ensuring
that our nursing staff are best deployed to meet the needs of our
patients.

Undoubtedly some of the arguments above are utilitarian, but this in
itself is an ethical theory. What then of other ethical and legal
perspectives? The CPT report (2017)5 criticised the practice of NTC in
English high-secure hospitals. It also criticised long-term segregation,
but this is not a practice in use in Scotland. Specific powers to
authorise NTC are set out in NHS England Security Directions (2013)6 and
the 2015 revised Mental Health Act Code of Conduct.7 These state that
NTC ‘should only be put in place where it is considered that this will
maximise the therapeutic benefit for patients as a whole in the
hospital’. CPT highlighted the importance of an individual perspective
in the provision of psychiatric care and I would argue that each of our
patients within The State Hospital is assessed for any negative effect
that NTC may cause, and care is modified if this is identified. Indeed,
The State Hospital adopted a human rights based approach over 10 years
ago and this was independently evaluated by the Scottish Human Rights
Commission8 and declared a good example for other public bodies. The UK
Government9 in its response highlighted the public consultation on NTC,
including patients in a high-secure setting, and the monitoring
arrangements in place through the National Oversight Group for High
Secure Services and announced its intention to review the use of NTC in
light of the CPT's comments.

It is the view of the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Special Committee
on Human Rights (SCHR) that NTC cannot be justified on ethical or human
rights grounds (G. Szmukler, personal communication, 2017). The SCHR
argue that NTC is incompatible with Article 5 (liberty and security) of
the European Convention of Human Rights and probably Article 8 (private
and family life), in that it is out of keeping with least restrictive
measures found in the Mental Health Act Code of Practice 2015. SCHR
considers the blanket imposition of NTC as an arbitrary restriction on
liberty. They argue that NTC crosses a ‘red line’. Within The State
Hospital, NTC was never introduced as a means to save money. It was
brought in as part of a new clinical model that employed the same number
of nursing staff for a reduced population, from 250 to 140 patients, but
in smaller, more homely ward settings. Given that NTC within The State
Hospital can be individually tailored regarding clinical needs and has
never been the subject of any complaints or comments from patients,
named persons, carers, advocacy, the Patient Partnership Group, staff or
the MWC, it seems extreme to suggest it crosses a red line or that it
constitutes inhuman or degrading treatment.

The SCHR suggests that NTC would be unlikely to meet criteria for a
lawful restriction of persons' residual liberty according to *Munjaz v
UK* 2913/06 [2012] ECHR 1704. Residual liberty refers to a further
deprivation of an individual's liberty under Article 5 of the European
Convention of Human Rights even if you are already detained. Further,
they argue that Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights
strengthens the importance of considering further restrictions in
someone already detained, whose personal autonomy is limited.

SCHR argues that NTC is not compatible with the principles of the 2015
revised Mental Health Act Code of Conduct in England, chiefly the least
restrictive option and maximising independence; respect and dignity; and
purpose and effectiveness. The 2015 revised Mental Health Act Code of
Conduct sets out five principles: least restrictive option and
maximising independence; empowerment and involvement; respect and
dignity; purpose and effectiveness; and efficiency and effectiveness.
All principles are of equal importance, but their weighting may change
depending on the context and nature of the decision being made. Surely
here it is the principles of efficiency and equity, and purpose and
effectiveness in promoting a system that supports recovery, that are of
more importance than the least restrictive alternative. The Mental
Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 has the underlying
principle of least restrictive alternative enshrined within Section 1.
It states that any function of mental health legislation should be
discharged in a manner that appears to involve the minimum restriction
on the freedom of the patient that is necessary in the circumstances.
The person who is discharging the function shall have regards to the
importance of the provision of appropriate services to the person who is
subject to the certificate or the order concerned. It can be argued that
minimum restriction should involve an open door at night-time, but this
may be at the expense of providing appropriate services. Another
principle contained within the Act is that of ‘the importance of
providing the maximum benefit to the patient’. It is surely more
important to have therapeutic opportunities open to the patients during
their waking hours and to fulfil the principle of maximum benefit rather
than argue that this is superseded by the principle of least
restriction.

The debate about NTC is an example of the choices that the NHS, public,
health professions and UK Government face. A legal case may result in a
decision that removes NTC as an option, but this does not remove our
responsibility for such a decision if we promoted this to the CPT and we
promote legal arguments in favour of removing NTC. Civil court decisions
are seldom based on right or wrong. They reflect and may lead societal
thinking. So have those who advocate for the abolition of NTC got this
right and are thinking in advance of those of us mired in, or
knowledgeable about, the practicalities of running high-secure services?
Or are they advocating a view that, if successful, will at best make
little difference to the lives of our patients as they sleep, given that
we already open the doors of those in distress, and at worst may
impoverish their lives because of reduced daytime activities if no new
funding is forthcoming for the greatly increased costs? And even if new
funding is made available, we have a responsibility to consider where it
has come from in terms of NHS funding and what the opportunity costs
will be. In considering the concept of value, increased daytime staffing
is of high and personalised value to the patients, and increased
night-time staffing is of low allocative (population) value. The CPT
report highlights poor levels of activities for patients in high-secure
care. At The State Hospital, this is our clinical priority. Patient
activity levels will deteriorate if NTC is no longer permitted. I firmly
believe that the principles of maximum benefit and efficiency and equity
outweigh least restrictive alternative in the case of NTC. Indeed,
removal of NTC may increase restrictions on patients during the daytime.
NTC should remain in place. Improved opportunities for patient activity
should be the campaign that unites us all.

**Lindsay Thomson** is professor of forensic psychiatry at University of
Edinburgh; medical director at The State Hospital, Carstairs; and
director of Forensic Mental Health Services Managed Care Network, UK.
