====================================
The Islamic faith and best interests
====================================



Jessica Two
Martin Curtice
:Correspondence: Dr Martin Curtice
(mjrc68@doctors.org.uk)

:date: 2019-8

:Abstract:
   This article reviews a 2017 Court of Protection case which assessed
   and decided issues relating to the Islamic faith and the Mental
   Capacity Act 2005. The case involved a 39-year-old Muslim man with
   learning difficulties. It centred on his ability to make decisions
   about two specific aspects of his faith – capacity for fasting and
   for the removal of pubic and axillary hair. The judgment describes
   how s.4 of the Act was applied in deciding these decisions under the
   doctrine of best interests. In doing so, it elucidates key principles
   which can be applied to similar cases of this and other faiths.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

This article reviews the Court of Protection judgment *IH (Observance of
Muslim Practice)* [2017].1 The case involved a 39-year-old man, IH. It
was an influential case as it considered the observance of Muslim custom
and practice in patients who lack capacity under the Mental Capacity Act
20052 (MCA) and Islamic law. In reviewing the case, this article aims to
bring out salient principles that may be of assistance to clinicians and
services that have a responsibility for Muslim adults who lack capacity.

.. _sec1:

Background to the case
======================

IH suffered from a profound learning disability, with the intellectual
developmental level of a 1–3-year-old, and had a diagnosis of atypical
autism. For the first 35 years of his life he resided in his family
home, where he was principally cared for by his father, TH. IH was born
in Pakistan but had lived in West Yorkshire all his life. His family,
devout Sunni Muslims, engaged in all daily activities associated with
the Five Pillars of Islam – faith, prayer, charity, fasting, and
pilgrimage – as well as fasting during Ramadan and celebrating Eid (the
Five Pillars being the foundation of Muslim life and regarded as
obligatory for Muslims). While at home, IH would participate in some of
these religious practices as he was able. This included daily prayers
and, earlier in his life, attending Mosque, although he eventually
stopped attending as his behaviour was occasionally disruptive to
others. TH, being a devout Muslim, was motivated to ensure his son was
supported, as was practical, to adhere as closely as possible to the
Five Pillars of Islam.

Despite increased levels of support for the family, IH eventually moved
into supported housing provided by the Local Authority. He required 2:1
support 24 hours a day, and was dependent on carers for all aspects of
his care. His family visited regularly and he returned to the family
home three times per week. IH experienced regular periods of agitation,
which could occur ‘dramatically and without warning’. During these
periods of agitation, which could be prolonged, IH had a tendency to
kick, bite, punch, and/or spit at his carers, who had sustained injuries
as a result.

The court was asked to consider two questions: 1)whether it was in IH's
best interests to fast during the daylight hours of Ramadan;
and2)whether it was in his best interests for his axillary and pubic
hair to be trimmed.

.. _sec2:

The position of the parties involved in the application
=======================================================

TH contended that the removal of IH's pubic and axillary hair was a
compulsory activity stipulated under Islamic law, and hence there was a
‘religious duty’ to observe this (albeit he modified this stance
following expert evidence as below). His father used to shave his son
when he was at home and in the first year when he moved into
accommodation. TH held the view that having his son's pubic hair shaved
was IH's ‘right’ and something he would have chosen to do himself had he
the requisite capacity to do so. IH was provided with Halal food to eat
and celebrated Eid with his family, but he had never been expected to
fast during Ramadan as it was recognised that he would not understand
the purpose of food and drink being withheld during daylight hours and
that this might have caused him distress.

The local authority's position was that it recognised the importance of
facilitating the religious observances of an individual, even those who
lacked capacity. It was agreed that staff members would carry out the
hair removal process every two weeks, although in actuality this did not
happen, and IH had not had his pubic or axillary hair shaved for three
years and never by his carers.

IH's social worker, herself a Muslim, expressed the view that Islam was
a significant part of IH's identity and ‘something of which he should be
proud’, and that ‘the observance of religious practices should be
supported where possible to allow a person to continue to associate with
their identity, background, culture and beliefs’. IH's main carer did
not believe trimming of IH's pubic and axillary hair to be in his best
interests, but the Team Manager of the Community Team for Learning
Disabilities considered that, ‘on a fine balance’, it was.

While the court accepted that it was important to support the religious
practices of IH, it concluded that the social worker ‘had significantly
misunderstood IH's capacity to understand and reflect the concepts
associated with the religion’ and that IH ‘has *no* understanding of the
concept of Islam … he has *no* capacity to feel ‘proud’ of his religious
heritage; nor is he able to actively ‘associate with’ an identity or
culture …’.

.. _sec3:

Capacity for fasting
====================

There was no dispute among the parties that, according to the MCA, IH
lacked capacity to make decisions regarding fasting during Ramadan. In
relation to fasting, the judgment laid out six specific criteria that a
person would be expected to understand in order to have capacity in this
regard (`Box 1 <#box1>`__). It was agreed that IH was not able to
understand any of the six points listed, and that in view of the nature
of his disability he would never acquire capacity to make these
decisions and hence lacked capacity to make this decision. Box
1Specifics a person should be able to understand when making decisions
regarding fasting. 1.What fasting is; the lack of food and liquid,
eating and drinking.2.The length of the fast.3.If for religion, for
custom (family or otherwise), for health-associated reasons or for other
reasons.4.If for religion reasons, which religion and why.5.The effect
of fasting on the body.6.What the consequences would be of making a
choice to fast and the risks of choosing to not fast or of postponing
the decision.

.. _sec4:

Capacity for removal of pubic and axillary hair
===============================================

The specific aspects that a person would be expected to understand in
order to have capacity to make decisions in regards to the trimming or
removal of hair for religious or cultural reasons were elucidated by the
court (`Box 2 <#box2>`__). It was again agreed by all parties that IH
did not have, and would never acquire, capacity in this regard. Box
2Specifics a person should be able to understand when making decisions
regarding removal of hair for religious or cultural reasons. 1.Which
parts of the hair are being removed – pubic, axillary, perianal, trunk,
beard, leg, torso or head.2.Whether the reason for the hair
trimming/removal is religious, for the maintenance of good hygiene,
custom or some other.3.If for a religious reason, which religion and
why.4.What the consequences would be of making a choice to have hair
trimmed/removed, and of not trimming/removing the hair.

.. _sec5:

Requirements of the Islamic faith for those lacking capacity
============================================================

When considering the degree to which those lacking capacity are expected
to adhere to the Five Pillars of Islam, the court consulted Dr Ali,
lecturer in Arabic and Islamic Studies at Cardiff University. Dr Ali
advised that while certain actions under Islamic law are obligatory,
allowances are made for those that are deemed to lack ‘legal
competence’. This term was defined as ‘a capacity or a potential for
mental functioning, required in a decision-specific manner, to
understand and carry out decision-making.’ As with capacity under the
MCA, capacity under Islamic law is always initially presumed to be
present. A person can only be declared to be ‘legally incompetent’ by a
court, following evidence from medical practitioners or experts in legal
competence, whose opinions under Islamic law would be deemed ‘legitimate
and authoritative’. A legally incompetent person (as well as terminally
ill people, disabled people and minors) is deemed to be in a heightened
state of spirituality and as such is exempt from adhering to many of the
major rituals of Islam. All parties agreed that IH could be declared
legally incompetent under Islamic law.

While fasting during the daylight hours of Ramadan is an obligatory
custom for all legally competent Muslims, certain groups are exempt from
fasting. These include minors, pregnant women, those who are travelling,
the ill, and the incapacitous. Given that IH had been declared ‘legally
incompetent’ under Islamic law, it was agreed that he met these
exemption criteria and as such would not be expected to fast.

The holy book of Islam, the Qur'an, advises Muslims to uphold high
standards of personal hygiene and to be ritually clean. As well as
Quranic verses, there are teachings from Hadiths (traditions or sayings
of the Prophet Muhammad revered as a major source of religious law and
moral guidance second only to the authority of the Qur'an) advising
Muslims as to the rulings of personal grooming. Under Islamic law, the
cleaning of pubic or axillary hair is a religiously sanctioned practice
deemed to be a normal human right (‘fitrah’) related to a pursuit for
ritual purity and cleanliness. The removal of pubic and axillary hair is
a recommended practice (‘mustahab’) but is not obligatory. While it
would not be acceptable for a Muslim to expose his genitals, it is
permissible for a Muslim who requires assistance with his care to have
carers clean or shave his genitals. However, the removal of pubic and
axillary hair is not a recommended practice for those that lack ‘legal
competence’ and there is no suggestion that Islamic law requires IH's
carers to carry out hair removal on his behalf or that his religious
rights are being violated by their not doing so.

.. _sec6:

Best interests decision-making
==============================

In determining what was in IH's best interests in relation to fasting
during Ramadan and removal of his axillary and pubic hair, the court
analysed Section 4 MCA – Best interests. This stipulates that, as far as
is ‘reasonably ascertainable’, IH's past and present wishes and feelings
(s.4(6)(a)), the beliefs that are likely to have influenced his decision
had he had capacity (s.4(6)(b)), and the wishes of his family
(s.4(7)(b)) should be taken into account. Explicit reference was made to
the seminal Supreme Court judgment in *Aintree University Hospitals NHS
Trust v James* [2013]3, which opined that any best interests test
‘should also contain a strong element of “substituted judgement”’,
meaning that the person making the decision should place great emphasis
on what the person is likely to have done had they had capacity to make
the decision for themselves. However, while an important component,
substituted judgement is not the entirety of a best interests decision.
The Supreme Court further stated ‘The purpose of the best interests test
is to consider matters from the patient's point of view. That is not to
say his wishes must prevail, any more than those of a fully capable
patient must prevail. We cannot always have what we want. Nor will it
always be possible to ascertain what an incapable patient's wishes are’.

.. _sec7:

Was it in IH's best interests to fast during Ramadan?
=====================================================

All parties agreed that IH would not be able to understand the purpose
of withholding food or fluids from him during the daylight hours of
Ramadan, and that to do so may cause him significant distress. There
were also concerns that fasting might lead to mild dehydration, which
could amplify side-effects of medication. The court concluded that it
was not in IH's best interests to fast during Ramadan and granted a
declaration that he should be relieved of this obligation.

.. _sec8:

Was it in IH's best interests for his pubic and axillary hair to be trimmed?
============================================================================

The court noted that the local authority caring for IH had an obligation
to ‘create a care environment and routine which is supportive of the
religion’ of any person under their care and ‘to facilitate the person's
access to, or observance of religious custom and ritual’. The court
cited the provision of IH with a Halal diet, despite him having no
understanding of the fact that the food he was provided with was Halal
and no understanding of the significance of a Halal diet, as an example
of the local authority recognising the need to respect IH's religion.
However, in regards to the custom of shaving of IH's pubic and axillary
hair, the court concluded that there was no obligation on the local
authority to ensure that this religious custom was observed. The court's
best interests reasoning on this is described in `Box 3 <#box3>`__. Box
3Text from the judgment in reaching the conclusion that it was not in
IH's best interests for his pubic and axillary hair to be trimmed‘In
short … there is simply no religious duty, or obligation on a person who
lacks capacity (‘legal competence’ in Islam) to trim or shave his or her
pubic and axillary hair, or on his carer to do so for them. IH does not
need to acquire this state of ritual cleanliness in order to derive
spiritual benefit as he already occupies an elevated status by virtue of
his incapacity. Moreover, I am satisfied that IH himself derives no
religious ‘benefit’ by having the procedure undertaken, as he would not
understand its religious significance. It is of no consequence to me, in
the consideration of these facts, that the carers may be blessed in the
eyes of Islam in undertaking a ‘praiseworthy’ activity by trimming the
hair; their interests are not my concern.’‘I agree with TH … that if IH
had capacity he probably would have observed this custom. … It would
have been entirely consistent with the religious and cultural norm
within his home and community. … However, this factor carries little
weight in my overall reckoning given that in progressive Islamic
religious teaching, as an incapacitous person IH is exempt from
observing the Islam rituals because he is already on a heightened state
of spirituality.’

This assessment also considered in depth the practical intricacies of
staff attempting such a procedure under the best interests doctrine. The
court was concerned that even if IH was cooperative, the procedure was
likely to be anxiety-inducing and distressing for him, which could
heighten his propensity to agitation and aggression. The court
acknowledged that, while IH did not ‘have any sense of personal
modesty’, the nature of such a procedure incurred ‘compromises to the
preservation of dignity’.

.. _sec9:

Conclusions of the court
========================

The court concluded that it was not in IH's best interests to (1) fast
during Ramadan, or (2) to have his pubic and axillary hair shaved in
accordance with Islamic custom. The balancing act contained within the
best interests assessment was eloquently described by the presiding
judge as: “‘I have faithfully endeavoured to consider these issues from
IH's point of view, while ultimately applying a best interests
evaluation. IH has a life-long developmental condition and has never had
the capacity to understand the tenets of Islam; the benefits of
adherence to such rituals do not obtain for him, but for others. The
fact is that by reason of his disability IH is absolved of the
expectation of performing this recommended procedure, and there is no
other clear benefit to him. The trimming of the pubic and axillary hair
would serve no other purpose. I am anxious that IH should be spared
additional stresses in his life, and wish to protect him and the staff
from the risk of harm – an approach which itself has the endorsement of
Islamic teaching'.”

.. _sec10:

Discussion
==========

The judgment included consideration of Islamic bioethics in its
decision-making and specifically that ‘No hurt no harm’ was a cardinal
principle of this approach. The judgment opined that it would be wrong
to create a situation whereby observance of Islamic custom could or
would cause harm to the person or their carers. Islamic bioethics is an
extension of Shariah (Islamic Law) and is intimately linked to the broad
ethical teachings of the Qur'an.4 It teaches that the patient must be
treated with respect and compassion, and that the physical, mental and
spiritual dimensions of the illness experience should be taken into
account. The principalist approach to biomedical ethics5 as a culturally
sensitive approach is broadly accepted and has been discussed among
Muslim scholars.6 The four general principles of this are: (1) respect
for autonomy, (2) beneficence, (3) non-maleficence, and (4) justice.
Justice is often regarded as being synonymous with fairness – it can be
seen as the moral obligation to act on the basis of fair adjudication
between competing claims.4 Gillon7 subdivided the obligations of justice
into: (1) fair distribution of scarce resources (distributive justice);
(2) respect for people's rights (rights based justice); and (3) respect
for morally acceptable laws (legal justice). In this way, it can be seen
that the MCA and the doctrine of best interests can readily be applied
to individuals of the Islamic faith, and that Islamic bioethics
underpins such an approach. Other legal cases involving various aspects
of the Islamic faith include adoption,8 child care orders and
immunisations,9 capacity to marry,10 capacity to marry and to have
sexual relations11\ :sup:`,`\ 12 and circumcision of a child.13

While this case centred on the Islamic faith, a similar approach can be
taken in best interests cases for people of all faiths. Where needed,
obtaining clarity from experts within a particular faith will be vital.
Also, systematically applying the whole MCA rubric for s.4 Best
interests decisions is of course paramount – the best interests
checklist as advised by the MCA Code of Practice14 (Para 5.32) being
vital for this. Within this assessment, it is important to establish a
person's reasonably ascertainable past and present wishes and feelings,
and the beliefs and values that would be likely to influence their
decision if they had capacity (s.4(6)). Similarly, where practicable and
appropriate, it is important to gain the views of significant others as
to the decisions at hand (s.4(7)). While such collateral history can be
invaluable, the intricacies of balancing and weighing such information
can be complex, as was seen in a case involving the potential cessation
of clinically assisted nutrition and hydration from an elderly Christian
man with end-stage dementia.15 In needing to obtain history from the
family for this best interests decision, the court noted that it was
‘important that the strength and conviction of their views is not
allowed to detract from a steady appreciation of the welfare of the
individual concerned’.

There has been a rapidly developing body of best interests case law in
recent years emanating from the Court of Protection. This has included
cases involving best interests decisions containing a significant
religious or faith-based element (`Box 4 <#box4>`__). The case of *Re
BM*\ 17 suggested an approach to the weighing up or balancing of
elements within best interests decision-making. This approach, which
could be applied as part of a balance sheet approach or used as
free-standing, involved identifying ‘the factor of magnetic importance’
– this factor being the one that tips the balance and determines the
eventual outcome. Although not finally accepted by the judge, counsel
had proposed that it was BM's ‘very deep faith’ that was the magnetic
factor in his case. Box 4Examples of best interests cases involving a
religious or faith-based element 1.\ *Sandwell Metropolitan Borough
Council v RG & Ors* [2013]16 – annulment of a marriage for a Sikh man
with a learning disability.2.\ *BM, Re* [2014]17 – the appointment of a
deputy for property and financial affairs in a man of Christian faith
who suffered an extensive cerebrovascular accident.3.\ *The London
Borough of Tower Hamlets v TB & Anor* [2014]18 – the assessment of where
to live and capacity to consent to relations for a married Bangladeshi
woman with moderate learning disabilities.4.\ *P, Re (capacity to tithe
inheritance)* [2014]19 – the capacity of a man with a chronic
schizoaffective disorder to make a ‘tithe’ donation of 10% of an
inheritance to a church.5.\ *Wye Valley NHS Trust v B* [2015]20 – the
potential amputation of a foot in a man with chronic schizophrenia in
whom religiose delusions and auditory hallucinations had become so
entrenched as to become an ‘intrinsic part of who he is’. This case has
arguably been at the forefront of a sea change in how courts apportion
weight to a person's views and beliefs as part of any best interests
assessment.6.\ *N, Re* [2015]21 – the determination of whether it was in
the best interests for a Jewish woman with multiple sclerosis and in a
minimally conscious state to continue to receive life-sustaining
treatment by means of clinically assisted nutrition and hydration
(CANH).*The above judgments, and all within this article, can be found
via `www.bailii.org <www.bailii.org>`__

The Law Commission review of Mental Capacity and Deprivation of Liberty
law22 has recommended a legislative addition to s.4(6) MCA such that
decision makers should ‘give particular weight to any wishes or feelings
ascertained’. The Government response23 has accepted that this
recommendation ‘should be enshrined in law’, noting that as part of a
person-centred approach the principle of taking past and present wishes
and feelings into account already represents good care practice.

We thank Dr Farooq Khan (Consultant in old age psychiatry, Birmingham
and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust) for advice on Islamic
faith aspects of the article.

**Jessica Two** is an ST6 and **Martin Curtice** is a Consultant in old
age psychiatry at the Worcestershire Health and Care NHS Trust, New
Haven Unit, Princess of Wales Community Hospital, Bromsgrove, UK.
