---
author:
- Åsa Jansson
date: 2019-4
institute:
- "Junior Research Fellow, Institute for Medical Humanities, Durham
  University. Email: <asa.k.jansson@durham.ac.uk>"
---

*Emily*\'*s Voices* is an autobiographical narrative of the experience
of living with voices, and forms part of a growing movement to normalise
and de-stigmatise voice-hearing. It can also be read as an astute
critique of the effects of psychiatric knowledge on selfhood and
identity. Knoll\'s story raises questions about what is at stake when we
label psychological phenomena as symptoms of specific illnesses.
Voice-hearing is often linked to schizophrenia, a diagnosis that can be
a source of fear and stigma.

The relationship between voice-hearing and schizophrenia in modern
medicine, and the perception of the schizo- disorders as 'madness
proper', are largely a product of the diagnostic separation of affective
and cognitive disorders, with hallucinations and 'bizarre' delusions
chiefly assigned to the latter. This division does not, however, reflect
the lived experience of many people who hear voices, as Knoll\'s story
illustrates. Her voices emerge in response to escalating anxiety; that
is, they appear to have a mood-congruent basis. Recent studies have
suggested that it is not unusual for auditory verbal hallucinations to
be induced by anxiety or depression, and this has also been the case
historically. Throughout much of the 19th century, it was widely
recognised that 'hallucinations of hearing' (as it was then referred to)
manifested in a range of different mental states, and were often
triggered by anxious or depressed mood. Following on from this,
*Emily*\'*s Voices* contributes a crucial embodied perspective to
existing challenges to dominant psychiatric nosology.

*Emily*\'*s Voices* can also be read as a manifesto for change. Knoll\'s
narrative shows that a more flexible, person-centred approach to
voice-hearing is urgently needed. Moreover, there is little evidence
from Knoll\'s experience that receiving a psychiatric diagnosis (or
several) is central, or even helpful, to her recovery; on the contrary,
it reinforces her existing fears that she is 'crazy'. The various tools
that enable Knoll to rebuild a life that is meaningful to her are not
contingent upon a specific diagnosis. Making peace with her voices
(however fraught that peace might be at times) becomes possible through
interpersonal support, talking therapy and, perhaps most importantly,
turning a difficult and traumatic experience into a resource, a form of
expertise, through her work as a researcher into voice-hearing. This
chimes with Callard and Bracken\'s suggestion that 'psychiatric
diagnosis is not fundamental to the enablement of people with mental
illness', but rather that the strategies that have held the most benefit
for patients 'have not been diagnosis specific'.

In sum, *Emily*\'*s Voices* is a timely and important contribution to
recent approaches to voice-hearing that seek to normalise this
phenomenon and understand it at the level of lived experience, as well
as to current debates about diagnosis in psychiatry and its
relationships with therapeutic interventions, selfhood, stigma and
shame. It is a moving story, and above all a courageous one, and I would
recommend it to anyone with an interest in voice-hearing, whether that
interest is professional or personal, or both.
