---
abstract: |
  Functional non-epileptic attacks (FNEA) are seizure-like events
  occurring in the absence of epilepsy. Having had many different names
  over the years including dissociative convulsions and pseudo-seizures,
  they now fall in the borderland between neurology and psychiatry,
  often not accepted by either specialty. However, there is evidence
  that there is a high rate of psychiatric comorbidity in these patients
  and therefore it is likely that psychiatrists will come across
  patients with FNEA and they should know the broad principles of
  assessment and management.

  We have provided a clinically based overview of the evidence regarding
  epidemiology, risk factors, clinical features, differentiation from
  epilepsy, prognosis, assessment and treatment.

  By the end of this article, readers should be able to understand the
  difference between epileptic seizures and FNEA, know how to manage
  acute FNEA, and understand the principles of neuropsychiatric
  assessment and management of these patients, based on knowledge of the
  evidence base.

  # Consent statement {#sec_a1}

  Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of [Box
  1](#BOX1){ref-type="boxed-text"}.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a2}

  None.
author:
- Rollo J.G. Sheldon
- Niruj AgrawalCorrespondence to Dr Rollo Sheldon
  (<rjgsheldon@doctors.org.uk>)
date: 2019-8
institute:
- 1South West London and St George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust, UK
- 2South West London and St George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust, UK
- 3Atkinson Morley Regional Neurosciences Centre, St George\'s Hospital,
  UK
- 4St George\'s University of London, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
title: "Functional non-epileptic attacks: essential information for
  psychiatrists"
---

# Clinical scenario {#sec1}

You are a core trainee in a community mental health team, working in an
out-patient clinic. You come out to call your next patient when you see
a 40-year-old woman lying on her back on the ground with her eyes closed
in the waiting room, with people crowding around her. The receptionist
informs you that she arrived a few minutes late in a distressed state
and was asked to take a seat. Within a minute she was seen slumping in
her chair and then sliding down to the ground, jerking all four limbs
while crying. When you approach her and try to talk, she responds to
your questions and soon opens her eyes and her shaking stops, but she
then slips back into jerking all four limbs again. You see on her wrist
that she has a medical alert bracelet, which reads 'medical alert:
non-epileptic attacks'. •What would be your immediate management of the
situation?•What are the principles of assessment and management in
functional non-epileptic attacks (FNEA)?•What are the differences
between epileptic seizures and non-epileptic attacks?

# Evidence base in FNEA {#sec2}

FNEA are when people present with what looks like epileptic seizures but
they do not have epilepsy or associated electroencephalogram (EEG)
changes or a physiological condition that may mimic seizures such as
syncope. This condition is also known as psychogenic non-epileptic
seizures (PNES), non-epileptic attack disorder (NEAD), psychogenic
seizures, hysterical seizures and so on. In ICD-10 (1992) they are
classified as 'dissociative convulsions', in ICD-11 (2018) as
'dissociative neurological symptom disorder' and in DSM-5 (2013) as
'functional neurological symptom disorder -- with attacks or seizures'.
The change in terminology over the years reflects the changes in
theoretical underpinning and clinical understanding. FNEA have been
described in multiple cultures without a specific diagnostic label for
4000 years, the term hysteria was then used for the next 2500 years,^1^
followed by conversion, dissociation and now FNEA, which is
theoretically neutral from a psychological standpoint and considered to
be acceptable to patients.^2^

FNEA are commonly seen in neurological and accident and emergency (A&E)
settings. Up to one in five patients in epilepsy clinics present with
FNEA and 20--40% of patients in epilepsy-monitoring in-patient units
have FNEA.^3^ These patients or their carers will often initially call
an ambulance and present to A&E departments. Indeed, nearly a quarter of
FNEA patients report an episode of FNEA status,^4^ which may in some
cases even lead to intubation in the intensive treatment unit. The
estimated prevalence of FNEA is 2--30/100 000 in the general
population^5^ and population incidence has been estimated to be
1.4--4.9/100 000/year.^3^ By contrast, the median estimated population
incidence of multiple sclerosis is 4.2/100 000/year and that of epilepsy
is 48/100 000/year.^6^ FNEA most commonly present in young adulthood and
in women, but can occur in children, older adults and men.^3^

The aetiology of FNEA, as with functional neurological disorders in
general, is thought to be multifactorial. Risk factors include female
gender, childhood abuse and neglect, avoidant coping styles, previous
functional disorders and somatisation, and recent stressful event which
may itself be 'organic' -- such as a head injury or syncope.^7^ In
addition, FNEA are associated with neuropsychological deficits and
alexithymia.^7^ Often overlooked is a family history of functional
disorders, although there have been no positive genetic findings to
date.^8^ There is an association with personality disorder, especially
cluster B and cluster C personality disorders,^9^ and a number of
patients have other psychological comorbidities such as affective
disorders and anxiety disorders,^10^ which may act as predisposing,
precipitating or perpetuating factors. Symptoms of panic and
dissociation are common leading up to an attack, and patients may even
'bring on' an attack to rid themselves of these symptoms.^11^

Distinguishing epileptic from non-epileptic attacks can be difficult,
and it is important to remember that there are no clinical signs that
*never* occur in epilepsy, and the only certain diagnostic feature of
epileptic versus non-epileptic attacks is video EEG (vEEG) confirming
epileptic or non-epileptic seizures.^10^ If this shows the *absence* of
epileptiform activity in the *presence* of the patient\'s typical
attacks, it confirms the diagnosis of FNEA. vEEG is of course only
diagnostic if the attack occurs during monitoring and can be falsely
negative on scalp EEG if there is an ictal focus deep in the frontal
lobe. However, vEEG is expensive and is carried out in only some cases.
Diagnosis is largely clinical, based on good history and clinical
observation of an attack, ideally supplemented by clinician-viewed video
of the attack. [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"} helps distinguish
clinical features of epileptic versus non-epileptic attacks, but should
not be used in isolation to make a diagnosis either way. Table
1Distinguishing clinical features in FNEA and
epilepsy.FeatureFNEAEpilepsyOnset in certain
situationsSometimesRarelyGradual onsetCommonlyRarelyOver 2 minutes
durationCommonlyRarelyAsynchronous limb
movementsCommonlyRarelyPurposeful movementsSometimesVery
rarelyThrashing, violent movementsCommonlyRarelySide-to-side head
movementsCommonlyRarelyTongue biting of tipSometimesRarelyTongue biting
of sideRarelyCommonlyEyes closedVery commonlyRarelyResistance to eye
openingCommonlyVery rarelyPupillary light reflexesCommonly
retainedCommonly absentIctal crying or vocalisationsSometimesVery
rarelyIncontinenceSometimesCommonlyPost-ictal rapid
reorientationCommonlyUncommonlyAbsence of cyanosisCommonlyRarely[^1]

Confusingly, some patients with epileptic seizures may also have
non-epileptic attacks. What is important in this case is the semiology
(clinical features of the seizure) and whether it is different from the
patient\'s normal epileptic seizures. Epileptic seizures tend to be
short, stereotyped and highly consistent, although of course they can
take different forms in the same patient, e.g. simple and complex.
However, in the case of the emergence of a new seizure type in a patient
with stable epilepsy, FNEA should be considered.

In terms of prognosis and outcomes, data suggest that 4 years after
diagnosis around a third of patients will be attack free.^14^ However,
being attack free alone does not result in greatly improved levels of
psychopathology or recovery of social function, as nearly half of
patients who are attack free are still in receipt of state benefits.^14^
These data suggest that social interventions aimed at recovery of social
function, e.g. going back to work, may be efficacious in improving
quality of life more than aiming for patients to be attack free; however
there are no studies examining social interventions alone and this is a
gap in the literature. Furthermore, there is a general lack of long-term
follow-up studies of patients with FNEA. Features associated with a
favourable prognosis include lack of past psychiatric history,
identifiable recent stressor, short duration of FNEA, higher
socioeconomic class, normal IQ, lower age, less vigorous seizures,
absence of comorbid epilepsy and no ongoing use of anticonvulsant
medication.^7,12^

Multiple treatments have been trialled including cognitive--behavioural
therapy (CBT) (both individual and group based), paradoxical treatment,
psychodynamic therapy, group therapy, family therapy, case management,
eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing, acceptance and commitment
therapy and multimodular approaches.^7,12,15--18^ However, the evidence
base is hampered by lack of control groups, small numbers of patients in
trials and also the highly variable population and presentation of FNEA.
We would suggest that the individualised treatment approach as described
in 2014 by Agrawal *et al*^18^ helps address this problem of the high
variability in FNEA patients.

The problem of small numbers in treatment trials is also being
addressed: The largest randomised controlled trial (RCT) to date is in
CBT. Goldstein *et al*^19^ conducted an RCT of CBT versus standard
medical care (SMC), with 33 patients in both arms, and seizure frequency
reduced significantly in the CBT arm. However, the statistical power
reduced significantly (*P* = 0.086) due to patients being lost to
follow-up. This CBT trial was extended and repeated and is currently
evaluating data as the 'COgnitive behavioural therapy versus
standardised medical care for adults with Dissociative non-Epileptic
Seizures' (CODES) trial.^20^ It aimed to allocate around 150 patients to
each arm -- SMC and SMC with CBT -- and is due to report.

Only one double-blind placebo RCT of treatment has been published in
FNEA, and this was of sertraline versus placebo.^21^ A total of 33
patients were assessed and a non-significant reduction in seizure
frequency was found in the sertraline versus placebo group. This was a
feasibility study for a larger RCT which, to date, has not been
undertaken.

# Assessment of FNEA {#sec3}

There are some key elements to the assessment of FNEA that should never
be forgotten. (1)A clear history from both patient and an informant,
ideally supplemented by video of the attack itself, is invaluable.
Patients with non-epileptic attacks tend to talk about attacks in a
different way to those with epilepsy (for example, talking about
seizures by total negation and without context, i.e. 'I feel nothing',
'I don\'t know anything has happened'), whereas those with epilepsy try
to give detailed explanations of what they did experience before or
after.^22^ It is important to get a clear understanding of how the
family react when a non-epileptic attack occurs as, in some cases, they
may inadvertently be reinforcing or maintaining the attacks.(2)A good
history is essential, especially for any recent stressful events. Some
patients\' attacks are clearly temporally related to a stressful event,
although this is no longer required for diagnosis.(3)A full psychiatric
history is required, assessing both past and current mental illness.
Both patients with epilepsy, and with FNEA are more likely than the
general population to have higher rates of depression and anxiety.^10^
Treatment of any comorbidities is an important part of treatment for
FNEA as -- although the data are limited by small numbers -- comorbid
prevalence rates of 63% with affective disorders, 46% with personality
disorders, 32.5% with somatoform disorders, and 19% with both anxiety
disorders and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) have been
reported.^23^(4)A thorough general medical history must be taken.
Patients with non-epileptic attacks have been found to be more likely
than patients with epilepsy to have functional or medically unexplained
symptoms in different organ systems, such as fibromyalgia, chronic pain
and irritable bowel syndrome.^24^ The most common symptom combination
distinguishing FNEA from epileptic seizures in one tertiary centre study
was chronic pain, migraines and asthma in FNEA compared with diabetes
and non-metastatic neoplasm in epilepsy.^25^(5)Determine the personal
and social history of the patient. Patients with non-epileptic attacks
are much more likely to report a history of abuse or neglect in
childhood, and this should be sensitively asked about along with usual
information such as birth trauma, developmental milestones, head
injuries and details of schooling and relationships. Importantly
however, some will not have this history of abuse or neglect. In some
cases this may need to be asked about after developing rapport with the
patient. They should also be asked whether they are still driving.(6)The
premorbid personality should be ascertained. Patients with non-epileptic
attacks are more likely to have a personality disorder than the general
population, especially cluster B and cluster C personality disorders,
although there are methodological problems with much research in this
area.^9,23^(7)The patient\'s illness beliefs, concerns, wishes and
expectations should be ascertained. Research has shown that patients who
are confident in the diagnosis of FNEA have a better outcome.^26^
Lasting doubts about epilepsy should be dispelled and it must be
emphasised that this condition is treatable and many patients fully
recover.(8)Finally, a biopsychosocial formulation encompassing the above
factors should be composed, using predisposing, perpetuating,
precipitating and protective format. This will guide management. Box
1Patient experience of functional non-epileptic attacksMy dissociative
seizures (NEAD) were precipitated by an episode of moderate depression
and its treatment with Sertraline on transition to university. I also
was experiencing panic disorder, GAD and
depersonalisation--derealisation disorder.Everyone was very panicked by
my first seizures. I visited several A&E departments, had numerous
ambulance visits and was bounced between psychiatric liaison, the A&E
staff and the CMHT, even having an overnight stay in AMU. No one could
give me a concrete diagnosis, or know where to refer me. I was dosed up
on benzodiazepines, which did not stop the seizures, and just made the
experience harder to cope with. I experienced PTSD following the
traumatic nature of these interventions; and they were completely
needless.Psychiatrists at CMHT seemed very worried, even more so than I
was, and this compounded the stress that was prolonging my condition.
They were, however, helpful in sourcing CBT to treat my anxiety and
depression.Six months after my first seizure, I was officially diagnosed
with dissociative seizures. The reassurance of a diagnosis itself, along
with further research into the condition, was enough alone to cause a
noticeable decrease in the severity of my seizures.I then saw Dr Sheldon
& Dr Agrawal at St George\'s. Dr Agrawal drew a diagram explaining how
stress can build to cause my seizures, and I used a CBT diary to
identify triggers over two months. I surprised myself with the diversity
and number of my triggers on reviewing my diary, which I now manage.A
greater understanding of my condition gained through psychoeducation,
and the use of grounding, distancing and distracting techniques, have
all been instrumental in my recovery. I am now discharged, and almost
seizure-free. I wonder how much better my experience could have been if
doctors had known how to treat my acute presentation?A&E, accident and
emergency; AMU, acute medical unit; CBT, cognitive--behavioural therapy;
CMHT, community mental health team; GAD, generalised anxiety disorder;
NEAD, non-epileptic attack disorder; PTSD, post-traumatic stress
disorder.

# Management {#sec4}

The management for all patients will naturally be different due to the
different nature of their attacks and their individual triggers, but
there are important overarching principles. These include making the
diagnosis clearly and early (and ideally soon coming off
anticonvulsants); biopsychosocial formulation including the role others
play in reaction to attacks; psychoeducation about non-epileptic
seizures; the management of comorbidities; the development of personal
insight and understanding triggers to attacks (which can be achieved by
things such as attack diaries); offering trauma-focused therapy if
appropriate; and the personal testing and utilisation of different
techniques such as grounding, relaxation and mindfulness. The use of
benzodiazepines and anticonvulsants can be harmful both in the short and
longer term. An overview of one such pragmatic, individualised treatment
pathway is provided in Agrawal *et al*.^18^

The diagnosis should in most cases be made by a neurologist. However,
many patients will benefit from neuropsychiatry-led sensitive and
detailed exploration of illness beliefs, further explanation of the
diagnosis and psychoeducation about triggers and management strategies.
In some cases, patients will have been on anticonvulsants and will have
lived with negative side-effects for years, not to mention the stigma of
epilepsy and practical handicaps from the condition, such as being
unable to drive. Some patients may only require a clear, sensitive
diagnosis for the FNEA to stop; however, these patients are thought to
be in the minority. In any case, the way a diagnosis is made is
important ([Box 1](#BOX1){ref-type="boxed-text"}).

Four models about conveying a diagnosis have been published.^13,27--29^
However, what is common between models are the principles of
reassurance; discontinuation of anticonvulsants; providing a type of
model for how FNEA come about -- including the relationship with
emotions; and that although symptoms are not consciously controlled,
patients can learn to identify triggers for seizures and learn to
intervene.

People with FNEA will ideally be seen by a psychiatrist with experience
of the assessment of FNEA and epilepsy, i.e. a neuropsychiatrist. The
multidisciplinary team is often helpful, for example in discussing
difficult formulations, and the team can offer individual therapy
tailored towards the FNEA or underlying factors as appropriate. Enough
time should be set aside in clinic to explore symptoms and history as
well as management. The clinic letter can itself be a useful tool to
explore illness beliefs at the next consultation.

Whether or not patients should remain on the neurological caseload is an
interesting topic and how helpful this is has not been explored
prospectively. Given some of the similarities in interpersonal
interactions with borderline personality disorder and patients with
FNEA, some believe that consistency is key and patients should be kept
in follow-up and that discharge should be slow and gradual.^9^ Indeed,
patients with FNEA often struggle to fit in within both neurology and
psychiatry services and they bounce between teams with clinicians
reluctant to take responsibility, similar to those with personality
disorders in psychiatric services.

In an acute situation such as the above, the importance is in
differentiating from an epileptic seizure. First, getting people to
stand aside and leave the area is important to be able to assess the
patient and manage the scenario. If your assessment is that this is a
non-epileptic seizure, which from the description is likely, then some
techniques can be used to arrest the seizure. For example, if a small
mirror (or the front-facing camera on a smartphone) is brought to the
patient\'s face, observe if the pupils converge on it (this is highly
unlikely in an epileptic seizure). This mirror technique can in some
cases stop the FNEA.^13^ However, if this is unsuccessful, it does not
mean that this is *not* a functional seizure. If the patient\'s eyes are
closed, it can be helpful to open their eyes to see if they resist eye
opening, which would be very unusual in an epileptic seizure. If the
patient can be spoken to and they respond emotionally to your voice
(which, again, is common in FNEA), then you can talk to them and calm
them. You could try asking them to tell you the day of the week, and to
open their eyes and look at something in the room and describe it in
detail. An example of such a grounding technique might be: 'tell me
three things you can see, two things you can hear, one thing you can
smell'. If the situation continues despite your best efforts, then be
reassured the FNEA will stop eventually. It would be helpful to still
see the patient despite the attack in the waiting room, if time allows.
What is key is that the ambulance should not be called -- unless the
patient has seriously injured themselves -- as a result of the FNEA and
no acute pharmacological treatment is indicated.

Such acute treatment may not only reinforce a need for benzodiazepines
or anticonvulsants, but has the potential to increase levels of
dissociation by reducing alertness. Indeed it has been postulated that
the variation in FNEA symptoms is due to the effect of
anticonvulsants^30^ and that other drugs inducing altered awareness
states, such as anaesthetic agents, can induce FNEA.^31^

Patients may ask about driving. Current Driver and Vehicle Licensing
Agency (DVLA) guidance in the UK dictates that people with FNEA should
cease driving and inform the DVLA of their condition. To resume driving,
people with FNEA should have episodes that are 'sufficiently controlled'
for 3 months as long as there are 'no mental health issues'. If there
are 'high-risk features' then 6 months of control and a 'specialist
opinion' is required before resumption of driving. This is the case for
both group-1 and group-2 licences.^32^

# Conclusion {#sec5}

We have discussed the acute and chronic management of a patient with
FNEA, highlighting the importance of individualised assessment and
management based on biopsychosocial formulation. We would recommend that
all patients with FNEA are referred to neuropsychiatric services, but
also appreciate that due to service provision and funding gaps this is
not always possible, and furthermore many patients have significant
psychiatric comorbidity requiring the skills and resources of general
psychiatry. Patients with FNEA can often seem as if they do not fall
neatly within the responsibility of neurology or psychiatry; however a
joint approach is likely to be the most productive given the degree of
comorbidity. Their often-arduous journey towards diagnosis and treatment
demonstrates why neurologists and psychiatrists should work, and train,
in collaboration.

The extensive gaps in the literature that have been mentioned include
the paucity of comparative studies between other episodic psychiatric
syndromes such as panic attacks and FNEA (with these studies tending to
compare FNEA patients with epileptic seizure patients), the lack of
large-scale neuroimaging studies and genetic studies. The difficulty of
establishing what abnormalities in studies are related to childhood
trauma, comorbid psychiatric illness or the effect of chronic functional
symptoms makes such studies difficult to perform. Studies assessing
interventions focusing on purely social function are missing, as are
large epidemiological studies, large personality disorder studies and
studies examining the effect of being on or off a neurological caseload.
Double-blind RCTs are extremely few in number, although this is not
surprising as most studies are of psychological interventions which
cannot provide a true placebo.

The earlier the diagnosis is made and biopsychosocial assessment and
management put in place, the better the outcome, including a full
resolution of symptoms. A neuropsychiatrist is ideally placed to do
this, but a general psychiatrist, if following the basic principles
discussed, can achieve good outcomes with these patients.

The authors thank Rowan Munson for his contribution to this article.

**Rollo J. G. Sheldon**, ST7 in Neuropsychiatry, South West London and
St George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust, UK; **Niruj Agrawal**, Consultant
Neuropsychiatrist, South West London and St George\'s Mental Health NHS
Trust; Honorary Consultant Neuropsychiatrist, Atkinson Morley Regional
Neurosciences Centre, St George\'s Hospital; and Honorary Senior
Lecturer, St George\'s University of London, UK

[^1]: Adapted from Reuber & Elger^12^ and Mellers.^13^ FNEA, functional
    non-epileptic attacks.
