========================================================================================================
Tick, tock, lock: night-time confinement in high security – history, practice, ethics and practicalities
========================================================================================================



Ed Silva
Andrew Shepherd
:Correspondence: Dr Andrew Shepherd
(andrew.shepherd-2@manchester.ac.uk)

:date: 2019-2

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Summary
      :name: sec_a1

   Night-time confinement, locking patients in their bedrooms overnight,
   is practiced within high-secure hospitals in the UK. This article
   provides context, sets out the history and reviews the ethical and
   pragmatic issues at stake. Thought is given to the future, where we
   appear to be moving toward a different approach.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a2

   E.S. is a consultant forensic psychiatrist at Ashworth Hospital. All
   his patients are confined at night. He represents the Royal College
   of Psychiatrists Forensic Faculty at the National Oversight Group,
   which is the strategic advisory body providing assurance to NHS
   England regarding the commissioning and provision of high-secure
   services.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

History
=======

Patients in UK hospitals are routinely locked up alone in their bedrooms
from 21.15 h until 07.15 h for no clinical reason. This has recently
been criticised by the Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) in
a report to the UK Government;1 hence this series of articles relating
to practices in high-secure hospitals (Ashworth, Broadmoor, Carstairs
and Rampton). Until the 1980s Blom–Cooper Inquiry,2 it was unremarkable
that patients in the then special hospitals were locked in their rooms
at night. The pendulum swung, and the 24 h opening introduced by one
inquiry was questioned by the security review that followed
another,3\ :sup:`,`\ 4 which proposed night-time confinement (NTC) for
‘high-risk’ individuals – although this was rarely, if ever, used. As
with almost all developments in forensic psychiatry, the reaction to a
high-profile offence, followed by yet another inquiry introduced the
Dangerous and Severe Personality Disorders services, which practiced NTC
from their inception in 2003.

The current practice of NTC in the high-secure services has been
permitted by the High Security Psychiatric Services (National Health
Service Commissioning Board) Directions (current edition available
through
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/high-security-psychiatric-services-directions).
In 2011, the then Minister for Health, Andrew Lansley, first allowed the
provider organisations to lock a patient's room at night only on the
conditions that the room had a toilet and nurse call bell, or if the
patient was continuously observed. No individual clinical reason to lock
the door was required. Instead guidance required the decision to be made
on the utilitarian argument that therapeutic benefit should be maximised
for patients as a whole; for example, by releasing staff during the day.
At the time, the chairs of the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Forensic
Faculty and Special Committee on Human Rights wrote to Mr Lansley to
express the obvious concerns (*de facto* restriction of liberty through
seclusion). The directions were considered by each of the provider
trusts boards and NTC has been established in all the English
high-secure hospitals as well as in Scotland (through different legal
mechanisms), and has remained a subject for review within the existing
governance arrangements. The recent Care Quality Commission (CQC)
(https://www.cqc.org.uk/) reports remarked on the absence of available
structured activity during the day for some patients in high-secure
services, contrary to the original rationale. Significant further
scrutiny has also followed the 2016 UK visit by the CPT who, among other
things, said that ‘…the systematic locking-in of patients at night,
which amounts to ten hours of *de facto* seclusion, is not acceptable in
a care establishment provided there are sufficient staff.’1 (p. 75 para.
139).

In practice this means that, apart from the unrenovated wards in Rampton
and Broadmoor, patients, with very few clinical exceptions, are locked
in their rooms for 10 h per night, regardless of route to high security,
offending history, current risk to others or dependency needs. It is
quite possible for a patient to be subject to NTC in high security while
awaiting transfer to low security or even, quite exceptionally, to a
community placement. Although the guidance accompanying the directions
requires clinicians to note the absence of contraindications to NTC, few
if any psychiatrists in this invidious position do so (as evidenced by
frequent discussions in peer supervision and other meetings); those that
do not, find themselves in the curious position of being criticised by
the CQC. Many, if not almost all, patients in high security have
significant histories of self-harm or attempted suicide, and some
present with ongoing extreme self-mutilation. At the time of writing,
every patient in Ashworth is confined at night. Nursing staff now
dispense night-time medication at 20.00 h and then muster patients to go
to their rooms as the night shift arrives. Night-time staffing in the
hospitals has significantly reduced, on occasion to levels that have
been themselves seen as worryingly low. Curiously, most patients do not
complain, either informally or otherwise, and some report feeling
safer.5 At Forensic Faculty Committee meetings, it has been suggested
that the obvious remedy is judicial review by a patient. This has not
occurred.

.. _sec2:

Research evidence
=================

As for many coercive approaches in forensic practice,6 there is a
significant absence of evidence in the literature. A search identified
two mixed-methods studies.7\ :sup:`,`\ 8 The first, based on the
experience at Rampton, demonstrated no statistically significant change
pre- or post-implementation in its chosen measures addressing ward
atmosphere, working environment and patient quality of life.
Semi-structured interviews suggested staff observed a less negative
effect than had been anticipated, whereas patients expressed a certain
ambivalence. The findings from the study are potentially influenced by
the close affiliation between researchers and the site of study, as well
as by the choice of wards (acute admission) for the pilot. In the second
study, based on the experience at Ashworth, measures were collected
relating to sleep hygiene, behaviour and findings from a bespoke
questionnaire, seeking to understand patients' concerns regarding NTC.
No statistically significant changes were observed. However, a parallel
investigation considering the attitudes of nursing staff revealed a
universally negative attitude to it. The potential to generalise
findings from the study were limited by difficulties in recruitment and
implementation, which may have resulted in skewed findings in relation
to the experience within the hospital as a whole. More generally, as
noted above, there is a general absence of evidence in relation to the
implementation of practices such as seclusion. A qualitative study,
addressing the process of seclusion in forensic practice,9 identified
clear communication of the ‘purpose’ of seclusion as being a key
ingredient in managing distress associated with the experience.
Widespread application of NTC could be seen as partially mitigating this
factor if it is assumed to be a normal practice by patients, staff and
others.

.. _sec3:

NTC and values-based practice
=============================

Building on the concept of principled ethical clinical practice, the
Francis report10 has reiterated the call for care providers to develop a
culture that focuses first on the patient and providing, within resource
limitations, compassionate care that does not inadvertently restrict
basic rights or cause avoidable harm.

The CPT report notes that NTC had the potential to cause individual
anxiety and that there was a lack of evidence of individual risk
assessment to mitigate this potential distress. Although the limited
research evidence base surveyed suggests an absence of harm, the CPT
also noted the absence of evidence of benefit and the CQC reports are
mixed, again highlighting concern at the restriction of liberty and
remarking on a lack of increased daytime structured activity by way of
mitigation.

Individual autonomy is clearly restricted through the act of confinement
at any time. However, arguments in relation to autonomy are complicated
with mentally disordered offenders11 because acts of violence against
individuals or society more generally lead to a socially sanctioned act
of imprisonment. Although the situation of forensic in-patients will
vary, the majority are not subject to court-ordered punishment. This may
add weight to the position outlined in the Tilt report,4 which proposes
that specific ‘high-risk’ individuals may perhaps be ‘proportionately’
subject to NTC. The blanket application of this restriction regardless
of risk, or progress along the care pathway, is confusing to many.

The argument raised in support of NTC is that of a justice-based
position, whereby resources consumed in the staffing of night shifts, to
allow free movement of patients, can be more appropriately allocated in
the day, to increase the availability of therapeutically oriented
activity. However, as has been noted by both the CPT and the CQC, there
has been an absence of increased structured activity during the day even
with NTC, suggesting that no benefit has emerged in this area. However,
interpretation of this situation is complex because, with the notable
increase in constraint on resources in recent years, it is hard to
determine how services would currently appear had funding remained on
the projected trajectory from the time of NTC's inception.

.. _sec4:

Moving forward
==============

The current position with regard to the practice of NTC is therefore
difficult, particularly in its current blanket implementation. There is
also a pragmatic reality: even if the decisions were reversed, neither
the money nor the staff are available to fill the gaps.

To return to the analogy of the pendulum, swings between restrictive and
more liberal practice can be seen as an institutional group response to
anxiety and external scrutiny.12\ :sup:`,`\ 13 Generally, these changes
are seen as being a collective response from within the group; however,
in this situation the swing of the pendulum has been affected by the
massive gravitational change of austerity. Clinical decision-making is
forced, in that it is being subjected to either political pressure or
fiscal reality, depending on one's viewpoint. As in other political
arenas, it seems apparent that it is some of the most vulnerable in
society who are subjected to restriction. There is also an
‘invisibility’ to the phenomenon, occurring as it does behind the
opacities of our walls, and it is perhaps also curious that it took an
investigation from the CPT, rather than our own governance structures,
to switch the night light on, and so we should thank our European
friends. Movement to a more dynamic and rational response is necessary.
The pendulum must swing again, but how can this best be achieved?

**Ed Silva** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist with Mersey Care NHS
Foundation Trust, UK; **Andrew Shepherd** is a clinical lecturer in
forensic psychiatry at the University of Manchester, UK and is a SpR in
Forensic Psychiatry at Ashworth Hospital, Mersey Care NHS Trust, UK.
