===============================
Sutures benefit not only wounds
===============================



Ann Maria Albert
Karel Wildschut
Marinos Chatzopoulos
Johanna Selway
:Date: 2019-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We compliment Buick and colleagues1 for their innovative venture. We
want to stress that the benefits of in-house management of minor wounds
are far more than financial.

.. _sec1:

Reputation
==========

Many foundation year, general practitioner and psychiatry core trainees
go to psychiatry after doing their surgery and Accident & Emergency
(A&E) posts, where they would have managed many wounds with glue,
staples and sutures. However, while in psychiatry, they are ‘duty-bound’
to refer patients with self-inflicted superficial wounds to the A&E.
This arrangement would make the A&E staff and others wonder why junior
doctors relinquish this role when moving to psychiatry, especially if a
few months earlier this had been part of their day-to-day role.

.. _sec2:

Self-esteem
===========

When junior doctors who are skilled in the management of superficial
wounds are forced by mental health trusts to refer patients with
superficial wounds to the A&E department, many junior doctors will
wonder why they are no longer being seen as suitable and competent
enough to carry out this procedure.

.. _sec3:

Costs to other patients
=======================

Most psychiatric in-patient wards are understaffed. Buick and colleagues
estimated the nursing costs under the presumption that only one nurse
would go to A&E with the patient. Often, two or more nurses would have
to accompany the patient to manage risks, including that of absconding.
Nurses taking patients to the A&E for management of superficial wounds
would result in less staff on the ward and less nursing care for those
patients who do not self-harm.

.. _sec4:

Stigma
======

Taking every patient with superficial wounds to A&E would perpetuate the
stigma about mental illness, mental health patients, services and staff.

.. _sec5:

Perpetuation of self-harm behaviour
===================================

At least for some patients who self-harm, being the centre of attention,
and being taken to the A&E by ambulance and accompanied by one or more
nurses is likely to perpetuate their self-harm behaviour.

The psychological dimensions of self-harm behaviour can be complicated.
The cognitive analytic model offers an understanding of how relationship
roles might play out in self-harm, whether self-to-self or
self-to-other.

For some patients, self-harm can elicit unhelpful, reinforcing
reciprocal roles and procedures, which may seem obvious if judged at
face value only. Continuing to enact these roles may delay the adoption
of more sustainable and healthy ways of dealing with distress. Being
accompanied to A&E by caring professionals and receiving restorative
care and attention there – while appropriate and wholesomely good –
might feel rewarding. It has the potential to evoke a rescuer-to-rescued
reciprocal role, or perhaps a caring-to-cared for role, but at
substantial personal cost.2\ :sup:`–`\ 4

For many patients, the same situation can indeed feel disempowering and
punishing when they are not given a choice in how we care for them in
the aftermath of self-harm. The National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence emphasises the need for people to be fully involved with
decision-making about their treatment and care.5

In the same context, it is possible for the patient to experience a more
direct reward. If the social reinforcement of self-harm is rewarding
enough, the individual may inflict more severe pain in order to continue
receiving that positive reinforcement from their environment.6

.. _sec6:

Mental health trusts’ view
==========================

Often, mental health trusts object to junior doctors managing
superficial wounds based on unsubstantiated arguments, e.g.: •how do we
prove that the junior doctor is competent?•what will happen if patients
complain about scars?•how do we ensure that the equipment is of the
required standard?•If they do so, both the trainee and the consultant
need to be very clear that they are doing this outside any Trust
governance structures and under their own assessment of the risks and
consequences. There are no supporting Trust policies or guidance for
this. It is a minefield for litigation.

.. _sec7:

The way forward
===============

It would be helpful for the College to take a stand and advise the
mental health trusts about the minimum services that need to be
provided, to ensure that junior doctors have the necessary skills and
enable them to provide the services that they are competent to deliver.
