================================
Queering the Mental Health Model
================================

Andrew Camden
:Date: 2019-8


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

I have been involved in a project run by the artist La JohnJoseph (JJ)
on ‘Queering the Mental Health Model’. JJ's interest in the area was
sparked by their experience visiting an ex-partner who was detained on a
psychiatric ward, where ‘queerness’ often seemed to be conflated with
illness by ward staff. JJ observed the difficulty of maintaining
individuality in the confines of the ward environment; they noted that
an attempt to do so was at times interpreted by staff as a sign of
pathology.

JJ led 10 sessions over 12 months around the UK, to which people who
self-identify as queer were invited to talk about their experience of
psychiatric services. There was a general sense that people felt poorly
understood outside specialist services, which are difficult to access;
participants described a sense of having to fight their way through the
system. There was, however, a multitude of positive feedback from people
who had felt able to access a small number of appropriate specialist
services.

‘Queer’ tends to be used now as an umbrella term to describe non-cis or
non-heterosexual people. Historically derogatory, from the early 1990s,
queer was reclaimed as a self-affirming term, originally by the gay
rights movement. Queer challenges our tendency towards conventional
categorisation into defined groups and helps remind us of individuality
and the diversity of identity. As part of the LGBTQ community, it is
known that people who self-identify as queer suffer higher rates of
mental distress than the population at large.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` JJ's
project will shed some light on the reasons for this.

There is a dearth of literature on this topic. A literature search by
Reay House Library (based at Lambeth Hospital in London) on the
‘experience of psychiatric/mental health services of people who
self-identify as queer’ found a total of 33 articles, of which four were
by UK authors. None of these had a specific focus on people who identify
as queer; they described experiences of the UK LGBTQ community in
general. Two articles have an historical focus. Hughes *et al* have
published two recent articles, one looking at the experiences of LGBTQ
youth (ages 16–25) of suicidality and help-seeking\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` and
one on the perceptions and practice of mental health staff of this
group.\ :sup:`1` There is clearly scope to further examine the
experience of psychiatric services of people who identify as queer, to
help inform how these might better meet demand and reduce feelings of
distress and marginalisation.

JJ's performance piece based on their experiences on the psychiatric
ward, *A Generous Lover*, will tour the UK in September. There is
further information at `www.lajohnjoseph.com <www.lajohnjoseph.com>`__.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.
