===================================================================================================================
The requirement for a general psychiatric assessment risks psychopathologising the experience of transgender people
===================================================================================================================

Michael Shaw
:Date: 2019-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

This paper and the service from which the statistics are drawn appear
concerning on a number of levels. It appears unlikely that the
fundamental assertion which underpins the statistics in this paper is
accurate, namely that ‘our case note review was able to capture all
patients referred within a certain time period in this geographical
area’.

The authors state that: ‘All individuals who request treatment for
gender dysphoria in Oxfordshire are referred to a single clinician
(C.B.) for psychiatric assessment and subsequent referral to a
specialist centre’, and later, ‘there is a single point of access in
Oxfordshire for onward referral to specialist gender clinics’.

This referral pathway is not consistent with mainstream practice in
other areas of England and is not supported by current protocols and
guidelines representing best practice. The 2013 College Report *Good
Practice Guidelines for the Assessment and Treatment of Adults with
Gender Dysphoria* emphasises referral by or via a general practitioner,
with no other gatekeeping requirement.

The requirement for a general psychiatric assessment is at best
unnecessary and at worst risks psychopathologising the experience of
transgender people who are presenting with gender dysphoria, an
experience of discomfort or distress which is not psychiatric in nature.

There is local awareness of the unusual nature of the arrangement in
Oxfordshire. The Oxford University LGBTQ+ society advises on its
website: ‘N.B. A lot of GPs will seek to refer trans customers to
psychiatrists (in Oxford, this is usually Dr Chris Bass), but this is a
completely unnecessary procedure. If you're seeking referral to a Gender
Identity Clinic to receive hormone treatment or surgery, this will only
lengthen the process. Psychiatric assessments are not required by Gender
Identity Clinics, and your GP is qualified to make the referral’.

Given the high proportion of students who will have families of origin
outside Oxfordshire and the high level of awareness within Oxford
University that a psychiatric assessment is unnecessary, it appears
likely that a significant number are bypassing the service.

Another factor not considered by the authors is the almost exponential
rise in people presenting to gender identity services who are under the
age of 17. Provision is via a centralised national service for young
people. At 17, their care is transferred to an appropriate gender
identity clinic. Transfers of care now comprise an increasing proportion
of referrals to the Northern Region Gender Dysphoria Service. As this is
the case nationally, such patients will also bypass Dr Bass and will not
feature in the statistics presented.
