=======================
How long is (too) long?
=======================



Birgit VöllmCorrespondence to Prof Birgit Völlm
(birgit.voellm@med.uni-rostock.de)
:Date: 2019-8

:Abstract:
   Forensic psychiatric services care for patients who present with a
   mental disorder as well as a risk to themselves or others, and have
   usually been convicted of an offence. Their needs are complex and the
   length of stay (LoS) in forensic settings is long. LoS is affected by
   patient factors as well as legal and policy issues. Owing to the
   considerable economic and ethical issues surrounding lengthy stays in
   highly restrictive settings, it is crucial that a strategy is
   developed for how to deal with this patient group.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Earnshaw *et al*, in this issue, describe a study looking at the length
of admissions in a medium secure unit in England over a period of nearly
30 years. They show a significant increase in length of stay (LoS) in
the most recent cohort, as well as far more discharges to other
psychiatric settings and fewer to independent living, with the
diagnostic composition of the cohorts remaining largely unchanged. The
paper is a welcome addition to the literature on LoS in forensic
settings. Evidence on LoS is scarce, despite its obvious ethical and
economic relevance. This editorial summarises the research on LoS to
date and considers ideas to improve service organisation for this group
of patients.

.. _sec1:

Methodological issues
=====================

There are a number of ways to investigate LoS::sup:`1` (a) admission
samples (i.e. considering all patients admitted during a particular
period with LoS calculated from admission to discharge); (b)
cross-sectional samples (the sample consisting of all patients resident
in the particular unit of interest on a particular date with LoS
calculated from date of admission to this time point); and (c) discharge
samples (all patients discharged during a particular period with LoS
calculated from date of admission to this date). Which method is the
best depends on the questions to be answered. Earnshaw *et al* use
admission samples, which has the advantage that the political and
service provision context is likely to be the same for all patients in
the sample at point of admission. What this method cannot capture is
those patients who have not been discharged at the time of data
collection, as their length of admission cannot be known at this point,
thereby underestimating LoS. Another, and more significant, limitation
of most research to date, regardless of which of the three approaches is
used, is that it only considers a relatively short period in the
patient's care trajectory, the admission to a single unit. In reality,
patients' pathways are complex and an individual may be admitted to a
number of secure units consecutively, adding to their overall LoS in
secure care.

.. _sec2:

What we know about LoS in forensic settings
===========================================

Concerns that some patients stay for too long in too high a level of
security were first raised following studies in high secure settings in
the 1990s involving assessments by the patients' own teams as well as
independent multi-disciplinary reviews. These suggested that between
one-third and two-thirds of patients did not require that level of
security.\ :sup:`2–5` Inadequate provision of beds in less secure
settings and inefficiencies in the system of transfer and discharge were
thought to be significant factors in the delayed transfer to a more
appropriate level of security. These findings led to the ‘accelerated
discharge programme’,\ :sup:`6` aimed at reducing patient numbers in
high secure care while bed numbers in medium and low secure settings
increased. At the beginning of the 1990s, there were 1700 high and 600
medium secure beds,\ :sup:`7` while in 2015 there were just under 800
high and about 3200 medium secure beds.\ :sup:`8` Although the reduction
of high secure beds is a welcome development, the increase in the
overall number of patients detained in secure settings is worrying. In
addition, while I am not aware of any published research in this area,
anecdotally, restrictions have increased in medium secure settings, e.g.
with regards to leave and handcuffing during leave.

Maybe somewhat surprisingly, there is no agreement or guidance as to how
long patients should stay in high secure settings in the UK. For medium
secure care, the original guidance from government, based on the
recommendations in the Glancy and Butler reports,\ :sup:`9` suggested an
upper limit of 2 years; however, a number of studies have demonstrated
that this LoS is far exceeded in a large proportion of cases.\ :sup:`10`
In a multicentre study in the UK, including all three high secure
hospitals and 23 medium secure services, both within the National Health
Service and the independent sector,\ :sup:`11` we found that 23.5% of
high secure and 18.1% of medium secure patients fulfilled our criteria
for ‘long-stay’. We defined ‘long-stay’ as having been in a high secure
setting for more than 10 years, in a medium secure setting for more than
5 years or in a combination of both for more than 15 years. These
figures were based on pilot work showing that these thresholds would
identify a population large enough in size to provide meaningful
conclusions for service developments, but not so large that a
substantial proportion of the total patient population would be
captured. Whether there has been an actual increase in LoS, however,
remains unclear – the paper in this issue of the *Bulletin* is the first
to investigate this question.

Research identifying factors associated with long stay is limited. In
the UK, one early study at one of the three high secure
hospitals\ :sup:`12` identified severity of index offence as the most
important factor for personality disordered patients, while for those
with mental illness psychopathology was a more relevant predictor of
LoS. Studies in medium secure settings have identified severity of
psychopathology, psychiatric history, seriousness of offending, patients
being on ‘restriction orders’ (requiring Ministry of Justice permission
for transfer), non-engagement in interventions, dependency needs and
lack of step-down facilities as factors associated with long stay. A
review of the international literature\ :sup:`1` similarly found that
the factors most frequently associated with longer stay were seriousness
of index offence, longer previous prison sentence, psychotic illness,
symptom severity and having no close relationship.

Patient perspective has thus far been largely neglected in research on
long stay in forensic settings. A qualitative study which formed part of
the multicentre study described above\ :sup:`12` and included 40 patient
interviews investigated patients' perspective on reasons for long stay,
their current situation and the prospect of moving on. Based on the
emerging themes – attribution, outlook, approach and readiness for
change – four overall ‘stances’ could be identified. Patients in the
‘dynamic acceptance’ group attributed their long-stay to themselves;
they felt overall positive about therapy and being in secure care but
felt they were ready to move on. Patients in the group we labelled
‘static acceptance’ attributed the reason for long stay internally and
externally, were somewhat less positive about therapies and did not
believe they were ready to move on. Those in the ‘dynamic resistance’
and ‘static resistance’ categories attributed their long-stay to
external factors and were largely negative about their placement and
interventions. Whereas the former group still believed they would move
on eventually, the latter had largely given up on the prospect of moving
on, despite their belief that they did not need to be in secure care.

.. _sec3:

Service provision
=================

Service provision in secure care is complex, entailing different levels
of security with vague entry and even vaguer exit criteria. For example,
those admitted to high secure care should present a ‘grave and
immediate’ danger, obviously words that leave a lot of room for
interpretation. Maybe somewhat surprisingly there is no agreement that
those having entered high secure care presenting such a danger should
then move on or be discharged if they no longer do so. In addition, how
does one measure progress, e.g. of a patient having committed sexual
offences against children? Such a patient might be very well adapted in
any setting not giving access to children, but what should be the
criteria to decide which level of security is the right one and when to
move on after years of settled behaviour? The debate around the poor to
moderate accuracy of risk assessment instruments for long-term
predictions is also pertinent here.\ :sup:`13` Unfortunately, in the UK
there seems to be little appetite to tackle these complex questions
nationally. Instead, each responsible clinician makes their own
judgement, and in many cases has to fight individual battles with the
next unit, trying to ‘sell’ their patient.

Little is known about the complex pathways forensic patients take. In
theory, they move from higher to lower levels of security in accordance
with the lowering of their risk and progress in therapy. In practice,
such ideal pathways are rarely achieved. For instance, we showed in our
study\ :sup:`11` that less than one-third of the sample of long-stayers
had stayed in their current secure unit only, while about 40% had stayed
in three or more settings. More than 50% of long-stay medium secure
patients had been admitted from another medium secure unit. This may be
good practice in order to try a different approach in individuals with
limited treatment gains. Nevertheless, it is clear that rather than
moving *on*, a large number of patients seem to be moving *around*. It
is difficult to see how this unfortunate state of affairs could be
changed without taking a longitudinal view and without the development
of national policy for this patient group.

Considering their pathways, the group of long-stay patients probably
consists of three subgroups: (a) those who are still on a trajectory of
positive, albeit slow, progress; (b) those who are ‘stuck’ currently but
might move to less secure conditions under certain circumstances; and
(c) those who require secure care for life. The first group is of least
concern. The second might benefit from improvements in service
organisation and advancements in psychotherapeutic and pharmacological
therapies. The third group is most controversial. In our own study,
consultants predicted that more than 40% of long-stay patients currently
resident in high secure care would still be there in 5 years' time. Even
for long-stay patients in medium secure care at the time of the study,
only a minority of patients were expected to achieve independent living
in the next 5 years.

Nevertheless, interviews with professionals in the UK demonstrated that
staff working in secure units still conceptualise the process of care
along the lines of ‘admission, treatment, rehabilitation, cure’, in
denial of the actual situation of most patients.\ :sup:`14` Staff felt
uncomfortable with the idea of dedicated ‘long-stay units’, which they
saw as warehousing. Many did not consider long periods of detention to
be problematic as long as treatment was still offered, despite the fact
that such treatment did not seem to make a difference to the patient's
chances of moving on. Although these sentiments are understandable, not
openly recognising long stay as a problem is likely to act as a barrier
to considering service improvements for this patient group.

.. _sec4:

International perspective
=========================

A number of countries have started to recognise the problem of long stay
in forensic psychiatric hospitals, resulting in a range of legal and
service provision developments.\ :sup:`15` Croatia, Italy and Portugal
now have legal provisions such that detention in hospital can no longer
exceed the length of a prison sentence the individual would have been
given had they been convicted as a non-mentally disordered offender.
While not going that far, in Germany the constitutional court ruled that
the length of detention has to be proportionate to the index offence and
that the longer detention lasts, the more the individual's right to
freedom weighs in relation to the protection of the public. While this
principle has long been established in the case law of the German
constitutional court, the new Criminal Code additionally specifies that
after 6 years of detention in a forensic psychiatric hospital, detention
has to be terminated unless there is a risk that further offences will
be committed that will cause ‘serious’ physical or psychological harm to
a victim; after 10 years such risk has to be ‘grave’.\ :sup:`16`

Other countries have developed policies and services specifically for
long-stay forensic populations. One example of particular interest is
service provision in The Netherlands. There patients can be given
‘long-stay status’ by a court on the application of their treating team.
Criteria for this status are: •having been an in-patient in a forensic
institution for at least 6 years;•having been a patient in two separate
forensic hospitals;•having completed relevant treatment programmes but
with little discernible progress (or consistently refusing to
participate in such programmes);•no reduction in risk in the foreseeable
future expected.

Individuals with long-stay status are diverted to specific long-stay
units, where the emphasis is on quality of life rather than
risk-reducing interventions. Crucially, an open discussion is held with
the patient about this process and they are fully aware of their new
status. Importantly, from a human rights point of view, this status is
not a dead end; rather, patients can move back into mainstream provision
if it is clinically indicated.

.. _sec5:

Recommendations
===============

Given the significant ethical and economic consequences of long stay in
forensic care, it is essential that a national strategy is developed to
deal with this complex patient group. Issues to consider in such a
strategy are: •taking a whole pathway approach;•clear entry and exit
criteria for services;•cut-off points for the definition of ‘long stay’
in the different levels of security;•independent reviews of long-stay
patients;•exploration of interventions designed to reduce
LoS;•improvement of the efficiency of pathways for this
group;•incentives to move patients on (e.g. through the Commissioning
for Quality and Innovation framework, as is already happening in some
trusts);•flexibility in moving between services with prolonged
transition periods;•introduction and evaluation of pilot services for
long-stay patients.

To develop such a strategy, wide consultation including patients and
carers is required to capture relevant perspectives and concerns.

**Birgit Völlm** is Professor of Forensic Psychiatry at the University
of Rostock and Medical Director at the Hospital for Forensic Psychiatry,
Rostock, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany.
