.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Lynne Jones has spent much of the last two decades setting up and
running mental health programmes in places devastated by natural
disasters and wars. Jones is a child psychiatrist, who began her career
in the Allinton Psychiatric Hospital, the former Allinton Asylum. From
the off, she cared more about pragmatic pacifism and ‘doing the right
thing’, which included a commitment to living by her values of public
service and altruism. She has a CV ‘full of gaps’: when she was at
Greenham Common, Bosnia, on the Somali border in Ethiopia, in Kosovo,
Ethiopia, Haiti, Tacloban, and many other places where bombs have fallen
or tsunami have washed away communities. Jones says her mother thinks
she is on ‘an extended gap year’.

Her memoir has been compared to the writing of Oliver Sacks, which I
think does them both a disservice. Jones' style and approach are
different to Sack's pen portraits of neurological conundrum, although
she does interlace clinical stories through her accounts. Her
reminiscences of being with asylum patients on the dance floor evoke the
recent work of Dr Charlie Howard, whose Music and Change project engages
with teenage gangs at street level, co-producing models of care
delivery.

Professionally, there is much to admire here, not least Jones'
commitment to academic rigor despite being far from university
departments. For instance, she describes staying on in Bosnia for an
additional year after her contract had ended to study the effects of war
on children. Her contributions to the intellectual, cultural and
academic life in the countries she is sent to are similarly admirably.
These exchanges are two-way: by spending time with communities and by
listening to young people, Jones provides solutions that work for them
and their families. She wears diverse theoretical cloaks lightly, using
combinations of systemic family therapy, medication, group therapy and
supportive counselling. Her stance is pragmatic, for example commencing
a young man on medication earlier than she would like so that she can
monitor the effects before her likely evacuation from the country.

Jones writes without bitterness or naïvety, recognising that, as a
humanitarian worker, she is sometimes a pawn in political game, for
example when she is part of a wider evacuation of international aid
workers and has to say hurried farewells to unwell patients and local
colleagues. There must surely have been times when Jones was fatigued,
professionally isolated, personally lonely. We don't hear about it. But
though she is stoic, she is also angry, especially about the
pseudoscience that underpins the trauma industry and the resultant
thoughtless ‘quick-fixes’ from many who ought to know better.

The atrocities she describes are apocalyptic in both scale and terror.
In them, she endures personal hardships: living without running water,
without electricity, yet aware of her privileged status, her passport,
her choice to be there, her safe home in the UK. Jones is repeatedly
drawn back to disaster scenes, not because of their horrors, but
because, ‘I hope,’ she says, ‘that some [of their courage] will rub off
on me’. In retelling these stories from her long humanitarian career,
she passes some of that courage to her readers. Her beautifully weft
stories of a lone psychiatrist bearing children's unbearable burdens are
beacons of hope to their bomb-shattered childhoods and to our broken
world.

In 2014, Jones and I were coincidentally participants on a memoir
writing course run by the Guardian Newspaper. We have not remained in
contact and she does not know I have read her book.
