===============================================================================
Subjective memory complaints after electroconvulsive therapy: systematic review
===============================================================================



Simon Vann Jones
Rick McCollum 

:Correspondence: Dr Simon Vann Jones (s.vannjones@nhs.net)

:date: 2019-4

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Few studies have looked at subjective memory impairment from
   electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) after treatment completion. We aimed
   to systematically review all available evidence for subjective
   post-treatment effects.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   We included 16 studies in this review. There was considerable
   between-study heterogeneity in clinical population, ECT modality and
   assessment scales used. The most common assessment scale (eight
   studies) was the Squire Subjective Memory Questionnaire. The majority
   of studies reported an improvement in subjective memory after ECT,
   which correlated with improved depression scores. Subjective
   complaints were fewer in studies that used ultra-brief pulse ECT.
   Longer pulse widths were associated with more subjective complaints,
   as was female gender and younger age of treatment in the largest
   study.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   There is considerable heterogeneity between studies, limiting
   meaningful conclusions. Ultra-brief pulse ECT appears to result in
   fewer subjective complaints.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is an effective treatment for major
depression; however, there is debate around the specific long-term
effects of the treatment on memory and the acceptability of this to
patients.1 There is wide variation in the post-treatment satisfaction
rates after ECT, with previous studies showing that the percentage of
patients who would consider having a second course of ECT varies between
36% and 98%.2 Multiple studies have shown that dissatisfaction with ECT
is related to feeling under-informed of potential
side-effects.3\ :sup:`–`\ 7

Pre-procedural fear and post-procedural assumptions that deleterious
cognitive changes were a direct result of the treatment have been
identified as the two areas most likely to lead to a negative view of
ECT.8 Evidence suggests that clinicians tend to overestimate the effects
of medical treatments and underestimate harm, so being able to
accurately quantify the additional risk that ECT poses to subjective
memory independent of the effects of depression would help both
clinicians and patients alike and may improve outcomes.9\ :sup:`,`\ 10
This review aims to summarise all studies that have assessed the
post-treatment effects of ECT on meaningful memory loss.

.. _sec1:

Methods
=======

This systematic review was completed in accordance with Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses reporting
guidelines (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). Fig. 1Preferred reporting items for
systematic reviews and meta-analyses flow diagram mapping search
history. CINAHL, Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health
Literature database.

.. _sec1-1:

Inclusion criteria
------------------

Studies measuring subjective memory at baseline followed by at least one
measurement after the completion of treatment, using a clearly described
scale (such as the Squire Subjective Memory Questionnaire, SSMQ11), or
questions that specifically assessed subjective memory were included.

A follow-up period of at least 24 h after the completion of therapy was
considered sufficient to allow enough time for the acute effects of the
final seizure to have passed and no limit was placed on the maximum
length of follow-up. Both prospective and retrospective studies were
included. Only published studies were included and studies in all
languages were considered.

Studies measuring memory only during treatment were excluded. Squire's
original studies from 1979 were excluded.

.. _sec1-2:

Information sources
-------------------

The online databases PubMed, Google Scholar, Embase, PsychINFO and
Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL) were
searched for eligible studies. The following search terms and Boolean
operators were used in PubMed as examples: ‘subjective AND (ECT OR
electroconvulsive)’, ‘memory AND (ECT OR electroconvulsive’).

.. _sec1-3:

Study selection
---------------

Abstracts were screened for inclusion by two independent reviewers.
Where any disagreement arose between reviewers, the full paper was
requested. All full papers were read and scrutinised by both reviewers
independently before deciding to whether to include them in the final
review. Screened papers references were searched to identify any further
papers.

.. _sec1-4:

Data collection process
-----------------------

Both reviewers used the same data extraction form and completed the data
collection independently. Both reviewers screened all papers deemed
eligible for inclusion and at the end of this process, data extraction
forms were compared for agreement. Where data were missing from both
forms and felt to be of significant value to the study question, the
authors of the study were contacted directly.

.. _sec1-5:

Data items
----------

The variables of interest from each study included the number and
diagnoses of the patients involved in the study, the modality of ECT
(e.g. unilateral versus bilateral or brief pulse versus ultra-brief
pulse), the memory assessment method used, the results of this and the
authors main conclusions.

.. _sec1-6:

Risk of bias within and across studies
--------------------------------------

Several sources of bias were considered including attrition bias, given
the patient population in question, and also the risk of acquiescence
and reporting or detection bias if memory assessments were carried out
by the same team that performed the treatment. There was also a two-way
risk of recall bias in this patient group with patients vulnerable to
both underestimating and overestimating the extent of their memory
impairment before ECT, because of the extent of their depression and the
effect this is known to have on memory.

All studies described methods for dealing with missing data if
applicable, with most studies reporting complete-case analysis or
intention to treat.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

A total of 877 abstracts were identified for potential inclusion, of
which 52 were felt to warrant full-paper requests. From these 52 and
their reference lists, 16 papers were selected for inclusion in the
final review (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). The main reasons for rejecting
papers were no baseline measure of subjective memory, paper measured
objective memory only, no measurement of subjective memory beyond the
final treatment and insufficient time between the final treatment and
measurement of memory.

.. _sec2-1:

Synthesis of results
--------------------

Because of significant clinical and methodological heterogeneity, it was
not possible to perform a meta-analysis on the included studies. No two
studies measured a comparable patient population, on the same scale,
using the same ECT modality, at the same time points (`Table
1 <#tab01>`__). Table 1Summary of included papersStudy (first author,
year)ParticipantsQuestionnaire usedModalityAssessmentResults summaryMohn
201623\ *n* = 31, unipolar depressionEveryday Memory
QuestionnaireBifrontal, *n* = 1; unilateral, *n* = 22; mixed unilateral
and bilateral, *n* = 8Baseline, 6 weeks and 6 monthsPre-ECT, 104.0 (SD
37.9); 6 weeks post-treatment, 107.9 (SD 43.6); 6 months post-treatment,
98.6 (SD 42.6); higher score indicates worse memoryBrus
201721\ *n* = 1212, 80% unipolar depression; 20% bipolar
depressionSeven-point variant of the ‘failing memory’ component of the
Comprehensive Psychopathological Rating Score86.9% had more than six
treatments; 91.6% had unilateral electrode placementBaseline and <1 week
post-treatmentSubjective memory worsened in 28% of the sample (31% women
*v.* 18% men; 32% young adults *v.* 22% adults aged over 65 years);
longer pulse widths correlated with more subjective complaints; no
difference between bilateral and unilateral placementBag
201612\ *n* = 140, 24.3% unipolar depression; 59.3% bipolar mania; 16.4%
bipolar depressionSSMQBilateral, brief pulse; mean number of sessions
was seven across all groupsBaseline and immediately post-treatmentMean
SSMQ score dropped −49.5 points between baseline and end of therapy;
patients with bipolar disorder reported less complaints than patients
with unipolar depressionKumar 201614\ *n* = 75, 77% unipolar depression;
10.7% bipolar type 1 disorder; 2.7% bipolar type 2 disorder;
schizophrenia 2.7%; schizoaffective disorders 5.3%Subjective Assessment
of Memory Impairment96% received right unilateral; the majority received
brief pulseBaseline and 1 day post-treatmentNo change in subjective
memory score during therapy despite objective evidence of
impairmentMayur 201315\ *n* = 40, unipolar depressionSSMQRight
unilateral; 50% ultra-brief pulse; 50% brief pulseBaseline, after 8
sessions and 3 months post-treatmentBrief pulse: −21.6 at baseline
(*n* = 19), −16.2 at 3 months (*n* = 10), within-patient change of
+12.7; ultra-brief pulse: −23.2 at baseline (*n*-16), −0.8 at 3 months
(*n* = 14); within-patient change of 14.86Fernie 201416\ *n* = 126,
unipolar depressionSSMQ and PRMQNot describedBaseline, 1 month, 3 months
and 6 months post-treatmentSSMQ improved from −14.1 at baseline to −4.58
at 6 months, with the greatest improvement seen 1 month after therapy:
−1.59 (SD 2.73); PRMQ score improved by approximately 10% from
baselineFazzino 201317\ *n* = 26, unipolar depressionSelected SSMQ
questions17/26 received right unilateral; 17/26 received ultra-brief
pulse width3–7 questions daily for 60 days (including treatment)No
change in subjective memory scores despite objective memory
improvementNg 200022\ *n* = 34, unipolar depressionSelf-Rating Scale of
Memory FunctionRight unilateralBaseline, after six treatments and 1
month post-treatmentImproved subjective memory score at end of
treatment; negative correlated with HRSD scoreSchulze-Rauschenbach
200518\ *n* = 14, unipolar depressionSSMQRight unilateral and brief
pulse widthBaseline and within 1 week of completing5.5-point improvement
in SSMQ score, although not statistically or clinically significantFrith
198324\ *n* = 70, unipolar depressionSingle binary question: ‘do you
experience memory problems?’Bifrontal ECT, median course of eight
sessionsBaseline, after treatment and at 6 monthsSham ECT responders,
ECT responders and sham ECT non-responders all reported improvement in
memory; ECT non-responders memory remained stably poorSmith
201019\ *n* = 85, unipolar depressionSSMQBilateral ECT; half had ten
sessions of continuation ECT Half had continuation
pharmacotherapyBaseline (post- ECT), 12 weeks and 24 weeksBoth groups’
SSMQ scores significantly improved from baseline; study looked at
continuation treatment onlySienaert 20102\ *n* = 48, unipolar and
bipolar depression; 23% had psychotic symptomsSSMQUltra-brief bifrontal
*n* = 24 and unilateral *n* = 24Baseline and 6 weeks73% patients were
glad they had ECT; SSMQ performance strongly correlated with
satisfaction on multiple regression analysis but also correlated with
depression score, so may not be independentBerman 200826\ *n* = 333,
unipolar depressionCFQ memory subscale40% bilateral, 34.7% unilateral,
24.3% combination; 14% sine-wave, 86% brief pulseBaseline, 1 week and 24
weeksBaseline 14.97 (SD 6.75), 1 week 13.01 (SD 6.39), 24 weeks 14.05
(SD 6.85) (higher scores indicate greater impairment)Arts
200625\ *n* = 12, bipolar and unipolar depressionCFQBilateralBaseline, 5
days and 30 daysCFQ score improved from coefficient of −0.2 at baseline
to −0.17 at 30 daysColeman 199620\ *n* = 70, unipolar
depressionSSMQMixture of bifrontal, RUL and bilateralBaseline and 2
months−31.5 at baseline, −5.4 at 2 monthsIkeji 199913\ *n* = 70 ECT,
*n* = 70 control; 30% unipolar depression; 37.1% schizophrenia; 28.6%
mania; 4.3% schizoaffective disordersTwo binary questions: ‘Is your
memory poor?’ ‘Do you worry about your memory?’BilateralBaseline and
seven intervals up to 6 months post-treatmentSubjective memory
complaints at 6 months: 37.1% of ECT group, 22.6% of control group [1]_

.. _sec2-2:

Participants
------------

We found that 15 out of 16 studies reported that major depressive
disorder in unipolar or bipolar depression was the indication for
treatment in the majority of patients. One study reported 59.3% of their
sample being treated for mania.12 Two studies reported use in patients
with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders, although it was
unclear whether these patients were treated for their depressive or
primary psychotic symptoms.13\ :sup:`,`\ 14

.. _sec2-3:

Assessment tool used and time points
------------------------------------

The most commonly used tool for measuring subjective memory change was
the SSMQ, with eight studies using all or part of this
scale.6\ :sup:`,`\ 12\ :sup:`,`\ 15\ :sup:`–`\ 20 This is an 18-item
questionnaire assesses various aspects of subjective memory on a Likert
scale from −4 (much worse) to +4 (much improved), providing a total
score comparing current memory with a previous time point. For the
purposes of these studies, it was assumed that memory was being compared
to premorbid memory, although this was not explicitly stated in any
study. Five of the six studies that provided group-averaged SSMQ scores
showed sustained improvements from baseline after ECT treatment (`Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__). Fig. 2Subjective memory change over time. A comparison
of studies using the Squire Subjective Memory Questionnaire (SSMQ).
Studies used brief pulse unless stated
otherwise.12\ :sup:`,`\ 15\ :sup:`,`\ 16\ :sup:`,`\ 18\ :sup:`,`\ 20
ECT, Electroconvulsive Therapy.

.. _sec2-4:

Modality
--------

.. _sec2-4-1:

Pulse width
~~~~~~~~~~~

Four studies included patients who had received ultra-brief pulse
width.2\ :sup:`,`\ 15\ :sup:`,`\ 17\ :sup:`,`\ 21 Two of these compared
brief with ultra-brief and both found longer pulse widths were
associated with more subjective complaints.15\ :sup:`,`\ 21 One of these
studies demonstrated that this difference was not accounted for by use
of bilateral versus unilateral.21

.. _sec2-4-2:

Laterality
~~~~~~~~~~

Eight studies favoured or exclusively used right unilateral electrode
placements, three studies favoured bilateral, one used bifrontal, three
used a combination of bilateral, bifrontal and unilateral, and one study
compared bifrontal with unilateral.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

Studies showed wide variation in the length of follow-up period used to
assess post-treatment memory. Although this does not allow a truly
longitudinal picture, it does allow the possibility of assessing whether
patterns may exist at different times points post-treatment.

.. _sec3-1:

Short-term follow-up
--------------------

A retrospective analysis of 1212 medical records from the Swedish ECT
treatment registry found, compared with a pre-treatment baseline, 26%
reported worse subjective memory post-treatment, defined by a two-point
deficit on the subjective memory component of the Comprehensive
Psychopathological Rating Scale questionnaire.21 In an attempt to
stratify risk, the study found that more women suffered with subjective
memory loss than men (31 *v.* 18%) and more younger adults than adults
aged over 65 years (32 *v.* 22%). The large sample size adds validity to
this finding. Patients were assessed within 1 week of treatment ending
compared with the start of therapy, limiting the extrapolation of this
data to long-term outcomes, and the majority of patients (91.6%)
received unilateral treatment. Short pulse wave and remission of
depressive symptoms were associated with reduced subjective memory
complaints and no dose effect was found.

A more recent study of 140 in-patients, 75% with bipolar depression,
undergoing ECT found a significant negative correlation between number
of treatments and deterioration in subjective memory score across
diagnostic groups tested within days of treatment by the SSMQ.12

Contrary to these findings, the only study to use the Subjective
Assessment of Memory Impairment found no change in scores amongst
participants between pre-treatment and immediately after completing the
course of ECT.14 Two smaller studies, using different measures, found
similar findings.18\ :sup:`,`\ 22

In a pragmatic study, an automated telephone system was used to
intensively monitor day-to-day fluctuations in mood and memory in a
small sample (*n* = 26) of patients undergoing out-patient ECT.17
Patients were asked daily questions related to subjective memory.
Objective memory scores improved with time and were correlated with
mood, whereas subjective memory scores remained stable. The authors
suggested that objective scores could be used to counter subjective
beliefs that may cause premature termination of ECT because of concerns
over side-effects.

.. _sec3-2:

Medium-term follow-up: up to 3 months
-------------------------------------

Using the SSMQ, a 2013 study found that patients (*n* = 35) experienced
a clinically meaningful and statistically significant improvement in
subjective memory across most domains with no significant deterioration
in any one domain, correlating with an improvement in depressive
symptoms.15 This improvement was sustained after 3 months. A study of 48
patients in Belgium reported similar findings with improvements in SSMQ
scores in both groups at 6 weeks post-treatment.2

In a case–control design involving 70 patients and 18 controls without
depression, those in the ECT group reported worse subjective memory at
baseline and a significant improvement immediately post-treatment.
Interestingly, at 2 months, their SSMQ scores were no different from the
control group who had not received ECT.20 Improvements were closely
correlated with mood scores and there was a possible relationship
between greater autobiographical memory deficits and subjective memory
problem complaints.

.. _sec3-3:

Medium-term follow-up: up to 6 months
-------------------------------------

A study of 31 patients in Norway measured cognitive function and
subjective memory with the Everyday Memory Questionnaire before starting
ECT, and at 6 weeks and 6 months post-treatment.23\ :sup:`,`\ 27 There
was no statistically significant change in subjective memory found
between all three time points, suggesting subjective memory complaints
were not simply correlated with mood.

A 2014 retrospective case-notes study of 126 patients in the UK found
that subjective memory improved at 1 month, 3 month and 6 months after
ECT.16 This improvement was closely correlated with an improvement in
Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating Scale score, suggesting a causal
link between depression and memory impairment that was reversible by
ECT; however, complete information was only available for 56 patients.
Further evidence of longer-term positive outcomes were found in a 2010
study of 85 patients that found significant improvements in subjective
memory at both 12 and 24 weeks after the end of the acute treatment
course.19

Comparing sham and real treatment, a study of 70 patients assessed
subjective memory with a single yes/no question. The percentage of
patients complaining of subjective memory problems had significantly
improved at 6 months in three of the four groups (sham versus real;
responders versus non-responders) and was no worse in the fourth (real
ECT, non-responders).24

Using a simple binary question, a Nigerian study (*n* = 70) found that
37.1% of the ECT group reported subjective memory problems at 6 months
compared with 22.6% of disease-matched controls.13 All participants in
this study recovered within six treatments, an unusually high response
rate that may, when combined with the average age of 29.4 years, limit
the generalisability of the findings.

.. _sec3-4:

Pulse width
-----------

All four studies that used ultra-brief pulse width reported a low
incidence of subjective memory complaints and where a direct comparison
was made, ultra-brief pulse width showed fewer side-effects than brief
pulse, with no different in treatment
effect.2\ :sup:`,`\ 15\ :sup:`,`\ 17\ :sup:`,`\ 21

Six weeks after the end of treatment, 73% of the 48 patients who
received ultra-brief therapy in a 2010 study were glad that they had
received ECT and satisfaction was correlated with both subjective memory
and depression scores.2 A 2013 study comparing brief and ultra-brief
therapy in 40 patients found improvements in memory at the end of
treatment from both brief and ultra-brief pulse widths; however,
ultra-brief therapy was superior, resulting in a resolution of memory
problems that was sustained at 3-month follow-up, with no difference in
treatment efficacy.15 A study of 26 patients undergoing ultra-brief ECT
who were followed up on daily for 60 days found ultra-brief therapy to
have no effect on subjective memory, as assessed by a selection of SSMQ
questions.17 The majority of patients in this small sample were
out-patients, reducing generalisability, and almost 40% were receiving
maintenance ECT.

.. _sec3-5:

Limitations
-----------

.. _sec3-5-1:

Heterogeneity of studies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There were considerable differences in patient characteristics across
all studies, including average age, diagnosis, gender and modality of
ECT, and all combinations of electrode placement positions were used
across studies. Within studies, only five delivered ECT with the same
electrode placement and pulse width to all patients. This heterogeneity
makes it very difficult to determine if any relationship exists between
mode of delivery or demographic factors and risk of side-effects. Data
on which patients are most vulnerable to ECT side-effects is still
lacking.28

.. _sec3-5-2:

Ratings scales
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Seven different measures of subjective memory were used across the 16
included studies, making comparison between studies challenging. The
SSMQ was the most widely used assessment tool, but doubt remains about
how well subjective tools capture actual experience. A study reporting
treatment satisfaction rates did not find the SSMQ to be an independent
predictor variable in their multiple regression model.2

A further criticism of rating scales is that they produce a single
summary or average score that may mask domain-specific complaints within
the questionnaire. Studies using qualitative assessments of memory
impairment have found subjective deficits at 24 weeks that were not
picked up by scales designed to capture subjective experience.26

A key limitation of all studies on ECT is the acceptability of the
treatment versus the alternatives, which could include additional or
alternative drug therapy or a longer period of illness. Also, with ECT
usually being reserved for the most unwell patients, there are issues of
impaired insight and recall bias that may undermine the construct
validity of any subjective memory questionnaire in this patient
population.

.. _sec4:

Conclusions
===========

The few studies that assessed subjective memory several months beyond
the end of ECT suggest that, on average, subjective memory scores tend
to recover over time, with ultra-brief pulse showing fewer side-effects
than brief pulse therapy. However, there is considerable heterogeneity
both between and within studies, limiting meaningful conclusions. Past
and future studies are vulnerable to high drop-out rates, observer bias
and concerns over the face validity of standardised instruments designed
to measure subjective memory. However, these tools and studies should
not be dismissed as being unreflective of patient experience.
Contemporaneous quantitative data provides a longitudinal picture,
reduces hindsight bias and may be most useful in identifying common risk
factors for significant memory loss rather than as a tool for
identifying specific deficits. Future subjective memory studies should
use the same outcome measure, such as the SSMQ, and measuring subjective
memory should become a routine part of ECT treatment and follow-up,
ideally allowing an international registry to be created to help us
identify those at low and high risk of memory impairment. Comparable
outcome measures should ideally be collected for patients receiving
alternative treatments.

More qualitative studies are needed to identify common experiences,
effects and meaning of any subjective memory loss after treatment, and
ultimately, whether this is an acceptable risk from this treatment for
major depression. Both of quantitative and qualitative approaches may
then be used to develop more sensitive memory assessment tools,
providing more informative to both patient and clinician during joint
discussions around whether to proceed with a treatment that remains one
of the most effective and controversial in medicine.

**Dr Simon Vann Jones** is an ST5 in old age psychiatry at Cornwall
Partnership Foundation Trust, Bodmin, UK. **Dr Rick McCollum** is a
consultant in old age psychiatry at Devon Partnership Trust, Exeter, UK.

.. [1]
   CFQ, Cognitive Failures Questionnaire; ECT, Electroconvulsive
   Therapy; HRSD, Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression; PRMQ,
   Prospective and Retrospective Memory Questionnaire; RUL, Right
   Unilateral; SD, Standard Deviation; SSMQ, Squire Subjective Memory
   Questionnaire.
