---
author:
- Catherine Marshall
- Ania Korszun
date: 2019-8
institute:
- Clinical Lecturer in Psychiatry, Centre for Psychiatry, Queen Mary
  University of London, UK
- "Professor of Psychiatry and Education, Barts and The London School of
  Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, UK. Email:
  <a.korszun@qmul.ac.uk>"
---

This is a comprehensive resource for professionals working with students
in higher education. Subsections of the book address in turn the student
experience, caring for students with mental health issues and how to
foster mental health in distinct student populations. The book takes an
academically robust approach to supporting student self-care, wellbeing
and development of resilience.

Individual chapters go on to address key presentations around substance
misuse, suicidality, mood and anxiety disorders, psychotic illness,
autism, ADHD, trauma, sleep and eating disorders. There is also an
important focus upon the role of university mental health services for
students who have faced sexual violence, those from military backgrounds
and first generation university attenders, as well as students
identifying as part of the LGBTQ community. It is in the last chapter
where the challenges for 'medical students, residents and fellows' are
explored, albeit somewhat briefly. The writers identify the unique
stressors for this group and reflect upon the obstacles to seeking help
such as stigma and confidentiality. It is noteworthy that all medical
students in the American system are postgraduate and therefore usually
older than British students, most of whom enter medical school straight
from sixth form/college and are less prepared for the expectations of
professionalism at this early stage of their development.

Although written from the perspective of the American educational
system, in general the content is still eminently transferrable to UK
institutions. Throughout the book, its contributors make few assumptions
as to prior knowledge, detailing everything from the risk-taking
behaviours that develop during 'emerging adulthood' to the descriptive
psychopathology for different major mental illnesses. Each chapter\'s
utilisation of 'key concept' bullet points and case examples further
increase its accessibility to the reader.

Ultimately the book makes recommendations not only on how student health
programmes can achieve excellence by successfully managing students with
major mental illness, but also on how all students can be supported to
reach their full potential. It is a valuable resource for teachers in
higher education.
