---
author:
- Josephine Fielding
- Christopher Bass
date: 2019-2
institute:
- "email: <j.fielding2@nhs.net>"
title: Author reply
---

Our paper aimed to highlight the marked increase in referrals seen
locally within recent years. We accept that, as Dr Shaw notes, some
people, particularly those from the student population who also have
families of origin outside Oxfordshire, may have been referred directly
to gender identity clinics and so were not captured by the data. This
would mean that our findings likely represent an underestimate of the
total increase in numbers of people seeking assistance from specialist
clinics, which makes the increase we did find even more striking.

We also appreciate Dr Shaw\'s points regarding the referral pathway in
Oxfordshire and the need to minimise the barriers transgender people
experience to accessing services. The clinical pathway has indeed been
reviewed and altered since the period described in the study, with
service users now being referred directly by general practitioners,
generally to the specialist clinic in Northamptonshire.

The clinic did not assess people under the age of 17, so we did not
include data on this age group in our study, but it is certainly
notable, as both Dr Shaw and Dr Clyde\'s letters highlight, that
referrals to gender identity disorder services (GIDS) for children and
adolescents have risen dramatically over the past five years. Dr Clyde
in her letter draws attention to the high rates of referral to GIDS for
children and adolescents since 2010, and in particular the increase in
rates of referral of those assigned female at birth. This has also been
our experience, although the increase was less marked in our adult
population than in the child and adolescent population Dr Clyde
describes, and it is interesting to consider possible reasons for this.
In our data, we found a marked trend towards more natal females being
referred over the six-year period from 2011 to 2016, with a ratio of
approximately 1:2 compared with natal males requesting transition. In
our previous audit published in 2011 and covering the period 2006--2011,
this ratio was 1:3 (Saunders and Bass, 2011). However this apparent
trend did not reach statistical significance in our data. We also
identified 8.5% of people presenting with non-binary gender identities,
which were not noted in our previous audit. The finding of increased
rates of autism spectrum disorder is also of considerable interest, and
our finding of 7.8% is almost certainly an underestimate. We agree that
clinics are being overwhelmed, and that there is an urgent need for both
more research and discussion in this rapidly changing field, in order to
best meet the needs of transgender young people and adults.
