---
author:
- Michael Morton
date: 2019-4
references:
- id: ref1
title: David James, FRCPsych, FRCPS (Glasgow, Hon), DCH, DipEd, DPM
---

Formerly Consultant Child Psychiatrist, Royal Hospital for Sick Children
and Knightswood Clinic, Glasgow, Scotland, UK

![](S2056469418000864_inline1.jpg)

David James, who died on 5 May 2018 at the age of 79, was one of three
pioneer consultant child psychiatrists appointed in 1971 to develop a
Department of Child and Family Psychiatry in the newly rebuilt Royal
Hospital for Sick Children, Yorkhill, Glasgow. During higher training in
psychiatry in the West Midlands, he studied the interplay of physical
and mental disorder at Birmingham Children\'s Hospital. This expertise,
together with his perspective on deprived families, was in demand in
Glasgow at a time of rapid advances in paediatrics. He worked closely
with the Yorkhill Renal Team to address psychosocial challenges arising
in the new paediatric dialysis and transplantation service.

His work at Yorkhill laid the foundation for an award-winning paediatric
liaison service, and, in 1989, his contribution to paediatrics was
recognised with an honorary Fellowship of the Royal College of
Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow.

Facing pressures to base child and adolescent mental health services
(CAMHS) entirely in the community, David fought hard for the
continuation of a hospital psychiatric service. He became a consultant
in Knightswood community CAMHS but also remained one of a small number
of paediatric hospital-based psychiatrists in the UK, sustaining the
Yorkhill service until a policy shift allowed the appointment of
colleagues to develop a modern paediatric liaison service.

David enjoyed multidisciplinary working but was conscious of the
particular responsibilities of doctors. He cherished the close
relationships between paediatric specialists that grew up in the
Children\'s Hospital. At a time when many child psychiatric teams were
reluctant to use medical diagnoses, and some would not prescribe, David
advocated for medical expertise, while awareness of the family and the
social context of medical transactions informed his practice and
prescribing. He was an early practitioner of family therapy. When faced
with lack of progress, David always retained hope and when other
professionals had decided that no more could be done he would continue
his work with patients and their families, with some remarkable results.
An enthusiastic teacher, he shared his wide experience through carefully
co-authored textbook chapters.

Born in Harrogate and proud of his Yorkshire heritage, David studied
medicine at Sheffield University, with house jobs at Sheffield
Children\'s Hospital. In a year out of medicine, with teaching practice
in an Approved School, he obtained a Diploma in Education and started to
consider training as a child psychiatrist. After a spell in paediatrics
at the Sheffield Children\'s Hospital, he moved back to psychiatry at
Mapperley Hospital. Early in his career, as one of a Sheffield
University team studying 'problem families', he co-authored a Royal
College of Psychiatrists book, 'Families without Hope' (1975), which has
been labelled a 'medical classic'.^1^

David met Hilary, his future wife, in Nottingham. Respect for her career
as an educational psychologist broadened David\'s expertise; he was
highly knowledgeable about the effects of developmental and psychiatric
disorders in the classroom. He leaves his wife, their two surviving
children and four grandchildren, of whom he was very proud. His older
daughter, also a doctor, pre-deceased him by three years.
