.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

How can we understand psychosis without experiencing it ourselves? How
can we convey such a complex, bizarre and (as Jaspers would have it)
*un-understandable* experience to others, particularly those new to
psychiatry? It is a difficult task.

Karin Fossum, the respected Norwegian crime writer, does not shy away
from confronting the more unpalatable aspects of the human mind. Her
portfolio has included an exploration of the psychological motivation of
paedophiles, elder abusers, and vulnerable people who are drawn into
crime. Her focus is not on what, but why.

*The Whisperer* centres on the unremarkable, quiet, middle-aged Ragna
Reigel, who, after surgery, was left with a disability that means she
cannot talk above a hoarse whisper. Isolated and ignored, no-one notices
(or particularly cares) when her thoughts and behaviour start to change,
until it is rather too late.

Fossum has used her talent for drawing us into the minds of the
misunderstood to powerful effect. Through the format of a sensitively
conducted police interview, we are carried alongside Reigel as she
develops psychosis. It is an unsettling and disorienting experience.

The book captures the sense of unease and apprehension that come with
delusional mood. This progresses into more defined delusions and
paranoia that permeate every aspect of Reigel's life. The loss of her
sense of agency and experience of perplexity and distorted perceptions
is well described. “‘…her overview was slipping…her body had been
knocked out of its natural measured rhythm…life was no longer
safe…external powers were taking over.’‘The night was no longer silent,
she could hear the seven billion people who lived on this earth. They
were breathing like an enormous beast, cackling and screaming and
wailing.’”

The language changes subtly as Reigel deteriorates, reflecting her
increasingly disordered thoughts as she struggles to make sense of what
is happening to her.

Through Reigel's isolation and loneliness, the book raises broader
questions about how we as a society care for the vulnerable and
marginalised. The effect of disability and impaired communication on
mental health is considered, as is the humane treatment of offenders
with mental disorders.

The book's great strength is its accessibility. It can be enjoyed on its
own merits as a work of fiction; yet it also communicates an experience
of psychosis in a way no textbook can. I would recommend it to medical
students and trainee psychiatrists, but even seasoned psychiatrists
could gain a great deal from it. Empathy starts with understanding the
experience of those we care for, and *The Whisperer* – quietly,
unassumingly and unnervingly – helps us to do just that.
