=====================================
Trials and tribulations of S49 orders
=====================================



Ilyas Mirza
Mukesh Kripalani
:Date: 2019-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Mental Capacity Act 2005 (MCA 2005) is an Act of Parliament,
applying to England and Wales, that provides a legal framework for
acting and making decisions on behalf of adults who lack the capacity to
make particular decisions for themselves.1 Under section 49 (pilot
order) of the MCA 2005, launched in 2016, the Court of Protection can
order reports from National Health Service (NHS) health bodies and local
authorities when it is considering any question relating to someone who
may lack capacity, and the report must deal with ‘such matters as the
court may direct’.2 This change has caused significant ethical
challenges for psychiatrists.

With regard to professional implications, Section 49 reports require an
opinion; according to British Medical Association (BMA) and General
Medical Council (GMC) guidance, this falls under expert witness work.
The recent Pool judgment is a reminder that the GMC is likely to
consider that fitness to practice is impaired if a doctor acts outside
what is considered their scope of work.3 The order is usually
accompanied by an instruction letter containing legal precedents and a
bundle sometimes containing conflicting assessments. Responding to such
instructions require medico-legal training and experience in giving
opinions to complex questions such as capacity to consent to sex, or
consent to drink. We would argue that there is a blurring of boundaries
between expert and professional witness. There is a need to clarify what
legal safeguards are in place for the author of Section 49 reports, if
their opinion is challenged, as it was in the Pool case.

In relation to patient care, the introduction of an automatic right to a
medico-legal report, which was previously funded from elsewhere, has
shifted the cost on to the NHS. Given that mental health services are
still block funded; more work without additional funding leads to
dilution of quality of care elsewhere in the system, affecting patient
care. Lack of parity of esteem between physical and mental health
funding makes this work an onerous burden. Increased workload without
remuneration has an adverse effect on staff morale, influencing
recruitment and retention within an already struggling NHS.

There is an urgent need to quantify the effects of these orders on
services. The Royal College of Psychiatrists, working together with NHS
England and the BMA, needs to define how medico-legal work can be safely
done within existing resources. Moreover, the BMA, GMC, the College and
NHS employers need to resolve the discrepancy that results from what is
considered expert witness work by regulatory bodies being framed as
normal NHS work by the Court of Protection.4 Legal safeguards need to be
in place if NHS professionals become subject to legal challenge, e.g.
from an aggrieved solicitor. Consideration needs to be given to a fresh
legal challenge if it is evident that this pilot order is affecting
patient care.
