===========================
Lionel Hersov, MD, FRCPsych
===========================



Philip Graham
:Date: 2019-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Formerly Consultant Psychiatrist, Maudsley Hospital, UK; Professor,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, USA

.. image:: S2056469418000669_inline1.jpg

Shortly after South Africa joined the war against Germany, Lionel
Hersov, who died recently at the age of 95, was 18 years old and just
beginning his medical studies in Johannesburg. He volunteered for the
South African Medical Corps Reserve and, from 1944 to 1945, he was
attached as a medical orderly to the Royal Durban Light Infantry, 6th
South African Armoured Division, and served first in the Middle East. He
was then with the 5th Army Group as it fought its way up mainland Italy.
His non-combatant status did not protect him against the threat of
violence. On at least one occasion he was ordered to enter territory
covered by enemy guns to check whether a fallen soldier had been killed
or was lying wounded.

Nor was he protected from antisemitism. At another time, a
German-speaking doctor pointed out to a severely wounded, captured
German officer that the man treating his wounds was a Jew. The officer
muttered ‘Jude, schwein’ as he spat at Lionel. He did not talk about his
war experiences but, much later, visiting the battle sites in Italy with
two of his children, he was deeply moved at the memory of friends who
had not made it home.

At the end of the war, Lionel resumed his medical studies at the
University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, qualifying as a doctor in
1948. Shortly after qualification, he decided to become a psychiatrist
and worked in various junior posts in Johannesburg and Pretoria.
However, training opportunities in psychiatry in South Africa were
limited at that time. In 1952 he was accepted on the psychiatry training
programme at the Maudsley Hospital, London. By 1955 he had decided to
specialise in child psychiatry, and it was in this field that he made
his mark. He only returned to South Africa subsequently for brief
visits.

In the mid-1950s, child psychiatric practice in Britain and elsewhere
was largely uninformed by scientific data. It was felt that the
behaviour and emotional problems of childhood and adolescence were too
complex to be studied in any systematic manner. Around that time, a
small number of academically minded child psychiatrists, of whom Lionel
Hersov was one of the first, decided that the time had come to apply
scientific methods to the subject.

His chosen topic, which formed the basis of his MD thesis, was
non-attendance at school. It was already known that children who failed
to attend school fell into one of two groups. There were school refusers
who were anxious about attending, either because of a fear of what might
happen to them at school, such as being bullied by another student or a
teacher, or because they were over-anxiously attached to their mothers.

Then there were truants who were usually rebelling against
unsatisfactory home backgrounds and found little at school to interest
them. Hersov was able to show that these two groups differed markedly in
their relationships with their parents, their personalities, their level
of academic achievement and the presence of other behaviour disorders.
His findings had major implications for clinical management.1

After he left the Maudsley, he was appointed a consultant child
psychiatrist, first at the Child Guidance Training Centre, London, and
then at the Children's Hospital, Great Ormond Street, London. He
returned to the Maudsley Hospital as a consultant in 1968, but also held
a part-time appointment attached to the paediatric department at the
Hammersmith Hospital.

While at the Maudsley, where he worked as a consultant child
psychiatrist until 1994, he was an inspiring teacher and role model.
Many of those who later made their mark in the field were led into it by
his example. He was an astute clinician who formed excellent therapeutic
relationships with the troubled children and families referred to him.
While he had had experience of personal psychoanalysis, his approach was
influenced not only by psychodynamic theory, but by a range of different
perspectives. His colleagues found him to be a delightful man, tolerant
and calm, with a talent for friendship. His warmth, humanity and wisdom
were all deeply appreciated.

Shortly after the publication of papers arising from his research, he
was invited to become Joint Editor of the recently founded *Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines.* He acted as
Senior Editor of this journal for 21 years, from 1963 to 1984. During
his editorship, the journal gained so greatly in status and prestige,
that, whereas in the beginning there were barely enough papers submitted
to allow quarterly publication, at the time he stopped, it had an
international reputation and began to appear six times a year, only
accepting papers of very high quality. He retained his connection with
the journal for a further 26 years, serving first as Corresponding
Editor while in the United States, and then as Book Review Editor.

In 1977, he was invited by Michael Rutter to be Joint Editor of *Child
Psychiatry: Modern Approaches,* the leading textbook in the field
worldwide. He remained joint editor for the next two editions of this
outstanding book. By now, Lionel's reputation as a leading academic had
become international, and in 1978 he was elected President of the
International Association of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. The
Congress held in Dublin in 1982, at the end of his presidency, was an
event made memorable by the step-change in the quality of presentations.

In 1984, he moved to a position at the University of Massachusetts
Medical School in Worcester, Massachusetts in the USA and remained there
for over 6 years. There, he had a major influence on the teaching of
child psychiatry and on clinical work. On hearing of his death, many of
his former colleagues in Worcester referred to the contribution he had
made there with extraordinary admiration. One wrote, ‘Lionel was a
wonderful man whose support to the emerging child division was
phenomenal and long-lasting’. Another noted that ‘While his expertise
was child psychiatry, his knowledge went far beyond this…’ Their
recollections had a lighter side. Many recalled his predilection for
frozen yogurt dessert.

After his return to London in 2000, Lionel was appointed Honorary
Distinguished Visiting Scientist at the Tavistock and Portman NHS Trust
and took a particular interest in mentoring psychiatrists in training.
Earlier, he had held a number of other significant positions. From 1976
to 1984 he was Civilian Consultant in Child and Adolescent Psychiatry to
the British Army, advising on matters arising with army families. In
2011 he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate jointly by the Tavistock
Clinic and the University of Essex.

Although he did not practice his religion once he reached adulthood,
Lionel's parents were both Jewish. They had migrated with their families
from Russia in the later years of the 19th century. His father, Charles,
was a shopkeeper, and his mother, May, née Goodman, looked after the
family and helped in the shop. He was the oldest of three with a younger
brother and sister. He was brought up in a small Transvaal town near
Pretoria, winning a place at the University of Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, to study medicine in 1940. In 1952, shortly after he came
to London for postgraduate training, he married Zoe Menell, a South
African graduate of Vassar College, New York. She had just completed
postgraduate studies at the Sorbonne, Paris. They had four children:
John, an advocate for learning disabled adults; Gregory, a theatre
director; Isabelle Mary, an art gallery curator; and Martin, a media
company executive.

In his younger days, Lionel was a stylish tennis player and later took
up squash, which he played highly competitively. In his early 70s,
however, he developed quite severe back pain which limited his mobility.
He remained an enthusiastic lover of jazz. Sometime before he died, he
developed Alzheimer's disease, which clouded his last years. He is
survived by Zoe and his four children, as well as five grandchildren.

Lionel Hersov, child psychiatrist, was born on November 19, 1922. He
died on March 11, 2018, aged 95 after a long illness.

Note: This obituary is based on one published in *The Times* on 18 May
2018.
