=======================================================================
Telepsychiatry in intellectual disability psychiatry: literature review
=======================================================================



Giri MadhavanCorrespondence to Dr Giri Madhavan (girimadhavan@gmail.com)
:Date: 2019-8

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and Method
      :name: sec_a1

   The aims of this review were to explore the effectiveness and patient
   and provider acceptability of telepsychiatry consultations in
   intellectual disability, contrasting this with direct face-to-face
   consultations and proposing avenues for further research and
   innovation. Computerised searches of databases including AMED and
   EMBASE were conducted.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Four USA studies of intellectual disability telepsychiatry services
   have been reported. The majority (75%) focused on children with
   intellectual disability. Sample sizes ranged from 38 to 900
   participants, with follow-up from 1 to 6 years. Outcome measures
   varied considerably and included cost savings to patients and
   healthcare providers, patient and carer satisfaction and new
   diagnoses.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The innovations summarised suggest a requirement to further explore
   telepsychiatry models. Despite some promising outcomes, there is a
   relative dearth in the existing literature. Further studies in other
   healthcare systems are required before concluding that telepsychiatry
   in intellectual disability is the best approach for providing
   psychiatric services to this population.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Background
==========

In provision of psychiatric services to people with intellectual
disability, several factors result in patients and carers experiencing
difficulty in attending out-patient appointments.1 As intellectual
disability services often cater for large geographical areas, these
factors include inconvenient travel.2

In the UK, there is an emphasis on finding efficiencies and providing
cost reductions to address the political austerity agenda.3 The
Transforming Care report4 for people with intellectual disability itself
cited cost savings for patients returning to the community.
Additionally, there is a growing movement towards a more environmentally
conscious provision of service.5\ :sup:`–`\ 7 Telepsychiatry8
consultations, on the surface, would appear to aid with these
issues.9\ :sup:`–`\ 11

Telepsychiatry has been broadly defined as the use of information and
communication technology to provide or support psychiatric services
across distances.10 The General Medical Council12 and the American
Psychiatric Association13 have produced guidance on the fields of
telemedicine and telepsychiatry, respectively. Notably, issues such as
practicalities (including security, confidentiality, patient and
provider identification, logistics, patient selection, prescribing
responsibilities and reliability of equipment), as well as ethical
issues including appropriate ability to escalate emergencies, are
highlighted as important in such a modality.

Several reviews have focused on telepsychiatry and
autism.14\ :sup:`–`\ 16 Many people with intellectual disability have
comorbid autism; however, the reverse is not always the case.17
Therefore, extrapolation of studies in telepsychiatry with autism,
unless intellectual disability is explicitly stated, may mask the
underlying needs of those with intellectual disability. Although a brief
review of intellectual disability in telepsychiatry exists in the
literature,18 this was methodologically flawed, as searches were limited
to PubMed, resulting in omission and limited synthesis with inclusion of
student teaching rather than telepsychiatry (patient-directed care).

Several innovative telepsychiatry services have been developed for use
in adult, forensic, and child and adolescent mainstream (i.e.
non-intellectual disability) mental health services.19\ :sup:`–`\ 22
These, however, do not focus on the key issues encountered by the
intellectual disability patient group and the specialist psychiatric
services that serve them.

.. _sec2:

Aims
====

The aims of this review were to explore the effectiveness and patient
and provider acceptability of telepsychiatry consultations in
intellectual disability, contrasting this with direct face-to-face
consultations and proposing avenues for further research and innovation.

.. _sec3:

Methods
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Search strategy
---------------

A computerised search was undertaken on 10 June 2018 using the following
databases: Cochrane Library, AMED, BNI, CINAHL, EMBASE, Medline, PubMed
and PsychINFO. The search was of English language, peer reviewed
journals for all dates available published in the respective databases.

Search terms were kept broad, to include as many studies as possible and
account for the different terminology used internationally and over time
for intellectual disability. The grey literature (opengrey.eu) was also
searched to avoid missing relevant publications. References from papers
that were selected by the search were also included if suitable studies
were encountered.

The search terms for title and abstract were: (telepsych*) AND (mental\*
OR intellect\* OR development\* OR learning*) AND (deficien\* OR
disabilit\* OR disabl\* OR retard\* OR disorder\* OR impair\* OR
handicap*).

.. _sec3-2:

Study selection
---------------

Papers considered eligible for inclusion in this review included those
where: (a) the participants were mental healthcare patients (adults or
children) who were classified as having an intellectual disability; and
(b) the intervention described was telepsychiatry, i.e. live synchronous
or asynchronous videoconference-based clinical psychiatry. English
abstracts of non-English articles were reviewed where available.

Papers were excluded where participants did not have an intellectual
disability, there was no telepsychiatric intervention, or they were
general review papers on telemedicine.

The titles and abstracts of reviews were identified, screened and
classified for extraction of full review for further analysis by the
author.

.. _sec4:

Results
=======

A record of the searches is provided in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__. A total of
472 records were identified by database searches. A further 12 were
retrieved by hand-searching from references. Of the 472 studies, 185
were duplicates and the remaining 299 were screened with abstracts
reviewed by the author. The majority of exclusions were on the basis of
the article having no clear reference to people with intellectual
disability. At this stage, 107 articles were selected, including several
involving participants with autism where further information was
required to determine whether an intellectual disability was also
present. Fig. 1Results of literature review search strategy.

| Upon reviewing the full text of these studies, a further 103 were
  excluded. In these cases, the articles were opinion, commentary or
  editorial pieces, primary research, or addressing autism but not
  concerning patient groups with intellectual disability. Four studies
  were included in the qualitative synthesis; a summary is provided in
  `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Table 1Characteristics of included studiesStudy
  IDSubjectsStudy locationInterventionOutcomeFundingGentile *et al*
  (2017)22900 patients,
| adults and childrenOhio (64 out of the 88 counties), USASynchronous
  telepsychiatry appointments with upper level residents and faculty
  physician partners. Various locations including homes, schools
| Follow up: 4 yearsData compared with year preceding intervention
| Improved access to care, reduced emergency visits/hospital admissions.
  Cost savings, reduced travel and medical expenses Reduced long-term
  services and support costsGrants from Ohio Department of Developmental
  Disabilities and Ohio Department of Mental
| Health and Addiction ServicesHarper (2006)23Four groups of children,
  including one group of children with developmental disorders and
  severe behavioural disorders within the total of 100
  participants.Iowa, USASynchronous cable system connected to two public
  school sites and a small regional hospital from the hospital-based
  Center for Disabilities and Development Two of the sub-projects
  included: (a) Telepsychiatry consultation – a real-time, two-way video
  conferencing psychiatry service for rural clients; and (b) specialised
  interdisciplinary consultations – a real-time, two-way video
  conferencing service for children with special health and behavioural
  needs in rural Iowa communities
| Follow up: 1.5 yearsPhone-based interview for families and
  professionals Outcomes specific to children with ID and severe
  behavioural disorders were not described separately.
| Parents reported high satisfaction and that the telemedical
  consultations were as effective as face-to-face visits, as well as
  reduced travel costsFederal funds from the National Library of
  Medicine under Contract No. N01–LM–6–3548Langkamp *et al*
  (2015)24Approximately 200 children with developmental disorders
| Four case studies described, one involving clear behavioural or mental
  difficulties with an IDTwo rural counties in North Ohio,
  USAAsynchronous telemedical care
| School-based telemedicine program Primarily uses store-and-forward
  technology to connect children with ID to their own primary care
  physician
| Follow up: 1 yearPost-visit survey and parent-reported outcomes
| High level of parent satisfaction, with 100% opting to continue to use
  service; 84% of children remained in schoolGrant from the Office for
  the Advancement
| of Telemedicine/HRSA (H2ATH07764) and a grant from
| Akron Children's Hospital FoundationSzeftel *et al* (2012)25126
  patients; 45 of these evaluated, of which 84% had an ID and 69% were
  childrenCalifornia, USASynchronous care
| Collaborative-care model: primary care provider provides long-term
  care at the local clinic; child psychiatrist provides evaluation and
  recommendations at a distant clinic through videoconferencing
| Follow up: 3 yearsRetrospective chart review
| Prior to initial assessment, no patients were diagnosed with anxiety
  or mood disorders Approximately one-third of patients received one of
  these diagnoses in the telepsychiatry clinic
| Patients seen six times on average in first year and three times in
  the second and third years Telepsychiatrist recommended a change in
  patient's medication for 82% of patients at initial assessment, 41% at
  year 1 and 46% at year 3Unclear [1]_

.. _sec4-1:

Study location
--------------

All studies took place in North America. Two of the studies took place
in Ohio but were run by separate teams in different locations. The
telepsychiatry care was provided in schools, hospitals and homes. All
studies appeared to be funded by non-commercial sources.

.. _sec4-2:

Study designs
-------------

There were no randomised controlled trials identified. The Harper study
used control groups that were evaluated on site rather than through a
telepsychiatry modality and were matched using age, gender,
socioeconomic status and problem type. The Langkamp study provided
access to a primary care physician; while this was not a study of a
psychiatric service, it was included as the cases described illustrated
patient types likely to be seen in a UK intellectual disability service.

.. _sec4-3:

Study populations
-----------------

Most studies (three) focused on children with intellectual disability,
while the remaining study (Gentile23) included both children and adults
with intellectual disability.

.. _sec4-4:

Sample size
-----------

Sample sizes of people with intellectual disability were unclear in two
studies (Harper24 and Langkamp25); however the sample sizes of the
others ranged from 38 to 900 participants.

.. _sec4-5:

Interventions
-------------

Broadly categorised, the interventions in this review included
psychiatric assessment and psychiatric follow-up, provided using a
telepsychiatry service. Prior to the development of the telepsychiatry
service, consultations were provided in a standard face-to-face model.
Studies included in this paper used both asynchronous and synchronous
connections, with the latter being more common (three studies).
Synchronous services provide live, two-way interactive transmission at
geographically separate locations,10 thereby simulating face-to-face
interviewing. Asynchronous services, by contrast, do not require the
presence of both parties at the same time, and have the advantages of
being relatively inexpensive and not requiring any special hardware
support. The information can be transferred in the form of data, audio,
video clips or recordings, and can be done by email or web applications
for review by a specialist at a later date.

.. _sec4-6:

Length of follow-up
-------------------

Follow-up length varied from 1 to 6 years.

.. _sec4-7:

Outcome measures
----------------

Outcome measures varied considerably across the research studies and
included cost savings to both patients and healthcare providers, patient
and carer satisfaction, new diagnoses and medication changes.

Notably, there was a 96% decrease in emergency room visits (Gentile23)
in the 12 months following treatment via the telepsychiatry model
compared with the preceding 12 months. The authors of that study suggest
that teams have access to nursing and medical staff between appointments
to assist in problem-solving in real time when issues occur between
appointments. They also discuss how staff provide education on
de-escalation techniques and options when patients exhibit behavioural
change. Although a remarkable 96% decrease was noted, one would question
the practice that existed prior to the telepsychiatry model. It is
likely that, as there was limited access to local professionals before,
the patients and carers may have been able to access professionals
remotely. Further information on this would have been useful to balance
the use of high-cost medical services with multiple accesses to
lower-cost services.

Gentile described hospital admissions decreasing by 85%. The authors
also noted that of their first 120 subjects, none had been admitted or
readmitted to state-operated institutions. They estimated the state of
Ohio saving approximately US$80 000 per person per year in support
costs. As above, more information on the frequency of contacts would
have been useful. Although the study highlights several patients
historically having had to use state-operated institutions, it cannot
necessarily be concluded that the telepsychiatry intervention was the
only reason there were no admissions or readmissions.

Harper24 noted a positive attitude to their telemedicine group, with 98%
stating that the experience was the same or more positive. Some parents
(12%) reported technical problems such as poor audio and camera
movement. Professionals rated the consultations as comparable to
face-to-face consultations. There were no significant differences in
consultation time. Over the time period, the authors evaluated costs
including time, travel and mileage. They concluded that the average
saving to the local district (professional and patterns) was US$971 per
telemedicine session. Additionally, the average saving for parents was
estimated to be US$125 per session, and fewer parents missed work.

Although there was no breakdown of cases in the Langkamp25 study, the
case studies included one illustrating a 10-year-old girl with
intellectual disability and agitation. The authors comment that her
parents were absent from work for healthcare visits less often as a
result of using the telemedical link. The parents also reported
appreciating their child receiving quality medical care without becoming
excessively distressed.

Szeftel26 and colleagues reported their patients as being seen six times
on average in the first year, and three times per year in the second and
third years. Severity and number of symptoms were noted to have
decreased over the three years, with fewer visits as treatment
progressed and fewer medication changes. The authors noted that changes
in medication, either in dosage or type, tended to take place in the
first rather than in later appointments, with 82% of patients having a
recommended medication change at the initial assessment; this may
suggest an emphasis on a biological rather than a holistic approach.

.. _sec5:

Discussion
==========

This study is the first review to undertake a comprehensive synthesis of
telepsychiatry in intellectual disability. There were two major
findings: (a) very few reports of such studies exist; (b) all studies
took place in North America. Unfortunately, it is therefore difficult to
draw firm conclusions about the benefits and constraints of such a
modality in this population group. The majority of the studies had
relatively low sample sizes and focused on a single nation's health
infrastructure (USA); hence, extrapolation to other populations and to
other countries is potentially erroneous.

Unsurprisingly, most studies focused on children, given the relative
ease of implementing such systems in children's services (as children
attend schools and are more likely to have parents as guardians). It is
therefore difficult to extrapolate satisfaction levels of parents to
those of adult patients receiving such services. Information on exact
numbers of patients with intellectual disability and mental illness or
challenging behaviour was missing in half the studies. None of the
studies discussed any legal implications of using remote services and
storage of video data, nor how to escalate difficulties if and when they
arose.

The absence of randomised controlled trials, the gold standard in
research study design, was a major flaw in these studies – and, in fact,
in telepsychiatry research as a whole.27 Furthermore, it is possible
that there are commercial intellectual disability telepsychiatry
services who have not published their data for economically sensitive
reasons and have therefore been missed by the searches.

However, despite these limitations, it would be irresponsible to dismiss
this body of evidence when taken in the context of the telepsychiatry
and general telemedical literature. Most notably, several reviews of
telepsychiatry in autism14\ :sup:`–`\ 16 have been conducted; these
offer some overlapping features that could benefit those considering
setting up telepsychiatry services in intellectual disability in other
countries. There are potential legal and technological issues that could
restrict the development of this field, and contextualising other
non-intellectual disability studies could benefit such service
innovators. Greenhalgh28 and colleagues recently conducted a
mixed-method study on video out-patient consultations, in which it was
concluded that despite such consultations appearing convenient, safe and
effective, this was only in patients judged clinically appropriate and
was a fraction of the overall clinic workload. The paper also highlights
that the National Health Service appears to be a difficult setting in
which to introduce technologies that imply major changes in service
models.

The studies overall suggested positive effects of the telepsychiatry
model for intellectual disability patients. Notably, an often-considered
concern from professionals regarding remote consultations is the loss of
subtleties and direct relationships that are built with face-to-face
appointments. These studies and the literature as a whole29 do not
support this. In fact, there is even evidence that children with severe
anxiety and autism can be more engaged during a telepsychiatry
consultation.30

In addition, there are notable savings to services, both directly and in
prevention of future hospital admissions, which are likely to appeal to
service providers. When this is taken in the context of the positive
patient and carer satisfaction results noted in the studies, it is
surprising there has not been a larger uptake of telepsychiatry services
in intellectual disability. If they develop sufficiently, such services
may become eventually be classified as a reasonable adjustment as per
the UK Disability Discrimination Act. In fact, the most recent National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence guideline31 for care and
support of people growing older with learning disabilities includes
specific advice to ‘consider the use of technologies such as telehealth
and telecare to complement but not replace the support provided by
people face to face’.

All studies identified were conducted in North America; no published UK
or European studies were found. This is surprising, as the UK has a
faculty of intellectual disability at the Royal College of Psychiatry
(https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/workinpsychiatry/faculties/intellectualdisability1.aspx)
and a well-established training scheme for psychiatrists to specialise
in intellectual disability psychiatry,32 as well as highly active
patient advocate groups such as Mencap33 and the Challenging Behaviour
Foundation.34 However, psychiatric services are generally be closer to
patient populations when compared with the USA. Of the locations
mentioned in the studies identified, Iowa is significantly low in
population density (21/km\ :sup:`2`) when compared with California and
Ohio (93 and 109/km\ :sup:`2`, respectively),35 although it is recorded
as having more urban than rural population. In the UK, the population is
more dense (271/km\ :sup:`2`)36 overall, with an estimate of 83% of the
population living in an urban setting.37 However, it is notable in the
UK that many on-call rotas are non-residential, covering large
geographical regions; thus, the application of telepsychiatry could
benefit both patients and a significant proportion of psychiatrists who
work with intellectual disability patients.

Nevertheless, despite the identified studies focusing on intellectual
disability services for children, the transition period from child and
adolescent mental health services to adult services could be a positive
avenue of research. Collaborative multi-professional appointments may in
fact ease the transition, and research involving telepsychiatry could
help to determine whether this is the case.38\ :sup:`,`\ 39 This is
often a difficult period for patients, carers and professionals,
particularly for those with intellectual disability.

More research in this field would be welcomed for less-developed and
more geographically spaced-out healthcare systems. Implementing both
synchronous and asynchronous remote consultations using some of the more
accessible, encrypted and mainstream video streaming services with
intellectual disability population groups is likely to become more
feasible, given that broadband services (and reductions in costs) have
permeated much of the globe, including geographically isolated areas.
Further research in less-developed countries as well as in other
healthcare systems would help to build a more robust literature and
facilitate innovation in this field. The rolling out of broadband
services across other nations, including the UK, has been relatively
slow in comparison with the USA; this may partly explain the lack of
telepsychiatry services, which require reasonable connection speeds.

Additionally, as costs of technology such as secure smartphone devices
and cheap encrypted applications decrease and data connection speeds
increase, it is likely that more healthcare providers internationally
may consider both implementing telepsychiatry services and sharing their
outcome data in the peer-reviewed literature. Integrating the findings
would therefore enable best practice guidelines to be developed, for
example.

None of the studies in this review mentioned the use of interpreters;
their incorporation into telepsychiatry, whether for Makaton, other
forms of signing or in fact more mainstream language translation, is
another potential avenue of research.40\ :sup:`,`\ 41

It is feasible that access to expertise via international collaborations
using asynchronous methods or taking advantage of time zone differences
for synchronous methods could enable, for example, vulnerable
intellectual disability populations in underserved areas to access
specialist intellectual disability psychiatric care to aid in reducing
mental distress. Additional health economic and environmental
evaluations in differing healthcare systems could also clarify whether
similar models of care are transposable to such systems. Specific
evaluation of environmental benefits or effects would also be a useful
outcome to evaluate in further research.

.. _sec6:

Conclusions
===========

This study identified four telemedical psychiatric consultation studies
in intellectual disability, mainly limited to children. While there is
some evidence of cost-effectiveness, improvement in patient and carer
satisfaction, and convenience, the fact that there were relatively few
studies limited to North America would suggest there is a need to
explore further these novel methods of enhancing current psychiatric
services.

Telepsychiatry models appear to aid in the empowerment of this patient
group, as well as providing cost savings. However, further studies are
required in other countries and across a wider age range before
concluding that telepsychiatry in intellectual disability is an
effective, acceptable and satisfying approach for providing psychiatric
services for this underserved population group.

**Giri Madhavan** is a Specialist Trainee (ST6) in Psychiatry of
Intellectual Disability at Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS
Trust, Coventry, UK.

.. [1]
   ID, intellectual disability.
