========================================================================================================================
Against the stream: intermittent nurse observations of in-patients at night serve no purpose and cause sleep deprivation
========================================================================================================================



David VealeCorrespondence to David Veale (david.veale@kcl.ac.uk).
:Date: 2019-8

:Abstract:
   This paper argues that intermittent nursing observations of
   in-patients at night do not reduce the risk of suicide or severe
   self-harm. Suicides between 23.00 h and 07.00 h are rare, and these
   overwhelmingly occur under intermittent observations. Such
   observation is purely a defensive intervention to document that a
   patient is safe at a particular time, as there is no engagement. For
   the large majority of in-patients, it has the unintended consequence
   of causing sleep deprivation. The intervention may cause harm to
   in-patients by making their disorder worse and increase their risk
   during the day. If patients are judged to be at immediate risk, then
   they should be placed on constant observation. If they are not, then
   optimising sleep is important for treating a psychiatric disorder and
   they should be placed on general observations.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Nursing observation is defined as ‘… regarding the patient attentively,
minimizing the extent to which they feel they are under surveillance,
encouraging communication, listening, and conveying to the patient that
they are valued and cared for …’.1 National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence guidelines2 define various levels of observation
determined by a risk assessment, especially for severe self-harm,
suicide, violence and absconding. These include *continuous* observation
by one or more staff; low-level *intermittent* observation (usually a
frequency of once or twice an hour); and high-level *intermittent*
observation (usually two to four times an hour). The term *general*
observations usually refers to a frequency of once or twice in a staff
shift. The importance of ‘engagement’ (that is, emotional and
psychological containment of distress and giving of hope) is emphasised
as a genuine (not just linguistic alternative) to observation.3 National
guidance and local policies assume that nursing observation operates
over 24 h. As I shall explain, this is where the problem lies:
‘engagement’ is not required at night when a patient needs to sleep and
to be kept safe.

It is up to the nursing staff to determine what fulfils ‘reasonable’
observation when patients are sleeping at night. A variety of practices
and frequency of observations are used at night to document that a
patient is safe at a certain time. Policies usually require the staff
member to clearly see the patient is breathing. At night this typically
involves either opening the window hatch in the door or entering the
bedroom and shining a torch on the patient's face or switching on a
light or waking the patient by shaking them to see that they are still
breathing. There are many complaints by patients on the practice as it
disturbs their sleep and they are frequently unable to get back to
sleep. However, the documentation of a patient's safety has become the
only metric of importance to regulators and managers. No research or
discussion has ever been published into the effectiveness for risk
management of nursing observations at night. However, I will argue that
the process of documentation by intermittent observations at night has
many unintended consequences.

Surveys of psychiatric in-patients find that the large majority
experience insomnia because of the noise and light on the ward and from
nursing observations.4\ :sup:`,`\ 5 There is a bidirectional
relationship so that insomnia is not just a symptom of psychiatric
disorder – intermittent sleep deprivation makes most psychiatric
disorders worse.6 Importantly, sleep duration is negatively correlated
with subsequent length of time in hospital7 and is associated with a
range of physical and mental health problems.8 Specifically, sleep
deprivation leads to negative changes in the neuroendocrine, immune and
inflammatory systems, as well as hypertension. Furthermore, evidence
from correlational and experimental studies have demonstrated that
reduced sleep has a severe effect on emotional regulation.9
Paradoxically, it would be better to have one night of continuous sleep
deprivation, followed by advancing the time of sleep over 3 days
combined with bright light in the mornings (called ‘triple
chronotherapy’). This resets the circadian rhythm and can lead to a
rapid improvement in risk of suicide and improvement in
mood.10\ :sup:`,`\ 11

Sleep deprivation and worsening of symptoms for the many might be
justified if it significantly reduced the frequency of suicide or severe
self-harm. However, the effectiveness of intermittent observations at
night in preventing suicide is highly questionable. The most recent
National Confidential Enquiry into Suicide and Homicide12 reported that
there were 114 suicides by in-patients in the previous year (compared
with 1600 suicides *per annum* by people known to psychiatric services
and about 6200 people *per annum* in the community who are not known).
About one-third of the in-patient deaths occurred during busy periods on
the ward (e.g. 07.00–09.00 h, 13.00–15.00 h and 19.00–21.00 h), hours
during handover or when staff had multiple duties to attend to.12 I
requested a further search from the National Confidential Inquiry on the
numbers of in-patients who died between 23.00 h and 07.00 h. Between
2011–2016, there were 464 in-patient suicides. Of these, 54 out of 338
(16%, excluding unknowns) died at night (about half on the ward, about
half off the ward). There are no statistics collected on the frequency
of severe self-harm. However, it would be surprising if the pattern of
self-harm were very different to the reduced risk of suicide between
23.00 h and 07.00 h.

What is also known is that 91% of in-patient deaths by suicide occur
under *intermittent* rather than constant observation.13 This is not
really surprising. If you were determined to end your life or self-harm
while being observed intermittently, you would choose a time just after
you have been observed and then act. The rate of suicide is 13.7 per
10 000 admissions (0.14%).14 Therefore, about two out of 10 000
admissions die at night between 23.00 h and 07.00 h, and these are
overwhelmingly under *intermittent* observation. It is true that because
there are no randomised controlled trials (RCTs) we do not know how many
deaths were prevented (or delayed) by intermittent observations. Owing
to of the very low rate of suicide at night (two per 10 000 admissions),
there will never be a RCT of, say, intermittent *v.* general
observations at night with mortality as the primary outcome, because the
numbers required would be about 250 000 to demonstrate non-inferiority
between two groups.

My conclusion is that intermittent observations at night currently cause
sleep deprivation for the majority of in-patients. They appear to do
little to prevent suicide and are just as likely to be increasing risk
during the day and prolonging in-patient stays. The best way of managing
risk is to treat the disorder, and this includes insomnia. When I
discuss this with colleagues, I find a widespread view that the practice
stems from institutions’ fear that something may go wrong, and that the
staff or hospital may be criticised by a coroner or regulator. When a
serious event occurs, the monetary as well as the human costs can be
large, and thus the best defence against possible negligence claims is
for staff to follow local policies or national guidelines. However,
guidelines that assume the same frequency of intermittent observations
during the day or night do not make sense because (a) staff are not
expected to engage a patient at night; (b) suicide is much less common
at night; and (c) when suicide does occur, it is generally under
intermittent observations. Night-time observations thus cannot be
justified on the grounds of keeping patients safe and may increase risk
over the following days by causing sleep deprivation.15

If a patient is assessed as an immediate risk to themselves or others,
then they should of course be put under *constant* observation at night
– I do not have a problem with this, with the caveat that deciding who
is at ‘immediate risk’ is unreliable at predicting suicide. There is no
evidence for differentiating between low, medium and high risk in
psychiatric in-patients.16 In brief, there is an overwhelming number of
false positives from those rated as having a high risk and just as many
suicides from those rated as a low or medium risk. This is important
because such ratings determine the level of observations during the day
*and* at night. Balancing reasonableness and proportionality are crucial
issues in observations at night. Thus, a policy of placing a patient
under intermittent observations at night because they are rated as low
or medium risk allows an institution to feel they are doing something to
manage risk and protect themselves from criticism from regulators or
negligence claims.

I would like to see several areas of change. First, observations should
be routinely called ‘engagement’ during the day and ‘observations’ by
night. Second, national guidelines on engagement and observation should
take into account that only a minority of suicides occur at night. Then
it should be possible to have a personalised care plan so that the
frequency of engagement during the day and observations at night can be
varied if the risk is assessed as differing according to context. Thus,
patients who are on intermittent once-an-hour engagement during the day
may be put on general observations at night. This should not stop staff
being inquisitive and vigilant when they believe something is ‘not
right’.1 Last, I would like sleep on an in-patient ward to be taken
seriously, and the principles of sleep hygiene and cognitive–behavioural
therapy for insomnia, adapted for a psychiatric ward, to be
implemented.17 This means focusing the culture and environment of a ward
on optimising sleep at night and therefore managing risk by treating the
disorder through improving sleep. We need to listen to patients and
develop innovative solutions to improve care at night. Finally, duration
of stay, global severity of psychiatric disorder and quality of sleep
should be important indicators for RCTs, single case experimental
designs and quality improvement projects on observations.

**David Veale** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at the Centre for Anxiety
Disorders and Trauma at the South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust and Visiting Professor in Cognitive Behavioural Psychotherapies at
the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Kings College
London, UK.

The author acknowledges salary support from the National Institute for
Health Research Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health at South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and the Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London.
