================================================================
Using Twitter to assess attitudes to schizophrenia and psychosis
================================================================



Giorgianna L. Passerello
James E. Hazelwood
Stephen Lawrie

:Correspondence: Stephen Lawrie (s.lawrie@ed.ac.uk)

:date: 2019-8

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Schizophrenia is a psychotic disorder that is stereotypically
   stigmatised as untreatable and associated with violence. Several
   authorities have suggested that changing the name, for example to
   psychosis, would reduce such stigmatisation. We aimed to compare
   attitudes to schizophrenia and psychosis on Twitter to see if
   psychosis was associated with less negative attitudes. Tweets
   containing the terms ‘schizophrenia’, ‘schizophrenic’, ‘psychosis’ or
   ‘psychotic’ were collected on `www.twitter.com <www.twitter.com>`__
   and were captured with NCapture. On NVivo, tweets were coded into
   categories based on user type, tweet content, attitude and stigma
   type by two independent raters. We compared the content and attitudes
   of tweets referring to schizophrenia/schizophrenic and
   psychosis/psychotic.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   A total of 1120 tweets referring to schizophrenia/schizophrenic and
   1080 referring to psychosis/psychotic were identified over two 7-day
   periods; 424 original tweets for schizophrenia and 416 original
   tweets for psychosis were included in the analysis. Psychosis was
   significantly more commonly included in tweets expressing negative
   attitudes (*n*\ =131, 31.5%) than schizophrenia (*n*\ =41, 9.7%) (χ²
   = 237.03, *P* < 0.0001). Of the personal opinions or dyadic
   interactions, 125 (53.4%) in the psychosis data set were
   stigmatising, compared with 33 (24.6%) of those in the schizophrenia
   set (χ² = 44.65, *P* < 0.0001).

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The terms psychosis/psychotic are associated with a significantly
   higher number of tweets with negative content than
   schizophrenia/schizophrenic. Together with other evidence, this
   suggests that changing the name of schizophrenia to psychosis will
   not reduce negative attitudes toward the condition.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   S.L. has received personal fees from Otsuka and Sunovion, and
   personal and research fees from Janssen.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec2-1a:

Schizophrenia and stigma
========================

Schizophrenia is the prototypical psychotic disorder and is
characterised by the psychotic symptoms of hallucinations, delusions,
disorganised speech, grossly disorganised or catatonic behaviour, and
negative symptoms.1 Typically, people with schizophrenia suffer from
social or occupational dysfunction, such that only a minority will be
able to live independently and obtain paid employment.2 Nevertheless,
around half of those with schizophrenia can be regarded as having a
relatively good outcome3 and most will derive some benefit from
antipsychotic medication.4

People with schizophrenia face a great deal of stigma, which is defined
as a ‘negative attitude (based on prejudice and misinformation) that is
triggered by a marker of illness’.5 This affects their social life,
occupation, self-esteem, confidence and ability to seek help and succeed
with treatment5. Stigma may even be ‘the main obstacle to the success of
programmes to improve mental health’.5 For example, young people with
schizophrenia are likely to delay seeking treatment because of perceived
stigma and the concerns that it would harm their chances of getting
jobs, they would not be taken seriously and would be seen as weak.6
Indeed, the way that members of healthcare teams treat patients with
schizophrenia is affected by stigma; for example, in reducing the
willingness and confidence of pharmacists to provide medication
counselling to people with schizophrenia.7 Further, people with the
diagnosis of schizophrenia often stigmatise themselves in that they
regard themselves negatively, and such ‘self-stigma’ is associated with
poor neurocognitive function.8

.. _sec2-1b:

Changing the name of schizophrenia
==================================

There has been debate as to whether renaming schizophrenia would reduce
the negative attitudes expressed about people with the condition. A
narrative literature review concluded that the advantages of a name
change would outweigh the disadvantages and suggested that an eponym be
used,9 although this conclusion was based largely on expert opinion. A
recent systematic review found that in countries that have adopted a
name change, the results have been inconclusive.10 The names changed
from and to are likely to be important. For example, in Japan, what was
called mind-split disease (a literal translation of the Greek origins of
the word schizophrenia) was renamed integration disorder.10 Koike *et
al*\ 11 found that this name change ‘had a limited effect’, whereas Aoki
*et al*\ 12 found some improvement in reducing the frequency of
reporting an association with violence.

In the English-speaking world, many authorities are beginning to abandon
the use of the term schizophrenia both in clinical practice and in the
academic literature, and increasingly refer to the condition as
psychosis (e.g. Sami *et al*\ 13). For example, the former
*Schizophrenia Bulletin* recently changed title to *Schizophrenia
Bulletin: The Journal of Psychoses and Related Disorders* in a bid to
acknowledge the changing ideas about the diagnosis of schizophrenia.14
In 2016, van Os suggested a name changed to psychosis susceptibility
syndrome and that the ICD-11 should remove schizophrenia as a term.15
The authors of the British Psychological Society's report *Understanding
Psychosis and Schizophrenia* debated whether even to use the word
schizophrenia in the title of their report.16\ :sup:`,`\ 17 They argued
that symptoms of schizophrenia and psychosis are not necessarily mental
illness, and labelling all patients who fulfil diagnostic criteria for
schizophrenia as having a mental illness can be detrimental and cause
more harm than good because of stereotypes and stigmatising views from
patients themselves and society. They argue ‘schizophrenia is
essentially an idea’ and does not explain the aetiology or likely
outcome for a patient.16 The move to psychosis appears to be based on
the assumption that this term will carry less of the negative
connotations with severity, chronicity, untreatability and violence
associated with schizophrenia. For example, it has been shown that the
chances of recovery for a patient diagnosed with schizophrenia (13.5%)
may be less than for those who have experienced only first-episode
psychosis (38%).18\ :sup:`,`\ 19 To our knowledge, this assumption of a
reduction in stigma has not been tested. Therefore, we wished to examine
if and how the word psychosis and the related term psychotic are used.
If it was found that people talk less negatively about psychosis than
schizophrenia, it would provide some support for the view that making
such a change in official documents, scientific papers and clinical
services would reduce stigma.

.. _sec2-1d:

The role of social media
========================

One way of assessing how different conditions are referred to and
discussed is to examine the usage of various terms on social media. Many
people use social media as an outlet for opinions and as a resource for
information about mental illness.20 Social media brings people from
different parts of the world together for debate and discussion and the
dissemination of information, and influence attitudes and health
behaviour.20 Twitter is a micro-blogging platform allowing users to
write tweets up to 140 characters in length. On Twitter, one can access
a vast amount of data in a limited amount of time, compared with other
social media outlets such as Facebook and YouTube, and people's tweets
are easily accessible without a reader having an account. Previous
studies have investigated how schizophrenia is discussed on Twitter,
finding a significant association with negative attitudes and opinions
compared with depression and diabetes.21\ :sup:`,`\ 22 However, as far
as we are aware, no study has compared how schizophrenia and psychosis
are discussed.

.. _sec2-1c:

Aims
====

Therefore, the primary aim of this study was to investigate the use of
schizophrenia and psychosis on Twitter and compare the relative
proportions of negative use of the two terms. We tested the null
hypothesis that there is no difference in the stigmatisation of
psychosis compared with schizophrenia on Twitter.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

To identify tweets for the study, Twitter's advanced search tool was
used on `www.twitter.com <www.twitter.com>`__ to find tweets that
contained the words ‘schizophrenia’ or ‘schizophrenic’, and ‘psychosis’
or ‘psychotic’ (we henceforth refer to these as schizophrenia/c and
psychosis/tic) and were captured with NCapture (NCapture for Chrome, QSR
International, Victoria Australia, available for download at
https://www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo/support-overview/downloads#Download-NCapture-and-other-NVivo-add-ons).
On NVivo (NVivo 12 for Mac, QSR International, Victoria Australia,
available for download at
https://www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo/support-overview/downloads#Download-NCapture-and-other-NVivo-add-ons),
using an inductive coding method suggested by Reavley and Pilkington,21
tweets were coded based on the degree and nature of stigma toward
schizophrenia/c and psychosis/tic as well as coding for user type and
tweet content. Exclusion criteria were as follows: (a)Lack of context:
where the tweet was unable to be understood by the reader or the tweet
was a spam tweet with no meaning behind it.(b)Non-English: where all or
the majority of the tweet was not in English.(c)Repetition: where the
tweet was exactly the same as another tweet in the data-set.(d)Retweet:
a reposted or forwarded tweet that was originally posted by another
user.

If included, each tweet was coded into three or four categories, as
follows: (a)User type: individual, consumer, health professional,
organisation and advocate.(b)Tweet content: personal experience of
mental illness, awareness promotion, research findings, resources for
consumers, advertisement, news media and personal opinion/dyadic
interaction.(c)Attitude: stigmatising, personal experience of stigma,
supportive, neutral and anti-stigma.(d)(If category (c) indicated
stigma) Stigma type: social distancing, dangerousness, snap out of it,
personal weakness, inaccurate beliefs, mocking or trivialising and
self-stigma.G.L.P. and J.E.H. initially coded 100 tweets, using the
categories and definitions from Reavley and Pilkington.21 Any tweets
that were hard to categorise were discussed and resolved before J.E.H.
and G.L.P. both coded 10% of the identified tweets to confirm the
interrater agreement. The overall agreement was 87.6%, illustrating that
the coding method had high reliability. G.L.P. then coded all tweets
from two 7-day periods: 16–22 April 2017 and 21–28 September 2017. Fig.
1Proportion of all tweets coming from each type of Twitter user.

To analyse the data, χ²-tests were manually calculated to compare the
proportions of the different types of tweets about schizophrenia/c
versus psychosis/tic. These were compared with a χ² table to determine
the *P*-value, with a value of *P* < 0.05 deemed significant.

We did not seek ethical approval for this study as it concerns the use
of previously published material in the public domain. Fig. 2The
proportion of all tweets in each ‘tweet content’ category. Fig. 3The
proportion of all tweets in each ‘attitude’ category.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

Examples of tweets in each category are shown in `Appendix
1 <#tab01>`__.

.. _sec2-1:

Inclusion and exclusion
-----------------------

The total number of schizophrenia/c tweets over the two 7-day periods
was 1120 and the total number of psychosis/tic tweets was 1080 over the
two 7-day periods. We excluded 696 (62.1%) schizophrenia tweets and 664
(61.5%) psychosis tweets from the data-set based on the criteria above,
leaving 424 (37.9%) schizophrenia tweets and 416 (38.5%) psychosis
tweets in the analysis.

For schizophrenia/c, 490 (70.4%) of the excluded tweets were retweets,
157 (22.6%) were repetitions, 27 (3.9%) were excluded because of lack of
context and 22 (3.2%) were not in English. For psychosis/tic, 560
(84.3%) were retweets, 78 (11.7%) were repetitions, 15 (2.3%) were
excluded because of lack of context and 11 (1.7%) were not in English.
Fig. 4The percentage of tweets that were stigmatising wtihin each ‘tweet
content’ category.

.. _sec2-2:

User type
---------

For schizophrenia/c, individuals (*n*\ =188, 44.3%) and organisations
(*n*\ =186, 43.9%) tweeted the most. This was followed by consumers
(*n*\ =22, 5.2%), health professionals (*n*\ =18, 4.2%) and mental
health advocates (*n*\ =10, 2.4%).

For psychosis/tic, individuals tweeted the most (*n*\ =275, 65.9%),
followed by organisations (*n*\ =108, 25.9%), health professionals
(*n*\ =28, 6.7%), mental health advocates (*n*\ =5, 1.2%) and consumers
(*n*\ =1, 0.2%).

.. _sec2-3:

Tweet content
-------------

For schizophrenia/c, the tweets were most commonly personal
opinions/dyadic interactions (*n*\ =134, 31.5%). This was followed by
research findings (*n*\ =105, 24.6%), experience of mental illness
(*n*\ =76, 17.8%), awareness promotion (*n*\ =37, 8.7%), advertisement
(*n*\ =35, 8.2%), news media (*n*\ =29, 6.8%) and resources for
consumers (*n*\ =10, 2.3%).

For psychosis/tic, the majority of tweets were also personal
opinion/dyadic interaction (*n*\ =234, 56.1%). This was followed by
experience of mental illness (*n*\ =59, 14.1%), research findings
(*n*\ =49, 11.8%), advertisement (*n*\ =38, 9.1%), awareness promotion
(*n*\ =20, 4.8%), resources for consumers (*n*\ =10, 2.4%) and news
media (*n*\ =7, 1.7%).

.. _sec2-4:

Attitude
--------

For both schizophrenia/c and psychosis/tic most of the tweets were
neutral (*n*\ =334, 78.6% and *n*\ =266, 63.9%, respectively). However,
there was a significant difference in the number of stigmatising tweets:
41 (9.6%) of the schizophrenia/c tweets were stigmatising, whereas 131
(31.5%) of psychosis/tic tweets were. χ²-testing revealed a significant
difference with a χ² value of 237.03 (1 d.f., *P* < 0.0001).

For schizophrenia/c, 35 (8.2%) were anti-stigma, 10 (2.4%) were
supportive and 5 (1.2%) were recounting a personal experience of stigma.
For psychosis/tic, 15 (3.6%) were anti-stigma, 2 (0.5%) were supportive
and 2 (0.5%) recounted a personal experience of stigma.

When analysing the stigmatising tweets, it was found that for
schizophrenia/c, 35 (85.4%) came from individuals, 5 (12.2%) came from
organisations and 1 (2.4%) came from a consumer. The vast majority of
the stigmatising schizophrenia/c tweets were personal opinions/dyadic
interactions (*n*\ =33, 80.5%). Six (14.6%) were from news media and two
(4.9%) were about experience of mental illness.

In the stigmatised psychosis/tic tweets, 123 (94.6%) came from
individuals and 5 (3.8%) came from organisations. Mental health
advocates and consumers made up the other users, each tweeting one
(0.8%) of the stigmatising psychosis/tic tweets. Finally, 125 (95.4%) of
the stigmatised psychosis/tic tweets were personal opinion/dyadic
interaction, 3 (2.3%) were about experience of mental illness, 2 (1.5%)
were advertisements and 1 (0.8%) was news media.

For schizophrenia/c, 33 (24.6%) of personal opinions/dyadic interactions
were stigmatising and 6 (20.7%) of the news media tweets were
stigmatising. Two (2.6%) of the schizophrenia/c tweets about experience
of mental illness were stigmatising. For the other categories of tweet
content, none of the tweets were stigmatising.

For psychosis/tic, 125 (53.4%) of personal opinions/dyadic interactions
were stigmatising. One (14.3%) of news media tweets was stigmatising,
two (5.3%) of the advertisement tweets were stigmatising and three
(5.1%) of tweets about experience of mental illness were stigmatising.
The other categories did not contain any stigmatising tweets. Comparing
the percentage of personal opinions/dyadic interactions that were
stigmatising demonstrates a statistically significant difference, with a
χ² value of 44.65 (1 d.f., *P* < 0.0001).

.. _sec2-5:

Stigma type
-----------

Of the stigmatising schizophrenia/c tweets, 22 (53.7%) were mocking or
trivialising schizophrenia/c, 10 (24.4%) were categorised as
dangerousness, 4 (9.8%) as social distancing, 3 (7.3%) as inaccurate
beliefs and 2 (4.9%) as self-stigma.

For psychosis/tic, 93 (69.4%) were categorised as mocking or
trivialising, 36 (26.9%) as dangerousness, 3 (2.2%) as inaccurate
beliefs and 2 (1.5%) as self-stigma.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The aim of this study was to assess any difference in views expressed
about schizophrenia compared with psychosis on Twitter to assess the
potential effect of a name change of schizophrenia. We found that the
terms psychosis/tic were more commonly included in tweets expressing
negative attitudes to these conditions than tweets referring to
schizophrenia/c. Most of the stigmatising tweets were tweeted by
individuals in the format of personal opinion/dyadic interactions. The
most common forms of such stigmatisation were mocking, trivialisation or
making associations with dangerousness. For both schizophrenia/c and
psychosis/tic, however, the majority of tweets were non-stigmatising and
provided potentially useful information, often about new research,
normally broadcast by organisations. Fig. 5Proportion of ‘stigma type’
in all stigmatising tweets.

.. _sec3-1:

Comparisons with previous studies
---------------------------------

As far as we are aware, this is the first study to assess attitudes to
schizophrenia compared with psychosis on Twitter or any other social
medium. However, there are some previous studies that have compared
attitudes to schizophrenia and other conditions on Twitter and on other
social media. Reavley and Pilkington21 compared schizophrenia with
depression on Twitter and found that there was a significantly greater
stigmatisation toward schizophrenia: 5% of the schizophrenia tweets they
identified (*n* = 451) were stigmatising. Joseph *et al*\ 22 examined
the use and misuse of schizophrenia on Twitter compared with diabetes
and found a significantly greater proportion of schizophrenia tweets
contained negative attitudes. Approximately one-third of their
schizophrenia tweets had negative connotations (*n* = 685). Our figure
of 9.35% (*n* = 424) falls in between what these two studies found. The
difference in the percentage of schizophrenia tweets rated as
stigmatising at different times could reflect coding differences but may
be because of the effect of short-term changes in discussions about
schizophrenia on Twitter.

There is some literature on the stigmatisation of schizophrenia and
psychosis in entertainment media. A content analysis of Finnish and
Greek videos on YouTube found that 83% of 52 videos portrayed
schizophrenia in a negative way.23 Similarly, Nour *et al*\ 24 found
that most videos presenting schizophrenia on YouTube inaccurately
portray the condition. Goodwin25 examined the stereotyping of characters
experiencing psychosis in 33 psychosis-related horror films released
before the study was conducted. He concluded that 78.8% portrayed a
homicidal maniac and 72.7% portrayed a pathetic or sad character. This
is in keeping with our finding that psychosis is heavily stigmatised.

News media are also a focal point for the stigmatisation of mental
health conditions. Vilhauer26 analysed 181 USA newspaper articles
mentioning the auditory verbal hallucinations that are diagnostic
features of schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. They found that
about 50% of the articles associated auditory verbal hallucinations with
criminal behaviour and violence. These findings are broadly in keeping
with a more recent study that concluded that over half of all UK
newspaper articles about mental health (*n* = 200) are negative and
18.5% indicate an association with violence.27

.. _sec3-2:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

The main strength of this study is its ability to assess peoples’
uncensored views about schizophrenia and psychosis without the need of a
survey, the results from which could be affected by social desirability
bias. The nature of Twitter means that, once published, a tweet is
accessible to anyone without further permission from the tweet's author.
Relevant tweets were easy to access on
`www.twitter.com <www.twitter.com>`__ with the advanced search tool and
the process of coding was relatively time-efficient and simple using
NVivo.

There are, however, a few limitations of this study. First, capturing
data for two arbitrarily chosen 7-day periods means that external events
and news cycles may have affected the way people discuss schizophrenia
and psychosis, perhaps reducing the generalisability of the data. Of
note, there were news stories about USA's response to North Korean
nuclear missile testing in the April 2017 observation period,28 and
September 2017's period was soon after a bomb injured 30 people in
London, England.29 A further study could look in detail about how news
media and current affairs influence people's expression of mental
illness on social media. A longer period of study could examine detail
how current affairs influence people's discussion of mental illness on
social media, and potentially highlight trends in how people discuss
schizophrenia and psychosis.

Another limitation is that spelling mistakes, abbreviations and
colloquial terms for the searched terms may be used in tweets. By
searching for only ‘schizophrenia, ‘schizophrenic’, ‘psychosis’ and
‘psychotic’, tweets containing mistakes, abbreviations and colloquial
terms will not have been captured in the search. We decided not to
include abbreviations and colloquial terms in the search because it may
not be clear whether tweets would actually have been about schizophrenia
and psychosis. An example would be the abbreviation ‘psycho’, which
could refer to psychopath, rather than psychosis. However, if anything,
it is more likely that spelling mistakes, abbreviations and colloquial
terms may have higher rates of stigmatisation. In a similar vein, future
studies could map the different definitions of schizophrenia/c and
psychosis/tic used by lay individuals and professionals as this may
influence the degree of stigmatising attitudes.

Both the 7-day window convenience sampling and the ability of users to
privatise their Twitter accounts could have contributed to selection
bias within the study. Content from private accounts would not be
visible to our searches, and it would be an interesting but technically
challenging study to assess whether private and public accounts have
different levels of stigma. Selection bias is an often-encountered issue
when conducting research on internet-based communications, and although
an attempt to mitigate this was made by analysing all tweets from within
the time frame, this may reduce the external validity of the
conclusions.30

Finally, this study only looked on `www.twitter.com <www.twitter.com>`__
and there are other social media platforms that could be assessed.
Facebook data may be hard to access as the average person is likely to
have their profile on a private setting, but it would be interesting to
see if psychosis content on YouTube is as negative and inaccurate as it
is for schizophrenia. Future work could also compare the stigmatisation
of different psychoses on Twitter and other social media.

In conclusion, on Twitter, psychosis is more stigmatised than
schizophrenia. This suggests that the term psychosis should not be used
if schizophrenia is to be renamed with the aim of reducing stigma.
Further, given that different psychotic disorders have particular
treatments and varying prognoses,31\ :sup:`,`\ 32 such a move to a more
generic term may do more harm than good.

**Giorgianna L. Passerello** is a medical student at Edinburgh Medical
School, College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, University of
Edinburgh, UK. **James E. Hazelwood** (BMedSci) is a medical student at
Edinburgh Medical School, College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, UK. **Stephen Lawrie** (MD Hons) is Head of
Psychiatry at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital, University of Edinburgh, UK.

Appendix 1Table of category definitions and example
tweetsCategoryDefinition of category (adapted from Reavley and
Pilkington21)Example
tweetSchizophrenia/schizophrenicPsychosis/psychoticTweet contentPersonal
experience of mental illnessThe user expresses their personal experience
of having a mental illnessAs a #schizophrenic, my social brain is not
all what it could be. Twitter seems like an avalanche of media frenzy
24/7 but maybe I'm nub :/Having a rough time lately with my
#mentalhealth Feeling exhausted and just not myself #depression #anxiety
#psychosisAwareness promotionThe user promotes awareness about
schizophrenia or psychosis by providing information or pointing readers
in the direction of where they can find informationSchizophrenia truth
and myths https://t.co/wGYFtMBNRa #schizophrenia
#mentalhealthRecognizing the symptoms is crucial in order to help those
suffering from #psychosis in #mania https://t.co/W40srtD86J\ Research
findingsThe user details outcomes in research by summarizing or linking
to publications and articles#Mental problems such as #schizophrenia and
#bipolar disorder could be linked to a yeast infection in the #gut
https://t.co/v1u1CBQZod\ Young people with #psychosis have a 24× greater
risk of death than their peers: https://t.co/KnGBZjMZZA\ Resources for
consumersThe user points someone with a mental illness in the direction
of helpful resources or provides adviceDid you check out our video
library yet? It's full of helpful resources about #schizophrenia &
#psychosis https://t.co/CMuFhZb9QC\ Take a look at SMART - a new mental
health website for people who have experienced psychosis! #psychosis
#recovery… https://t.co/7Yk2Hh7Yas\ AdvertisementThe user advertises
events or products and services for saleApplications close soon:
Neuroscience PhD Projects in our lab (School of Medicine, Uni of
#Wollongong #Australia) http://bit.ly/2y2D7Fs #uow #neuropharmacology
#MedicinalCannabis #cannabinoids #depression #schizophrenia #cognition
#microbiota #FindAPhD #PhD #DoSomethingAmazingDon't miss HOAX Our Right
to Hope @HoaxOrth Award-winning trilogy of art on #psychosis Liverpool &
Salford https://t.co/apUVQRNEYP\ News mediaThe user tweets a summary of,
or hyperlink to, a news storyMental health trust is asked to take action
after death of Norwich man at hospital unit #schizophrenia #bhive
https://t.co/eZ51APnuCg\ Antiques Roadshow expert died after psychotic
episode, inquest hears -#postpartum #psychosis
https://t.co/lppuWm3N6O\ Personal opinion/dyadic interactionThe user in
conversation with someone or expressing their own personal opinion or
viewReading Bleed Through by Adriana Arrington - this is one tough read
#Schizophrenia@donnabrazile and, now he's using the moab to divert
attention w NKorea. #psychosis ya think?AttitudeStigmatisingA tweet that
expresses a negative attitude toward schizophrenia or psychosisAs a
woman, I'm laughing at this, because I think these things are only
things you've ever heard inside your own head #Schizophrenia
much?@realDonaldTrump Your level of #psychosis and #sociopathic
tendencies is truly the only way you sleep at nightPersonal experience
of stigmaThe user describes a personal experience of being stigmatised
because of schizophrenia or psychosisBeing #Schizophrenic, on a down
phase, relating traumas to therapist, they like to tell me I'm a
coldblooded emotionless sociopath. ]No! #BipolarMoving account of how an
experience of #psychosis and the #stigma that surrounds it, changed a
life forever https://t.co/yjkg3qAVbS\ SupportiveThe tweet is supportive
to those with schizophrenia or psychosisI love the insight into
#psychosis wish everyone suffering could have access to successful
treatment #moneyformentalhealthTy for your kindness. I also want to send
love and support to all those suffering #schizophrenia or
#SchitzoAffectve as well as family membersNeutralThere is a neutral
attitudeLife goal achieved today! Writing for The New York Times!
https://t.co/pfz6757QRc #Schizophrenia #mentalhealth
#workingfromhomeLet's do a Scottish sequel: Surviving #Psychosis
https://t.co/IGufn98Wz9\ Anti-stigmaThe tweet promotes a reduction in
stigma toward those with schizophrenia or psychosis@pfrench123 Always
great to see novel and engaging ways to break down #stigma in
#psychosis. We hope the project does very wellMIND MATTERS: Mental
illness doesn't always lead to #violence https://buff.ly/2hsyzBn
#schizophrenia #bipolar #treatment #getthefactsStigma typeSocial
distancingThe user expresses the wish to have no contact with someone
with schizophrenia or psychosis#IfYouSeeMeInRealLife you're not a
schizophrenic. If not go to your nearest psychiatrist now!
#Schizophrenia #MentalHealthAwarenessN/ADangerousnessThe user implies
that someone with schizophrenia or psychosis is dangerous and may cause
harmSchizophrenic Canadian who beheaded bus passenger walks free, won't
be monitored http://medicalnews.drifterup.com/News/Details/40640 …
#Schizophrenia @MedicalNewsLHAny excuse for #war. #American politics has
truly been taken over by #psychotic #warmongers at the detriment to
#humanity. #HandsOffSyriaSnap out of itThe user implies that the person
with schizophrenia or psychosis can ‘snap out of it’ by
choiceN/AN/APersonal weaknessThe user implies that schizophrenia or
psychosis are because of personal weaknessN/AN/AInaccurate beliefsThe
tweet indicates the user has a lack of knowledge or inaccurate beliefs
about schizophrenia or psychosisThe US Government is a split
personality… #Schizophrenia@ddanielsen you did all you could @F1abraham
can't be fixed, there's no fixing a person who is that #psychotic. @MTV
you made her fix itMocking or trivialising(a) The user is rude,
insulting or trivialising toward someone with schizophrenia or
psychosis; (b) The user uses schizophrenia or psychosis as an insultSome
people follow you, when you follow back, they unfollow. #Twitter
#schizophrenia@Pamela_Moore13 What kind of drugs is this POS on
#psychoticSelf-stigmaThe tweet implies the user has internalised a
stigmatising attitude toward schizophrenia or psychosisI'm going mad
today though I've been officially diagnosed as a crazy person.
Schizophrenia is a real downer #Schizophrenia #hearingvoicesI think I'm
starting to realize that everyone around me is a lot more in touch with
reality than I am. #psychosis #mentalillnessUser typeIndividualA user
who does not specify whether they suffer from a mental
illnessN/AN/AConsumerA user who states on their profile, or within the
sample tweet, that they suffer from a mental illnessN/AN/AOrganisationsA
user who states on their profile that they are an organisation, or group
of peopleN/AN/AHealth professionalsA user who states on their profile,
or within the sample tweet, that they are a healthcare
professionalN/AN/AMental health advocateA user who states on their
profile, or within the sample tweet, that they are a mental health
advocateN/AN/A
