---
author:
- Jan R. Oyebode
date: 2019-4
institute:
- "Professor of Dementia Care, Centre for Applied Dementia Studies,
  University of Bradford. Email: <j.oyebode@bradford.ac.uk>"
---

This passionate book gives insights into ways to understand and support
people living with dementia. It holds out a challenge to all of us to
remember the impact -- for better or worse -- that our words and actions
have on those with dementia. It highlights the imperative of acting in
ways that value people with dementia and enable them to continue to make
the most of their strengths; it does so by giving the reader
constructive, tangible, feasible ideas.

In making his arguments, Sabat uses the biopsychosocial framework,
speaking of the importance of taking a person-centred, holistic
perspective to appreciate each different person and his or her
communications and reactions. He argues that prejudice, stigma and
misunderstanding undermine morale and damage the lives of people with
dementia, leading to inappropriate regimes in care settings and
disrupted confidence and relationships.

It could be argued that none of this is new. Arguments for holistic
understanding of the impact of illness have been put forward for several
decades, including in relation to dementia, and the need for
person-centred care is already enshrined in UK and in global policies.
However, the continuing shortcomings in care and the prevailing myths
about dementia indicate that there is a continuing need to improve the
respect and care we offer people with this disorder. One part of this is
to educate successive generations of health and social care
professionals about the nature of dementia and of person-centred care,
which is where this book can assist.

The book provides a path into the territory of truly understanding the
nature of the sometimes-slippery concept of person-centred care. Its
success lies in its readability and it is easy to pick up. The text is
written in accessible language and is broken into bite-sized chunks by
the use of headings written in the form of italicised questions. The
arguments are based on research evidence and case studies, illustrated
by personal examples from the lives of people with dementia. The
superficial softness of the text provides a clever medium for some
challenging messages, which Sabat gently but insistently brings home.
They are challenges that are hard to refuse.
