===========================
Naomi Richman, BM, FRCPsych
===========================



Philip Graham
:Date: 2019-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

**Formerly Reader, Institute of Child Health, and Honorary Consultant
Child Psychiatrist, Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street,
UK.**

.. image:: S2056469418000748_inline1.jpg

Naomi Richman, who died recently at the age of 84, carried out
pioneering studies on the prevalence of emotional and behaviour
disorders in pre-school children in the 1970s and 1980s. She was the
first author of a monograph published in 1982 *Preschool to School: A
Behavioural Study*\ 1. A review of this book began by quoting John
Ruskin: ‘All books are divisible into two classes: books of the hour and
books of all time’. There was no doubt into which category this
monograph belonged, nor would her two co-authors – Jim Stevenson and I –
have been in any doubt that she was the inspiration behind the study.

The study was carried out while Naomi was based at the Hospital for Sick
Children, Great Ormond Street, and then at the Institute of Child
Health, London. It involved more than 700 3-year-old children living in
Waltham Forest. First, it demonstrated that it was feasible to produce
criteria for a ‘case’ in pre-school children. This was achieved by the
development of the Behaviour Screening Questionnaire, the first
specifically designed for pre-school children. It allowed the
calculation of the high prevalence of behaviour disorders in this age
group: around 7% for moderate and severe problems. Further, by following
children up to 8 years old, she and Jim Stevenson were able to show
that, contrary to the then-current popular belief, behaviour problems in
pre-school children and the language delay often associated with them
were not transient and part of normal development, but often persisted
at least well into the primary school years.

This study was the first (although many were later carried out by other
researchers) that examined the stresses leading to behaviour problems in
very young children. A particular set of problems related to bringing up
young children in tower blocks, and much of the concern for family life
in such buildings first arose from studies in which Naomi played a
leading part. With Jo Douglas, she went on to develop behavioural
methods of dealing with sleep problems in early childhood. These were
evaluated using controlled designs and found to stand up to rigorous
testing. Naomi and Jo published a best-selling Penguin book *My Child
Won*'*t Sleep*, which described their techniques, and then ran training
workshops for health visitors, enabling them to apply this management
approach.

In 1989, Naomi went to work for the Mozambique Ministry of Education,
first on sabbatical leave and then full time, on a Swedish Save the
Children Fund programme aimed at helping children traumatised by the
civil war that was then raging in that country. She developed training
programmes for teachers working in areas where large numbers of children
had been in direct contact with war and violence. From her experiences
in Mozambique, she developed her ideas regarding principles to help
children involved in organised violence.

Naomi also worked in Angola (with Pam Zinkin and Nazeen Kanji), Central
America, the occupied territories and South East Asia, organising
training programmes for children similarly exposed to violence. She was
strongly critical of medical approaches to so-called post-traumatic
stress disorder. She saw this as an often inappropriately applied
diagnosis that implied a psychiatric condition needing specialist
therapy, without regard to the frequently ongoing nature of traumas and
the ways culture influenced community attitudes towards them. Instead,
in her influential articles and manuals, she emphasised the need for
traumatised children to be reintegrated into their families and given
appropriate education.

In 1996 after returning to the UK, Naomi carried out a comprehensive
study of the psychosocial needs of Kurdish, Somali and Vietnamese
refugee children and families in Hackney, London. Out of this work, she
wrote a guide for professional workers entitled *In the Midst of the
Whirlwind: Manual for Helping Refugee Children.*

Naomi was born and brought up in Leeds. Her father, Louis (a
shopkeeper), and her mother, Gertrude (Gerti), were second-generation
Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe. She won a place at the local
grammar school, Roundhay High School, and from there she went on to read
medicine at St. Hilda's College, Oxford. After clinical training at the
Middlesex Hospital Medical School, she did house jobs, one of them with
the paediatrician Dermod McCarthy who insisted that parents of children
in hospital should, contrary to the then-current practice, be allowed to
visit at all times of the day.

Her psychiatric training was undertaken at the Maudsley Hospital between
1961 and 1964. After leaving the Maudsley, she spent some years in the
USA, some of the time as a research fellow on a course in the
epidemiology of mental handicap, which was run by Zena Stein at Columbia
University Medical School, New York.

Naomi was active politically throughout her life, both as a left-winger
and as a feminist. In 1980 she was one of a small group of women doctors
who founded the organisation ‘Women in Medicine’ to combat patriarchal
attitudes in the profession and to assist medical women in their
careers. She remained highly active in this group until it disbanded in
2002.

She was a woman of wide interests with strong political views, feisty in
her support for the underprivileged. A talented artist, she was also a
keen and knowledgeable birdwatcher, gardener, theatregoer, swimmer in
the Highgate Women's Pond and loyal friend to many. She did not have a
family of her own, but developed very close, supportive relationships
with her niece, Rachel, and nephew, David. In her later years she
suffered from Alzheimer's disease. Not always an easy person, in her
last years she became an altogether sunnier, more relaxed personality.
Naomi died on 16 June 2018 and is survived by her niece, two nephews and
three great-nephews.
