.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

‘I do not consider precision in diagnosis, or even assessment, to be the
main goal. I want us to remember that helping a child forward is the
main goal.’ Andrew West's learned lament for what has been forgotten
about the primary task of child and adolescent psychiatry is required
reading for anyone engaged in child mental health. Often ironic, his
text puts us in the position of a child visiting a Child and Adolescent
Mental Health Services (CAMHS) clinic: ‘the child will be looking for
some genuineness … children are as acutely aware of bullshit as they are
of condescension and they are not fooled’. Here is a doctor who sees it
as his duty to identify with his patient: ‘I know what it feels like to
be misunderstood,’ says Andrew, taking the further step to see ‘that it
may not be in [the child's] greater interests to be free of this
particular symptom’. That symptoms have functions is a sophisticated
perspective, encouraging the clinician not to hurry too quickly to
remove them.

Andrew cites the great paediatrician-turned-psychoanalyst Donald
Winnicott's view that it is necessary to ‘contain the conflicts … rather
than anxiously looking around for a cure’ (p. 2).1 In that spirit –
though it may only be for a short time – the psychiatrist offers himself
as a ‘powerful therapeutic companion’ who is ‘able to slow time down and
actually enable treatment to take place’. This creative encounter is not
likely when the clinical service has a very limited number of answers.
‘A parent says, “I want my child to behave better,” and the clinician
says, “this is ADHD; I suggest that you attend a parenting group and I
can prescribe medication for your child”. It is reminiscent of a
conversation between two deaf people along the lines of, “are you
thirsty? No, it's Friday”.’

Since diagnostic psychiatry became the dominant mode around three
decades ago, too little attention has been paid to consultative skills
in the profession. Andrew West proposes an ethical practice for modern
child and adolescent psychiatrists, placing particular emphasis on the
initial assessment and on the ‘saying goodbye’, both of which can be
powerfully therapeutic in themselves, whatever other clinical
intervention may be provided. Dr West obliges us to see the experience
from the patient's and family's point of view, where ‘treatment’ is not
just what is ordered after an assessment but something that ‘begins at
the point that the service accepts the referral’. A beautifully written,
highly intelligent and inspiring book.
