=================================================================================================
2.5 years on: what are the effects of a ‘frequent attenders’ service in the Emergency Department?
=================================================================================================

Soraia Sousa
Tracey Hilder
Christopher Burdess
Philippa BoltonCorrespondence to Dr Soraia Sousa
(soraia.sousa@gmail.com)
:Date: 2019-6

:Abstract:
   This study focused on an evaluation over 2.5 years to establish if a
   frequent attenders' service in an Emergency Department (ED) impacted
   on the overall number of patients attending as well as the numbers of
   their attendances. For this, three patient lists from April-September
   2015 and three lists from a matched period in 2017 were randomly
   selected and the two samples compared. Results showed both a
   reduction in the number of total patients identified as frequent
   attenders as well as a reduction on the number of attendances to ED.
   The study suggests that the implementation of a frequent attenders'
   service is associated with benefits, not only for the individual
   attendances per patient, but also in an overall reduction of the
   number patients classed as frequent attenders.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   The authors have no conflict of interest to declare regarding this
   manuscript.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Patients who frequently attend the Emergency Department (ED) have been
characterized as a heterogeneous group,(n.d.a)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.b) often
with complex healthcare needs who are at least as sick as non-frequent
attenders(n.d.b)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.c) and have been associated with a
higher expected mortality rate.(n.d.a)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.d) A recent
national Commission for Quality and Innovation (CQUIN) aimed to improve
the way services manage these patients. This was based on the Cambridge
study(n.d.e) which highlighted that there should be services designed to
integrate physical and psychological needs of these patients at the ED
interface. In the current CQUIN, a cohort of patients who attend
frequently is identified, and the pre and post intervention attendances
across the cohort are compared with a 20% reduction in attendances
required to achieve the target.

However, in the UK, the longer term effect of a frequent attenders' (FA)
service has not been evaluated in terms of whether such a service has an
impact on the overall number of patients attending ED who are classed as
‘frequent attenders’.

In Durham and Darlington a FA's service has been running since 2014
following the implementation of a local CQUIN with County Durham and
Darlington National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust in 2014/2015
which aimed to reduce attendances in those attending the Emergency
Department (ED) 20 times a year or more. Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys
(TEWV) NHS Foundation Trust was also involved in providing mental health
support via the Psychiatric Liaison team, and the North East Ambulance
service were the third partner in this project. This CQUIN was
commissioned in response to guidelines from the Royal College of
Emergency Medicine (August 2014).(n.d.f) Due to the relatively small
numbers of patients attending over 20 times a year the service saw all
patients attending 15 times a year or more.

The initial local CQUIN demonstrated a 46% reduction in attendances in
the cohort over a 12 month period compared to the previous 12 months and
every patient demonstrated a reduction in attendance. Similar outcomes
have been showed in other studies.(n.d.g)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.h)

This service has been in place 2.5 years at the time of this study and
an evaluation of its impact over this time period was conducted. This
evaluation aims to establish if a FA's service impacts on the overall
number of patients attending frequently as well as the overall frequency
of their attendances to the ED.

.. _sec1:

Methods
=======

The Frequent Attenders Service has been set up between the ED of the
University Hospital of North Durham in Durham and the Liaison Psychiatry
team. Patients are identified as frequent attenders by the ED if they
attend 15 times a year or more. Each month a list is produced from the
ED of all these patients. The list will have on it any patient who has
attended the ED department 15 times or more in the previous year with no
other exclusion criteria applied. The patients on the list are discussed
at a monthly Multi-Disciplinary Team (MDT) meeting with ED, Liaison
Psychiatry and the North East Ambulance Service (NEAS). The number of
patients in the list for each month is dynamic as each month there will
be new patients who meet criteria, some patients will be discharged as
they have reduced their attendances and others who will continue on from
the preceding month's list.

For some patients already involved in services, liaison with their
established care providers is undertaken as often those providers are
not aware of the ED attendances and are able to address the situation
with the patient effectively within current care provision. For other
patients a letter is sent offering them an appointment with the Liaison
Psychiatry team, sometimes in collaboration with a different team – e.g.
a joint consult with the respiratory nurses and Liaison Psychiatry.
Plans of care are put in place for all patients with contributions from
the MDT and the patient, if the patient chooses to engage. If the
patient does not engage, a plan is put in place anyway if there are
sufficient concerns about risk e.g. a plan may ensure that a patient
with health anxiety does not receive iatrogenic harm from unnecessary
tests. Education is also done with ED clinicians to look at approaches
to talking to patients who frequently attend and potential management
strategies. Two liaison clinicians (consultant psychiatrist and advanced
nurse practitioner) coordinate the service and contribute 1 session a
week between them on average.

This evaluation was conducted by randomly selecting three patient lists
between April-September of the year 2015 and comparing this data to
three randomly selected patient lists from a similar period in 2017.
This was done to ensure that the result was representative and not
skewed by a single particularly good or bad month. Therefore, the total
number of patients for each list was obtained and their average number
calculated.

Other data collected to compare the two cohorts was: age, gender, and
most common clinical presentation. One list from each year only was used
for this extra information. During the evaluation we followed up the
patients who had attended in 2015 to analyse how many were still
attending frequently in 2017. During this we noted how many had died and
what their original reason for attending was. This mortality data is
also presented in the results.

The data was collated and analysed using Microsoft Excel 2010. Consent
from patients and ethical approval was not sought given that the study
was a service evaluation of an established service and no patient
identifiable information is presented.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Analysis of the average number of patients attending 15 times a year or more
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Considering the period between April-September 2015, an average of 43
patients were attending ED 15 times a year or more, whereas this number
reduced to an average of 17 patients in 2017 as shown in `Table
1 <#tab01>`__. This equates to a reduction of 60% in the average number
of patients attending 15 times a year or more over the period of 2.5
years. Table 1Total number of patients per list and respective
descriptive analysis and t-test resultMonth
(List)2015MeanSD2017MeanSD95% CI for MeanTDfSig.
(2-tailed)14143.334.041316.675.5115.71, 37.616.7640.00252412334814

An independent sample t-test was conducted to compare the means of the
samples for 2015 and 2017. There was a statistically significant
difference between the means of the number of patients per month in 2015
when compared to 2017 (t (4) = 6.76, *P* = 0.0025).

.. _sec2-2:

Analysis of the average number of total attendances amongst the frequent attenders over preceding 12 months in 2015 compared to 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As can be seen in `Table 2 <#tab02>`__, the average number of total
attendances over preceding 12 months by patients attending 15 or more
times a year reduced from approximately 833 to 437 which is 396 fewer
attendances. This amounts to a 48% reduction on the total number of
attendances across the 2.5 years of the study. This difference was shown
to be statistically significant (*t* (4) = 6.38, *P* = 0.0031). Table
2Number of total attendances amongst the frequent attenders and
respective descriptive analysis and t-test resultMonth
(List)2015MeanSD2017MeanSD95% CI for MeanTdfSig.
(2-tailed)1731833.3389.97393436.6759.16224.04,
569.286.3840.003128695043900413

.. _sec2-3:

Descriptive analysis of age, gender and clinical presentation to ED
-------------------------------------------------------------------

As stated in the methods section, for this part of the analysis only one
random list of each year was considered. For both years, each list
considered showed a small majority of female patients (55% in 2015 and
57% in 2017). The median age of patients in 2015 was lower than in 2017
(36 *v.* 43 years old) (IQR 28.5–53 *v.* IQR 33–65).

Both samples also showed a similar distribution for clinical
presentation to ED. Personality disorders and alcohol and substance
misuse lead the most common clinical presentations followed by pain,
undiagnosed dementia and chest problems (most commonly patients with
respiratory problems) as it can be observed in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__. The
Figure also shows the general reduction in the number of patients
attending ED. However, this reduction is not the same across the
different clinical presentations with the categories of undiagnosed
dementia, children under 18, complex physical health needs and other
remaining unchanged from 2015 to 2017. On the other hand, a reduction is
seen in patients attending with alcohol and drug misuse problems,
respiratory problems, pain and borderline personality disorder. Fig.
1Clinical presentations to ED in absolute numbers. A/S misuse, alcohol
and/or substance misuse; BPD, borderline personality disorder; HA/MUPS,
health anxiety/medically unexplained psychiatric symptoms; PH, physical
health.

.. _sec2-4:

Analysis of outcomes for patients across the 2.5 year period of the study
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

It was also observed that all the patients who had been identified as
frequent attenders in 2015 reduced their number of attendances to less
than 10 per year by 2017 (some were not attending at all) and
consequently they were no longer on the FA list, with the exception of a
single patient (Patient A). Patient A is the only patient to be present
in the FA's list in 2015 and 2017 and has also the highest number of
attendances per year of both groups.

Of 13 elderly patients who presented as FA throughout the 2.5 period
analysed, 11 had a previously undiagnosed dementia and almost all of
those eventually required residential care.

It was noted that of the patients who attended in 2015, 9 had died 2.5
years later. Of these 2 were elderly patients who died of natural
causes, one was a patient with a terminal illness and 5 were patients
with substance abuse, 4 of which were alcohol related. In fact, when
examined more closely, of the 8 original patients with alcohol
presentations in 2015, 4 died within 18 months of identification as
being a frequent attender. Also, of note, none of the patients in 2015
who presented with a primary presentation of self-harm or suicide
attempts had died in the following 2.5 years.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The implementation of a MDT approach to reduce attendance to ED services
by frequent attenders has been suggested as effective by a number of
studies(n.d.g)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.h) and has therefore been recommended by
the College of Emergency Medicine. However, a significant number of
studies regarding this have been done outside of the UK which has
implications on how much information can be extrapolated towards the UK
population given significant differences in the national health care
systems.

This study observed that since the implementation of the FA's Service, a
marked reduction of the number of patients classed as ‘frequent
attenders’ occurred from an average of 43 patients falling into this
category each month in 2015 compared to an average of 17 patients in
2017. The average number of attendances of these patients for the
preceding 12 months also reduced from approximately 833 to 437. Both
reductions were statistically significant.

The reduction in the number of patients on the monthly frequent
attenders list from implementation of the service was unexpected. A
number of factors might have contributed to this result. As it was
presented in the results, with exception of patient A, all patients
clustered as frequent attenders in 2015 reduced their number of
attendances and did not qualify for this category by 2017, which means
that the 2017 patients' list (with the exception of patient A) was made
of new patients. This means that there isn't a cumulative effect by
which the list expands year after year as new patients are added. This
has also been discussed by other studies. In two
studies(n.d.b)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.h) it has been demonstrated that some
patients will qualify as FA during a period of crisis which is not a
situation that repeats year after year. Therefore, each cohort tends to
have a new set of patients while others are removed from the list.

Another potentially contributing factor to this result is the
educational component of the project in which ED clinicians are
encouraged to identify patients earlier and utilise more effective
management strategies thereby reducing the potential of the patients to
become frequent attenders.

The reason why early identification of these patients contributes to
reduction in their attendance could be related to early addressing of
potential conditioned responses that some patients develop by going to
ED. For example, in acute exacerbations of chronic pain, the patient
learns that ED will provide IV analgesics which will be more effective
than oral therapy due to associated immediate euphoria and deep
relaxation rather than just the analgesic effect. Hence during acute
exacerbations of chronic pain coming to ED becomes the learned response.
There is also an association of hospital in general as a place of safety
and comfort which has been referred to as the “brick mother” by
psychotherapist Henri Rey. Therefore, the patient learns that his fear,
which will greatly impact on pain, will be more favourably managed in
hospital than at home and this gives rise to a further conditioned
response. By acting early, this response can be addressed before it
becomes deeply entrenched and therefore patients can be better managed
in the community e.g. in conjunction with support from the pain team.
Overall practice has changed as well, with fewer clinicians prescribing
IV analgesics for acute exacerbations of chronic pain and there have
been fewer patients attending with acute exacerbations of chronic pain
as can be seen in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__.

Another way behavioural reinforcers have been addressed is by taking a
positive risk approach to physical health presentations, in particular
in patients with health anxiety. This has been done by minimizing the
number of investigations carried out in patients who have been
appropriately investigated and who do not present with new symptoms.
This has benefits for the system as it reduces the cost of the emergency
episode but also for the patient as it reduces iatrogenic harm by
repeated exposure to unnecessary procedures and harmful ionising
radiations. A consistent approach to this also helps stop the chain of
reinforcement.

It has been noted that for some patients, simply being sent a letter
informing them that they are a frequent attender and offering help to
address this seems enough to stop them attending. For others it is about
getting the relevant community services to work better for the patient –
e.g. often mental health services will not be aware that a patient is
attending ED frequently and this can be addressed through crisis plans.
Working with the community respiratory team has been highly effective in
helping patients who repeatedly present with respiratory concerns, or
referring patients to the pain clinic to come up with innovative
community ideas for managing acute exacerbations of chronic pain have
helped. These interventions appear to be the most likely explanation to
the difference in the reduction of different clinical presentations seen
in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__, with the highest reductions in pain, respiratory
problems and borderline personality disorder presentations.

In this study, female gender was predominant, whereas a number of
studies(n.d.c)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.i)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.j) have showed higher
prevalence of males in groups of frequent attenders. The mean age of
patients in the second cohort was 7 years younger and generally this
study presented lower mean ages than other
studies(n.d.i)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.j). Some
studies(n.d.a)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.k) have also suggested that the age
distribution is bi-modal with peak ages in younger patients (<40 years
old) and old age (>65 years old).

Two unexpected groups emerged that warrant further research: firstly,
older people who attended ED frequently often had undiagnosed dementia
and potentially older people frequently attending ED could be a red flag
for considering this. Secondly, substance misuse patients in this study
have a very poor prognosis. Half of the 2015 patients identified as FA
with substance misuse problems have now died. This has serious
implications for how these patients are cared for – they often do not
engage in usual substance misuse services and this warrants further
consideration as to what services models are needed to best support
these high risk patients.

Regarding the costs of frequent attenders to ED: Considering the
distribution of common presentations to ED in our sample, it is likely
that basic investigations such as blood analysis or an x-ray are done
which means that the cost per presentation will be around £127.(n.d.l)
If a more specialized investigation such as a computerized tomography
(CT) or ultrasound scan is done, the cost further increases to around
£207.(n.d.l) This calculation does not take into consideration inpatient
admissions (average cost £400 per night), or the use of ambulances
(average cost of £254 per attendance).(n.d.m) More than this, though,
are the costs related to excess mortality and morbidity in this group of
patients, whose underlying conditions are not being optimally managed,
potential iatrogenic harm from unhelpful tests, investigations and
treatments, poor patient and clinician experience and the
disproportionate amount of time these patients take up in the ED due to
their complexity. Of note, in the original CQUIN of patients attending
over 20 times a year, there was a reduction of 170 inpatient admissions
to the acute trust in the 12 months prior to the intervention compared
to the 12 months post intervention.

There are a number of limitations to this evaluation and results should
not be interpreted too broadly. The sample was collected from the area
covered by County Durham and Darlington NHS Foundation Trust hospitals
which covers a population with its unique characteristics that differ
from other areas. Moreover, the sample for the study was small and
therefore limits generalization into the general population. Another
important issue, as mentioned above is the availability of other
services which conditions the type of patients presenting to ED. That
said, most literature reviewed concentrated on the effects of service
implementation and therefore focused on assessing a single cohort of
patients pre and post intervention and analysis of those individual's
reduction of attendance whereas this service evaluation was able to show
broader benefits in terms of actually reducing the number of frequent
attenders rather than only the number of attendances per patient.

In conclusion: a frequent attenders' service can be effective in
reducing the overall number of patients attending ED 15 times a year of
more. This has led to the service being able to see patients attending
10 times a year or more. The most effective elements of the service are
hypothesised as being: the psychoeducation of clinicians; working with
patients and other relevant agencies to help them manage their condition
in the community more effectively; identifying and breaking the cycle of
the conditioned response these patients show to emergency services and
the liaison between different services.

.. _sec4:

Case study
==========

Ms D had a long history of COPD exacerbated by anxiety and previously
attended ED over 40 times a year. Following a period of brief
intervention with the frequent attenders' clinic which involved: joint
work with the respiratory community team; a plan with the ambulance
service to differentiate between an anxiety episode and COPD; a
management plan for ED; the patient becoming involved with a community
support group with the respiratory team; support with the local housing
and social support team. Since this intervention was put in place Ms D
has attended ED only once a year in the last 2 years (both
appropriately) and has had one additional ambulance call where the crew
managed the presentation at home.

**Dr Soraia Sousa** is a Trust Doctor in Psychiatry in the Tees, Esk and
Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Mrs Tracey Hilder** is an
Advanced Nurse Practitioner for Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS
Foundation Trust working in the Liaison Psychiatry team at University
Hospital of North Durham, UK. **Dr Christopher Burdess** is an Accident
and Emergency Consultant for County Durham and Darlington NHS Foundation
Trust working at the University Hospital of North Durham, UK. **Dr
Philippa Bolton** is a Liaison Consultant Psychiatrist for Tees, Esk and
Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust working in the Liaison Psychiatry team
at University Hospital North Durham, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.
