===========================================================================================================
Changes in smoking status, mental state and plasma clozapine concentration: retrospective cohort evaluation
===========================================================================================================



Inti Qurashi
Paul Stephenson
Chitra Nagaraj
Simon Chu
Richard Drake
Lewis Couchman
Robert Flanagan [1]_

:Correspondence: Dr Paul Stephenson
(paul.stephenson2@merseycare.nhs.uk)

:date: 2019-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To investigate the percentage of patients who commenced smoking after
   transferring out of a non-smoking forensic psychiatric unit, the
   corresponding clozapine dose adjustments, the effects on plasma
   clozapine/norclozapine concentrations and observed changes in mental
   state. We reviewed the notes and plasma clozapine/norclozapine
   concentrations of 46 patients transferred to medium secure units
   between July 2008 and December 2013.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Thirty-five patients commenced smoking. Their median clozapine dose
   was increased by 50 mg/d. In the non-smokers, the median clozapine
   dose remained unchanged. Plasma clozapine/norclozapine concentrations
   were significantly reduced in smokers despite dosage adjustment.
   Eighteen patients experienced deterioration in mental state after
   transfer; almost all these patients were smokers.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Approximately three-quarters of patients who were non-smokers by
   virtue of being in a secure non-smoking environment commenced smoking
   after transfer. Monitoring of clozapine serum levels and assessment
   of mental state in the immediate period after a change in smoking
   status is indicated.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1-1a:

Clozapine use in schizophrenia
==============================

Clozapine is the only antipsychotic licensed for use in patients with
treatment-resistant schizophrenia. It has a narrow therapeutic index and
pre-dose plasma clozapine concentrations between 0.35 and 0.60 mg/L are
associated with optimal response, although patients may show such a
response at lower or indeed higher plasma concentrations.\ :sup:`1`
Adverse effects are more likely at plasma concentrations above
0.6 mg/L.\ :sup:`2`

.. _sec1-1b:

Clozapine metabolism
====================

Clozapine is primarily metabolised to its principal plasma metabolite
*N*-desmethylclozapine (norclozapine) by the cytochrome P450 (CYP)
isoenzyme CYP1A2, with possible additional contributions by CYP2C9,
CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4.\ :sup:`3,4` There are significant
differences in plasma concentrations of clozapine between patients
receiving the same dose, owing to factors including age, gender and
exposure to tobacco smoke.\ :sup:`5,6` The magnitude of the effects of
the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in tobacco smoke in increasing
CYP1A2 activity are second only to dose on plasma clozapine
concentrations.\ :sup:`7` A systematic review of the effects of smoking
cessation on plasma clozapine concentrations found clozapine dose
reductions of between 30 and 40% were required to achieve pre-cessation
concentrations.\ :sup:`8` Neither the nicotine in cigarettes nor
nicotine replacement therapy products have an effect on clozapine
metabolism.\ :sup:`8`

.. _sec1-1c:

Schizophrenia and smoking
=========================

Patients with schizophrenia are more likely to smoke cigarettes, and in
greater quantity, than the general population.\ :sup:`9` An evaluation
from a UK forensic psychiatric medium secure unit found 84% of
in-patients were smokers before the introduction of a smoking ban, and
cessation rates after smoking reduction programmes are less than
7%.\ :sup:`10,11`

Ashworth Hospital is a high-security psychiatric hospital serving the
population of Northern England and Wales. The hospital has approximately
200 male in-patients who are detained under various sections of the
Mental Health Act 1983; none have unsupervised community leave. The
hospital became a non-smoking unit on 1 July 2008. Tobacco products are
not permitted in the hospital. This is a policy that is effectively
implemented as all hospital staff, patients and visitors are subject to
rigorous security measures, including searches in and out of the
hospital and x-ray scanning of personal possessions. Patients no longer
requiring treatment in a high secure unit are transferred either to
prison or to medium secure units. At the time of this evaluation, all
the medium secure units to which patients were transferred permitted
smoking.

.. _sec1-1d:

Clozapine and smoking
=====================

We could find no published study that documented changes in smoking
status and clozapine dose requirement after transferring out of a
non-smoking psychiatric unit. We decided to investigate the percentage
of patients who commenced smoking after transfer, the corresponding
clozapine dose adjustments performed, the associated effects on plasma
clozapine and norclozapine concentrations and observed changes in mental
state.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

The service evaluation was registered within Mersey Care National Health
Service (NHS) Foundation Trust. We identified patients prescribed
clozapine who were discharged to medium secure units (both NHS and
independent) from Ashworth Hospital from July 2008 to December 2013.
Patients transferred to a medium secure unit on trial leave remain under
the nominal care of the Responsible Clinician at Ashworth hospital and
are routinely reviewed by clinical staff from Ashworth Hospital; trial
leave is for a minimum period of 6 months and can be longer, allowing an
opportunity to review case records and changes in smoking status. From
the clinical notes we collected data on clozapine dose, plasma clozapine
and norclozapine concentrations, smoking status and mental state in the
6 months pre-transfer and up to 12 months post-transfer. Patients who
were either discharged without a period of trial leave, or remitted
directly to court or prison were excluded. Plasma clozapine and
norclozapine concentrations were monitored as necessary to help guide
clozapine dose adjustment. The last clozapine plasma measurement on file
was used as a measure of post-transfer plasma clozapine and
norclozapine. Information routinely recorded when requesting plasma
clozapine assays include the time and date of sample, time and date of
last clozapine dose, clozapine dose (milligrams per day), mode of
administration (tablets or suspension), duration of clozapine treatment,
age (years), gender, body weight (kilograms), smoking status (yes/no)
and other relevant information that could aid interpretation of the
result, such as co-prescribed drugs and the reason for the assay
request.

Statistical significance of analysed data was calculated using paired
*t*-tests and Fisher's exact test as appropriate.

.. _sec2-1:

Ethical approval
----------------

The service evaluation was registered within Mersey Care NHS Foundation
Trust. Ethical approval was not required; no individual patient is
described.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

Forty-six male patients with complete data were identified. All had a
diagnosis of schizophrenia (ICD-10 F20).\ :sup:`12` Ethnicity was White
British (*n* = 27), White Irish (*n* = 2), Black Caribbean (*n* = 3),
Black African (*n* = 2), other Black background (*n* = 4), Pakistani
(*n* = 2), Indian (*n* = 1), other Asian background (*n* = 1), and other
mixed background (*n* = 4). The median age at the start of trial leave
was 37.1 years (range, 24.8–56.0 years).

Plasma clozapine and norclozapine concentrations had been measured in
all patients before transfer (median time before transfer, 89.5 days;
range, 1–315 days). The median number of plasma clozapine assays
performed after transfer to a medium secure unit was 2 (range, 1–9).
Plasma clozapine was first measured on average 45 days post-transfer
(range, 2–345 days). A total of 72% of patients had plasma clozapine and
norclozapine measured within 1 month of starting trial leave; this
increased to 87% of patients at 3 months post-transfer.

Thirty-five patients (76%) commenced smoking after transfer and eleven
(24%) remained non-smokers (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). The average duration
of follow-up was 6.6 months in both the smoking and non-smoking groups.
Table 1Comparison of pre- and post-transfer data: clozapine dose (mg/d)
and clozapine concentration (mg/L)Smokers (*N* = 35)Non-smokers
(*N* = 11)Pre-transferPost-transfer\ *P-*\ value\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ Pre-transferPost-transfer\ *P-*\ value\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ Median
(range) clozapine dose (mg/d)275 (150–550)350 (175–750)250 (125–500)250
(200–400)Mean (s.d.) clozapine dose (mg/d)306 (101)376 (133)<0.01270
(104)282 (67)0.54Mean (s.d.) plasma clozapine concentration (mg/L)0.58
(0.20)0.43 (0.15)<0.010.47 (0.16)0.40 (0.14)0.11Mean (s.d.) plasma
norclozapine concentration (mg/L)0.34 (0.12)0.28 (0.12)<0.010.33
(0.10)0.29 (0.11)0.03 [2]_

In the smoking group the median clozapine dose before transfer was
275 mg/d and this increased to 350 mg/d after transfer; an increase of
27%. The median dose increase was 50 mg/d (range, 75 mg/d decrease to
375 mg/d increase) and there was a statistically significant decrease in
both plasma clozapine concentration and plasma norclozapine
concentration after transfer in the smoking group. In the non-smoking
group the median prescribed dose before transfer was 250 mg/d and this
remained unchanged after transfer (range, 100 mg/d decrease to 125 mg/d
increase). We found no plasma clozapine concentrations >1 mg/L in either
the smoking or non-smoking group post-transfer.

Mental state deterioration was defined as either a worsening of residual
symptoms after transfer or emergence of new psychopathology. Eighteen
(39%) patients showed evidence of deterioration in their mental state
and of these, all but one were in the smoking group (*P* < 0.05;
Fisher's exact test). The median time to mental state changes was 54.5
days after transfer as recorded in the clinical notes (range, 6–175
days). Ten patients, all within the smoking group, experienced an
exacerbation of psychotic symptoms (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). For three
patients who experienced increased psychotic symptoms, the trial leave
period was extended as a consequence. Notably, no patients in the
non-smoking group experienced either a worsening of psychotic symptoms
or emergence of new psychopathology. The remaining eight patients, seven
of which were in the smoking group and one in the non-smoking group,
experienced non-psychotic changes in mental state, including increased
self-harm, sexual disinhibition, amotivation, agitation and anxiety. In
all cases (*N* = 18), the mental states of these patients improved with
an increase in clozapine dose and no patients required readmission to
the high-security psychiatric hospital as a consequence of a change in
their mental status. Table 2Symptoms experienced after transferPsychotic
symptoms (10 patients)Paranoid delusions7Auditory
hallucinations3Religious delusions1Delusional memory1Non-psychotic
symptoms (8 patients)Agitation3Anxiety3Amotivation1Worsening
self-harm1Sexual disinhibition1

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

A not unexpected finding was that most patients commenced smoking
despite being provided with nicotine replacement therapy and smoking
cessation advice both before and after transfer. Studies have shown that
enforced tobacco abstinence in secure environments has little effect on
post-release smoking status.\ :sup:`13,14`

There is an established association between tobacco smoking and the
pharmacokinetics of clozapine, with higher clozapine doses generally
required in smokers when compared with non-smokers. A previous
evaluation of plasma clozapine concentrations before and after
implementation of a hospital-wide smoking ban found a mean increase in
plasma clozapine of 36% in non-smokers when outliers were
excluded.\ :sup:`15` We found a mean clozapine dose increase of 23%
(median increase, 27%) occurred in smokers prescribed clozapine and this
is less than the 40% dose increase recommended where one or more packs
of cigarettes are used per day\ :sup:`16` and less than the
recommendation to increase the clozapine dose by a factor of 1.5 over a
period of 2–4 weeks.\ :sup:`17` This difference may be because of the
effect of restricted time periods off the ward for patients in our
sample, who were in a medium secure unit, which is likely to have
limited their consumption of tobacco. However, it may also be that
clinical teams were cautious in increasing clozapine doses, or patients
were reluctant to take more clozapine, given the observed changes in
mental state in the smoking group.

We found that receiving clinical teams were aware of the association
between plasma clozapine and smoking status and the need to proactively
monitor and adjust doses accordingly. As noted earlier, 72% of patients
had plasma clozapine and norclozapine measured within 1 month of
starting trial leave and this increased to 87% of patients at 3 months
post-transfer. There were nevertheless adverse changes in the mental
state of almost half of patients who had recommenced smoking. It is
possible these symptoms were secondary to the observed reduction in
plasma clozapine concentrations. Previous studies investigating the
effects of smoking on mental state have focused on patients with
neurosis rather than psychosis.\ :sup:`18` We found that most patients
experiencing changes in mental state had psychotic symptoms, although
this may reflect the symptoms of this particular population from a high
secure psychiatric unit. However, structured rating scales were not used
in our survey given the nature of this evaluation.

Our study population was of a modest size and data were collected over a
minimum follow-up period of 6 months, allowing ample time for changes to
clozapine dosing schedules and changes in mental status to have been
observed. A limitation of this study is our use of case notes as a
source of patient data as case notes do not always include all data that
would otherwise have been collected systematically via a structured
interview. Our recording of patient mental status before and after
smoking resumption is therefore open to assessment bias. Additionally,
the post-transfer plasma clozapine and norclozapine concentrations used
in this study were not necessarily performed before the recorded dose
adjustments. Given the nature of this study (i.e. a service evaluation),
we did not control for clozapine dose when measuring the effect of
smoking on clozapine and norclozapine plasma concentrations. It should
be noted that the non-smokers had a statistically significant lower
norclozapine plasma concentration after transfer; we are unable to
explain this finding. Finally, we cannot be certain that the non-smoking
patients were entirely abstinent as we relied on patient notes to
classify smoking status; we did not measure plasma or urine cotinine to
confirm smoking status.

This evaluation is a reminder to clinicians that changes in smoking
status may cause marked changes in clozapine plasma concentration, and
require substantial adjustments in clozapine dosing. We anticipate this
evaluation will assist clinicians in the management of patients
prescribed clozapine who commence smoking after a period of abstinence
and advocate close monitoring of plasma clozapine concentrations,
clozapine dose and mental status in patients who change their smoking
status, to minimise the risk of relapse.

**Inti Qurashi** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist in High Secure
Services at Ashworth High Secure Hospital, Mersey Care NHS Foundation
Trust, UK. **Paul Stephenson** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist in
High Secure Services at Ashworth High Secure Hospital, Mersey Care NHS
Foundation Trust, UK. **Chitra Nagaraj** is a consultant forensic
psychiatrist in Low Secure Services at Hollins Park Hospital, North West
Boroughs NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Simon Chu** is a senior lecturer in
the Department of Psychology at the School of Psychology, University of
Central Lancashire, UK. **Richard Drake** is a senior lecturer and
honorary consultant at the Division of Psychology and Mental Health,
University of Manchester, UK. **Lewis Couchman** is Facility Director of
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring at Analytical Services International, UK.
**Robert Flanagan** is a consultant clinical scientist and Director of
the Toxicology Unit at King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest** None.

.. [2]
   Two-tailed paired *t*-test.
