====================================================================
Against the stream: early diagnosis of dementia, is it so desirable?
====================================================================



Carol Brayne
Sarah Kelly
:Correspondence: Carol Brayne (cb105@medschl.cam.ac.uk)

:date: 2019-6

:Abstract:
   The Prime Minister's challenge on dementia called for improved
   dementia diagnosis rates, based on assumptions of benefit to
   individuals and those who care for them. Subsequent policies have led
   to increased target drives for clinical practice to achieve early
   diagnosis of dementia through intense case identification. However,
   the current evidence base and treatment options do not support
   screening for dementia, and there is little empirical evidence that
   such intensive case identification and early diagnosis for dementia
   is justified without a better understanding of the benefits, costs
   and potential harms to individuals and services.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

‘Of course,’ many would respond to the question in the title of this
paper. The same response would be heard for any chronic disease. Surely
it must be better to detect a serious condition as early as possible.
Even to question this response could be interpreted as somehow unethical
or immoral. It stands to reason that the earlier a health condition is
detected, the more effective any intervention will be. Such is society's
starting point, endorsed by the successes and widespread promotion of
national population screening programmes such as screening for breast,
cervical or colon cancer.

In the case of dementia, following this reasoning, early diagnosis would
allow earlier treatment. The individual and his or her family would be
able to plan more effectively for the future, for example, to access
care and support and by making advanced decision plans.

To begin with, what is meant by ‘early diagnosis’ along the clinical
pathway of dementia? There is evidence that dementia goes through an
asymptomatic stage where there may be no clinical symptoms but precursor
biological and neurological changes. This may progress to an early
symptomatic stage, for example, with subjective memory complaints or
mild cognitive impairment (MCI), before moving on to a later symptomatic
stage where there is a clear effect on daily living with further
progression to advanced dementia.1\ :sup:`,`\ 2 Dementia is a complex
syndrome with a gradual evolution. In some people with dementia,
however, these stages may not be consistent or clearly defined. For
example, MCI has been defined as the grey area between intact cognitive
functioning and clinical dementia,3 but not everyone with MCI will
progress to a full diagnosis of dementia.4\ :sup:`,`\ 5

Further, there is a distinction between: population screening, that is,
screening everyone at a population level, including healthy or
asymptomatic individuals, with the aim of very early identification;
applying a ‘screening’ test in a clinical setting, where a clinician
detects symptoms during routine attendance; and using a ‘screening’ test
in people who are theoretically at high risk but where there is no other
concern for the clinician, the patient or family members.

This still leaves the question of what is meant by ‘early’. The Oxford
English Dictionary definition includes ‘in good time’, ‘before the usual
time’, and ‘prematurely’. Each of these definitions requires a different
type of evidence. ‘In good time’ suggests a time that is appropriate for
that individual within their context; ‘before the usual time’ suggests a
pre-emptive or screening process without implication of benefit or harm;
while ‘prematurely’ suggests the possibility of harm.

David Cameron's Prime Minister's challenge on dementia called for
improved dementia diagnosis rates.6 However, it is unclear whether this
challenge reflected a push for diagnosis earlier along the clinical
pathway or a concern that much more advanced cases of dementia, were
being missed. Whatever was intended, subsequent policies and rhetoric
have led to strong, target-driven pressure for clinical practice in
England to achieve greater levels of ‘early’ diagnosis of dementia
through increased case identification. This drive for increased early
diagnosis assumes it is beneficial for all people with dementia, without
concern for the possibility that this might divert resources from other
services.

A drive for diagnosis earlier along the pathway requires (1) screening
and diagnostic methods with high sensitivity and specificity; (2)
adequate support and follow-up to confirm the diagnosis; (3) the
availability of effective treatment and support; and (4) the
availability of sufficient services to provide diagnosis, treatment and
support. There is an implicit assumption here that evidence-based
intervention provides a positive change in prognosis for individuals
and/or the well-being of those around them. Although this assumption is
justified for the national cancer screening programmes described
previously, this is not the case for dementia.

At the present time, population screening for dementia for all people
aged over 65 is not recommended by the UK National Screening Committee,7
despite regular revisiting of the evidence. The UK's Committee concluded
that the current best screening test for dementia does not accurately
identify those people who have dementia and those who do not. For every
100 people aged 65 tested, 18 would test positive, but only six of these
would have dementia and one case would be missed.7 A substantial
proportion of those tested would therefore be ‘false positives’.
Crucially, in order to recommend screening, treatments need to be
available that would slow or even prevent dementia. The Committee
concluded that such treatments do not exist for dementia at present.

Additionally, for population screening programmes to be introduced,
population-relevant evidence, usually in the form of trials conducted in
relevant populations, is required. For those conditions where national
screening has been introduced, the benefits to the population have been
tested and estimated and there are effective treatments available.

Thus, to justify the introduction on a national basis of intense case
identification, a robust and rigorous evidence base is required.8 To
date, no trial of intensive case identification for dementia has
examined the likely effects, benefits and harm. The only evidence that
is currently available is from those people who have been identified
through existing identification approaches, with no systematic attention
to any harm that might have been experienced.

Individuals identified through intense case identification and screening
will have different natural histories from those identified through
services. They are more likely to be wrongly diagnosed or, if accurately
diagnosed, to have a benign course. In the absence of a well-designed
trial, the benefits assumed from early diagnosis, such as support and
service provision, are inevitably exaggerated. While assumed benefits of
early diagnosis include planning support and services, reducing crises
and family stabilisation, a number of adverse effects such as anxiety,
depression and uncertainty about the future have been reported.9
Excessive health anxiety can also be created by screening, particularly
when findings are equivocal, leading to additional suffering and
abnormal internet use (cyberchondria). There is also potential for
diagnostic errors and diversion of resources and services from those
clearly manifest cases of dementia where individuals and their families
have sought help. Anxiety, depression and concern about the future have
similarly been reported following a diagnosis of MCI.10

The process of diagnosis of dementia has been described as a
‘collective, cumulative, contingent process’11 that often develops over
time. A diagnosis of dementia affects not just the person with dementia,
but also their family members and the services around them. Reactions to
a diagnosis and readiness for a diagnosis vary between individuals with
dementia and their family/carers,12 so it is important that the
diagnosis of dementia is ‘timely’ or ‘in good time’ both for the person
with dementia and the people around them. This concept of timely
diagnosis means disclosure of the diagnosis at the ‘right time for the
individual with consideration of their preferences and unique
circumstances’.13

The pathway from early identification of suspected symptoms usually
involves referral to specialist secondary care assessment, often to
memory clinics. The number of patients referred to memory clinics
increased by 31% from 2013 to 2014,14 and those people with dementia
estimated to have received a formal diagnosis increased from 42% in 2012
to 62% in 2015.15 However, confusion about complex referral criteria
resulting from the drive for early diagnosis to memory clinics may have
resulted in delaying referral, with a resulting negative effect on
timely diagnosis.15

It has also been argued that relying solely on opportunistic diagnosis
may lead to avoidable harm. For example, it is often stated that late
diagnosis results in higher rate of falls of people with unrecognised
dementia, or confusion after hospital admissions. Late diagnosis may
leave people insufficient time to plan for the future. Diagnoses are
still too often made after a crisis. However, these claims are difficult
to test empirically – people who already have a diagnosis also
experience these problems; it remains uncertain whether diagnosing
dementia at an ‘earlier’ stage would have made a difference to an
individual.

Research is needed to address these uncertainties, including
experimental designs in the introduction of service changes. The
introduction of major initiatives for vulnerable populations without
evaluation is extremely costly and has an inevitable harmful effect on
already overstretched services.

Currently, clinical efforts should be focused on achieving a *timely
diagnosis* defined as when people with dementia and those around them
are ready for and will benefit from it. Until there are effective
treatments for dementia, and the benefits of early diagnosis to
individuals and the effects of adequate support on individuals and
services have been rigorously evaluated, the benefits, costs and
potential harms of early diagnosis remain uncertain.

**Carol Brayne** is Professor of Public Health Medicine at the Cambridge
Institute of Public Health, School of Clinical Medicine, University of
Cambridge, UK. **Sarah Kelly** is a research associate at the Cambridge
Institute of Public Health, School of Clinical Medicine, University of
Cambridge, UK.
