---
abstract: |
  Cate Bailey outlines the origin and goals of the new trainees\'
  section of the *BJPsych Bulletin*. 'Praxis' will involve two
  components. The first will be clinically inspired and problem based.
  Trainees will have an opportunity to collaborate with experts from
  different disciplines to examine how existing literature and knowledge
  can be applied to practice, with a clinical scenario forming the basis
  for discussion. The second component will be made up of commissioned
  or proposed editorial-type articles on subjects which fall broadly
  under the heading of personal and professional development. This will
  offer a space for reflection on relevant contemporary topics such as
  resilience, burnout, supervision, and patient involvement and
  co-production.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a1}

  C.B. is editor of the *BJPsych Bulletin* trainees\' section.
author:
- Cate BaileyCorrespondence to Cate Bailey (<cate.bailey@nhs.net>)
date: 2019-6
institute:
- East London NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
title: Praxis makes perfect?
---

It was a surprising, not to mention slightly terrifying honour to be
offered the role of Editor of the new trainees\' section of the *BJPsych
Bulletin*. Three years after achieving my membership of the Royal
College of Psychiatrists, I find I have stumbled into the heart of the
institution itself. So perhaps I am justified in experiencing an episode
of acute (on chronic) imposter syndrome. Each of the RCPsych journals
were, to my colleagues and I training in Australia, the most esteemed
publications one could imagine. Until now, my own attempts to grace
these pages had been limited to poetry -- though those two small
references, I think, have added significant gravitas to an otherwise
relatively slim academic CV.

The *BJPsych Bulletin* has a long history of offering trainees
opportunities where they can gain editing experience. Since 1999, the
*Psychiatric Bulletin*, as it was formerly known, held posts for
trainees to sit on the Editorial board, engage in peer reviewing and
develop an individually selected project during their three-year
tenure.^1^ This new post, however, represents a unique challenge to
create an entirely new section focusing on trainees and education. It is
already apparent that the *Bulletin* regularly publishes on topics of
education and training, and on clinical issues relevant to trainees.
This is perhaps why it is one of the most frequently read journals among
trainee psychiatrists in the UK.^2^ So, how to take this further?

While preparing for the interview for the post, I allowed my mind to run
wild with all the things I would like to read about: issues I felt were
pertinent to the trainees of today, and the psychiatrists of tomorrow,
in the current climate of uncertainty and austerity. These are strange
times indeed. Core trainee recruitment is up by a third, at least in
part thanks to the RCPsych \#choosepsychiatry campaign, which aimed to
challenge the perceptions that patients with mental health conditions
don\'t get better, and portrayed the specialty as a unique chance to
understand a person from multiple perspectives.^3^ These figures are
more impressive still, given that applications to specialty training are
falling overall and junior doctors are apparently leaving in droves.^4^
However, the life of psychiatry trainees is far from rosy, as eloquently
outlined in the trainee-led review into morale and training in
psychiatry, aptly titled 'Supported and Valued?'.^5^

The new section, is of course, a work in progress and will no doubt
evolve in response to the limits of reality, time and what is achievable
in the medium of print. Having said that, one of my goals is to find
ways to engage readers beyond the traditional journal form, through
online content, Twitter discussions and podcasts. Although a reluctant
millennial, and generally inept user of social media, I\'ve been
inspired in this area by my enthusiastic geriatrician colleagues
[@MDT_podcast](@MDT_podcast), and by psychiatrists Katherine Adlington
(clinical editor [@bmj_latest](@bmj_latest) and
[@Kateadlington](@Kateadlington)), Derek Tracy
([@Derektracy1](@Derektracy1); Editorial board member and social media
leader @TheBJPsych) and none other than the Twitter queen herself: our
distinguished president Wendy Burn ([@wendyburn](@wendyburn)). These
represent a handful of the growing number of clinicians and researchers
who are connecting creatively, finding novel and inclusive ways of
sharing, discussing and debating information. The Bulletin will be
regularly tweeting updates including news about the trainees\' section
via [\#BJPBulletin](#BJPBulletin).

Naturally the first task when developing any new section (after buying
fresh stationery) is to think of a snappy name. Inspired by
phenomenology and psychopathology, I found myself immediately searching
for German words. It was tempting to settle upon 'weltschmerz' (meaning
world weary, or 'mental depression or apathy caused by comparison of the
actual state of the world with an ideal state').^6^ Though perhaps a
little too sullen, it did capture something of the zeitgeist and the
mood of many junior doctors. Other contenders, although clever, were
slightly esoteric, e.g. 'verstehen' ('empathic understanding of human
behaviour').^7^ Perhaps if I had been more Twitter-savvy I would have
conducted a poll. But the aforementioned limits of reality (particularly
time) meant it had to be an executive decision. And so we came upon
'Praxis'.

Derived from Greek, praxis means 'the exercise or practice of an art,
science, or skill' or 'practical application of a theory'.^6^ In a more
occupational or neurological sense, it is the ability to plan or execute
movement (<https://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/>). It also
has further connotations in educational theory. Paulo Freire, one of the
most influential thinkers about education in the late 20th century,
regarded praxis as more than an action based on prior knowledge. Rather,
he described a dedication to human well-being, truth, and a perpetually
shifting interaction between question and answer: the application of
knowledge to action for change.^8^ That sounds a lot like psychiatry,
and what I hope we can achieve in some small way with this section.

The section will involve two components. The first has been modelled on
*BMJ* Endgames, and is clinically inspired and problem based. This
section aims to capture the fertile discussion of local case
presentations with more comprehensive analysis and varied perspectives.
Psychiatric presentations sit at the intersection of the biomedical,
social, cultural, and interpersonal, the past and the present. This
section will explore these often knotty and interconnected aspects, with
a clinical scenario forming the framework for discussion.

Trainees will have an opportunity to collaborate with experts from
different disciplines to examine how existing literature and knowledge
can be applied to practice. In any given scenario, possible avenues for
discussion could include neuroscience, diagnosis, formulation,
treatment, transference and countertransference, practicalities,
real-world service provision, and ethical and legal considerations.

The College is in the process of developing a new curriculum, and the
collaboration with the Gatsby Foundation and the Wellcome Trust has
already seen 'Brain Camps' being held around the country.^9^ This new
section may be a place where new neuroscience can be woven into a
holistic approach. Patient involvement will be strongly encouraged, and
we have been helpfully guided by the *BMJ* in this regard.^10^ A
template for these clinical types of paper will be available on the
website shortly.

The second component will be made up of commissioned or proposed
editorial-type articles on subjects which fall broadly under the heading
of personal and professional development. This will offer a space for
reflection on relevant contemporary topics. Subjects I hope we can
explore include psychodynamic and systemic approaches to resilience and
burnout, consideration of what supervision should entail, trainee
experiences of organising their own personal therapy, the experience of
discrimination in psychiatric training, and what meaningful patient
involvement and co-production looks like in practice and education. In
commissioning for this section, I propose to work closely with the
Psychiatry Trainees\' Committee and the College to ensure we are
responding to the needs of trainees.

As Dr Poole has said in his editorial, the future of the journal depends
on you.^11^ The success of the trainees\' section depends on trainees
and trainers pitching ideas for articles. If you\'re facing a complex
clinical scenario, the chances are that someone else is too. And if you
think you might never see your name in this journal -- believe me, I\'ve
been in your shoes. Praxis is about dialogue, so get in touch. As Freire
said, 'knowledge emerges only through invention and reinvention, the
restless, impatient, continuing, hopeful inquiry beings pursue with the
world and with others'.^12^

**Cate Bailey**, ST6 in Old Age and General Adult Psychiatry, Isle of
Dogs Community Mental Health Team, East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
