---
author:
- Lizzie Swaby
- Richard Holt
- Rebecca Gossage-Worrall
- Daniel Hind
date: 2019-10
institute:
- "Study Manager, Clinical Trials Research Unit (CTRU), University of
  Sheffield. email: <e.a.swaby@sheffield.ac.uk>"
- Professor in Diabetes and Endocrinology, University of Southampton
- Study Manager, CTRU, University of Sheffield
- Assistant Director, CTRU, University of Sheffield
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
title: "Provision of weight loss programmes and their influence on
  weight after 1 year: follow-up survey of usual care in the STEPWISE
  study"
---

In 2014, the National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
recommended that people with psychosis, especially those taking
antipsychotic medication, should be offered a combined physical activity
and healthy eating intervention.^1^ Moreover, from 2014, Commissioning
for Quality and Innovation (CQUIN) supported these recommendations by
introducing annual financial incentives to mental health trusts in
England to improve their provision of physical healthcare.^2^ However,
our previous survey conducted in 2015 of ten UK National Health Service
mental health trusts participating in the STEPWISE trial^3^ highlighted
that such interventions were largely unavailable, and where programmes
were offered these were variable and not always widely accessed.^4^

As a follow-up to our previous survey,^4^ and in conjunction with the
STEPWISE study,^3^ we investigated changes in usual care provision of
physical activity and/or healthy eating programmes during the course of
the STEPWISE trial. As with the initial survey, mental health
professionals completed the survey on behalf of the same ten
participating STEPWISE sites.

The number of trusts offering trust-led lifestyle programmes declined
from eight to four out of ten during the study. In those trusts not
offering programmes, patients were often signposted to externally run
services, such as council or voluntary-sector programmes, which was also
the case in the first survey.

Seven sites reported changes in services since the previous survey.
These included an increased awareness of the need for physical health
monitoring; expansion of existing services such as dietitians, healthy
living services and gyms; and new provision of services, for instance,
one trust had formed a planning group to develop a trust-led programme.

More trusts reported offering support to stop smoking than in the first
survey (60% *v*. 30%), with three trusts either being or becoming smoke
free since baseline, and more sites providing access to smoking
cessation advisors.

A similar number of surveyed trusts reported recording biomedical
measures prior to starting antipsychotic medication, but more trusts
reported ongoing monitoring of physical health measures at 1 year than
in the first survey, indicating a move towards compliance with the NICE
guidelines.

This follow-up survey suggests that trusts are beginning to implement
some aspects of NICE physical health recommendations, but the
availability of lifestyle programmes offered to patients remains
limited. Possibly reflecting the influence of the national CQUIN
programme, awareness of the importance of physical health in mental
health is increasing, and staff are reportedly more knowledgeable about
the services that are available to patients within their trust,
including programmes and facilities offered by external services.

Further research would be needed in order to generalise these findings
to all UK mental health trusts, as only STEPWISE participating sites
were surveyed, which may have resulted in a biased sample. In addition,
a longer-term follow-up may have revealed more substantial changes by
allowing more time to overcome barriers and implement processes.
