====================================================================================
The effect of integrated care on self-management and emergency department attendance
====================================================================================



Nikki Scheiner
Sarah Cohen
Ruth Davis
Tim Gale
Amanda Agyare
:Correspondence: Dr Nikki Scheiner
(nikki.scheiner@nhs.net)

:date: 2019-6

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The Frequent Attenders Programme is a joint initiative between
   Hertfordshire Rapid Assessment, Interface and Discharge service and
   the Emergency Department of the West Hertfordshire NHS Trust, which
   aims to divert frequent attenders from the emergency department by
   addressing their unmet needs. This paper describes the range of
   interventions put in place from the time that the service was set up
   in 2014 until the introduction of the new national Commissioning for
   Quality and Innovation 2017–2019, which tasked National Health
   Service trusts to improve services for people with mental health
   needs who present to Accident and Emergency. The terms emergency
   department and Accident and Emergency are used interchangeably,
   reflecting the practice in policy documents. A subsequent article
   will report on the impact of the Commissioning for Quality and
   Innovation in Hertfordshire.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Analysis of the interventions indicated a highly significant (*P* <
   0.0001) mean reduction in attendances. Lower gains were made in
   patients whose primary presentations were alcohol-related. A failure
   to effect change in two patients led to a significant revision of
   their respective care plans, resulting in a subsequent reduction in
   their attendances.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   An integrated approach to patients with complex presentations was
   associated with high levels of both patient and referrer
   satisfaction. It is hypothesised that dismantling the barriers
   between physical and mental health may lead to similar successes in
   frequent attenders in other in-patient and community medical and
   psychiatric services.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In 2014, there were approximately 21 million visits to hospital
emergency departments in England; in 2016, this number had increased to
23.57 million. The increase between 2015 and 2016 was 5.2%, equivalent
to an average of 3216 more people attending each day.1 Among these,
there is a small population of patients who attend on a frequent basis,
despite not experiencing a medical emergency. Analysis of the data in
Hertfordshire consistently indicates that more than 80% of these
patients are either currently open or known to mental health services, a
figure that underscores a strong relationship between mental health
difficulties, unmet needs and a search for urgent help. The lack of an
integrated approach to mental health has been implicated in the
significantly reduced life expectancy of those suffering mental
illness.2

.. _sec11-1:

Rates of frequent attendances to UK emergency departments
=========================================================

The definition of a frequent attender varies, with some National Health
Service (NHS) trusts focusing on the admission rate of repeat attenders,
and others focusing on the inappropriate attendance rate. In Scotland, a
frequent attender is defined as someone who attends the emergency
department 10 times or more in a 12-month period, or more than 5 times
in a 3-month period. In England, in 2012–2013, 12 000 people made more
than 10 visits in a 12-month period to individual emergency departments,
with just over 150 attending on more than 50 occasions; some individuals
attended nearly 250 times in 1 year.

Official concern about these rates coincide with the release of official
figures in early 2015 that recorded the NHS's worst performance in
emergency department for a decade, with 8.4% of patients forced to wait
for more than 4 h after arriving at hospital. In February 2015, the
*London Evening Standard*, using information obtained under the Freedom
of Information Act, reported that ‘hundreds’ of patients are visiting
London hospitals on more than 20 occasions each year.3 In February 2016,
the London Ambulance Service disclosed that they currently had 47 768
‘non-managed’ frequent callers in the capital, resulting in an excess of
183 000 conveyances to hospital.4 In June 2017, the *Quarterly
Monitoring Report* of The King's Fund, reported that in the previous 12
months, 2,500,000 people in the UK had spent more than 4 h in emergency
departments, and that the finance leads of the Clinical Commissioning
Groups stated that the pressures on emergency departments are their
highest operational concern.5

.. _sec11-2:

Hertfordshire initiative to improve care offered to frequent attenders
======================================================================

The awareness of the widespread negative consequences of inappropriate
attendances at emergency department led to the creation of The
Hertfordshire Rapid Assessment, Interface and Discharge (RAID) Frequent
Attenders Programme. This paper describes the development of a joint
initiative between Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS Foundation
Trust and Watford General Hospital to offer standardised care to
frequent attenders. Both the successes and the challenges of
implementing individualised and co-produced care plans are discussed,
and are followed by reports of the outcome data for the first 2 years of
the programme.

The pathway reflected the shared understanding that patients suffering
mental health problems face long waits in environments not suited to
prevent crisis escalation; many self-discharge before receiving a mental
health assessment. Additionally, individuals may face negative attitudes
from general hospital staff toward people experiencing a mental health
crisis, particularly toward those who self-harm.6 Consequently, their
needs continue unmet and their attendances persist. At the same time,
resources are diverted from patients requiring medical treatment. [1]_

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

The West Hertfordshire Frequent Attenders Pathway
-------------------------------------------------

.. _sec1-1-1:

Aims
~~~~

The West Hertfordshire Frequent Attenders Pathway was set up in early
2014, expanding on an earlier RAID initiative that solely focused on
frequent attenders to Watford General Hospital who were also known to
mental health service. The revised remit extended to include prolific
attenders either not known or not currently open to services. This
reflected the finding that in the absence of a bespoke care plan, the
frequency of patients' attendances either remained consistent or
increased over a 12-month period. A core group comprising the RAID
Consultant Psychiatrist and Consultant Psychologist, an Emergency
Medicine Consultant and Senior Sister from the Emergency Department at
Watford General Hospital and liaison workers from the country drugs and
alcohol service Change, Grow, Live, initially met on a monthly basis
(now bi-weekly) to identify patients who had attended the emergency
department more than 15 times in a 12-month period, or who showed a
recent escalating pattern of attendance (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__:
2009–2013). Fig. 1Presenting complaints of frequent attenders to Watford
General Hospital.

.. _sec1-1-2:

Method: from single intervention to biopsychosocial assessment and multiagency meetings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before the 2017–2019 Commissioning for Quality and Innovation (CQUIN),
which tasks NHS trusts to achieve a 20% reduction in attendances of
patients with mental health difficulties to Accident and Emergency (A&E)
departments, referrals were accepted from clinical navigators in the
acute general hospital and all staff working in the emergency department
and the RAID teams. Cases were prioritised according to clinical need,
and individual interventions put in place as appropriate. In some cases,
this was as simple as sending an email to a specialty consultant asking
for a review of the patient's condition, or involving district nurses in
ongoing care of patients' daily needs.

Patients with comorbid physical and mental illness, or only with mental
health difficulties, were invited to an assessment with the consultant
psychologist. The key features of the assessment were its comprehensive
evaluation of all areas of the patient's life (domestic, social,
occupational), whether problematic or not, and the lack of time
constraint. This enabled the clinician and the patient to achieve a
joint understanding of the precipitating and maintaining factors for the
frequent emergency department attendances, and formulate a bespoke and
dynamic care plan, which could be modified as the patient's
circumstances changed.

Patients with more complex presentations, for example, with multiple
comorbidities and/or psychosocial difficulties, were discussed at a
multiagency meeting, with the patient's general practitioner (GP)
playing a pivotal role. To maximise attendance of involved
professionals, invitations were sent out 2–3 weeks in advance, and
followed up by a telephone call. Meetings were often arranged to take
place at the patient's local surgery to accommodate GP clinic schedules;
alternatively, conference call facilities were arranged. Participating
agencies included the emergency services (the police, the east of
England ambulance service, and – on occasion – the fire service), social
services, specialty consultants, pain nurses, housing associations,
children and family services, community mental health services, service
managers and representatives of the two trusts' respective legal
departments. In cases when key stakeholders were unable to attend or
contribute by telephone, the findings, together with the meeting's draft
care plan, were mailed to them.

.. _sec1-2:

The care plan
-------------

The patient's and/or carer's involvement in the planning meeting varied
between individuals. In cases where guardianship is discussed,
family/carers are routinely invited; where there are known engagement
difficulties, the patients and their families (if they so wished) were
invited to join the second part of the meeting, which would typically be
attended by fewer clinicians to reduce potential stress for the patient.
Following the agreement with, or at least the acceptance of the draft
plan by all stakeholders, it was signed by the patient and a nominated
health professional (usually the patient's care coordinator) and then
distributed to all agencies and services, including the Mental Health
Helpline. A copy of the care plan, including its review date, is kept in
the patient's emergency department folder, so that it can be accessed
whenever they attend, including out of hours, when junior doctors often
come under pressure from patients to provide inappropriate treatments.

A more flexible approach was adopted with patients whose lives tended to
be more chaotic often because of psychosocial issues such as
homelessness and addiction. The Multi-Disciplinary Team discussion of
the needs of these individuals would typically end with an agreement
that if they attended the emergency department, the RAID psychologist
would be advised so that (if possible) an on-site assessment could be
conducted. If this was not possible, the patient would be invited to a
biopsychosocial assessment. If the patient did not attend, an attempt
was made (with the patient's consent) to meet at their GP surgery.
Assessments have also been conducted at a homeless hotel, an
intervention dependent upon both the assessor's availability at the time
the patient presented and the patient's state of sobriety.

In all cases, emphasis is placed on the therapeutic ethos of the care
plan: professionals attempt to balance what is given to the patient (for
example, a referral to psychological therapy or access to community
activities) with what is taken away from the patient (for example,
ambulance conveyance to the A&E department on demand). If the patient's
circumstances change, an earlier review meeting may be called.

.. _sec1-3:

Non-engagement
--------------

Patient non-engagement with services does not preclude the
implementation of a multiagency care plan. It may change, however, the
nature of the interventions. *In extremis*, the emergency services (both
the police and the ambulance service) imposed a malicious telephony fine
for wasting emergency services' time or, on very rare occasions, made an
application to the court to demote the security of tenancy or evict a
tenant whose frequent calls and troublesome behaviour significantly
affected the mental health of vulnerable neighbours. The Frequent
Attenders Programme trialled a collaboration with an organisation that
worked with those with chaotic lifestyles (typically homelessness and
substance misuse) who cost the NHS in excess of £75 000 *per annum*. The
organisation, Reducing Chaos, provided transport to patients to support
them to attend medical appointments, benefits interviews, addiction
groups and meetings relating to their housing.

.. _sec1-4:

Data confidentiality
--------------------

Terms of Reference for the Frequent Attenders Programme are sent to the
Caldicott Guardian of all participating agencies and services to enable
the sharing of information on a need-to-know basis.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

In demographic terms, the largest number of frequent attenders were
women in the 26–39 years age group. In terms of cost to the NHS, the
most expensive group were the over 65 years age group of both genders.
These patients typically lived alone, had limited social networks and
appeared to derive considerable comfort from the care and attention they
received in the emergency department. Young adults (18–25 years) were
disproportionately represented in the cohort, highlighting both the lack
of good transition services between child and adult mental health
services, and the need for improvement in treatments for those with
emerging personality disorders.

In the first 2 years of the Frequent Attender Programme, 126 patients
were referred to the Frequent Attender Pathway, 90 of whom were deemed
appropriate. Of the 36 not accepted, 12 fell below the threshold rate
for inclusion on the Pathway; 24 patients reduced their attendances
before an intervention was put in place, reflecting an improvement in
their housing status. The number includes some out-of-area patients and
a small cohort not been previously known to mental health services.
Notwithstanding, the majority (>70%) are or have been open to community
mental health teams in the county. As expected, most of these patients
present with complex needs, including dual diagnosis (mental illness and
substance misuse) or dual diagnosis together with a physical health
problems. The primary diagnosis of the Hertfordshire frequent attender
population is represented in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__, although it should be
emphasised that there is considerable overlap between most of the
conditions.

Results for the first 40 patients to complete 12 months after the RAID
intervention, whether in the form of a biopsychosocial assessment and
simple care plan for a new frequent attender or a multidisciplinary care
plan for a patient with chronic and more complex needs, showed a
substantial reduction in attendances for just under 90% of patients. In
the 12 months pre-intervention, the mean number of attendances was 19.9
(mean, 19.88; s.d. 14.49); this figure dropped to a mean of 6 (mean,
6.00; s.d. 9.95) in the 12 months post-intervention (t(40) = 6.32,
*P* < 0.0001). The mean associated cost similarly reduced from £7557
(mean, 7557.58; s.d. 5545.79) 12 months pre-intervention to £2097 (mean,
2097.29; s.d. 3904.20) in the 12 months post-intervention (t(40) = 6.12,
*P* < 0.0001). The reductions in both attendance and cost are highly
significant (*P* < 0.0001).

| In terms of attendances, the highest number for any individual in the
  12 months before the RAID intervention was 61; this patient has only
  attended once in the subsequent 24 months (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). In
  financial terms, the cost of the most expensive patient on the Pathway
  was £21 567. The average cost of attendance was £354, as compared with
  a minimal intervention cost of £67.00 (advice only) and the next level
  of intervention, which costs £87.00 (advice plus painkillers). [2]_ In
  another case, a patient attended 34 times before the care plan and 4
  thereafter. Table 1Patient vignettesVignette 1Vignette 2Vignette
  3Presenting factors45-year-old male malingerer; long forensic
  history67-year-old woman with history of childhood sexual abuse and
  social deprivation made multiple daily calls to ambulance service;
| asked ambulance crew to stop at Costa on the way to hospital; asked
  for sandwiches on arrival at A&E50-year-old man relapsed 2 months
  after leaving a private alcohol rehabilitation programme; because of
  the risk he posed to his children, he was obliged to leave the family
  home, and ended up sleeping on the streetsRate of attendance45
  attendances throughout A&E departments in South-East England45 A&E
  attendances to West Herts11 A&E attendances to West HertsCare planRAID
  psychiatrist worked with the police to place him on the Police
  National Computer, and negotiated a high threshold for detention under
  section 136 to avoid reinforcing maladaptive behavioursFollowing a
  professionals meeting, and with her agreement, she was rehoused in
  supported accommodationUrgent intervention, facilitated by the
  Hertfordshire FAP, the emergency department Medical Registrar, CGL and
  the Crisis Team found him a crisis bed in a residential placement,
  where he completed a community detox with chlordiazepoxideOutcome and
  new rate of attendanceOne in the 24 months following the planZero in
  the 24 months following the planZero in the 24 months following the
  plan [3]_

As shown in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__, alcohol is the primary presenting issue
in 34% of referrals. Patients with alcohol dependence often lead chaotic
lives and tend to present to the emergency department only when drunk,
making a meaningful assessment difficult. They also tend to ‘disappear’
for extended periods of time, either because they move between counties
or because they are sentenced to prison sentences, typically for theft
of alcohol. Their attendances also trace a different pattern to other
frequent attenders: typically, they have cycles of abstinence
alternating with cycles of relapse.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

Analysis of the results of the Hertfordshire Frequent Attenders
Programme underscores that the most effective way of reducing
inappropriate attendances and enhancing patient self-management is
locating the frequent attender at the centre of the care plan. The
Programme demonstrates that close collaboration between RAID and the
emergency department, an integrated multiagency approach and a holistic
assessment of the patient's needs improve outcomes. Although
individualised care plans can, at least in theory, be drawn up by the
Multi-Disciplinary Team in the absence of the patient, the patient's
involvement, which may range from a brief assessment in the emergency
department up to active co-production, is associated with a greater
reduction in attendances. In complex cases, co-production demands a high
level of flexibility on the part of the RAID team, including the
willingness to offer an outreach service if required. Giving the patient
the time they need to explain their difficulties is, unsurprisingly,
reflected in individual behavioural change.

The Hertfordshire initiative, as well as programmes set up by other NHS
mental health trusts, highlights that many patients who are frequent
attenders to their hospital emergency departments have received
suboptimal care or simply fallen through a gap in service provision. It
is clear that the reasons for non-emergency attendances are complex, and
multifactorial. Further, mental illness may or may not be involved in
patients' presentations: 24% of the frequent attenders referred to the
North-West London local CQUIN (2013–2014) were reported to have complex
psychiatric morbidities. Geographical variations reflect different
socioeconomic demographics and patterns of migration. What emerges
equally clearly is the close relationship between patients receiving
suboptimal care and the lack of integration both within and between NHS
trusts, and between the health and social care systems. The outcome is
either silo provision, gaps in care or duplication.

Several factors are implicated in the failure to provide comprehensive
integrated care. Separate commissioning arrangements for substance
misuse (a common reason for frequent attendance) and mental health
result in disjointed service provision for patients. A lack of
communication both between agencies, such as social services, the police
and the acute general hospital, and between community and acute teams,
forestalls any attempt of a seamless service provision. The problems of
commissioning and communication (service factors) are exacerbated by the
sizeable number of frequent attenders, often with dependency issues, who
access urgent care centres or attend hospitals outside their own trusts
(patient factors). In the first scenario, they may provide an alias, or
simply not give their full details. In the second case, there is, to
date, no communication between trusts unless a dedicated and savvy
emergency department consultant alerts colleagues in neighbouring
trusts. Requests from neighbouring trusts for information related solely
to the number of attendances of an individual are often delayed or even
lost in information governance systems. It seems highly probable the
current figure of the 200 000 annual unscheduled frequent attendances
are an underestimation.

It may be significant that frequent attenders typically make a high
number of complaints about the medications and investigations offered,
and/or their perceived treatment by emergency department staff. Some
inappropriately request admission; others self-discharge prematurely.
Many are angry; most are lonely. Those with limited psychological
insight may project their frustration with their lives on to the
emergency department. The experience of the Hertfordshire Frequent
Attender Programme underscores that a multidisciplinary and, where
appropriate, multiagency approach helps professionals manage their own
emotions and enables patients to reflect on their own difficulties and
make meaningful change. The strong therapeutic ethos of care-planning
and individual interventions deepens stake-holders' understanding of the
interplay between the medical, social, psychiatric and biological
vulnerabilities of patients, and is reflected in the positive feedback
from both patients and referrers. Exploring the reasons for
inappropriate attendances at the emergency department in an unhurried
manner, with compassion and an absence of judgement, helps identify not
only the predisposing and presenting factors in an individual's
maladaptive coping strategies, but also the biopsychosocial perpetuating
factors. Once the problem has been clarified, it becomes possible to
look for solutions.

.. _sec3-1:

Other frequent attender programmes and future directions
--------------------------------------------------------

Early work with frequent attenders in 2012–2013, undertaken by the West
London Mental Health NHS, led to the development of a local CQUIN in
Central North-West London. Building on the work undertaken by the West
London Mental Health NHS Trust in 2013–2014, a local CQUIN initiative
was developed to identify the most frequent attenders in each of the
nine A&E departments, and to create a sustainable model to reduce their
unscheduled attendances. The most common primary reason for presenting
at an A&E department in this cohort of 128 patients was substance misuse
and attendant problems (34%), followed by long-term medical conditions,
either with or without a comorbid mental health condition (27%). The
elderly frail with globally deteriorating physical health accounted for
15%, and the remaining 24% mainly comprised complex psychiatric
morbidity.7

A smaller pilot project (*N* = 20) targeting frequent attenders in the
Royal Bournemouth Hospital in 2013 reported that, ‘in many cases’,
medically unexplained symptoms drive unscheduled presentations to the
A&E department.8 This finding may be contextualised in light of the
report by Bermingham *et al* into the cost of somatisation among the
working population in England and Wales in 2008–200,9 which found the
cost to the Exchequer of patients with medically unexplained symptoms to
exceed £18 billion, a figure that may be compared with the cost of
caring for people with dementia.9 Costs to the NHS (investigations,
treatments, consultations) amounted to £3 billion, with the rest being
accounted for by benefit payments, loss of productivity through
unemployment and reduced quality of life. In the time since the
publication of the report, these figures have increased (Senior Policy
Advisor, Centre for Mental Health, personal communication, 2016).

Further analysis was provided by Clifford Mann, President of the College
of Emergency Medicine, who identified two cohorts of inappropriate
frequent attenders at the emergency department: those unwilling to wait
for a GP appointment and migrants, unfamiliar with the English system of
healthcare.10

The initiatives outlined above together with the work in Hertfordshire
indicates that the scope for developing the model is considerable. An
assertive outreach pathway is already being trialled by the Watford RAID
service. The pathway could additionally be extended to include frequent
attendances to GPs and to primary and secondary community services, as
well as to admissions to the acute general hospital. Integrated
commissioning with other projects that target unmanaged complexity and
frequent service use is already under discussion. The potential both for
sharing good practice, training and education at a local, regional and
national level is considerable. Helping people improve their quality of
life through self-management, as well as bringing about significant
savings to health and social care economies, benefits individuals and
the wider society.

.. _sec3-2:

Limitations
-----------

The limitations of the study relate to both internal and external
validity. The study design does not allow causality to be established
between the intervention (the care plan) and the outcome (the frequency
of attendances). Aware that the use of a control group or a randomised
methodology were both ethically problematic, the researchers compensated
by collecting both retrospective and prospective data. Future studies
will seek to establish internal validity by increasing the size of the
population studied and extending the follow-up period to 3 or 5 years.

The regional focus of the study limits its generalisability. Relative to
London, Yorkshire and North-East England, Hertfordshire (and other
regions of the East of England) has a small refugee and migrant
population. Comparing interventions and outcomes with the results in
areas with large populations of asylum seekers and migrants, who
typically use the emergency department as their first port of call, will
improve the level of evidence, perhaps leading in time to the
development of a national protocol for improving the lives of frequent
attenders.

We would like to thank Dr Niall Galbraith for his invaluable support,
expertise and kindness as a mentor under the *BJPsych Bulletin* author
mentoring scheme.

**Dr Nikki Scheiner** is a consultant psychologist in liaison psychiatry
with Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust, UK. She
is the founder of the Frequent Attenders Programme, together with Dr
Sarah Cohen. **Dr Sarah Cohen** is a consultant psychiatrist now
specialising in perinatal medicine with the Hertfordshire Partnership
University NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Dr Ruth Davis** is a consultant
in emergency medicine at Watford General Hospital, UK. **Professor Tim
Gale** leads the Research and Development Department at Hertfordshire
Partnership NHS Foundation Trust and is also a visiting professor at the
School of Life and Medical Sciences at the University of Hertfordshire,
UK. **Amanda Agyare** is a trainee counselling psychologist with
Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

.. [1]
   Hertfordshire RAID is currently working with the police to harmonise
   the risks assessments that the NHS and the police use to determine
   the most appropriate course of action when a patient leaves the
   emergency department before assessment.

.. [2]
   Figures do not include unscheduled GP attendance or East of England
   triage (£97 for ‘hear and treat’; £237 for conveyance). The costs of
   residential care placements are similarly excluded.

.. [3]
   A&E, Accident and Emergency; West Herts, West Hertfordshire
   hospitals; RAID, Hertfordshire Rapid Assessment, Interface and
   Discharge service; FAP, Frequent Attenders Programme; CGL, Change,
   Grow, Live service.
