====================================================================================================
Do patients get better? A review of outcomes from a crisis house and home treatment team partnership
====================================================================================================



Mohsin Faysal Butt
David Walls
Rahul BhattacharyaCorrespondence to Rahul Bhattacharya
(rahul.bhattacharya@nhs.net)
:Date: 2019-6

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The Tower Hamlets Crisis House (voluntary sector), in partnership
   with the local home treatment team, offers a brief residential
   alternative to psychiatric hospital admission. Here, we review
   clinician-reported (Health of the Nation Outcome Scales; HoNOS) and
   patient-reported (DIALOG) outcome scores collected from successive
   admissions between June 2015 and December 2016, to assess the
   effectiveness of the service model. We identified 153 successive
   admissions, and of these, 85 (55.6%) and 91 (59.5%) patients
   completed both admission and discharge DIALOG and HoNOS
   questionnaires, respectively. We analysed ten out of twelve HoNOS
   domains and eight patient-reported outcome measure DIALOG domains.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   We found a statistically significant improvement in nine out of ten
   domains of HoNOS and three out of eight domains of DIALOG.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   A partnership between a home treatment team and crisis house can
   result in positive outcomes for patients, as determined by both
   clinicians and patients.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1-1:

What is a crisis house?
=======================

Over the past decade, a nationwide drive to reduce and consolidate
in-patient psychiatric beds across the UK National Health Service (NHS)
has resulted in a concomitant growth in alternative models of intensive
care in community settings, including an increase in the number of
crisis houses.1 A crisis house offers provision for people who find
themselves in a mental health crisis as a community-based alternative to
hospital admission.2 The Tower Hamlets Crisis House (THCH) offer a
short-term, community-based service for people who find themselves in
significant mental distress, which is recognised to be potentially less
stigmatising, coercive and institutionalised.3 A mental health crisis
may be because of a variety of reasons, ranging from suicidal behaviour
with or without intent, panic attacks or extreme anxiety, psychotic
episodes or other behaviours that can potentially endanger the patients
themselves or others.4

.. _sec1-2:

Outcomes in Mental Health
=========================

Healthcare outcomes are the results of care in terms of patients' health
over time.5 Outcomes can be assessed by the patient, in the form of a
patient-reported outcome measure (PROM), or by the clinician, in the
form of a clinician-reported outcome measure (CROM). Over the past
decade, increasing emphasis has been placed on medical interventions
that yield high value for patients, with value defined as the health
outcomes achieved per unit currency spent.5 If value improves, both
patients and commissioners can benefit as the economic sustainability of
the healthcare system increases. Although home treatment team (HTT)
services are known to have inexpensive resource utilisation and foster
better patient experiences,6 there is little research exploring their
outcomes, particularly PROMs. The DIALOG intervention is an 11-item PROM
that assesses patients' well-being on a 7-point Likert scale. Only the
first eight questions of the DIALOG intervention assess patient-reported
outcomes, whereas the last three domains assess patient experiences. The
Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS) intervention is a 12-item
CROM intervention assessing four domains on a five-point Likert scale
(0–4): behavioural problems, impairment, symptomatic problems and social
problems.

.. _sec1-3:

Aims
====

To our knowledge, there is a paucity of agreed methodology for the
analysis of CROM data.7\ :sup:`,`\ 8 Similar challenges exist in
analysing PROM data, given no nationally agreed methodology exists to
assess these outcomes. The aim of this study was to measure the
effectiveness of the THCH, using routine collection of PROM and CROM
data.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

Data were collected as part of a routine service key performance
indicator by the voluntary sector provider in partnership with the NHS
trust and reported to the commissioners. The study received ethical
approval as a service evaluation from the East London NHS Foundation
Trust because the process did not involve any additional data collection
or patient contact.

In this retrospective case series, we reviewed HoNOS and DIALOG data
from successive patients admitted to the THCH at both admission and
discharge (two-point data), between June 2015 and December 2016. Data
were collected from quarterly reports submitted as a part of quarterly
reporting. To avoid double-counting, e.g. in patient episodes that
spread over more than one quarter, data were reconciled to ensure
patients who were admitted and discharged over two different quarters
were identified as single patients and double-counting was therefore
avoided.

For the analysis, the authors compared HoNOS (CROM) and DIALOG (PROM)
ratings at admission and discharge. Therefore, we did not analyse the
three patient-reported experience measures in the DIALOG intervention
(questions 9–11). This study did not assess domain four (cognitive
problems) of the HoNOS, as most of the patients presenting to the THCH
did not have cognitive difficulties. We also decided not to assess
domain eight of the HoNOS intervention (other mental and behavioural
problems: specify A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I or J, where A is phobic, B
is anxiety, C is obsessive–compulsive, D is mental strain/tension, E is
dissociative, F is somatoform, G is eating, H is sleep, I is sexual and
J is other, specify) because of the heterogeneity of conditions that are
assessed in this domain. As a secondary outcome measure, the number of
patients who required acute hospital admission or terminated their
treatment in an unscheduled manner over this period were noted.

Results are displayed as the means ± s.e.m. Statistical significance
between the two-point PROM and CROM data-sets were determined by a
paired *t*-test. All statistical tests were performed with GraphPad
Prism, version 6.0d for MAC OS (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA,
USA). Statistical significance was assumed when differences were at
*P* < 0.05.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

| There were 153 admissions during the time period. Two-point DIALOG and
  HoNOS data were available for 85 (55.6%) and 91 (59.5%) admissions,
  respectively. Among those for whom two-point DIALOG data were
  unavailable (*n* = 68): 47 customers did not complete the discharge
  PROM but had a planned discharge, 6 customers did not complete the
  discharge PROM as they were either admitted to hospital or abandoned
  occupancy, and for 15 patients there was no admission or discharge
  DIALOG score (see `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). Two-point and one-point HoNOS
  data were available for 91 (59.5%) and 62 patients (40.5%),
  respectively. There was >85% matching in the cohort of patients who
  completed the two-point DIALOG and HoNOS interventions. For HoNOS
  scores, we show a statistically significant improvement in nine out of
  ten assessed domains, where domain five (physical illness or
  disability problems) was the only outcome that did not reach
  statistical significance (see `Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__). Among the eight
  DIALOG scores assessed in this analysis, we show a statistically
  significant improvement in domains one (mental health), five (leisure
  activities) and eight (personal safety) (see `Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__).
  Comparing similar domains in the HoNOS and DIALOG (see `Table
  1 <#tab01>`__), we show some degree of mirroring in the clinician and
  patient responses, although there is some discrepancy, e.g. comparison
  numbers four, seven, nine and ten. Fig. 1A flow diagram of patients in
  the study. CROM, clinician-reported outcome measures; DIALOG, PROM,
  patient-reported outcome measures; HoNOS, Health of the Nation Outcome
  Scales. Fig. 2Outcomes of the HoNOS (CROM) score (*n* = 91). A lower
  mean score indicates a better psychiatric profile. The mean has been
  plotted along with ±s.e.m. CROM, clinician-reported outcome measures;
  HoNOS, Health of the Nation Outcome Scales. \*\ *P* < 0.05,
  \*\*\ *P* < 0.005. Fig. 3Outcomes of the DIALOG (PROM) score
  (*n* = 85). A higher mean score indicates a better psychiatric
  profile. The mean has been plotted along with ±s.e.m. DIALOG, PROM,
  patient-reported outcome measures. \*\*\ *P* < 0.005. Table 1A
  comparison of similar domains in the HoNOS and DIALOG
  interventionsComparison numberDomains assessed in the HoNOS
  intervention\ `a <#tfn1_2>`__\ HoNOS *P* valueDomains assessed in the
  DIALOG intervention\ `b <#tfn1_3>`__\ DIALOG *P* valueRelationship
  between HoNOS and DIALOG scores1Domain one:
| Overactive, aggressive, disrupted or agitated
  behaviour\ `\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Domain eight:
| How satisfied are you with your personal safety?
| Domain one:
| How satisfied are you with your mental health?\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__
| `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Yes2Domain two:
| Non-accidental self-injury\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Domain eight:
| How satisfied are you with your personal
  safety?\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Yes3Domain three:
| Problem-drinking or drug-taking\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Domain one:
| How satisfied are you with your mental
  health?\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Yes4Domain five:
| Physical illness or disability problemsDomain two:
| How satisfied are you with your physical health?No5Domain six:
| Problems with hallucinations and delusions\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Domain
  one:
| How satisfied are you with your mental
  health?\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Yes6Domain seven:
| Problems with depressed mood\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Domain one:
| How satisfied are you with your mental
  health?\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Yes7Domain nine:
| Problems with relationships\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Domain six:
| How satisfied are you with your friendships?
| Domain seven:
| How satisfied are you with your partner/family?No8Domain ten:
| Problems with activities of daily living\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Domain
  five:
| How satisfied are you with your leisure
  activities?\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Yes9Domain 11
| Problems with living conditions\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Domain four:
| How satisfied are you with your accommodation?No10Domain 12
| Problems with occupation and activities\ `\*\* <#tfn1_4>`__\ Domain
  three:
| How satisfied are you with your job situation?No [1]_ [2]_ [3]_ [4]_

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

Over the past decade, commissioning in health has rightly turned its
focus from commissioning for activity towards commissioning for
outcomes. The Five Year Forward View for Mental Health stresses the
importance of funding psychiatric services that have transparency around
quality and outcomes, and suggested these should be in place by
2017–2018 for adult mental health services.9

In recent years, the patient–doctor relationship has evolved: from a
paternalistic approach to one that is more collaborative with increased
respect for patient autonomy.10 Given this evolution in the healthcare
model, there is increasing recognition of the importance of involving
patients in the development and evaluation of healthcare service
delivery and quality improvement. PROMs are the tools that have been
developed to ensure both a valid and reliable measurement of
patient-reported outcomes. PROMs are directly reported by the patient
without interpretation of the patient's response by a clinician or
anyone else and pertain to the patient's functional status associated
with healthcare or treatment.11 Capturing both PROM and CROM data in
clinical practice provides a more complete understanding of the impact
of a healthcare intervention.

HoNOS is mandated as the nationally recommended generic CROM, to be
administered by mental health professionals.9 Although HoNOS has been
around for 20 years,12 currently no universally agreed methodology for
analysing this score exists in the literature.8\ :sup:`,`\ 13 The DIALOG
intervention was developed as part of a multicentre trial developed from
Mensa, and then further developed as a solution-focused therapy tool.14
The DIALOG intervention is suggested by NHS England as an effective PROM
intervention, but there are several alternatives, including the
Questionnaire about the Process of Recovery and Short Warwick &
Edinburgh Mental Well Being Scale.9 The analysis of PROM scores around
DIALOG is in its infancy.

To our knowledge, this is the first report to systematically compare
outcomes of the HoNOS and DIALOG interventions in a crisis house and HTT
partnership. Given no standardised approach to analyse HoNOS and DIALOG
data-sets exists in the literature, we analysed each item in the HoNOS
and DIALOG interventions individually to achieve maximum granularity of
data, as well as to allow us to compare similar fields in DIALOG and
HoNOS, which would permit a degree of triangulation of clinician and
patient perspectives. Our study shows that improvement in CROM scores is
not always reflected by an improvement in PROM scores.

It is encouraging that mental health (DIALOG domain one) and personal
safety (DIALOG domain eight) – the domains in which a mental health
crisis service would be expected to have maximum impact – both feature
statistically significant improvement in PROM scores. This finding is
supported by statistically significant improvement in similar CROM
scores assessing overactive, aggressive, disrupted or agitated behaviour
(HoNOS domain one); overactive, aggressive, disrupted or agitated
behaviour (HoNOS domain one); non-accidental self-injury (HoNOS domain
two); problem-drinking or drug-taking (HoNOS domain three); problems
with hallucinations and delusions (HoNOS domain six) and problems with
depressed mood (HoNOS domain seven).

Broadly speaking, there are four models of community base
community-based crisis services:3 (a) clinical crisis houses, providing
residential services with staff onsite through the night and have a high
level of clinical staff involved in providing onsite care; (b)
specialist crisis houses, which share similar features to clinical
crisis houses but are aimed at specific groups such as women and people
with early psychosis; (c) crisis team beds, which provide a small number
of beds aimed at short stays and are fully integrated with Crisis
resolution and home treatment (CRHT) teams and (d) non-clinical
alternatives, which are mainly managed by the voluntary sector with few
clinical staff but many have also forged strong links with CRHT teams.
Not all crisis houses have the same degree of collaboration with CRHTs,
nor do they all offer residential support; for example, the Dial House
in Leeds, UK.15 The THCH, established in 2010, is a partnership between
the voluntary sector provider Look Ahead and East London NHS Foundation
Trust (ELFT). The THCH service is embedded within the HTT, which
‘gate-keeps’ all admissions to the accommodation. There were initially
five beds in the facility, which expanded to a ten-bed service in 2012.
We would consider our model a hybrid of model (a) and (c) and our
results indicate that such a model is effective in facilitating patient
recovery. Given the heterogeneity of crisis house models, our outcomes
cannot be generalised to other models of crisis house.

Our study is not without limitations, one being the limited sample size.
Indeed, patients have a right to refuse to complete the DIALOG
questionnaire, which explains the relatively little DIALOG data compared
with HoNOS (85 *v.* 91). Although we attempted to administer the HoNOS
scale to all patients, this could be done more predictably at admission:
unscheduled discharges or very short admissions limited the opportunity
to obtain discharge, and consequently, two-point data.

Unfortunately, the data used to analyse CROM and PROM outcomes did not
include demographic details or ICD-10 codes. This information would have
clarified the groups of individuals who most benefitted from the crisis
house intervention. A previous multicentre study comparing the crisis
house model to an in-patient psychiatric service noted that patient
populations using both services were different with regards to gender,
ethnicity and ICD 10.16 This dissimilarity could mean crisis houses are
not a ‘true’ alternative to hospital admission, as the crisis house
service could be treating patients who are not as unwell. This is an
issue that does not affect the THCH: in a separate analysis performed by
our group in 2015, we reviewed the patient profiles of crisis house
clients (*n* = 299) and compared these with admissions to an acute
in-patient ward (*n* = 677), and found that patients matched on gender,
ethnicity and ICD-10 code (results were presented as a poster at the
RCPsych International Congress17).

For (the majority of) patients who demonstrated an improvement in HoNOS
and DIALOG scores, we are unable to comment on the precise intervention,
or indeed the interplay of interventions, that facilitated improvement
in their mental health. Was it being in a safe environment, the
therapeutic relationship, pharmacotherapy, practical support or natural
resolution of their social crises? In the absence of specific
documentation of diagnoses, interventions offered and a ‘control’ group
(e.g. an in-patient population), we are unable to discern the elements
of the crisis house admission that were effective. It is also possible
that this study has overestimated the impact of a crisis house
intervention in the HoNOS and DIALOG scores, given patients for whom
two-point data is available are more likely to have had a favourable
course of treatment, as they would have been more engaged with staff and
not made an unscheduled departure or required acute hospital admission.

In conclusion, we report evidence that a crisis house and HTT
partnership can result in favourable results particularly around
patients' mental health and safety as assessed by both the patient and
clinician. Our findings support the effectiveness of a novel partnership
model, supporting its continuance, and providing data to help mental
health commissioners elsewhere in determining their local model of
crisis care. Despite the study's limitations, its findings are worth
disseminating, given that the evidence base for HTTs is inadequate and
is even less established for crisis houses. Furthermore, the routine use
of clinical outcome measurements in adult mental health remains patchy,
despite significant national drivers. Our findings make a sizeable
contribution to the limited literature describing the crisis house
service, which is often poorly understood and infrequently commissioned.
We hope this study encourages similar services to routinely collect and
analyse PROM and CROM scores to develop a rich evidence base in this
field.

**Mohsin Faysal Butt** is a medical student at Barts and The London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, UK. **David Walls** is manager of
Tower Hamlets Crisis House service, Lookahead Housing, UK. **Rahul
Bhattacharya** is a consultant psychiatrist with the Tower Hamlets Home
Treatment Team and clinical lead for Crisis House, East London NHS
Foundation Trust, UK.

.. [1]
   DIALOG, PROM, patient-reported outcome measures; HoNOS, Health of the
   Nation Outcome Scales.

.. [2]
   This study did not assess domain four (cognitive problems) or domain
   eight (other mental and behavioural problems: specify A, B, C, D, E,
   F, G, H, I or J, where A is phobic, B is anxiety, C is
   obsessive–compulsive, D is mental strain/tension, E is dissociative,
   F is somatoform, G is eating, H is sleep, I is sexual and J is other,
   specify; all items are scored on a range from zero to four).

.. [3]
   This study did not assess domain nine (How satisfied are you with
   your medication?), domain ten (How satisfied are you with the
   practical help you receive?) or domain 11 (How satisfied are you with
   the consultations with mental health professionals?). All domains are
   assessed on a range from one to seven.

.. [4]
   *P* < 0.05, \*\*\ \ *P* < 0.005.
