---
author:
- Daniel Robinson
- Samuel Dearman
date: 2019-6
institute:
- "Foundation Year 2 Doctor, Cumbria Partnership NHS Foundation Trust,
  UK. email: <Daniel.Robinson@newcastle.ac.uk>"
- Consultant Psychiatrist, Cumbria Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
title: "Still room for improvement: standardisation of clinical
  correspondence and experience in a rural crisis and home treatment
  service"
---

The communication of important clinical information in the management of
our patients continues to occur in the large part through clinical
letters, electronic or otherwise. Poor letter writing which misses
important information and does not highlight key considerations leads to
suboptimal care. This is certainly true in the crisis and home treatment
team environment, where patients present with increased levels of risk
and are often discharged solely to the care of their general
practitioner (GP). Unfortunately, omission of information often occurs.
A study of letters from mental health services in London found a
mismatch between what GPs felt they needed to know and what was being
included; for example, only 17% of the letters in this study included a
diagnosis.^1^ Evidence suggests that structured letter formats take no
longer to read, are preferred by GPs, improve comprehension of letters
and reduce the risk of omission of information by the author and
reader.^2^

Anecdotally, we observed variation in our medical correspondence to our
GP colleagues and thus undertook a quality improvement project looking
at improving the quality and consistency of letters produced by our
team. This project was used as a developmental opportunity for one of
our trainees under consultant supervision to learn more about the
quality improvement process and to solidify trainees' understanding of
the psychiatric history, mental state examination and risk assessment as
core psychiatric competencies. We determined clinical letter
standardisation by including widely recognised components of the
psychiatric history and the requirements of our service operational
policy. We included diagnosis with ICD-10 code, formulation, risk
assessment plan and capacity to consent to the care plan.

In phase 1, using our standardised template, we examined all existing
letters from a randomly selected period (January and February 2018)
within the service. Of these, 44% included past psychiatric history, 38%
included past medical history, 19% included personal history and none
included forensic history. Mental state examinations also contained
omissions, with 62% documenting speech, 56% documenting thoughts and 63%
documenting perception. From the perspective of a crisis and home
treatment service, it was noteworthy that history of self-harm was
included in 38% of letters, risk of suicide in 81%, harm to others in
50%, risk to dependants in none, and risk of self-neglect and
vulnerability documented in 25% each.

The standardised letter template was developed collaboratively,
communicated to and agreed with all medical practitioners of all grades
in the service. It was universally implemented and allowed to be used
for 6 months. After this we again assessed the content of medical
letters, including all those produced for a second randomly selected
period (September and October 2018). A significant improvement was seen.
Following implementation of the template all aspects improved: past
psychiatric history (96%), past medical history (92%) and forensic
history (67%). It was reassuring that documentation of risk of suicide
increased to 100%, self-harm to 96%, harm to others to 96%, harm to
dependants to 80% and vulnerability to 84%. Regarding the mental state
examinations, speech was documented in 92%, thoughts in 100% and
perception in 96%.

Overall our results demonstrate that standardisation of doctor\'s
letters continues to be an area for improvement within psychiatric
services, but that relatively simple methods and collaborative efforts
can lead to significant quality improvements. We hope our approach
warrants consideration from the wider pool of colleagues as we meet our
duties to improve the quality of services^3^ and especially commend
engaging trainees in the process as a learning opportunity in an attempt
to add as much value as possible.
