============================
Suicide and the psychiatrist
============================
------------------------------------------------------------
: Commentary on… Effects of patient suicide on psychiatrists
------------------------------------------------------------



Allan House [1]_
:Correspondence: Allan House
(a.o.house@leeds.ac.uk) [2]_

:date: 2019-10

:Abstract:
   Research into patient suicide indicates that it has an impact on the
   psychiatrists involved, but leaves a number of unanswered questions
   about which elements of the experience are most likely to cause
   problems, who is most at risk, what is the clinical or professional
   significance of any effect on the psychiatrist and how other
   professionals are affected. Despite these uncertainties, it is clear
   that a response is needed, with three bodies responsible in different
   ways for coordinating one: the relevant mental health trust, as
   employer; the Royal College of Psychiatrists, as the professional
   representative body; and the National Confidential Inquiry into
   Suicide and Safety in Mental Health, as mediator of social and
   professional impact.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Something like one in four of all those who die by suicide in the UK
have had recent contact with mental health services, so it is not
surprising that many psychiatrists will have close experience during
their career of this worst of all outcomes. Neither is it surprising
that there are emotional and practical consequences of such an
experience for the psychiatrists involved.\ :sup:`1` A paper by Gibbons
and colleagues in this issue\ :sup:`2` describes the findings from a
survey of psychiatrists about their experiences of patient suicide and
serves as a useful reminder of the importance of this aspect of
psychiatric practice; at the same time the results raise a number of
questions about the specifics that lie behind these apparently
self-evident truths.

.. _sec1:

The nature of the experience of patient suicide
===============================================

What we are considering here is the idea of patient suicide as a life
event for the psychiatrist. That is, it is an occurrence that directly
impinges on the individual practitioner and has the potential to provoke
a response that may be transient and unremarkable or may reach the level
of intensity and duration that amounts to a disorder. What exactly is
the nature of the exposure being considered?

In life-events terms, patient suicide is a complex event. That is, it
has a number of more-or-less essentially interrelated features. There is
the death itself and its immediate circumstances; inevitably, there is a
formal inquiry (or more than one) in which the psychiatrist is likely to
be asked to account for their own involvement; colleagues and close
others make their own responses; finally, there is likely to be media
coverage.

In relation to the first element of this complex – the death itself –
the mention of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) raises a question
about level of exposure and proximity to the event. The UK's National
Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Safety in Mental Health (NCISH)
has defined recent service contact as being within the 12 months before
death;\ :sup:`3` the survey reported here asked about suicide of a
patient the psychiatrist had ‘been working with’, which suggests,
without being specific, a more immediate connection (proximity). Surely
the death of an in-patient in which staff are directly involved with
attempts at resuscitation will have different effects from the death of
somebody seen as an out-patient weeks or months before it occurred? The
question is – should we, in the name of efficiency, focus more on the
effects of some suicides (or the suicides of some people) than of others
or should we accept that all suicides merit a staff-support response?

Life-events research tells us that external events are not just shocking
in some non-specific way, they have a meaning that shapes the response
we make – loss causing depression, threat causing anxiety and so on.
While it is not difficult to understand the patient's death itself as
uncomplicatedly negative – with perhaps an element of loss, threat and
(under certain circumstances) the existential threat that constitutes
trauma – the other elements of the exposure outlined above are less
clear cut. They may be negative – critical, blaming, inducing guilt – or
they may be positive – conveying support, affirmation, exoneration. It
is difficult to see that these other aspects of the experience can be
avoided, so the question is – can they be moderated either by direct
influence on other parties or by support for the involved psychiatrist?

.. _sec2:

Who is most at risk?
====================

Life-events research has produced a certain amount of ambiguity about
the cumulative effect of multiple events. If one event is not severe
enough to cause an emotional problem, what about several subthreshold
events, are they additive? One of the more surprising (to me) findings
from the present study\ :sup:`1` relates to the number of respondents
who had experience of multiple patient suicides. Is this a question of
age (years of exposure)? Area of work? What difference does it make? Is
this a situation where multiple exposure sensitises or desensitises?
This sort of accumulated experience of patient suicide is not likely to
be picked up by suicide review, where the focus is on the patient and
their care. Rather, it raises a question about staff review and how
uncommon but important events can be monitored over time.

.. _sec3:

What exactly are the effects?
=============================

One of the inevitable weaknesses of questionnaire surveys is that they
leave certain questions underexplored, and in this case it is difficult
to judge exactly how severe the reported responses were. Clearly, the
emotional effect of such an event can be significant, but in clinical
terms even in a selected sample only a very small number took time off
work or thought they were ill. It is not clear how many respondents
sought professional help for their mental health, although about a
quarter said that some form of counselling or therapy would be a good
idea. In conventional psychiatric terms most of this would be described
as no more than mild or moderate disturbance and would be unlikely to be
accepted for treatment following referral to the average community
mental health team. Is this a matter for occupational health or for the
marshalling of personal resources? The majority of respondents in this
study acted as if they thought the latter, whereas the authors conclude
that the answer ought to be more towards the former.

An intriguing question not raised by the authors is the degree to which
the response to patient suicide might have a positive dimension. There
is a substantial literature on personal growth consequent upon
adversity, and another possibility is raised by the observation that
women reported a greater sense of responsibility and effect on their
clinical confidence. There is evidence from other areas of medicine that
female doctors tend to practise differently, with better
outcomes,\ :sup:`4` raising the question of whether the problem in
medicine is female diffidence or male overconfidence. A worried sense of
responsibility and questioning of our competence may be stressful, but
it is not necessarily bad for our patients if it leads\ :sup:`1,5` to
more vigilance and desire for involving others when managing patients
perceived to be at risk of suicide.

.. _sec4:

What about other mental health professionals?
=============================================

Most mental health practice involves multidisciplinary teams – ward
teams, crisis teams, home treatment teams, community mental health
teams. Even in out-patient services, the patient who sees a psychiatrist
is quite likely to have contact also with a community psychiatric nurse
or other professional. It is a striking feature of the present study –
and a number of the others cited – that these other professionals are
not mentioned. One wonders whether some part of the psychiatrist's
involvement had been to contribute to team discussions about the
implications of a patient suicide, or to offer support to a non-medical
colleague? Certainly, there is no reason to believe that doctors alone
are vulnerable to the stresses of clinical work.\ :sup:`6`

As a mild digression, it is interesting to note how little literature
there is on the effects of patient suicide in clinical psychology and
improving access to psychological therapies (IAPT). These services have
a reputation for reluctance to take on patients perceived to be at risk
of suicide, but even so it must be the case that some suicides occur
while the patient is ‘working with’ or has had recent contact with the
relevant professionals. For example, the wider impact of suicide is
discussed in a recent British Psychological Society
publication,\ :sup:`7` but the effect on professionals is not covered.
The implication is that, as in psychiatry, the expectation is for
individual practitioners to manage for themselves.

.. _sec5:

A final question: what are the implications?
============================================

Gibbons and colleagues, no doubt wishing to avoid wandering too far from
their data, make few recommendations about what should happen next.
Nonetheless, there are implications of their findings.

First, patient suicide is a complex event with a number of components
that represent relatively predictable challenges for the mental health
professional. The most common perceived needs in the present survey were
for instrumental and informational support in facing these challenges.
It is surely the employing organisation's responsibility to provide such
support, organised via the medical director. It would be helpful if the
Royal College of Psychiatrists were to provide practical guidance. The
NCISH could also have a role here. Researchers are expected to indicate
to research ethics committees how they will ensure that participants
from whom they collect information are aware of how to access help; the
NCISH could act as a useful conduit for independent (from the employing
trust) guidance to psychiatrists faced with the death of a patient on
whom they are providing data.

Second, the ‘exposure’ in patient suicide varies in intensity and
proximity, and the emotional and social impact also varies. This argues
against, as does much other work in trauma response, a global approach
to preventive intervention at an individual level. Follow-up of staff at
(say) 6 months after a patient suicide could readily be incorporated
into staff review and support – especially for those in high-risk
subspecialties or with multiple experiences of patient suicide.

Finally, we should embrace multidisciplinarity in this as in other areas
of practice. It would be a useful collaborative exercise for the College
to convene a working group with other official bodies, to include at
least the British Psychological Society and Royal College of Nursing,
with the aim of producing a common set of guidelines on staff support
after patient suicide – a small but important part of the larger
question of health and well-being in the NHS workforce.

**Allan House** is Professor of Liaison Psychiatry at the Leeds
Institute of Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Leeds,
UK.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.

.. [2]
   See this issue.
