============
Author reply
============



John L. Taylor

:date: 2019-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Jean O'Hara is correct in saying that I am a responsible clinician
working with people with intellectual disabilities with offending
histories and complex needs – in both in-patient and community settings.
As such, my experience of the impact of the Transforming Care national
plan is concrete and real rather than ‘perceptual’.

It is nonetheless encouraging to learn that NHS England recognises that
some people with intellectual disabilities and/or autism need
high-quality in-patient care and treatment at times. The question is,
post Transforming Care, where are they going to receive it given the
wholesale closure of specialist NHS services – including some rated by
the Care Quality Commission as outstanding? The options would appear to
be either the profit-focused private sector, or acute mental health
in-patient units where the specialist care and treatment required is not
available.

I note that Dr O'Hara doesn't refer to the data that indicate clearly
that the Transforming Care national plan has failed to significantly
reduce the number of people with intellectual disabilities and/or autism
in in-patient facilities. Rather, she introduces a new metric of the
‘need for admission’. This is not defined but seems to refer to
admission rates. It is suggested that the national plan has been
successful in reducing the variation in the ‘need for admission’ across
the country. Given that a reduction in the geographical variation of
admission rates could be achieved by closing beds in some areas whilst
maintaining (or increasing) bed numbers in others, with no overall
reduction in the number of beds across the country, one might wonder
whether this is another case of smoke and mirrors?

Three-and-a-half years on, the Transforming Care programme has failed to
invest the tens of millions of pounds in community services in England
promised in the national plan. Can we then be comforted by the news that
the NHS Long Term Plan ‘is explicit about its focus on increasing
investment in intensive, crises and community support’, or is this just
another example of ‘jam tomorrow and jam yesterday, but never jam
today’1 for people with intellectual disabilities?

I am employed by Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust;
however, the opinions expressed in this response are my own and do not
reflect the views of the Trust.
