=====================================
Section 12 approval: fit for purpose?
=====================================



David Rigby
Lynsey McAlpine [1]_
:Correspondence: Dr David Rigby
(david.rigby@nhs.net)

:date: 2019-12

:Abstract:
   In light of the increasing numbers of detentions of mentally unwell
   patients in the UK and the recent review of the Mental Health Act,
   this editorial seeks to analyse the process of Section 12 approval of
   doctors from a medical educational perspective. We compare the
   approval mechanisms with assessments in other specialities and
   suggest evidence-based improvements. We believe that a rethinking of
   the Royal College of Psychiatrists' learning objectives for Section
   12 approval and the introduction of a summative assessment would
   improve the knowledge and skills of clinicians performing an
   important and scrutinised role within our society.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In recent years there has been a dramatic increase in compulsory
in-patient psychiatric treatment in the UK. In 2016, National Health
Service (NHS) Digital reported a 47% increase in the number of
detentions under the Mental Health Act over the preceding
decade.\ :sup:`1` The reasons for this are multifactorial and include
reduced access to social care, changes in the provision of psychiatric
services and reductions in the number of psychiatric beds. Another
factor that must be considered is the Mental Health Act assessment
itself. Approval under Section 12 of the Mental Health Act confers the
ability to deprive individuals of their liberty and curtail their human
rights. This is one of the most life-altering powers a doctor can hold.

There is a danger that clinicians are not equipped with the knowledge
and skills to wield this power safely and effectively, which could have
a marked effect on the number of detentions under the Mental Health Act.
In light of the recent independent review into the Mental Health Act and
consequent discussions about what modern mental health legislation
should entail, it is imperative that we scrutinise the process for
training and approving the clinicians who carry out these assessments.
Although the specifics of mental health law vary widely across the
world, there are shared fundamental principles and an examination of the
training, skills and assessment of professionals carrying out detentions
of mentally ill individuals is an important process for psychiatrists to
consider.

This article seeks to evaluate these training, approval and revalidation
processes for Section 12 doctors and suggests evidence-based
improvements.

.. _sec1:

The current state of affairs
============================

Under current legislation in England and Wales, the Secretary of State
can grant approval under Section 12 of the Mental Health Act, provided
the clinician meets the requirements set out in the Act. This
responsibility is delegated to local Section 12 panels, which also hold
responsibility for the accreditation of induction and refresher courses.
A clinician can be approved for a period of up to 5 years; at the end of
this period they can apply for revalidation,\ :sup:`2,3` which is
contingent on participation in a section 12 refresher course.

We sent a questionnaire to all 23 providers of Section 12 courses and
obtained only 5 responses. Although this is a low response rate, we
triangulated this information with other sources to acquire information
about key features of the courses. Section 12 induction courses and
refresher courses typically last 2 days and 1 day, respectively. The
cost of an induction course will range between £200 and £400. Attendance
is generally monitored using a sign-in sheet, with no verification of
identity. The courses consist of a series of lectures covering the
nationally mandated learning objectives (see `Box 1 <#BOX1>`__). Some
courses will include an interactive component such as a case discussion
or a quiz. There is no requirement to summatively or formatively assess
whether the learning objectives have been met. Box 1Section 12 course
learning objectives\ :sup:`3` To have a broad understanding of the
provisions contained in Part 2 of the Mental Health Act relevant to the
initial detention of a patient under Sections 2, 3 and 4.Be able to
describe the role of a Section 12(2) doctor and that of others when
undertaking a Mental Health Act assessment.Understand the meaning of,
and be able to refer to, the criteria for detention under Part 2 when
making a medical recommendation.Be able to describe the guidance
contained in the Code of Practice relevant to the role and
responsibilities of a Section 12(2) doctor when undertaking a Mental
Health Act assessment.To use knowledge of the impact that an assessment
may have on patients and their carers to inform the approach to an
assessment.Be able to complete the statutory forms lawfully.

This lack of formative assessment is particularly concerning considering
that there is evidence to indicate that there are inadequacies in many
psychiatrists' understanding of the relevant legislation. When a random
sample of Section 12-approved clinicians in the West Midlands were
interviewed, none of them were able to define ‘mental disorder’ as it
appears in the Mental Health Act.\ :sup:`4` In a similar study in
Scotland, only 10% of consultant psychiatrists were able to give the
statutory definition of mental disorder.\ :sup:`5` This raises questions
about the training, approval and revalidation processes.

On completion of the induction course, prospective Section 12 doctors
must undergo an approvals process whereby they must provide two
referees, with the requirement that one of the referees is an NHS
consultant psychiatrist familiar with the work of prospective Section 12
doctors. In theory, this is an additional check that the prospective
clinician has the required knowledge and skills. In practice, there is
no framework for how a referee should assess whether the prospective
clinician has the complex skills specific to Mental Health Act
assessments. Furthermore, it is likely that clinicians seeking Section
12 approval will choose consultants who are also their line managers as
referees. Therefore, it would be equally unlikely that the referee would
have witnessed the aspiring Section 12 doctor complete a Mental Health
Act assessment because of the Mental Health Act's need for an
independent doctor.

.. _sec2:

Analysis
========

When analysing the educational effect of these training courses, three
questions must be considered: What are the learning objectives? How does
the training meet these learning objectives? And how are they assessed?

.. _sec2-1:

What are the learning objectives?
---------------------------------

Miller\ :sup:`6` described the assessment of clinical skills and
competencies as four levels of increasing complexity as shown in `Fig.
1 <#fig01>`__. Taking the example of venepuncture: knowing what a blood
test is and its indications would satisfy the lowest level of the
pyramid. Being able to describe how to take blood would show that the
clinician ‘knows how’ to perform the task. Assessing the individual
performing a simulated blood test on a manikin would satisfy the third
level of the pyramid and observing the competency being performed on a
patient would demonstrate proficiency of the highest level on the
pyramid. Fig. 1Miller's pyramid\ :sup:`6` a framework for classification
of assessment in medical education, can be used to align assessment with
learning outcomes. EMQ, extended matching question; MCQ, multiple choice
question; OSCE, objective structured clinical examination.

Biggs and Tang\ :sup:`7` have aligned the imperative words used to
describe learning objectives to levels on Miller's pyramid so that words
such as ‘identify’, ‘define’ and ‘describe’ refer to learning objectives
at the bottom of the pyramid and ‘perform’ and ‘demonstrate’ are
associated with the highest level on the pyramid. By this analysis, the
current learning objectives for Section 12 approval courses are only
assessing the lowest levels of the pyramid. Indeed, the only practical
skills required are ‘completion of the statutory paperwork’ and
‘rectification of errors’. There appears to be a presumption that the
clinician will develop the necessary skills elsewhere. This is not
necessarily the case; for example, clinicians who have achieved
membership of the Royal College of Psychiatrists are eligible to apply
for Section 12 approval, but as an international examination, the
MRCPsych does not assess UK mental health law.

Performing a Mental Health Act assessment is a complex skill requiring
the ability to apply the principles of mental health law to challenging
clinical situations; this is not reflected in the current learning
objectives, which focus on simple knowledge and skills with relatively
little emphasis on higher-order learning.

.. _sec2-2:

How does the training meet these learning objectives?
-----------------------------------------------------

To motivate prospective Section 12 doctors and support them to achieve
these higher-order learning objectives, the learning activities should
be closely aligned with these objectives.\ :sup:`8` At present, Section
12 courses rely heavily on lecture-based teaching, with a focus on
conveying large volumes of factual content. This may be problematic
because although lectures can be a useful didactic method for imparting
factual knowledge, they are less effective at changing attitudes and
behaviours. For teaching complex skills, the evidence base supports the
use of active learning activities to engage learners in more effective
and more sustained learning.\ :sup:`9`

.. _sec2-3:

How is it assessed?
-------------------

There is an absence of any mandatory assessment in the Section 12
approval process, and this has significant implications. Assessment
serves two distinct educational functions: it is used to evaluate
whether the learning objectives have been achieved and it is used to
drive learning.\ :sup:`10` The widely held belief that ‘if it's not
assessed, it's not important’ is backed up by substantial evidence
demonstrating that trainees learn more effectively when they know they
will be assessed.\ :sup:`11` If they are not formally assessed, they
will not achieve the learning objectives. The ability to perform a
Mental Health Act assessment is a complex skill, requiring a sound
knowledge base and extended abstract thinking, and this needs to be
reflected in the learning objectives, learning activities and assessment
process.

.. _sec3:

Our solution
============

To optimise their educational effect, the design of training courses
should be guided by the evidence base. Appropriate learning objectives
should be created based on the knowledge and skills required of a
Section 12 doctor, and the learning activities should be aligned with
these objectives. We propose a teaching model similar to that used in
Advanced Life Support (ALS) training run by the UK Resuscitation
Council, whereby prospective Section 12 doctors would be given
standardised educational material before the course, either as written
material or as a series of e-learning modules. This could employ a
variety of formats to suit different learning styles, and would allow
clinicians the flexibility to work through the material at their own
pace. A pre-course self-assessment quiz would allow them to test their
level of understanding and identify learning needs, as well as ensuring
engagement with the pre-course material.

Instructors should therefore have more confidence that the doctors will
have decent levels of working knowledge of the Mental Health Act to
build upon during the course. The face-to-face training course would
then have scope to focus on higher-order skills such as applying their
knowledge of the pre-course material to ‘real-life’ scenarios.
Instructors would have flexibility to make their training course unique;
for example, by using role play, case discussions and simulated Mental
Health Act assessments.

Rather than simply signing an attendance sheet, there should be a formal
identification check at the outset of the course. Furthermore, sign-off
should be contingent on an end-of-course summative assessment with two
key components: a written multiple choice test and a practical
assessment such as a case discussion with the instructor. Concerns about
failing a substantial number of prospective Section 12 doctors are
understandable, but these fears are misplaced: if the assessment is
criterion-referenced and aligned with the learning objectives, and the
pass mark is determined by an appropriate methodology such as the
Angoff\ :sup:`12` method, the assessment will uphold the minimum
standard without failing candidates unnecessarily For context, only 3.4%
of candidates fail their ALS training.\ :sup:`13` With something as
important as Section 12 approval, minimum standards must be upheld and
summative assessment is the only way to achieve this.

Of course, there are practical and cost considerations when implementing
such an assessment. The development of a question bank and determination
of an appropriate pass mark would be resource-intensive; nonetheless, it
is still feasible and the advantages of incorporating assessment into
the training far outweigh the disadvantages. The cost to the delegate of
attending a Section 12 approval course are similar to those attending
ALS. Therefore it is likely to be financially feasible to implement
these changes.

We also propose a modification to the learning objective for Section 12
approval courses to reflect the changes in assessment and the complex
nature of the Mental Health Act Assessment as detailed in `Box
2 <#BOX2>`__. Box 2Proposed Section 12 course learning objectives
aligned with assessment methods **Outline** the provisions contained in
Part 2 of the Mental Health Act relevant to the initial detention of a
patient under Sections 2, 3 and 4 of the Mental Health Act.With
reference to the Mental Health Act Code of Practice, **describe** the
role of the Section 12 doctor and other participants in a Mental Health
Act Assessment.\ **Explain** the criteria for detention under Part 2 of
the Mental Health Act.\ **Perform** a holistic assessment of a patient's
history and mental state in the context of a Mental Health Act
assessment.Based on a holistic clinical assessment, demonstrate sound
and lawful **application** of the statutory criteria for detention under
the Mental Health Act and **justify** the chosen course of
action.\ **Demonstrate** lawful and accurate completion of statutory
forms.\ **Reflect** on the patient's experience of a Mental Health Act
assessment, and how this might affect their mental state and engagement
with healthcare services.

.. _sec4:

Conclusion
==========

The authority to detain someone against their will is one of the
greatest powers that can be granted to our profession, and it is a
responsibility that should be taken seriously. Future legislation (and
indeed the Royal College of Psychiatrists) should revise the learning
objectives of Section 12 courses to mandate a more appropriate standard
than the bare minimum set out in the current format of the learning
objectives. Efforts should be taken to ensure that this training is
evidence-based, developed from sound educational principles and
reinforced by appropriate assessment.

**David Rigby** is an ST5 Psychiatrist with Waltham Forest Older Adult
Mental Health Team, North East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Lynsey
McAlpine** is a Core Psychiatric Trainee and Fellow in Medical Education
at East London NHS Foundation Trust and the Centre for Psychiatry, Queen
Mary University of London, UK.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest** None.
