---
author:
- Francis Stella Sophia Senthil
date: 2019-12
institute:
- "Trust Locum Consultant Psychiatrist, Lincolnshire Partnership
  Foundation NHS Trust. Email: <sophiasenthil@doctors.org.uk>"
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
title: "Personal resilience for psychiatrists: systematic review"
---

I read with interest this article^1^ which explores the factors that
promote and maintain psychiatrists' well-being, particularly personal,
workplace and non-work-related factors such as increased self-awareness,
extending job roles, discrete work activities, and/or support from
family or social environment.

John. D. Yoon and Brendan M. Daley, studying the association between a
sense of calling and physician well-being,^2^ reported that a higher
sense of calling in primary care physicians and psychiatrists was
associated with an increased level of job satisfaction and resilience
from burn-out. This reflects the deeper sense of meaning and purpose
that work can bring, which generates and even sustains motivation and
enables working with vision. However, there are reported challenges
relating to the bureaucratic and technological demands that physicians
experience, which mean the sense of calling can be hard to sustain.

A report from the Association of American Medical Colleges published in
February 2019 highlights the misalignment between practitioners' values
and practices and those of organisations, which can contribute to
burn-out and diminished well-being.

Authors Adam M. Brenner and John Coverdale, in their update on trainee
wellness,^3^ report on voluntary resident-led peer group reflective
practice for medical students as an intervention for social
connectedness. Although the study was of small sample size and lacked a
control group, social belonging appeared to be a positive predictor of
well-being, diminished imposter syndrome and tolerance of diverse
perspectives, suggesting that this model deserves further attention as a
potential means of improving resilience in trainees and professionals or
psychiatrists.

The authors quote in their update Winston Churchill\'s famous saying:
'Now this is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. but
it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning'. These words express hope for
momentum towards victory; we are still in the early stages of addressing
burn-out and improving well-being, but perhaps we are moving in the
right direction.

Christine Montross, in her book *Falling Into the Fire: A
Psychiatrist\'s Encounters with the Mind in Crisis*,^4^ describes
'patients who are so difficult to diagnose or treat -- uncertainty it
arises', 'I hold my trust in medicine up to the light, I see that it is
full of cracks and seams. In some places it is luminous. In others it is
opaque. And yet I practice'. She discusses how over time she has
developed trust in the daily work of talking, treating and attempting to
heal: 'you have to be anchored to the shore -- to the people and things
that are central to your own life'.
