===========================================================================
Correcting inaccurate assumptions underpinning Transforming Care in England
===========================================================================

Jean O'Hara
:Date: 2019-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

John Taylor(n.d.) is an experienced responsible clinician looking after
offenders with intellectual disabilities and/or autism presenting with
complex needs. I can accept the perceptual position he has taken on some
of the challenges outlined in his editorial. However, his assertion that
underpinning Transforming Care is an assumption ‘that the hospital is
always bad, and community is always better’ is inaccurate. We have
explicitly said that some people will need specialist in-patient care,
treatment and support at times. When this is needed, we should strive to
deliver better quality care, a reduction in restrictive practices,
therapeutic environments, improved patient experience and reduced
lengths of stay. At the start of the national learning disability
programme, we had a five-fold variation in the ‘need for admission’ to a
mental health/learning disability bed across the country. This has now
reduced to a three-fold variation. The National Health Service (NHS)
Long Term Plan
(`www.longtermplan.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/nhs-long-term-plan.pdf <www.longtermplan.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/nhs-long-term-plan.pdf>`__)
is explicit about its focus on increasing investment in intensive,
crisis and community support and improving the quality of in-patient
care across the NHS and independent sector.

I am the clinical lead for the national learning disabilities programme
in England

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.
