---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  True Colours is an automated symptom monitoring programme used by
  National Health Service psychiatric services. This study explored
  whether patients with unipolar treatment-resistant depression (TRD)
  found this a useful addition to their treatment regimes.
  Semi-structured qualitative interviews were conducted with 21 patients
  with TRD, who had engaged in True Colours monitoring as part of the
  Lithium versus Quetiapine in Depression study. A thematic analysis was
  used to assess participant experiences of the system.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  Six main themes emerged from the data, the most notable indicating
  that mood monitoring increased patients\' insight into their disorder,
  but that subsequent behaviour change was absent.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  Patients with TRD can benefit from mood monitoring via True Colours,
  making it a worthwhile addition to treatment. Further development of
  such systems and additional support may be required for patients with
  TRD to experience further benefits as reported by other patient
  groups.
author:
- Emma Incecik
- Rachael W. Taylor
- Beatrice Valentini
- Stephani L. Hatch
- John R. Geddes
- Anthony J. Cleare
- Lindsey Marwood[^1]Correspondence to Rachael W. Taylor
  (<rachael.taylor@kcl.ac.uk>)[^2]
date: 2020-04
institute:
- 1Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry,
  Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s College London, UK
- 2National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre at
  South London & Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King\'s College
  London, UK
- 3Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Italy
- 4Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 5Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, UK
- 6South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
title: "Online mood monitoring in treatment-resistant depression:
  qualitative study of patients\\' perspectives in the NHS"
---

Patients with treatment-resistant depression (TRD) can experience a more
chronic and severe course of illness.^1^ These outcomes could be
improved by online mood monitoring to facilitate treatment
personalisation, and the evaluation of treatment efficacy.^2--4^ True
Colours is an automated monitoring system developed by clinicians and
currently used by psychiatric services in Oxford Health National Health
Service (NHS) Foundation Trust, as well as by clinical trials across the
country. Patients in Oxford Health are provided with access to True
Colours by their clinical team at their or their clinicians request,
whereas clinical trial teams can use the system to monitor participants
and collect relevant outcome data. True Colours is also available via
the Bipolar Disorder Research Network to patients with a diagnosis of
bipolar disorder living in the UK.^5^ The system allows patients to
self-monitor and self-manage symptoms^6^ by prompting them to complete
personalised questionnaire assessments according to the time, frequency
and mode of interaction selected. Patient responses are stored and
displayed graphically through the interface, and are also made available
to the patient\'s clinician or research team.

Adherence rates in patients with bipolar disorder are between 75 and
100%,^7,8^ and qualitative assessments indicated that patients with
bipolar disorder find the system easy to use and a positive contributor
to their clinical care and self-management.^9^ Comments on the
flexibility of the system led to the development of a personalised
questionnaire feature, which allows patients to add questions to their
schedule.^10^ However, although the system is routinely used by patients
with unipolar TRD, it is not clear whether they similarly benefit.
Establishing the experience of this patient group is essential to
maximising the clinical utility of this and other mood monitoring
systems. This study aimed to qualitatively assess the perspectives of
patients with unipolar TRD who used True Colours as part of the Lithium
versus Quetiapine in Depression (LQD) study.^11^

# Method {#sec1}

Ethical approval was obtained from Cambridge South Research Ethics
Committee (approval number 16/EE/0318). All participants provided
written informed consent. This study has been carried out in accordance
with the Declaration of Helsinki.

## Participants {#sec1-1}

LQD participants were invited to take part in this study between March
2017 and March 2018. This was a convenience sample, meaning that LQD
participants attending an 8, 26 or 52 week follow-up assessment in that
period were given the opportunity to participate in this additional
study at the relevant follow-up assessment, conducted at a clinical
research facility. Repeat interviews were not conducted. The full
methodology of LQD has been reported.^11^ In brief, adult patients
meeting the criteria for TRD were randomised to receive lithium or
quetiapine augmentation and followed up over 12 months. As part of the
study, participants were asked to complete two questionnaires weekly via
True Colours to collect primary outcome data: the Quick Inventory of
Depressive Symptomatology (QIDS-SR)^12^ and Work and Social Adjustment
Scale (WSAS).^13^ Study-specific questions regarding medication were
included to track dosage and adherence.

## Interview procedures {#sec1-2}

Participants took part in semi-structured interviews conducted by a
researcher (full interview schedule is in the supplementary material,
available at <https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2019.92>). Researchers were
predominantly female and held a relevant undergraduate or master\'s
degree. L.M. conducted training with all interviewers. Typically, the
researchers had an existing relationship with the interviewees having
conducted their prior LQD assessments. Interviews ceased once data
saturation was reached, meaning no new emergent themes were being
identified by the collection of additional data.^14^

## Data analysis {#sec1-3}

Interviews were audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim and checked by
another researcher. All identifiable information was removed, and
participants were assigned a code for reference.

A thematic analysis was conducted -- a widely used method for
identifying, analysing and reporting patterns within data -- with steps
recommended by Braun and Clarke.^15^ This included actively reading the
entire data-set several times, systematically identifying and coding for
key features, analysing codes and combining them to form broader themes.
Themes were them reviewed and refined to ensure that they were
appropriate in relation to the coded extracts, as well as the entire
data-set. This led to the removal of some themes (e.g. owing to lack of
supporting data), and the collapsing of others into one, with additional
subthemes. Finally, themes were appropriately named, and evidence
included for each in the present report. This approach is inductive
(bottom-up), meaning the themes identified were data driven.^16^ Two
researchers (E.I. and B.V.) conducted analyses independently, and
discrepancies in the identified themes were discussed with L.M. and
R.W.T. until resolved by consensus. The second rater (B.V.) did not
conduct any qualitative interviews, minimising any potential bias.

# Results {#sec2}

A total of 26 individuals were invited to take part; 21 participated and
five declined, primarily owing to fatigue (see [Tables
1](#tab01){ref-type="table"} and [2](#tab02){ref-type="table"} for
demographics and clinical characteristics). We generated 81 initial
codes from the qualitative data and combined them to form six themes
(see [Table 3](#tab03){ref-type="table"}). Duration of interviews ranged
from 3 to 17 min (mean 6.9 ± 3.3). Table 1Demographic characteristics of
participants (*n* = 21)CharacteristicAge (years), mean (s.d.)41.5
(15.2)Gender, *n* (%)Female8 (38)Male13 (62)Employment status, *n*
(%)Employed10 (48)Unemployed7 (33)Students2 (10)Retired2 (10)Education
level, *n* (%)Primary education or less1 (5)Secondary education3
(14)College-level education or equivalent5 (23)Degree-level
education/diploma5 (23)Postgraduate degree7 (32)NHS trust, *n* (%)South
London & Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust13 (62)Northumberland, Tyne and
Wear NHS Foundation Trust3 (14)Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust5
(24)[^3] Table 2Clinical characteristics of participants
(*n* = 21)CharacteristicTotal HRSD score,^a^ mean (s.d.)22.3 (5.8)Number
of past episodes of depression, mean (s.d.)4.1 (4.6)Number of
antidepressant treatment failures in current episode, *n* (%)213 (62)33
(14)44 (19)51 (5)Length of current episode in years, mean (s.d.)8.4
(11.2)Number of axis 1 comorbidities, *n* (%)04 (19)15 (24)\>112
(57)Overall mean % adherence to weekly True Colours data submission
(s.d.)72 (35)[^4] Table 3Themes and
subthemesThemeSubthemesInsightAnticipated insight (before using True
Colours)  
Experienced insight  
Envisaged insight (gained through continued use of True Colours)Absence
of behaviour changeNot applicableImproved clinical careUsing feedback
during clinical appointments  
Valuing access to human supportPrioritisationOrganising time  
MotivationCategorisation concernsDiscrepancy between experience and
questionnaire response options  
Ambiguity and repetitiveness of questionsInterface featuresPositive
experiences  
Challenges  
Suggestions for improvement

## Insight {#sec2-1}

### Anticipated insight (before using True Colours) {#sec2-1-1}

Participants frequently described how True Colours enabled greater
understanding of illness. This outcome was anticipated by almost half of
the participants upon hearing about the system. "'I thought that, you
know, it would give us something to go by, some kind of guideline, on,
you know, where I am with my moods, or my behaviour and my sleeping and
so forth' (P6).'I had an expectation that it may be useful that you
would have some form of er...information that you know, whether you\'re
progressing or whether you\'re not in relation to your treatment, and in
relation to how your illness is affecting you' (P7)."

### Experienced insight {#sec2-1-2}

Regardless of whether it had been anticipated, 18 participants found
that symptom monitoring enabled reflection. For some, viewing changes
over time helped put their mood into perspective, particularly when
feeling low. The process of completing questionnaire(s) appeared to play
a key role in increasing awareness, and how mood linked to symptoms such
as increased weight. Although many participants viewed this awareness
positively, and one person reported a positive effect on their mood, a
small number did not find it beneficial. "'It\'s allowed me to monitor
things 'cause obviously certain weeks can be worse than others or better
than others...so yeah it\'s been quite useful' (P1)'Rather than thinking
"I\'m really depressed, I\'m really depressed, I\'m really depressed",
I\'m able to kind of say "the score\'s the same" and actually,
it\'s...your mood is the same...it\'s, you know, in your head that
things are worse' (P10).'You\'re looking at that \[graphs\] saying "Eee
God I\'m depressed" and it makes you feel even worse' (P7)."

### Envisioned insight {#sec2-1-3}

This subtheme refers to insight that could be gained through continued
use of True Colours. Six participants felt this could be possible,
several of whom had not experienced significant mood fluctuations when
using True Colours, but felt the graphs could help detect future
changes. Others, who had not used the graphs discussed how they could
offer future insight into mood patterns. "'I would have thought that if
I did use it \[graphs\], yes it would be useful...'\'cause it would, you
know, be able to tell me where the fluctuations are. With this said, I
will make, um...endeavour to have a look in the next couple of weeks'
(P6).'I don\'t think it was originally that it would be particularly
useful until I actually see how the changes are mapped on the graphs and
stuff like that. So, the more interested I am, I think the more useful
it\'ll be' (P8).'I mean its early days but umm...but I think it \[the
graphs\] will be useful in the future' (P20)."

## Absence of behaviour change {#sec2-2}

True Colours did not appear to affect the way in which most participants
(*n* = 19) managed their depression. Because of the lack of changes
reported, no subthemes were identified for this category. Participants
recognised that the system could provide them with information, but did
not see how this could translate to illness management. "'Probably
er...not err...not as much as manage it but be aware of it' (P21).'No.
Just...just it\'s informative. It doesn\'t change my lifestyle' (P18)."

## Improved clinical care {#sec2-3}

### Using feedback during clinical appointments {#sec2-3-1}

Seven participants suggested the feedback provided via True Colours
(i.e. graphs) could improve the efficiency of time spent with healthcare
providers. "'True Colours would be a way of keeping track of everything
and also it would give me a visual representation to show medical
professionals as opposed to just going well... I had a bad week 2 weeks
ago. I can actually show them what happened as opposed to trying to
remember it' (P1).'I think for a professional that is dealing with your,
or supporting you, I think that information I think may be useful'
(P7)."

### Valuing access to human support {#sec2-3-2}

For four participants, the awareness that they could be monitored by a
professional who would understand their difficulties was a source of
reassurance. "'When I had a bad week then I emailed Tr...the...the link
on True Colours...to say look, this is happening and...and it did help
to know that somebody else understood what I was going through rather
than me saying to somebody I\'m feeling a bit...crap this week and
they\'re just - oh...pooh poohing it really' (P4).'Knowing that there is
somebody out there that\'s monitoring me...which is nice' (P3)."

## Prioritisation {#sec2-4}

### Organising time {#sec2-4-1}

Seven participants admitted that they struggled to schedule time for
True Colours and often forgot to complete questionnaires. "'There just
isn\'t enough time in my day to do it' (P5).'Sometimes I\'ll be working
or something and I\'ll forget to do it' (P1).'The only times I\'ve kind
of not done it is when I\'ve kind of been really busy throughout the
day' (P10)."

### Motivation {#sec2-4-2}

Even setting aside the issue of time, over half of participants
indicated that because of a lack of interest, not prioritising or
viewing True Colours as useful and/or an inertia (related to their
illness), it was difficult to engage consistently. "'It depends where I
am mentally on that particular day. Um...sometimes, do you know, I
won\'t, I won\'t, won\'t be able to get out of bed to brush my teeth.
And to be able, do you know, look onto your phone and fill out
questionnaires, it\'s nigh on impossible' (P6).'While I was sat there
trying to psychoanalyse myself through True Colours I feel as though I
could be doing something, achieving something that will possibly help me
through this journey I am on' (P5).'I think that you can spend too much
time thinking about like erm being depressed, or the causes of
depression, or how you\'re feeling, rather than living your life' (P8)."

## Categorisation concerns {#sec2-5}

### Discrepancy between experience and questionnaire response options {#sec2-5-1}

Seven participants raised concerns regarding their ability to accurately
summarise symptoms over the past week when there had been significant
variability. They also felt there were not sufficient options to express
experiences. "'I couldn\'t categorise myself because my days are so...at
the moment so mixed up' (P5).'Umm...sometimes it\'s hard to put how
you\'ve been feeling or...kind of...getting an average...having a
discrete box can be hard when you kind of want to do "well it\'s that
point 5 or..."...ideally I\'d say "it\'s just one between two points"
rather than...a specific number' (P15)."

### Ambiguity and repetitiveness of questions {#sec2-5-2}

Comments were also made regarding the wording of some questions, and how
they were either difficult to understand, or similar to others. This
left a small number of participants feeling unsure about how to respond.
"'There was one question on there which...um...seemed a bit...could be
misconstrued' (P2).'Yeah, yeah, like it\'s sometimes you feel it\'s
getting rep...uh...repeating itself all the time' (P3)."

## Interface features {#sec2-6}

### Positive experiences {#sec2-6-1}

Positive features relating to the interface were identified. Just over
half of participants described the ease of logging on and completing
questionnaire(s), and five participants commented on the usefulness of
personalised weekly prompts. "'Yeah...it\'s really easy...it\'s all...
it\'s all laid out there for you so you just umm you know...tick
whatever it is' (P20).'I\'ve had experienced nothing technical wise
about it, nah, it\'s always been quite problem free' (P7).'I think like
it\'s good that there\'s a reminder...and that I could choose when it
was. Umm...because it\'s like quite a convenient time for me just like
in the evening to go on my phone, and it\'s quite quick to do the
questionnaires...and like you can choose when that comes which I
think\'s really good' (P19)."

### Challenges {#sec2-6-2}

A variety of challenges relating to True Colours were similarly
identified. Although participants were aware they could access response
graphs, not all were using this feature. Four found the graphs difficult
to interpret, and therefore not useful, and one commented on the lack of
graphs for personalised questions. Further, 13 participants reported
technical and interface issues, which affected their ability to complete
questionnaire(s) and/or access feedback. "'Like the symptom graph I
don\'t quite get, and I don\'t quite understand how it
works...erm...'cause I just see it as a load of blobs' (P10).'I\'d added
like other questions just like for myself on there, but I wasn\'t able
to see those on the graph, I could only see the study ones' (P19).'It\'s
not as good on the phone 'cause you can\'t see it as properly as well as
you can on the computer' (P3).'I can\'t log in, I don\'t try anymore'
(P14)."

Finally, two participants felt that human contact, rather than a
technology-based approach, would more likely facilitate an open and
honest sharing of information and aid recovery. "'I think the only way
you get to know things is by talking...I know that\'s not
um...possible...but for people like me with my problem at my age we are
not used to...um...baring our soul on a computer' (P5).'I could fill a
questionnaire and I could lie through my teeth, but I think you soon get
caught out if you\'re sitting with a human being' (P8)."

### Suggestions for improvement {#sec2-6-3}

Six participants volunteered information about ways in which the
interface could be improved, including simplification of the
questionnaire(s), and further personalisation options such as adding
notes to questionnaire responses. "'I still feel it can be simplified,
to make it, make it a bit more user friendly. Realising that, you know,
people using it may have various mental health issues, that might
require, a bit more basis yes or no' (P7).'Maybe if you could like... I
don\'t know, like write notes at bottom or something, or like just for
your own reference' (P20).'Perhaps some way of changing the size of the
text very easily would help, especially for people who aren\'t very
computer literate' (P15)."

# Discussion {#sec3}

This study explored whether patients with unipolar TRD found True
Colours, an online mood monitoring system used by NHS services, a useful
addition to their treatment regimens. Our key findings were that mood
monitoring enabled participants to feel that they had greater insight
into their disorder, regardless of whether this was anticipated before
use, but participants felt that their use of True Colours did not result
in behaviour change. Many participants viewed their increased insight
positively; but for some, spending time evaluating their symptoms was
thought to contribute to a deterioration in mood. This aligns with the
suggestion that the ability to identify and characterise one\'s mood
state can predict positive affect, but a tendency to frequently
scrutinise one\'s mood can predict negative affect and rumination.^17^

For most participants the perceived increase in insight was not
associated with subsequent behaviour change. Neither completing the
questionnaire(s) nor viewing the online graphs, which depicted their
responses over time, led participants to make connections between
patterns in their illness and their lifestyle choices. This is in
contrast with research in patients with bipolar disorder, whereby
monitoring via True Colours and other automated systems was associated
with change in behaviour/improved self-management.^8,9^ This may be
owing to the differing nature of TRD, which is not characterised by the
same cyclic mood changes, and patients with unipolar TRD may require
additional support for mood monitoring to inform behaviour change. It
may be that patients with TRD who are undertaking therapies such as
behavioural activation could benefit in this regard. The potentially
unique needs of this patient group highlighted here would clearly
benefit from further qualitative and quantitative research to fully
understand how patients with TRD can benefit from this and other mood
monitoring systems.

Although participants did not use True Colours for self-management,
their responses suggested confidence that the system could improve
clinical care by reducing reliance on their ability to accurately recall
symptoms over time. The prospect of obtaining more contemporaneous data
via this and other mood monitoring systems may improve our understanding
of the course of major depressive disorder/TRD, and support the
improvement of outcomes. Another key contributor to the enhanced
clinical care theme was the belief that True Colours would give patients
access to human support. This perception appeared to provide
participants with a sense of support and reassurance, although this may
have been inflated because of participants' awareness that their
adherence was monitored by the LQD study team. However, True Colours
does facilitate real-time data sharing with clinicians in standard
clinical practice, although this may not be the case with other mood
monitoring systems, and whether or not data is monitored by a clinician
should therefore be made clear to those who use any online mood
monitoring platform.

Three key barriers to mood monitoring via True Colours were identified.
First, participants indicated that it was difficult to find the time
and/or motivation to engage consistently with the system. However, as
discussed, LQD participants were required to complete two questionnaires
each week as well as study-specific questions.^11^ In standard clinical
practice, a manageable amount and frequency of use could be agreed
between patient and clinician. Balancing the need to collect sufficient
data while minimising the burden placed on patients is an important
consideration and likely to be relevant to other online platforms.

Second, participants raised concerns about their ability to categorise
experiences on standardised questionnaire(s). For some, there were clear
discrepancies between what they had experienced and available response
options. Others felt uncertain about question wording, reporting that
they were difficult to understand or repetitive. Although these
difficulties relate to the QIDS-SR and WSAS, and not the monitoring
system itself, they indicate a need for the continued development of
simplified self-report questionnaires to maximise the utility of online
mood monitoring systems while maintaining the validity and reliability
of assessments.

Finally, although participants had a positive experience with features
of the interface (e.g. weekly prompts), a variety of issues were
reported. Several participants chose not to view the graphs, and the
majority of those who did had difficulty accessing or interpreting
feedback. In addition, technical issues limited the ability of some to
interact with the system. Although these graphical and technical
concerns can be addressed, the finding that a small number of
participants simply preferred human contact indicates that applications
such as True Colours will not be acceptable to all, as is the case with
any intervention.

There are limitations to this study. Convenience sampling was used, and
although this is a widely used method of sampling in qualitative work,
it may limit the transferability of the results to other settings,
particularly as all participants were selected from a single clinical
trial.^18^ Participants also varied in how long and to what extent they
had used True Colours, making it difficult for some to comment on
certain features (e.g. the graphs). The content and frequency of
questionnaires was also protocolised according to the design of the
wider clinical trial, although patients did have the flexibility to add
additional questionnaires to their schedule. Therefore the experience of
participants in the present study may therefore differ from those of
patients using the system to support their usual care, and future
investigation of online mood monitoring in a purely clinical setting
would be of benefit. However, it is noted that the protocolised
questionnaires included in this study are routinely used in clinical
practice.

To our knowledge, this is the first study to explore the experiences of
patients with TRD who use the True Colours mood monitoring system. Our
findings are encouraging and suggest the system is reasonably well
adhered to and provides an effective way of capturing outcomes. However
further development is needed to improve the participant--system
interface, and maximise the clinical utility of True Colours for this
group. Another important step should be the examination of True Colours
use in relation to treatment outcomes, to assess not only whether
patients perceive the system to be beneficial, but also whether this
translates to an improvement in empirical outcomes.

Although this qualitative study was conducted in a single sample taken
from a clinical trial, the differences between the experiences of
patients with unipolar TRD reported here and those of patients with
bipolar disorder^9^ may have wider implications across settings and mood
monitoring platforms. It is clear that online tools developed to support
patient care are not 'one size fits all', and the experiences and
preferences of individual patient groups must be accounted for during
development if such tools are to provide the benefits intended.

We would like to thank Vanashree Wadekar for programming and setting up
the LQD study questionnaires on the True Colours system, Valeria De
Angel and Emanuella Oprea for their contribution to data collection, and
Sarah Mather, Jake Hutchinson and Kimberly Nortey for transcribing
interviews and data collection. We also thank all of the participants
for their valued contribution.

**Emma Incecik** is an MSc student and Research Assistant at the
Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s College London, UK. **Rachael W.
Taylor** is a PhD student at the Department of Psychological Medicine,
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s College
London; and National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research
Centre at South London & Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King\'s
College London, UK. **Beatrice Valentini** is an MSc student at the
Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s College London, UK; and Department of
General Psychology, University of Padova, Italy. **Stephani L. Hatch**
is a professor at the Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s College London, UK.
**John R. Geddes** is a professor at Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust;
and the Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, UK. **Anthony J.
Cleare** is a professor at the Department of Psychological Medicine,
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s College
London; National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research
Centre at South London & Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King\'s
College London; and South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
**Lindsey Marwood** is Postdoctoral Clinical Trial Manager at the
Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s College London; and South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

# Supplementary material {#sec4}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2019.92.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::

The LQD study is funded by a grant from the National Institute for
Health Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment (HTA) programme
(reference 14/222/02). This research was also part-funded by the
NIHR--Wellcome Trust King\'s Clinical Research Facility (CRF), the NIHR
Oxford Cognitive Health CRF, the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre (BRC)
at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King\'s College
London, and the NIHR Oxford Health BRC. The views expressed are those of
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the
Department of Health and Social Care.

The study was designed by R.W.T., L.M. and E.I. with support from A.J.C.
and J.R.G. R.W.T., L.M., and E.I. contributed to data collection. E.I.,
B.V., R.W.T. and L.M. contributed to the analysis, with support in
analysis design from S.L.H. E.I. and R.W.T. drafted the manuscript and
all authors made revisions to the intellectual content and approved the
final version. All authors are accountable for all aspects of the work.

[^1]: **Declaration of interest:** In the past 3 years, A.J.C. has
    received honoraria for speaking from Astra Zeneca and Lundbeck;
    honoraria for consulting from Allergan, Janssen, Livanova and
    Lundbeck; support for conference attendance from Janssen and
    research grant support from the Medical Research Council (MRC),
    Wellcome and National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). S.L.H.
    has received grant support from Wellcome Trust, NIHR, Department of
    Health and Social Care, MRC, Guy\'s and St Thomas\' Charity, and the
    Economic and Social Research Council. J.R.G. led the conception of
    True Colours and has overseen its implementation in routine clinical
    practice and research studies. He is an NIHR senior investigator and
    has received research funding from MRC, Wellcome and NIHR. No other
    authors report any conflicts of interest, although E.I. conducted
    some of the interviews as part of her master\'s dissertation
    project.

[^2]: These authors contributed equally to this work.

[^3]: Percentages may not add up to 100 owing to rounding.

[^4]: HRSD, Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression.

    a\. Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression. *J Neurol Neurosurg
    Psychiatry* 1960; **23**: 56--62.

    Percentages may not add up to 100 owing to rounding.
