================================================
Freda E. Martin, MD, FRCPsych, FRCPsych (Canada)
================================================



Dora Black

:date: 2020-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

**Formerly Chair, Department for Children and Parents, Tavistock Clinic,
London, and Executive Director, CM Hincks Treatment Centre, Toronto,
Canada**

Freda Martin, who died in Toronto on 2 August 2019 at the age of 87, was
one of the early pioneers of family therapy, first in the UK and then in
Canada. In 1962, while working at the Tavistock Clinic, London, in
collaboration with Janet Knight, she published an important paper
describing the assessment of disturbed children involving the whole
family.\ :sup:`1` At that time, the standard assessment of such children
involved the mother being seen by a social worker, while the child saw
the psychiatrist. Fathers were either not seen at all or seen usually on
only one occasion with the mother. Freda Martin, with Rosemary Whiffen
and John Byng-Hall, influenced both by John Bowlby and the family
therapy movement in the USA, was able to demonstrate how not just
assessing but treating the whole family as a unit often illuminated the
family dynamics in a manner impossible to achieve when family members
were seen individually.

Freda came to the Tavistock Clinic with an unusual background. Arriving
there in 1960 as the first psychiatrist with a Jungian, rather than a
Kleinian, analytic training, she was not aligned with the existing
predominantly psychoanalytic factions. This enabled her to be eclectic
in her clinical work and to espouse her belief in the importance of
multidisciplinary teamwork, involving psychiatrists, psychologists,
social workers and psychotherapists.

Initially, she met much hostility at the Tavistock Clinic from those who
found it difficult to accept that an analyst could embrace such views.
She persisted, first as one of a number of colleagues and later as Chair
of the Department for Children and Parents.

In 1975, she returned to Canada, eventually becoming Executive Director
of the CM Hincks Treatment Centre in Toronto. Here she was able to
introduce clinical approaches derived from attachment theory. According
to a colleague, she brought to Canada the importance of early
intervention to promote physical and emotional well-being in all
children, as well as her belief in the importance of postgraduate
training for all disciplines, which she regarded as equally necessary
for helping children and families. Today these ideas are accepted and
practised, even in centres formerly devoted to only one treatment mode
for disturbed children.

She initiated postgraduate multidisciplinary training and research into
what previously had been a purely clinical setting. The renamed Hincks
Dellcrest Centre Gail Appel Institute, now part of the Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, came into being in 1986. It required new, expanded
premises. Freda Martin persuaded the Board to construct a seven-floor
building on the clinic car park. It was opened by John Bowlby.

She continued to develop new approaches to treatment applying them, for
example, to the successful treatment of anorexia in adolescents. In a
seminal paper published in 1990,\ :sup:`2` she described what she called
‘run-away’ effects at various systemic levels (physiological,
individual, family, social), which triggered dieting behaviour in
perfectionistic personalities.

Creating a link with the University of Toronto, where she was an
assistant professor, enabled her to create fellowships to train social
workers and psychologists, educators and psychotherapists in family
therapy and infant mental health.

Freda Martin (née McQueen) was born in Niagara Falls, Canada, on 11
April 1932 to Andrew, an engineer, and Lily. She studied medicine at the
University of Toronto Medical School, qualifying in 1956. In 1959, she
came to the Maudsley Hospital, London, for postgraduate psychiatric
training. She was appointed a senior registrar at the Tavistock Clinic
in 1960, shortly afterwards becoming a consultant and then Chair of the
Department for Children and Parents.

Freda met her husband Kenneth Martin, an adult psychiatrist who worked
mainly in private practice, at the Maudsley. They had two children.
Freda and her family loved to relax in the family ‘cottage’ by Devil
Lake, where they sailed, canoed and entertained friends.

After leaving her full-time post in 2005, Martin became involved in
advising the provincial and federal governments about the importance of
teaching parents and educators about early physical and emotional
development. She set up and evaluated 3-year ‘learning through play’
courses all over Canada. Later, she worked in Jamaica and Latvia with
senior professionals using this material to train parents, carers and
nursery staff. These activities were funded by the Canadian
International Development Agency. After full retirement, she took
singing lessons and enjoyed singing in a choir. Very recently she helped
children to read as well as reading to fellow residents in her
retirement home.

Freda is described by family members and her many devoted colleagues as
outstandingly creative, decisive, forthright and brisk. She was not
afraid to speak her mind, although she was always regarded as kind and
supportive to staff and students.

The daughter of a close friend described her as a ‘bullshit detector’.
When this same friend was terminally ill, Freda, in the words of her
friend's daughter, ‘enabled mum to articulate and process her own
death’, with support and love, helping the family in their grief.

Kenneth died in 2012. Freda is survived by her two children, Andrew and
Peter, as well as by two grandchildren.
