---
abstract: |
  The HCR-20 has taken on a life of its own. In forensic services it has
  been elevated from helpful aide-mémoire into a prophetic tool worthy
  of Nostradamus himself. Almost every outcome is interpreted through
  it. Despite the evidence of its limited utility, the difficulties of
  predicting rare events, the narrative fallacies and other heuristic
  biases it creates, and the massive opportunity costs it entails,
  commissioners and services alike mandate its use. Yet in routine
  practice the problems are not acknowledged, multiple conflicts of
  interest lie unobserved and other opportunities are neglected.
author:
- Edward Silva[^1]Correspondence to Edward Silva
  (<ed.silva@merseycare.nhs.uk>)
date: 2020-12
institute:
- Ashworth Hospital, Mersey Care NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
title: The HCR-20 and violence risk assessment -- will a peak of
  inflated expectations turn to a trough of disillusionment?
---

Violence risk assessment is a core part of forensic psychiatry. It has
evolved from an unstructured clinical and anecdotal exercise, through
the use of actuarial tools and is now dominated by a variety of
structured professional judgement (SPJ) instruments. Of these the
Historical Clinical Risk Management-20 (HCR-20) is pre-eminent. It has
itself evolved: first published in 1995, it is now in its third
iteration. Initially it was used as an aide-mémoire to assist clinicians
and others to systematically assess what were believed to be risk
factors for violence across time: historical (ten items), clinical and
risk management (five each). In 2001 further materials were added,
including scenario planning.

The HCR-20 is the most widely used violence risk assessment tool in the
world,^1^ and in the UK it has become the ubiquitous gold standard for
the risk assessment of violence in forensic services. NHS England
commissioners of secure services for forensic patients mandate an HCR-20
assessment, updated every 6 months, even when there is no history of
violence. As can be the case with many expert judgements,^2^ any outcome
can be seen through its lens. In cases of disaster, 'the HCR-20 was
completed incorrectly', 'the recommendations were not followed', 'it was
not updated on time' and, most seriously, 'there was no HCR-20'. When
there is success then the merits of the risk assessment and assessor are
praised. Fearing blame in the event of failure, my psychologist
colleagues spend dozens of hours reading through volumes of notes and
the outputs are so long as to be unreadable. Explanations of previous
violence are formulated, estimates of risk made and future risk
scenarios hypothesised. The tool is over-relied on to guide patient
management through complex systems of care, a task it cannot achieve.
Curiously, updates are frequently done after clinical decisions about
management have been made. But the limitations are not acknowledged and
they are legion. Some are relevant to violence risk in general and
others specifically to SPJ tools and the HCR-20 in particular.

# Limitations to SPJ tools {#sec1}

•There is no grade 1 randomised controlled trial (RCT) evidence for the
effectiveness of SPJ tools in reducing violence; the only RCT tested the
Short Term Assessment of Risk and Treatability (START) and gave a
negative result.^3^•Most items in structured risk assessment
instruments, especially the Psychopathy Checklist --Revised (PCL-R), and
many in the HCR-20 do not predict violence.^4^•Random combinations of
risk factors are as useful as those assembled in standardised
instruments.^5^•The HCR-20 ignores pertinent facts regarding the
importance of adherence to specific drug treatments and risk.^6^•The
area under the curve (AUC) measure of utility bears very little
relevance to use in clinical practice and ignores the difficulty of
prediction when base rates are low.^7^ It is a concept rarely used in
other areas of medical practice, where positive predictive value (PPV)
is the usual measure.•As with any attempt to predict rare events^8^ (p.
170) the PPV of the HCR-20, as with other risk tools, is poor and it
produces many more false- than true-positive findings.^9^•High-quality
negative evidence regarding the utility of multiple risk tools is not
noticed, is refuted and as yet has had no impact on commissioners or
services.^9,10^•Intellectual and financial conflicts of interest in the
publications on various SPJ tools are not mentioned.^11^ Those who
submit research papers on the HCR-20 and other risk instruments rarely,
if ever, declare an interest in receiving fees from training in its use.
Yet it is a 'product', like a pharmaceutical agent, and one for which
they stand to gain financially if it is promoted. Similar conflicts may
exist for those who conduct serious adverse incident reviews
recommending improved use of risk assessment if this is also a service
they provide on a commercial basis.•The narrative explanations of risk
formulations and future risk scenarios are accepted. They are not seen
as rhetorical devices requiring empirical validation, unlikely to be
correct in systems too complex for analysis. To make sense of the world
humans require stories that examine concrete events, ignoring chance and
the things that did not happen. Any recent salient event is a candidate
to become the kernel of a narrative explanation.^12^•Narratives combined
with recent or high-profile events feed heuristic biases, including
representativeness, availability and, most important, affect.^13,14^ In
forensic services our patients have often violated basic human norms:
rape, incest, murder, mutilation and losses of control.^15^ At times we
will be disgusted. This is rarely acknowledged and instead there is a
serious risk that an emotionally driven sense of disgust^14^ will result
in the immediate generation of opinions for which the supporting
evidence is subsequently found, with risk assessment becoming confused
with the assessment of outrage^16^ and becoming a moral
exercise.^17^•Whatever our organisations may tell us, it feels as if
there is only punishment for failure and so an increasing tendency to
risk aversion is inevitable.^18^•The definition of violence used in the
HCR-20 is so broad (including verbal threats) as to be meaningless in
the services we work in.

# The consequences of ignoring these limitations {#sec2}

Ignoring these difficulties is not just a failure of a tool. It has
enormous consequences for patients, professionals, the public and those
who pay for our services. The patients we care for face prolonged
detention and the opportunity cost of professional time that could be
spent delivering interventions. The patients we do not care for face
delays in accessing care, often untreated and in inadequate facilities
in prison. As professionals we become preoccupied with avoiding failure
instead of achieving improvement and it often feels like the risk that
is being managed is the risk to ourselves and to, or even from, our
organisations. An explicit analysis of risk will be an important part of
a patient\'s treatment, but in the context of deficiencies in treatment
and access to care, an HCR-20 will not protect us, or our organisations,
from litigation or public criticism. Instead of trying to determine what
the prospective risk is given the facts and the base rates, we
anticipate how failure will be perceived in hindsight. Those that fund
our services complain that too many are detained,^19^ while removing
funding from objective research.^20^ Inquires^21^ continue to recommend
interventions that do not work -- case management,^22^ risk assessment
and community treatment orders^23^ -- and themselves can fuel narrative
fallacies.^24^ Through our overvalued ideas regarding risk assessment,
forensic services are left caring for a tiny percentage of mentally
disordered offenders, who we dare not part company with, and at vast
expense.^25^

# What can we do? {#sec3}

The argument is not that risk assessments should be abandoned, only that
we should be much more circumspect about their power, utility and
explanatory value, and recognise how narratives may mislead as well as
explain. This is now the position in the related field of suicide risk
assessment. In stark contrast to the requirements for secure services
and the use of the HCR-20, the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) advice is: 'Do not use risk assessment tools and
scales to predict future suicide or repetition of self-harm'^26^ (p. 8),
for the simple reason that we cannot stratify risk using the tools
available. The information they provide regarding the likelihood of the
outcomes we are really concerned about is of no practical use.^27^ But
it is very hard for systems to change and for professionals to give up
their sincerely held beliefs. This is the case throughout medicine. It
takes an average of 17 years to translate research findings into
practice.^28^ Although short structured assessments would be helpful,
our attempts to stratify risk of violence are not useful and should be
abandoned, as should narrative explanations of the past and
hypothesising future scenarios. It is not particularly useful to say
that a man who has been violent in the past might be violent in future
if intoxicated, threatened, feeling disrespected or aggrieved, lost to
follow-up, non-adherent to antipsychotic or mood stabilising medication
and in contact with a vulnerable potential victim.

Some hope that technology will provide a solution. But it took the
resources of Deep Mind\'s artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities,
combined with a vast sample of over 700 000 patients, to develop a
system to predict the highly specific outcome of acute kidney injury
within the tight window of 48 h in highly monitored in-patient
environments.^29^ So why do we think that we can predict violent
behaviour over timescales of weeks, let alone months or years, on the
basis of human analysis, or that in future AI will be able to make
longer-term predictions about far more complex human behaviours? Even if
such analytic systems are developed, it is questionable whether
clinicians, patients or the legal system would accept them. It is likely
that highly discriminatory variables would be key factors in AI
algorithms -- gender, age, ethnicity, residence in a high crime area,
peer group criminality -- and there would be fears that the scenarios of
*The Minority Report* would emerge.^30^ Instead the approach adopted by
NICE regarding suicide and self-harm should be taken, with the emphasis
on the delivery of effective treatments, ensuring services are
adequately resourced and developing better habits regarding quality.^31^

# A hint of change? {#sec4}

A quick search using Google Trends shows that online interest in the
HCR-20 has fallen dramatically, from a peak in September 2007 to date.
The Gartner Hype Cycle,^32^ with its phases of a technology trigger, a
peak of inflated expectations, a trough of disillusionment, a slope of
enlightenment and then a final plateau of productivity, is held as an
example of the boom, bust and then stabilisation of new technologies.
But perhaps this is what is happening already?

**Edward Silva** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist at Ashworth
Hospital, Mersey Care NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK. He has worked
in secure services since 1998 and has been involved in the use of SPJ
tools throughout as part of the routine clinical care of many detained
patients.

[^1]: **Declaration of interest:** E.S. is involved in the use of SPJ
    tools as part of the routine clinical care of detained patients.
