====================================================================================================
Safeguarding the physical health of people with severe mental disorders during the COVID-19 pandemic
====================================================================================================



Shuo Zhang
Jayati Das-Munshi
Graham Thornicroft
:Date: 2020-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is putting
unprecedented stress on global healthcare systems. Psychiatrists have
also seen great changes to their day-to-day practice with a move towards
telephone and video consultations alongside general practice and
secondary care colleagues. As we move towards operating in these new
ways for the foreseeable future, it is likely that COVID-19 will further
exacerbate multilevel risk factors for excess mortality in people with
severe mental disorders (usually understood to include people with
psychosis, bipolar disorder or major depressive disorder).

People with SMD already have a 2–3 times higher premature mortality
rate, accounting for a 10–20-year reduction in life expectancy, mediated
through increased exposure to risk factors for non-communicable
diseases, such as smoking, harmful use of alcohol, sedentary behaviour,
iatrogenic effects of medications and inequitable access to healthcare
services.\ :sup:`1` Those with SMD also often receive poor quality care,
including health promotion and prevention, screening and treatment.

Individuals at higher risk for severe COVID-19 infection and mortality
are people aged over 60; with underlying conditions such as obesity,
hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, or chronic respiratory
disease; and those who smoke.\ :sup:`2` For other infectious diseases,
people with SMD are likely to be at increased risk of: (a) exposure to
the disease; (b) accessing less effective healthcare; and (c) increased
vulnerability for significant morbidity and mortality.\ :sup:`1`

Although there are overlaps with pre-existing multilevel risk
factors,\ :sup:`3` there are some important differences. For individuals
with SMD, disorder-specific factors of COVID-19 such as early symptoms
being common and non-specific could delay diagnosis, and it is possible
that people with SMD may be less able to self-monitor and raise concerns
if their condition deteriorates. Furthermore, COVID-19 has the potential
to mimic signs and symptoms seen in severe clozapine-associated
complications, such as neutropenic sepsis and myocarditis, which can be
difficult to clinically differentiate from severe COVID-19.\ :sup:`2` We
anticipate that health-related behaviours, such as tobacco use and
associated higher prevalence of underlying lung disease in the SMD
population, will increase the risk of COVID-19 complications and deaths
from pneumonia.

Individual vulnerabilities are exacerbated by health system factors such
as absence of relevant shared guidelines for the management of COVID-19
from physical health and mental health bodies, diversion of resources
from mental health settings, high rates of COVID-19 illness within the
health workforce, and the challenges of infection control management in
mental healthcare settings, exacerbated by global shortages of personal
protective equipment (PPE).

People with SMD have continued higher exposure to sociocultural risk
factors including experiences of stigma and discrimination, living in
deprived neighbourhoods, and limited family and community
resources.\ :sup:`3` At present the impact of these factors within the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic is unclear.

We suggest the following measures to address individual, facility and
health system determinants of health.

Individuals should be supported with infection prevention, for example
the direct provision of education about handwashing, social distancing
and the signs and symptoms of COVID-19 along with health promotion
strategies such as smoking cessation or harm reduction, reducing drug
and alcohol use, and optimising conditions such as diabetes mellitus,
chronic respiratory conditions and cardiovascular health. People with
SMD should maintain contact with mental healthcare teams and receive
ongoing review of mental health needs. At present although there has
been some specific guidance on supporting people with cognitive
impairment and dementia,\ :sup:`4` it remains unclear what the impact of
the pandemic may be on people with SMD, a group who may be especially
vulnerable because of pre-existing social isolation, which may be
further exacerbated by social distancing measures.

Staff at mental health community and residential facilities should have
equal access to PPE and training on infection control in order to reduce
the risks of infection. Urgent reviews of visitor policies, and
assurance of sick pay for self-isolating staff are also needed.

Further consideration is needed to optimise effective delivery of care
when mental and physical health staff reduce routine face-to-face
meetings, and to minimise disruptions in the supply of medication and
routine monitoring of medications such as clozapine and lithium. People
with SMD may need additional support in accessing services when
community health centre staff adopt new ways of working, such as
telephone or video consultations.

People with SMD should be offered the same level of treatment for
physical healthcare in line with the principles of non-discrimination,
the Right to Health, and the fundamental demand of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals,\ :sup:`5` namely to ‘leave no-one
behind’.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
