==========================================================================
Mental health, smoking and poverty: benefits of supporting smokers to quit
==========================================================================



Vicky Salt
Ciaran Osborne
:Correspondence: Vicky Salt (vicky.salt@ash.org.uk)

:date: 2020-10

:Abstract:
   Smoking rates among people with common mental health conditions
   remain around 50% higher than those in the wider population; this is
   a significant cause of the 10–20-year reduced life expectancy of
   people with mental health conditions. However, the effects of smoking
   go far beyond physical health. Research estimates that smokers with
   mental health conditions could be spending as much as £2200 a year on
   tobacco, pushing an estimated 130 000 people with a common mental
   disorder into poverty. The Government has set a target for England to
   be smokefree by 2030; however, without a dramatic increase in
   support, smokers with mental health conditions risk being left
   behind. Action on Smoking and Health provides the secretariat for the
   Mental Health & Smoking Partnership. The Partnership aims to reduce
   the inequality in smoking rates between people with mental health
   conditions and the wider population. It brings together Royal
   Colleges, third-sector organisations, trade unions and academia to
   review progress and highlight areas for further action.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

The challenge
=============

People with mental health conditions die on average 10–20 years earlier
than individuals in the wider population.\ :sup:`1` High smoking rates
are one of the key reasons for this health inequality.\ :sup:`2` Smoking
rates remained largely static among people with mental health conditions
during the 20 years from 1993 to 2013, at around 40%.\ :sup:`3` Although
new figures suggest that this prevalence is starting to decline, smoking
rates among people with common mental health conditions remain around
50% higher than those in the wider population.\ :sup:`4,5`

However, the effects of smoking go far beyond reduced life expectancy;
it influences employment prospects,\ :sup:`6` reduces
earnings,\ :sup:`6` increases care needs\ :sup:`7` and causes
poverty.\ :sup:`8` Higher smoking rates are associated with every
indicator of disadvantage, but most adult smokers want to
quit.\ :sup:`9` Smokers with mental health conditions are aware of the
risks to people around them from second-hand smoke and see this as a
motivator to quit; clinicians must offer support to enable them to do
so.

The challenge of The Mental Health and Smoking Partnership is to help
tackle these inequalities.\ :sup:`10` The Partnership was established in
2016 following publication of *The Stolen Years: The Mental Health and
Smoking Action Report* by Action on Smoking and Health (ASH), with the
ambition of reducing smoking prevalence to 5% or less among people with
mental health conditions.\ :sup:`11` The report sets out the sector-wide
action needed to reduce smoking rates among people with mental health
conditions, from reviewing the training of the mental health workforce
to building the research base on peer support and
expert-by-experience-led interventions.

Three years on, the Government has published the Tobacco Control Plan
for England,\ :sup:`12` NHS Long Term Plan\ :sup:`13` and Prevention
Green Paper,\ :sup:`14` committing to reducing smoking prevalence among
people with mental health conditions. However, change is not happening
quickly enough. The recent Green Paper *Advancing our Health: Prevention
in the 2020s* sets an ambition to end smoking in England by 2030,
defined as a prevalence of 5% or less.\ :sup:`14` To achieve this, using
the latest publicly available data,\ :sup:`15` it is estimated that the
annual rate of decline from 2014–2030 among people with mental health
conditions needs to be an ambitious 1.82 percentage points a year, more
than double the previous rate of decline. Unless we dramatically
increase the support available, this target will not be met, and people
with mental health conditions will be left behind.

.. _sec2:

Tobacco, health and poverty
===========================

In his landmark 2010 report, *Fair Society, Healthy Lives*, Michael
Marmot made clear the moral dimension of tackling health inequalities:
‘Inequalities are a matter of life and death, of health and sickness, of
well-being and misery. The fact that in England today people from
different socioeconomic groups experience avoidable differences in
health, well-being and length of life is, quite simply, unfair and
unacceptable’.\ :sup:`16`

Half of all lifetime smokers will die from their addiction, that is,
more than 96 000 people every year in the UK. For every smoker who dies,
an estimated 30 others will be living with smoking-related
diseases.\ :sup:`17` This should be reason enough to act.

However, there are also short-term, immediate benefits to quitting
smoking. Smoking decreases disposable income (defined as household
income after tax and National Insurance contributions), which can be
returned to the household when smokers quit. Smokers in social housing
spend, on average, 14.6% of their disposable income on tobacco, compared
with 6.9% among owner occupiers and 5.8% of those living in privately
rented accommodation.\ :sup:`18` This has substantial economic
consequences, with more than 1 million people – including 263 000
children – living in poverty as a direct result of income lost to
expenditure on tobacco. The proportion of social housing tenants living
in poverty increases from around a quarter (28.3%) to two in five
(42.8%) once the costs of smoking are considered.\ :sup:`8`

Research commissioned by ASH and Public Health England has shown the
extent to which people with mental health conditions are economically
disadvantaged due to smoking.\ :sup:`19` Higher rates of smoking are
found among people with a mental health condition living in poverty
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Looking at the number of cigarettes smoked and
taking into account purchases of illicit and cheap tobacco, researchers
estimate that smokers in poverty spend an average of around £1200 a year
on smoking, at 2015 prices.\ :sup:`19` However, adjusting for
underreporting of the amount of tobacco smoked, smokers with a mental
health condition below the poverty line could be spending over £2200 a
year on tobacco.\ :sup:`19` Table 1Smoking prevalence according to
mental health disorder and poverty\ :sup:`19`\ Type of disorder
reportedSmoking prevalence in whole populationSmoking prevalence among
those in povertyCommon mental disorder34%46%Currently taking
psychoactive medication34%46%Longstanding mental disorder40%52%

Using the conservative estimate of £1200, researchers estimate that
around 130 000 people with a mental health condition are pushed into
poverty by expenditure on tobacco. `Table 2 <#tab02>`__ shows a
breakdown of smokers with common mental disorders, those taking
psychoactive medications and those with longstanding mental disorders
across the UK, who are pushed into poverty by expenditure on
tobacco.\ :sup:`19` Table 2Population estimates of the number of UK
adults with a mental disorder who are in poverty and who smoke, and who
are drawn into poverty by their expenditure on
smoking\ :sup:`19`\ Common mental disorder (CIS-R score >12)Currently
taking psychoactive medicationsLongstanding mental disorderSmokers with
disorder who are in poverty\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ Smokers with disorder who
are in poverty\ `b <#tfn2_2>`__\ Numbers with disorder drawn into
poverty by smoking\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ Smokers with disorder who are in
poverty\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ Smokers with disorder who are in
poverty\ `b <#tfn2_2>`__\ Numbers with disorder drawn into poverty by
smoking\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ Smokers with disorder who are in
poverty\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ Smokers with disorder who are in
poverty\ `b <#tfn2_2>`__\ Numbers with disorder drawn into poverty by
smoking\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ UK1 217 733904 647135 304553 801405 28255 380717 110425 420100 062England1 021 983759 225113 554464 778340 13346 478601 835357 03483 977Scotland103 01176 52711 44646 84834 284468560 66235 9878464Wales58 91343 767654626 79319 607267934 69420 5824841Northern
Ireland33 82525 128375815 38311 257153819 91911 8172779 [1]_ [2]_ [3]_

The effects of expenditure on tobacco are compounded by lower earnings
among smokers in employment, with non-smokers earning on average 6.8%
more than smokers. Smokers are also significantly less likely to be in
employment than never-smokers. Long-term smokers are 7.5% less likely to
be in employment than never-smokers.

People with mental health conditions are more likely to be unemployed,
to receive benefits and to be living in relative poverty than those
without mental health conditions.\ :sup:`2,20` It is well documented
that debt and financial stress can exacerbate mental ill health and that
people with mental health conditions are more likely to experience debt
problems.\ :sup:`21` The interactions between smoking, poverty, debt and
mental health suggested by these studies are important reasons to
support smokers to quit.

.. _sec3:

Effects on mental health
========================

Further motivation to support smokers with mental health conditions to
quit comes from the positive influence this can have on mental health.
Quitting smoking is associated with reduced depression, anxiety and
stress, as well as improved positive mood and quality of life compared
with continuing to smoke.\ :sup:`22` For some people with mental health
conditions, smoking can feel like ‘self-medicating’, and people say that
it is an important way for them to deal with stress. However, this
relief is temporary, linked to relieving withdrawal from nicotine and in
the long term it can exacerbate symptoms.\ :sup:`23` The effect of
smoking cessation on anxiety and depression appears to be at least as
large as that of antidepressants.\ :sup:`22`

Not only does smoking cessation improve physical health and reduce the
chances of developing a smoking-related disease, supporting smokers to
quit can also lift them out of poverty, return valuable disposable
income to households and improve mental health.

It is also crucial that we remember that a majority of smokers want to
quit.\ :sup:`9` This is true among all smokers, including those with
mental health conditions.\ :sup:`24` An even larger majority (71%) of
smokers wish they had never started.\ :sup:`25`

.. _sec4:

Providing support to quit
=========================

This raises the question: are services doing enough to support smokers
with mental health conditions to quit? In 2016, the Five Year Forward
View for Mental Health set a target for all in-patient mental health
services to be smokefree by 2018.\ :sup:`26` This commitment was
reiterated in the Tobacco Control Plan for England, which stated that it
would include ‘providing integrated tobacco dependence treatment
pathways’\ :sup:`12` in line with National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) guidance: *Smoking: Acute, Maternity and Mental Health
Services* (PH48).\ :sup:`27` There are no specific targets for community
mental health services, yet ASH's survey of community mental health
practitioners, discussed below, shows that there is a need to focus on
the support provided by community mental health teams.

.. _sec4-1:

In-patient settings
-------------------

This 2018 target has been missed. A 2019 survey of mental health trusts
in England found that nearly one in five (18%) did not have a
comprehensive smokefree policy in line with NICE guidance.\ :sup:`28`
Over half (55%) of trusts reported not always asking patients about
their smoking status on admission, and 57% of trusts said that staff
accompany patients on escorted leave to smoke every day, a practice
which is: ‘\ *…outdated. It reduces the resources available to deliver
clinical care*\ :sup:`29` *and causes direct harm to
patients*.’\ :sup:`12`

Further, although all trusts reported that they offer nicotine
replacement therapy (NRT) to patients, only 49% offered varenicline
(Champix).\ :sup:`28` This is likely to be due in part to historic
misunderstandings about the effects of varenicline on mental health.
However, evidence shows that varenicline is not associated with negative
outcomes for people with mental health conditions.\ :sup:`30–32` As
reflected in the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ position statement on
prescribing of varenicline: ‘\ *varenicline is a generally safe and
well-tolerated medication which has been proven to increase rates of
smoking cessation in psychiatric and non-psychiatric
populations*\ ’.\ :sup:`33`

However, prescribing rates for varenicline are falling fast,
particularly for people with mental health conditions. Primary care data
for over 200 000 smokers shows that smokers with mental health
conditions were 31% less likely to be prescribed varenicline than NRT,
despite varenicline being more effective.\ :sup:`32` Smokers with mental
health conditions who were prescribed varenicline were 19% more likely
to have successfully quit at 2-year follow-up, compared with those
prescribed NRT.\ :sup:`32`

These policies must be addressed to ensure that all smokers are being
offered the best support available to quit, in line with NICE guidance.
Smokers with mental health conditions are often more heavily
addicted,\ :sup:`2` and ensuring they have access to the most effective
pharmacotherapy is essential to supporting quit attempts.

ASH's survey also showed significant variation in approaches to vaping,
from allowing a range of devices to be used across trusts, to
prohibiting the use of e-cigarettes. National guidance from
PHE,\ :sup:`34` the Royal College of Physicians\ :sup:`35` and the Royal
College of Psychiatrists\ :sup:`33` highlights that vaping is
substantially less harmful than continuing to smoke. Under UK
regulations, the Medicines and Health Care Products Regulatory Agency
(MHRA) oversees notification of new nicotine-containing e-cigarettes and
e-liquids, and operates a yellow card reporting system for any adverse
reactions.\ :sup:`36` A report is not proof that a reaction was caused
by vaping, just that the reporter suspected it might have been. From 20
May 2016 through to 9 January 2020, the MHRA had received 84 yellow card
reports on 245 adverse reactions, including 27 serious respiratory
events.\ :sup:`37` In 2019, over 3.6 million people in England were
estimated to be using e-cigarettes.\ :sup:`38`

E-cigarettes are the most popular aid to quitting smoking in
England,\ :sup:`39` and research has shown that using an e-cigarette
along with behavioural support can be twice as effective for quitting
smoking compared with using NRT.\ :sup:`40` Further, vaping is much
cheaper than smoking. Research suggests that smokers who switch to
e-cigarettes spend around £417 a year on vaping, substantially less than
the estimated expenditure on tobacco of £1200 a year.\ :sup:`41` These
benefits should not be underestimated, and trusts should review policies
in line with the latest evidence\ :sup:`37,42` and national
guidance.\ :sup:`43`

Smokers also want greater provision and variety of support. In a focus
group with 12 participants with experience of in-patient services or
with family in in-patient services, no participant felt that the support
offered on admission to a smokefree in-patient service was
sufficient.\ :sup:`44` They noted that smokefree often felt like a
‘tickbox exercise’ rather than part of their care, with references to
clear failings in the support options available: ‘\ *Handing someone a
card with a number should not, in my opinion, count as actively giving
someone smoking cessation support – that's what I've had. But they can
say they've given you some support; the fact that you couldn't use the
phone at the time doesn't seem relevant*\ ’.

To reduce the inequality in smoking rates between people with mental
health conditions and the wider population, it is essential to improve
the support offered in in-patient services. There are examples of trusts
leading the way on this agenda, offering excellent support and engaging
with smokers to ensure that they are addressing the broader social
aspects of smoking and not just physiological withdrawal. Public Health
England's videos on implementation of NICE PH48 illustrate some of these
examples.\ :sup:`45` If we are to achieve a smokefree 2030 for people
with mental health conditions, these examples must become the norm.

.. _sec4-2:

Community services
------------------

A similarly patchy picture of support is seen in community services,
which support the majority of people with mental health
conditions.\ :sup:`46` Although there is less evidence here, a
small-scale, self-selecting survey conducted by ASH of 103 mental health
nurses (representing 33 trusts) and 171 psychiatrists (representing 48
trusts) found that over 55% reported receiving no training on supporting
smoking cessation.\ :sup:`47` Only around a quarter of respondents said
that they ‘always’ or ‘usually’ delivered very brief advice on smoking.

Prescribing medications for smoking cessation was reported to be
similarly uncommon in community settings. Three-quarters (76%) of
qualified nurses said that they never prescribed smoking cessation
medications (NRT or varenicline), as did three-fifths (59%) of
psychiatrists.\ :sup:`47`

.. _sec5:

What works?
===========

This absence of support is concerning, especially as there is a strong
evidence base around what works to support smokers to quit. Smokers are
three times more likely to quit successfully with the support of a
specialist stop-smoking service than when attempting to quit
unaided.\ :sup:`48,49`

The Smoking Cessation Intervention for People with Severe Mental Ill
Health (SCIMITAR) pilot\ :sup:`50` and randomised controlled trial
(SCIMITAR+)\ :sup:`51` were built on this evidence base. The SCIMITAR
trials tailored the support set out in NICE guidance for people with
mental health conditions, showing that such an approach is both
effective and cost-effective. SCIMITAR compared the effectiveness of
combined behavioural and pharmacological support for smoking cessation
with usual care.\ :sup:`51` Trial-condition participants received
face-to-face behavioural support delivered by a trained mental health
professional and prescriptions of their choice of smoking cessation
medications, the most commonly chosen being NRT. Adaptations for people
with severe mental health conditions – including extended pre-quit
sessions, ‘cut down to quit’, and home visits – were offered in the
trial arm. Compared with usual care, this intervention more than doubled
quit rates at 6-month follow-up and showed significant improvements
after 12 months.\ :sup:`51`

Participants in the SCIMITAR trial reported that the intervention being
delivered by mental health nurses was important to them. It was
important that they felt this support was being delivered by someone who
would understand their mental health diagnosis without judgement and
with professional expertise.

An ASH/Rethink focus group participant highlighted clearly the unique
part a mental health nurse could play in supporting smokers:
‘\ *Community mental health nurses visit people in their own homes, and
they see how that person is managing. Smoking's expensive … if it's the
difference between paying your electricity bill and buying a packet of
fags… If this person is struggling, the community mental health nurse is
in a good position to advise and act as a sign-post … and link with GP
services and the local chemists that offer smoking
cessation*\ ’.\ :sup:`44`

This illustrates the value of training mental health professionals to
deliver smoking cessation advice and support. However, studies have
shown that mental health staff may not see addressing smoking as part of
their role. One study found that only 48% of respondents felt that
addressing smoking was within their remit as a mental health
professional,\ :sup:`52` and one in five were not sure whether quitting
smoking would have a positive effect on recovery or thought quitting
smoking could have negative effects.\ :sup:`52`

The persistence of these myths undermines the potential for mental
health services to support smokers to quit, and highlights the need for
smoking and smoking cessation to be included in the training of mental
health professionals.

.. _sec6:

Making change happen
====================

Population-level interventions that have driven down smoking rates
nationally have largely failed to reach smokers with mental health
conditions. Although the specific commitment to supporting people with
mental health conditions to stop smoking in the NHS Long Term Plan is
welcome, the pace of change is currently slow.\ :sup:`13` Transformation
funding through the NHS Long Term Plan will not be in place nationally
until 2023–2024.\ :sup:`13` Although this additional funding and
national commitment is welcome, it will not, on its own, help enough
smokers with mental health conditions to quit.

Smoking rates among people with mental health conditions will not reach
the national ambition of 5% or less by 2030 without a trained workforce
that sees smoking and smoking cessation as part of their role. The
current lack of training in smoking cessation among the mental health
workforce, as evidenced by trust and community surveys, is a problem
that must be tackled if staff are to be able to deliver on these
commitments.

Smokers expect doctors to ask them about smoking and deliver advice. If
clinicians are not asking about smoking, it sends the signal that this
is nothing to worry about. All psychiatrists should be able to deliver
very brief advice, an evidence-based brief intervention on smoking that
asks about smoking status, advises that support is available that will
increase the chances of successfully stopping, and signposts smokers to
further support. This is not designed to support someone through their
quit attempt; it is about raising the issue and motivating smokers to
try to quit.

Smokers with mental health conditions are likely to be more heavily
addicted and therefore can find quitting harder.\ :sup:`2` Ensuring that
smokers with mental health conditions have access to the right
pharmacotherapy to support them to quit is essential. Mental health
trusts must ensure that the most effective treatments, including
combination NRT and varenicline, are on their formularies and that they
are being prescribed to patients in line with NICE
guidance.\ :sup:`27,53`

Psychiatrists have a key role in reducing smoking among people with
mental health conditions and in turn need appropriate training to
deliver this. Although people can become immune to statistics about
disease and death caused by smoking, reminding them about the effects
that smoking has on well-being and quality of life is always worthwhile.

The number of people with mental health conditions pushed into poverty
by smoking demands urgent action. Although quitting smoking will not
solve poverty for everyone with a mental health condition, giving people
the support they need to quit is a big step in the right direction.

.. _sec7:

About the authors
=================

**Vicky Salt** is Policy Manager at Action on Smoking and Health, Hatton
Garden, UK. **Ciaran Osborne** is Interim Director of Policy, Action on
Smoking and Health, Hatton Garden, UK.

We thank Dr Peter Byrne of the Royal College of Psychiatrists.

V.S. led on the writing of this article, with input and review from
C.O., who has been overseeing the work of the Mental Health and Smoking
Partnership.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec8:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.88.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. [1]
   CIS-R, revised Clinical Interview Schedule; HBAI, households below
   average income.

.. [2]
   Poverty based on 60% median gross income within survey.

.. [3]
   Poverty based on HBAI poverty threshold.
