===========================================================================================================================================
Defining what a ‘carer’ is and the role they play in in-patient mental healthcare: A focus group study with patients, carers and clinicians
===========================================================================================================================================

Aysegul Dirik
Justina Kaselionyte
Domenico Giacco
Stefan Priebe\ **Correspondence:** Aysegul Dirik. Email:
a.dirik@qmul.ac.uk
:Date: 2020-09

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background
      :name: sec_a1

   The value of carer involvement has been extensively researched and
   promoted. However, the field lacks exploration of conceptual issues,
   which might help to explain why there are widespread difficulties in
   putting policy into practice in this area, as implementation rates
   remain low internationally.

   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a2

   This qualitative study explored patients’, carers’ and clinicians’
   perspectives on the role of carers in mental healthcare, particularly
   with regards to in-patient settings.

   .. rubric:: Method
      :name: sec_a3

   Sixteen focus groups were conducted with patients, carers and
   clinicians who have current or previous experience of in-patient
   settings. A thematic analysis was conducted on the transcripts,
   exploring two key domains: (a) what a ‘carer’ is, and (b) how the
   ‘carer’ role is described within the context of the hospital
   environment.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a4

   Participants diverged in their opinions of what the ‘carer’ role
   entails, and the perceived helpfulness of it. Issues unique to the
   in-patient setting were identified, such as the role of the hospital
   environment in enabling or being a barrier to carer involvement.
   These differing perspectives and contextual factors had an impact on
   the position of carers in the hospital setting, as they could be
   viewed as helpful, a hindrance or as passive visitors, depending on
   the perspectives of clinicians.

   .. rubric:: Conclusions
      :name: sec_a5

   More clarity and agreement is needed between patients, carers and
   clinicians in terms of how the ‘carer’ role is defined. This has the
   potential to improve carers’ experience of involvement in hospital
   settings.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1-1:

Background
==========

In the field of mental healthcare, the involvement of family and
friends, often referred to as ‘caregivers’ or ‘carers’, has been
demonstrated to be useful for a variety of outcomes for patients. This
includes a decrease in relapse and rates of readmission to
hospital.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` The efficacy and implementation of carer
involvement has therefore received much attention in research and carer
involvement policies and guidelines are widely promoted in mental
healthcare internationally (for example from the UK National
Collaborating Centre for Mental Health\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` and UK Department
of Health and Social Care\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`). However, the literature
lacks an examination of fundamental conceptual issues,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`
the exploration of which might help us to better understand why carer
involvement is so widely promoted in theory yet so poorly or
inconsistently implemented in practice, both in the UK and
internationally.\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.d)`

‘Carer’ is a policy-derived term, which aims to value the contribution
that family members and friends make to patients’ care. However, there
is a need to explore how the ‘carer’ role is actually understood by
patients, their family members and friends and front-line clinicians.
This is especially pertinent in hospital settings, as patients may be
admitted to hospital following the deterioration of relationships or as
a result of a breakdown in their usual social support
networks.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` There is therefore value in exploring this
topic to better understand how ‘carers’ are viewed in the context of
mental healthcare, and how this might have an impact on the nature of
their involvement in patients’ care.

.. _sec1-2:

Research question
=================

How do patients, carers and clinicians conceptualise the role of carers
in the context of mental healthcare and in-patient settings?

.. _sec2:

Method
======

.. _sec2-1:

Design
------

Focus groups were conducted with patients, carers and clinicians to
explore their opinions and experiences of carer involvement in
in-patient mental healthcare. The groups were conducted as part of a
larger study of stakeholders’ views on what carer involvement in
in-patient mental healthcare should entail, and the methodology is
described in further detail in a separate article.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` For
the present part of the study, the topic guide contained questions and
prompts pertaining to participants’ conceptualisations of what the carer
role entails, and the use of the term ‘carer’.

.. _sec2-2:

Participants
------------

Purposive sampling was used to recruit patients and carers through the
East London NHS Foundation Trust in-patient and out-patient mental
health services as well as local service user and carer organisations
located in the London Boroughs of Hackney, Newham and Tower Hamlets.
Advertisements were put on social media (Twitter and Facebook). All
clinicians who participated in the study worked in in-patient services
at the East London NHS Foundation Trust.

Maximum variation sampling was used to ensure a diverse sample of
participants across mental health settings (acute in-patient units,
triage wards, community settings), local boroughs and, in the case of
staff, job positions. Patient and carer participants were recruited both
from settings where a patient was currently in hospital, and from those
who had been admitted to hospital within the past 5 years. Additionally,
carers were recruited from both settings where an individual might
already self-identify as a ‘carer’ (for example carer organisations) and
settings where they might not do so (for example by being approached by
a clinician when they visit a relative in hospital). Carers could also
self-refer by responding to adverts shared widely via email lists,
Twitter and bulletin boards. The advert did not use the word ‘carer’ but
instead asked ‘have you or someone you support ever been admitted to
hospital for mental health reasons?’. This was to attract participants
with potentially wide-ranging views on the ‘carer’ role, as well as
those who were not familiar with the term ‘carer’.

Sample size was initially planned on the basis of aiming for 6–8
participants per focus group, and 6–12 groups in total, as recommended
by Finch, Lewis & Turley (cited in Ritchie et al).\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` This
was envisaged to allow for active participation for all members while
giving individuals opportunities for more detailed discussion. However,
adjustments were made for each group type, for example carers and
clinicians were invited in higher numbers, to allow for the possibility
that a proportion would cancel because of caring or working
responsibilities.

Patients over 18 years old who were able to provide informed consent,
had experience of admission to psychiatric hospital (within 5 years) and
sufficient command of English were eligible for the study. Carers were
eligible if they were over 18 years old, had experience of supporting
someone who was admitted to psychiatric hospital (within 5 years) and
sufficient command of English. Clinicians had to have current experience
of working in acute in-patient settings.

Potentially eligible patients who were identified by clinicians were
asked permission to receive further information from researchers about
the study. Patients, carers and clinicians who self-referred were also
given the opportunity to discuss details of the study with the
researcher, before arranging to attend a focus group.

.. _sec2-3:

Ethics statement
----------------

All procedures contributing to this work comply with the ethical
standards of the relevant national and institutional committees and with
the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008. Ethical and
institutional approvals were provided by the East London NHS Foundation
Trust and the East of England – Essex NHS Research Ethics Committee
(ref:15/EE/0456). All participants provided their written informed
consent to take part in the study, as well as providing verbal consent
to begin recording.

.. _sec2-4:

Procedures
----------

Focus groups were facilitated by two researchers, with at least one
clinically experienced and able to provide support if any of the
participants became distressed or agitated. Except for one mixed
patient–carer group, separate focus groups were conducted with carers,
patients and clinicians to account for possible counterproductive
dynamics between the groups and ensure that each group could express
their views freely. Although up to ten participants were sought for most
of the focus groups, smaller groups of three to five participants were
arranged with patients who were currently in hospital, to minimise
overstimulation and allow each participant to share their opinions
comfortably.

A topic guide was developed based on guidance in Ritchie et
al\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` and was designed to facilitate up to 90 minutes of
discussion. Each of the three participant groups had a slightly amended
version of the same topic guide, so that the questions were relevant to
them as patients, carers or clinicians. The initial aim of the guide was
to gather opinions to develop a carer involvement intervention to be
used in in-patient settings. After introductions and ground-rule
setting, two main topics were introduced, each with a set of questions,
probes and prompts to encourage active participation of all members. The
discussion topics began (a) generally, asking participants about their
views on carer involvement in mental healthcare, and (b) developed into
specific questions about how to involve carers in hospital settings,
including a discussion of barriers and facilitators to involvement in
different clinical procedures. The topic guide was amended after five
focus groups, as the questions on hospital procedures and potential
interventions were refined following discussions in the initial groups.

The guide was applied flexibly to enable open discussions within each
group. Consequently, although the whole topic guide was covered in each
group, different groups discussed some topics more in-depth than others.
Participants were asked open-ended questions to stimulate discussions,
and all questions were posed as neutrally as possible to encourage them
to express their honest opinions. For example, they were asked what they
think about the term ‘carer’ and following this, they were asked to
discuss what the helpful and unhelpful aspects might be of involving
carers in in-patient treatment.

.. _sec2-5:

Analysis
--------

The focus groups were audio recorded and transcribed using intelligent
verbatim and omission of identifiable information, such as names. The
analysis was conducted independently of the linked
study,\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` which had focused on the practicalities of
barriers and facilitators to carer involvement in in-patient treatment.
NVivo software was used for coding and organising data during the
analysis. Interim analysis was conducted by J.K. and A.D. after nine
focus groups and a decision was made to continue with recruitment. After
16 focus groups, J.K., A.D. and D.G. had a reflective discussion about
whether saturation of themes had been reached, and it was decided to
cease recruitment.

Inductive thematic analysis\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` was used to analyse the
transcripts. This involved looking for common themes and exploring
whether there are any similarities and differences between the
participant groups. The stages included initial familiarisation with the
data corpus by reading all transcripts. Initial coding of the
transcripts was then conducted for all transcripts with the research
question in mind. Distinct areas of exploration were then identified
through the initial coding, and further analysis was conducted within
the framework of two domains: (a) what a ‘carer’ is, and (b) how the
‘carer’ role is described within the context of the hospital
environment.

An iterative process of identifying subthemes through reflective
discussions was conducted throughout the analysis. Labels were attached
to each quote during the coding process to identify whether it came from
a patient, carer or clinician. Comparisons between the three participant
groups were then made at later stages of analysis, once initial themes
had been formed. Clusters of related subthemes were converted to
overarching themes, with transcripts and quotes being re-checked to
ensure consistency of the themes. For example, initial coding of quotes
describing ‘battles’ were further analysed to understand which aspect of
the hospital context and/or procedures was resulting in this perception,
and what this meant in terms of being a ‘carer’. Largely, these quotes
described how carers were perceived by professionals as being
‘difficult’ and there were several examples from different participant
groups to support this view. These quotes were placed into themes after
the transcripts were checked for alternative views. After finalising the
themes, quotes were extracted for the article for transparency and to
illustrate the findings, although some demographic information was
changed to preserve anonymity.

All transcripts were independently coded and analysed by A.D., a
researcher with a primary interest in patient perspectives on family
involvement and J.K., a researcher with interests in sociocultural
perspectives on mental health. The findings were discussed and agreed
with a third researcher (D.G.), an academic and clinical psychiatrist
who had also conducted some of the focus groups and was familiar with
the transcripts. These backgrounds may have influenced each author's
personal interpretation of the themes. However, efforts were made to
maximise the rigour and trustworthiness of the analysis process by
analysing the transcripts separately and then having multiple reflective
discussions on the development of the themes. Any points of disagreement
were discussed and the transcripts were re-checked throughout the
analysis process before deciding on the final themes.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Participants
------------

Eighty-six participants attended 16 focus groups held between 2014 and
2016. This included 31 patients, 22 carers and 33 clinicians. Four focus
groups were held with carers, five with patients, six with clinicians.
Clinician focus groups were broadly separated by profession: ward
managers, nurses, psychologists, psychiatrists and support workers. One
mixed group was held with both patients and carers. Smaller groups were
held for participants currently in acute treatment to support their
participation; the size of all groups varied from three to ten
participants. Sociodemographic characteristics of the participants have
been provided in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. All participants had experience
of voluntary or involuntary admission to a psychiatric hospital within
the past 5 years, either as a patient, carer or staff member. Further
demographic details about the participants are available in the linked
study.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` Table 1Sociodemographic characteristics of
participantsPatientsCarersCliniciansGender,
*n*\ Men16216Women152017AgeMean (s.d.)43 (12.3)51 (15.8)40
(10.4)Undisclosed *n*\ 8––Role,
*n*\ Patient31–Parent–14–Partner–3–Sibling–2–Son/daughter–2–Sibling and
daughter–1–Psychiatrist––6Psychologist––4Nurse––10Ward manager––6Support
worker––6Activity coordinator––1

.. _sec3-2:

Thematic analysis
-----------------

The thematic analysis was divided into two domains: exploring
participants’ understanding of the ‘carer’ role and how they describe
the role they play in hospital settings. Unless otherwise specified, the
themes appeared in all three participant types: patients, carers and
clinicians. The Appendix contains a summary of the themes and subthemes
within these two domains.

.. _sec3-3:

Domain one: who or what is a carer?
-----------------------------------

It was difficult to find a universally acceptable term for a ‘carer’, as
there was diversity in participants’ perceptions of what a ‘carer’ does.
To some extent, caring could be seen as an every day part of human
relationships. Some carers felt it did not need a label or further
recognition, and so they preferred to use everyday terms such as
‘mother’ or ‘father’ instead. However, some carers viewed the caring
role as something that is defined by going beyond what a family member
would already do. The term ‘carer’ therefore was seen as a title that
recognises this. Some clinicians saw it as more of a service term, used
between staff only: “‘Like, I would never say, “This is so-and-so's
carer” in front of the person.’ (Clinician 32)‘No, of course not.’
(Clinician 31)”

.. _sec3-3-1:

Caring in mental health is distinct from physical health
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Participants noted how ‘with mental health patients…every bit counts, no
matter how small or big’ (Clinician 22) and often, the support was not
always clearly defined, but involved ‘being with’ the person. Carers
used words like ‘sitting’ ‘minding’ and ‘monitoring’. Through this they
said how there was an element of ‘experiencing with’ the person when one
is a carer. This was seen as unique to mental health. Participants also
described how carers do what staff cannot or do not do. Many
participants felt that carers should be rewarded for reducing the
pressure on services and for providing the support that nobody else
could.

Furthermore, caring in mental health was described as different to
physical health in terms of how it ‘crept up’ on people, and one became
a carer ‘gradually’, ‘without noticing’. It was a ‘job with no end date’
because the unique nature of the support meant that there was so much
uncertainty in the process. It was also felt that carers had little
choice in the process. One patient felt that their family being forced
to care was akin to a ‘form of slavery’ (Patient 21). “‘Sometimes you
could be caring for somebody for such a long time, you don't even know
when you started, or when you stopped so to say, “now you're a carer”,
it doesn't work like that.’ (Carer 14)‘Some people don't want to care
and they're in a carer role. They're just angry with them, resentful and
I've met people who resent being positioned in the family, in the
genogram. So location-wise they've got that role and they've got no
choice and [Clinician 12: ‘mm’] and others do it because obviously they
want to…’ (Clinician 13)”

.. _sec3-3-2:

Disagreement on when caring begins and ends
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Participant groups differed most strikingly in their definitions of when
someone can be called a ‘carer’. Clinicians discussed at length the idea
that the term ‘carer’ had ‘the idea of some sort of chronicity’
(Clinician 1) and was frequently unnecessary or inappropriate to use it
in acute mental health settings. “‘You would use it if you have been
yeah, in in mental health services for, you know, quite some time or
your relative had an illness that was prolonged for months and months or
years then you become a carer but it's not really something in an acute
setting.’ (Clinician 5)”

Similarly, patients often felt they only had a ‘carer’ when they were
unwell, as their fluctuating mental and emotional states meant they
experienced fluctuating levels of need. This left carers in the position
of always needing to be available but not knowing when their involvement
would be welcomed or rejected. “‘Well “carer” is to me like … you're
still not well. You're still being cared for. I mean I'm at a stage
within my recovery where, I'm not being cared for. I'm caring for
myself. So I'm my care – they're just people who are there to help me
when I do start falling back and so to me they're not carers, they're
support.’ (Patient 24)‘He [previously] referred to me as a carer, yes,
but now where he feels that he's on the road of recovery, he feels that
I'm not caring for him as much. But, I am caring for him in what I'm
doing for him. I do care for him …I'm having to be the one that has to
access the services. I'm the one that has to attend all the meetings
[Carer 19: ‘hmm-hmm’] …’ (Carer 18)”Although some family members felt
the term ‘carer’ was ‘a bit patronising’ as it implied the patient
needed care all the time, many others described the ‘24/7’ nature of
caring as all-encompassing and requiring constant monitoring in case the
person's symptoms return. One referred to their role as a ‘mind-minder’.
Some clinicians also described how they felt carers were the ones who
had to ‘deal with it 24/7’ and ‘day in, day out’. “‘We care for them
overall…is not just physical or mental. It's everything. [Carer 17:
‘everything’, Carer 18: ‘yeah’] …I think the trouble is that there may
be people who think, “It's only when I'm ill in hospital that you have
become a carer,” but you are 24/7 worried about it. Worried about when
it is going to happen again. [Carer 18: ‘yeah’] …“Has he eaten?” So it's
all the time care.’ (Carer 19)”

.. _sec3-3-3:

Discomfort with dependency
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Participants differed in how they conceptualised dependency. Many
clinicians and some patients expressed discomfort with the idea of a
patient being dependent on a carer. “‘Err it's yeah it kind of implies a
bit of feebleness about someone who needs the one cared for long time
which isn't necessarily the case and isn't what we're aiming for.’
(Clinician 16)‘A lot of us have evolved from … I mean, there are
probably nurses that do, but most people have moved away from that kind
of … You've got a mental health problem, so you are obviously rubbish,
you can't do anything, so you must have a carer, kind of thing.’
(Clinician 28)‘But then I think there's also the other side maybe
“carer” like you can't do anything for yourself … you're helpless.’
(Patient 7)”Others viewed dependency differently. They were comfortable
with the idea that there might be a temporary period where someone has
lost their independence and needs support to look after themselves
again. This was often described as a major point of contention with
staff. “‘Yeah, a carer is … you know the family, someone you rely on
when you can't cook or clean?’ (Patient 27)‘It's like we have to retrain
our loved ones what they used to love to do, what they used to do, we
we're teaching them all over again it's like [Carer 7: ‘baby’]. It's
like they're babies again [Carer 7: ‘yeah yeah’] but while we're talking
to the doctors and people they don't get it [Carer 7: ‘no’] because they
just think “he's a big geezer … a big bloke” [Carer 7: ‘mm’].’ (Carer
8)”Although (as above) some clinicians expressed discomfort about
disempowering overtones, many carers saw irony in this, as the nature of
an involuntary hospital admission itself was viewed as paternalistic by
some. “‘They're saying, “They [will] do what they want to do.” Then why
do they restrain them? Why do they pin them down? You know?’ (Carer 19)”

.. _sec3-3-4:

Not all ‘carers’ are caring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A difficult issue specific to mental health was that ‘the one group of
people who could be their carers are the problems in some way’
(Clinician 13). This jarred with the idea of calling someone a ‘carer’,
as they might be implicated in the person's mental health problems by
‘adding to the stress’ (Clinician 2). Staff did not know always know how
to work with this contradiction. “‘… we use it in a quite generic way
without really thinking about it but a lot of the time they're not
really carers err … a lot of time they don't know enough about the
condition to be considered a carer and sometimes they do more harm than
good.’ (Clinician 16)”

Patients described harm as being misunderstood and being put under
pressure to stop ‘playing up’ or ‘attention-seeking’ and that they felt
pressure from family members who were pushing for their progress to be
‘two steps further than what it should be’ (Patient 26). They felt
strongly that it was their families’ ‘lack of understanding’ that made
them feel worse. “‘I don't think they should have any [involvement]. My
family they don't understand my illness [Patient 8: ‘mm-hmm’] so I'd
rather they don't know anything you know. They don't understand the
illness at all.’ (Patient 9)‘… It's helpful for them to be involved
because if they weren't there, we'd have nobody else to help you but at
the same time it's hard as well because they don't have the knowledge
that they need …’ (Patient 26)”

.. _sec3-4:

Domain two: what is a carer's role in hospital?
-----------------------------------------------

.. _sec3-4-1:

The role of the hospital environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The hospital environment itself was seen as an important contextual
factor that overshadowed all aspects of the patient and carer
experience. As described next, participants spoke of the atmosphere and
procedures as pertinent factors in determining the role of carers.

.. _sec3-4-1-1:

Frightening atmosphere
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All three participant groups’ descriptions of the hospital environment
mentioned elements that were unwelcoming and frightening, with one
stating it was ‘scary for the relative, just as scary it is for the
patients’ (Clinician 17). This was especially the case during the
admission process, which was described as ‘a traumatic and chaotic
experience for all the involved’ (Clinician 10). During this time,
family and friends could be an ‘invaluable’ source of comfort for
patients, although this was also a time when both patients and carers
were more likely to feel traumatised and in need of information to
alleviate concerns. Clinicians described how carers might find it
‘distressing’ to view their relative being restrained or very heavily
medicated. For this reason, they sometimes preferred to keep carers away
to prevent them from witnessing upsetting scenes. Carers recounted the
reassuring impact of ‘very calm staff’ during these times. “‘I was
terrified.’ (Patient 25)‘You're scared of the whole situation, so you
don't really talk to anyone, you – you don't wanna talk to staff, ‘cause
it's a frightening experience and it takes a while before you can actual
feel settled enough to talk to people and…if your carer is someone
that's spent a lot of time with you, they know how you are, so you're
possibly gonna open up more to them.’ (Patient 24)‘Especially when it's
your first time. I remember my first time [Carer 1: ‘first time’] was a
nightmare [Carer 1: ‘nightmare’] [Carer 2: ‘yeah’] yeah nightmare, bad
memories.’ (Carer 3)”

.. _sec3-4-1-2:

Inflexible systems: wards rounds and the medical model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Moreover, the structure of the hospital system itself was seen as an
indirect barrier to the meaningful involvement of carers. Ward rounds
were viewed by many participants as the main way families can be
involved but also the greatest source of difficulty. Carers described
them as inflexible and a source of uncertainty and stress. As most
important decisions were made there, carers considered consultant
psychiatrists to be the most important people to work with. However,
clinicians noted that it is the consultants that often have little time
to spend with individual patients and carers. “‘And it can be quite
intimidating as well [Carer 11: ‘completely’]. You walk in and
everyone's kind of all eyes on me.’ (Carer 3)‘it's like a panel [Carer
11: ‘yeah’] isn't it?…I still can't get my head round what care
co-ordinator, a social worker and somebody else does [Carer 11: ‘mhm’]
 ….’ (Carer 14)‘… other than the psychiatrist, who else needs to be in
the room?…I don't actually know why so many people have to be in the
room if they don't have actual involvement in the patient's care? ‘Cause
otherwise it looks like they're just … it's one of their team's meetings
and we're part of the entertainment.’ (Carer 15)”

Clinicians in the focus groups were able to critically reflect on the
system that they work in, recognising that it was very rigid, with
medication frequently at the forefront of discussions. This placed
carers’ role on the periphery, as they were often not seen as a core
part of the patient's care or the clinical team's routine procedures.
Working with carers was seen as a resource-intensive add-on service that
was difficult to provide. “‘The service itself doesn't lend itself for
you to implement –.’ (Clinician 28)‘Yes, it's not flexible enough.’
(Clinician 29)‘ – It's not flexible enough for a carer to access help.’
(Clinician 28)‘ – Because, we work to a medical model. So the focus is
we've got this ward round, we've changed the meds and that's…we'll all
sit here, you can walk in, your back is against the wall and you've got
15 min, off you go. If that. Because we've got to talk about meds and
everything else…It's chaired by a medic. It's their set time and you
suit that.’ (Clinician 26)‘ – And we call ourselves a client-led service
– ’ (Clinician 29)‘ – Yeah, exactly [laughs].’ (Clinician 28)”

.. _sec3-4-1-3:

Patients and clinicians as gatekeepers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Carers were not perceived as having any rights to involvement – the
decision was seen as one that either the patient or clinician had to
make. Admission was a particularly difficult time as the patient might
not have capacity or might feel ‘hostile to family’. Clinicians
described how this period was a ‘struggle’ and how difficult it was to
‘balance both needs’ in these situations. “‘It's about them [the
patients], exactly.’ (Clinician 32)‘Yes, so it's their choice and their
rights.’ (Clinician 33)”

Participants from all three stakeholder groups felt it important to
override the patient's wishes in order to act in their ‘best interests’,
as carers were seen as a source of contextual information that could
facilitate the admission process and as a source of support for
patients. Some patients expressed regret that they had excluded carers.
However, many still felt strongly that they should always be the ones to
decide the level of involvement. “‘That's where the carers come in,
doesn't it? Initially the first, second, third day, that's where the
carer's voice should be heard more than being pushed aside.’ (Carer
17)‘I think they – they should be involved even if you're paranoid. If
it's in your best interests that these people know then I think they
should be…should be informed.’ **(**\ Patient 30)‘I want them brought
in, then I would bring them in but in ten years I've only brought them
in once. I tell them not everything but I tell them … um which stuff's
safer.’ (Patient 8)”

.. _sec3-4-2:

The roles allocated to carers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Within this context, the way carers were described could be broadly
allocated to one of three roles: (a) a useful resource, sometimes in
need of support themselves; (b) troublemakers, creating a hindrance to
everyday clinical procedures or (c) invisibles, having no clear role and
not being central to anything. The allocated role largely depended on
how clinicians conceptualised the role of carers, as the same carers
described being included and valued in some settings and excluded in
others.

.. _sec3-4-2-1:

A useful resource, that requires care
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Carers could be seen as a useful resource for the healthcare team. One
source of their knowledge came from knowing the patient intimately when
they were ‘well’ and were able to contrast this with their current
mental state. “‘They've gone through the process of you going from being
well to getting unwell, so they they're kind of experts around your care
and they need to be involved fully with the psychiatrist, the team.’
(Patient 7)”

Carers were then able to advocate for the patient during a time that
they had difficulty expressing their needs. They were also seen as
supporters of symptom monitoring and treatment adherence. Staff
described examples of the involvement of carers resulting in a positive
impact on patients’ outcomes, and speedier recovery.

Some saw the carer's role as a person who is in need of support
themselves. Clinicians described how they saw it as their responsibility
to support carers individually, while maintaining the patient's
confidentiality. However, often patients’ and clinicians’ descriptions
of how to support carers was limited in nature, required consent from
the patient, and was largely aimed at supporting the carer to continue
caring. “‘I think that calling your family members or a friend or a
relative a “carer” is quite good but then there should be a little bit
more input in terms of you know supporting them to care for the
patient.’ (Patient 20)‘I think in the case of acute mental health
treatment, I think family … need the most reassurance and the most
education as well about what's going wrong. They need to have their life
– have their mental health right so they can care for someone [else].’
(Patient 1)”

.. _sec3-4-2-2:

Troublemakers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Conversely, carers in the groups described how they could just as easily
be seen as ‘busybodies’ and ‘troublemakers’ who were ‘overinvolved’ and
presented a hindrance to services. Related to this, many carers
described the hospital as a place of ‘battle’ that was ‘daunting’ and
where they had to ‘fight’ and be ‘pushy’ to be included. This subtheme
was particularly pronounced, and discussed at length in the focus
groups. “‘Who we care for, our loved ones, they don't realise what we
have to go through when confronting professionals. […] you get seen as
the trouble maker …So it is a massive battle. Until this day I still get
missed off the list for CPA [Care Programme Approach] meetings.
Recently, I've just got told the day before, and that was not even from
the [team].’ (Carer 18)‘I used to go each week and ask to go to the ward
round and I wasn't allowed to go…'til one day I broke in to one of
them.’ (Carer 11)”

This notion was supported by patient and clinician examples, who
described clinicians intentionally excluding carers with the aim of
‘facilitating procedures’ and protecting patients and themselves from
‘overwhelm’ due to ‘overinvolvement’. “‘In our ward rounds, we don't
have family involved at all. We used to but I don't think the consultant
liked it. I think it was too much.’ (Clinician 32)‘…they [carers]
intervene too much [Patient 8: ‘mm-hmm’].’ (Patient 9)‘… there's a
cooling off period before the patients settle down. If there's a
relationship problem … we will keep them away for a while until such
tempers settle down and perhaps they [patients] can explore [if] their
presence or involvement will be of any benefit …That is [a] clinical
decision, team decision, yes.’ (Clinician 4)”

However, some patients viewed the solution to these problems as an
increase in involvement and education for carers, so they could more
appropriately support their needs. Clinicians and carers also felt that
carers would participate with ‘better understanding and less
interference’ (Clinician 17) when given information and reassurance.
“‘My father was displaced as my nearest relative and I think instead of
displacing him they should have given him more education and information
and raised awareness about my condition so that maybe he could have come
to an understanding make a more informed decision, ‘cause he was saying
he doesn't want me to be detained and they said, “okay, we are just
gonna displace your nearest relative”, which I found very unhelpful
very, very horrible.’ (Patient 7)‘Yeah, [this time] I was invited to
every ward round … everything was explained and that calms your anxiety,
if you're given the information.’ (Patient 7)”

.. _sec3-4-2-3:

Invisibles
^^^^^^^^^^

Finally, a less direct type of exclusion was commonly described. Carers
often felt ‘invisible’ on the ward and excluded from ward procedures
through omission. Unlike the previous theme, not engaging with carers
was not necessarily because of intentional exclusion, but because
clinicians were unable to see how their role could support carers. This
also related to the non-systemic nature of many hospitals, where the
main focus of treatment decisions were regarding the patient's symptoms
and their medication. Carers were described as having at most a
peripheral role in these procedures. “‘I was invisible. You know, I was
totally invisible. […] There was never a chance that you could go into
there and say, “How was my daughter today?” Because there's no one
person to ask. So I'm lost. So I'm just like a visitor, really, when I
go to visit. And I was there all the time.’ (Carer 19)‘When we come to
the hospital ward rounds and this and that, they don't really wanna to
talk to me sometimes. I'm just sitting there like a dummy [Carer 5:
‘yeah’]. I can't say nothing.’ (Carer 3)‘You know when you see a mother
crying? [Clinician 32: ‘yeah’] It's more emotive than seeing the service
user really unwell…’ (Clinician 30)‘ – I think it's because you know
that they're unwell, and there's a reason that they're presenting like
that. But then – ’ (Clinician 32)‘ – And you can do something to help.’
(Clinician 31)‘Yes. You feel you're actually working to make them feel
better. But with the carer, it's like, what can I do to…?’ (Clinician
32)”

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec4-1:

Main findings
-------------

This was a focus group study exploring patient, carer and clinician
views of the role of carers in in-patient mental healthcare. We found
some agreement on the types of support carers provide for patients.
However, there were differences in opinion between the different
stakeholder groups about when someone can be said to be providing care
and the point at which someone can ‘justifiably’ be called a carer.
Additionally, the hospital setting was seen as both directly and
indirectly precluding the involvement of carers. The set-up of the
service placed carers in one of three positions: supportive experts that
provide collateral information, ‘troublemakers’ who get in the way of
ward procedures and, perhaps the most difficult, ‘invisibles’, people
who may spend substantial time on the ward but whom staff do not always
know how to include in their routine procedures.

There were also multiple differences in opinion regarding the carer
role, which might explain why carers often fell into these allocated
roles. There was clear disagreement about what constitutes caring and
unhelpful behaviour, as was demonstrated in the varying attitudes toward
dependency. What some saw as providing essential care, others saw as an
impediment to recovery. What emerged was that discomfort with the idea
of dependency is not necessarily a universal. Although staff wanted to
protect patients from ‘overwhelm’, many patients saw the solution to
poor relationships with carers as increased involvement, so they have a
better understanding of mental health and can support them more
appropriately.

Additionally, although formal definitions of ‘carer’ exist, in reality,
there were vast differences in labelling. Family members felt their
caring role was all-encompassing in nature, whereas patients and
clinicians did not often share this view, and had various personal
definitions for when someone can rightly be called a ‘carer’. The
disagreement about whether being a ‘carer’ is a constant state, or if it
has to be ‘earned’ through caring for someone chronically unwell was
linked to mismatched expectations in the clinical setting. It was not
always clear if the existence of a ‘carer’ would be acknowledged or
accepted, and if this person would be entitled to inclusion, information
and support. However, family members themselves reported a lack of
choice about their caring role: it felt simultaneously imposed on them
and denied from them.

Another major complicating factor were the fluctuations of mental and
emotional state in patients in acute treatment. Carers were often left
unsure as to how welcome they were as patients changed their minds
between wanting to include them and not. This was combined with a range
of positive and negative reactions from different staff members towards
carers, which compounded the uncertain and stressful nature of the
overall experience. Many people were left with the impression that
hospital is a ‘frightening’ place or a ‘battleground’.

.. _sec4-2:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

The study sample enabled us to explore and compare the views of
patients, carers and clinicians from a variety of roles and settings.
The diversity in demographics and experiences helped us to identify
common experiences across different settings. One potential limitation
was the inclusion of people who self-define as a ‘carer’, as they might
represent a small proportion of family and friends who are providing
support in clinical settings. However, our recruitment strategy included
people from a variety of settings beyond carer organisations, such as
asking clinicians to share study details with the visitors of people
currently in hospital. This ensured that there was diversity among
participants in terms of their understanding of the ‘carer’ role.

Overall, while focus groups are a good method for generating ideas, they
are not ideal for the in-depth exploration of topics. This study may be
viewed as a starting point into more in-depth qualitative enquiry into
this area, particularly as this field has a lack of patient
perspectives. Finally, this study mainly focused on in-patient
treatment, and there might be other complicating factors that have an
impact on peoples’ experiences in other settings. Further discussion of
strengths and limitations may be found in our linked
article.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

.. _sec4-3:

Interpretation and comparison with literature
---------------------------------------------

Previous literature highlights the difficulties experienced by families
in the clinical setting. Jankovic and colleagues mapped out carers’
experiences and found that difficulties begin to arise long before
reaching the hospital admission stage.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` This might
explain some of the discrepancies in participant views on when someone
can be called a ‘carer’. For carers, the less visible process of
monitoring to prevent relapse might be experienced as a constant state,
not just confined to when the person is unwell. Furthermore, the process
leading to admission is often described as traumatic for the family
members themselves, resulting in them needing higher levels of
information and reassurance, but being unsure if they will receive this,
or face exclusion or invisibility.

Studies of carer perspectives describe how they feel that
confidentiality is used by clinicians as a reason to exclude them in
in-patient settings.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` Wilkinson & McAndrew describe
families’ feelings of powerlessness that can arise from being excluded
and feeling invisible in in-patient settings.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` By
including clinicians and patients themselves in these focus groups, we
demonstrate some of the reasons why carers might be excluded beyond the
desire to protect patient confidentiality. In some cases, there appears
to be a fundamental clash of values in terms of what is best for the
patient. The patient voice itself, however, is not always included in
these decisions, as illustrated by examples of family members being
excluded to protect patients from overwhelm or because the carer
disagrees with the treatment plan.

Each type of exclusion requires a different approach to address it.
Intentional exclusion might be avoided through increased communication
at the outset. This might include efforts to find common goals and
values during the treatment process, or by addressing families’
underlying needs for acknowledgement and reassurance. However,
unintentionally leaving families out due to not considering them as
central to ward procedures might be a more difficult, systemic issue to
address.

The hospital setting being a barrier in itself is usually discussed in
terms of the individualistic, non-systemic nature of the
setting.\ :sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.l)` Our study specifies some of the most
difficult aspects, and why it may be such a challenge to overcome them.
The centrality and time-limited nature of ward rounds, for example,
emerged as a frustration for all stakeholders. Our linked studies
specify some of the practicalities of what could be done to overcome
some of these organisational barriers.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.f)`
Frameworks such as the Triangle of Care\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` or intervention
models such as SYMPA (systems therapy in acute
psychiatry)\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` or Family Intervention\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` can
also provide some structure and guidance to this process.

Finally, Landeweer and colleagues highlight differences in what
patients, carers and clinicians view to be barriers to family
involvement. They suggest these discrepancies are the result of
differences in their underlying beliefs and values.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` This
study illustrates that indeed, even the definition of ‘carer’ is not
necessarily agreed among all stakeholders. The reasons for this might be
because of different motivations and belief systems about what mental
health is and what treatment should entail.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` While all
parties might view the patient's independence as the ultimate aim, the
route to this and the speed at which it happens might not be universally
agreed, resulting in conflict in the acute setting.

.. _sec4-4:

Implications for practice
-------------------------

The role of families in hospital settings is not universally agreed.
They can present a variety of needs ranging from basic information,
emotional support or collaboration to support the patient's treatment.
This can pose difficulties for clinicians, who describe the conflict of
having to attend to the individual patient while trying to best manage
the needs of carers. This is dealt with in different ways, as some
choose to work more closely with families and others exclude them from
ward procedures. Families therefore face strong uncertainty in the
in-patient process, not knowing if they will be welcomed, supported,
ignored or excluded.

A further complicating factor emerged that not all clinicians viewed
family members as carers and did not see it as their role to include
them in clinical procedures. This may be related to what the fundamental
purpose of a hospital is perceived to be. If it is solely to attend to
the presenting symptoms of a patient, the presence of additional family
members will indeed be seen as a hindrance to ward procedures. If a
broader, systemic view is taken, those same family members might be
conceptualised as major members of the patient's social network, whose
presence can be beneficial, whether they are ‘carers’ or not. In
reality, many clinicians placed themselves somewhere between both of
these views, depending on the ‘ideal’ and ‘realistic’ service they could
provide on a given day. However, this inconsistent approach might
compound the high level of uncertainty already present in this setting.
Structured procedures to routinely identify and support carers might
alleviate some of the difficulties described above.

Additionally, as acknowledged by all three participant groups, patient
choice is important, but it does not preclude meaningful interactions
with carers. Although it must be acknowledged that many ward procedures
and confidentiality rules are not set-up to favour carer involvement,
positive examples of other ways of engaging carers demonstrated that it
is still possible to improve upon patient, carer and clinician
experiences in the in-patient setting.

Overall, this study highlights the importance of clarity when
considering the ‘carer’ role, as misunderstandings can have the
potential to have a negative impact on patient, family and staff
experiences. As demonstrated by participant examples, excluding carers
might appear to help clinical procedures in the short term, but could
create more divisions between patients, carers and clinicians in the
long term. Establishing wishes and expectations at the beginning of
admission might be one way of opening up the potential for communication
and reducing the likelihood that a patient or carer feels they have not
been listened to. Finally, giving clinicians the space to have open
conversations and critically reflect on core fundamentals such as the
role of carers in their work might help them to problem-solve, and
decide how to adapt their approach to carer involvement within their own
local context.

In conclusion, there is no single agreed definition of ‘carer’. This
conflict in how a carer is viewed has the potential to have a major
impact on their experience in in-patient settings. The implementation of
carer involvement initiatives should incorporate addressing this
fundamental aspect. Overall, it could be concluded that there needs to
be clearer agreement about the role of carers in hospital settings, as
they fluctuate between being perceived of as important resources,
passive visitors or adversaries.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

All authors had access to the study data for the duration of data
collection and analysis. A.D. and S.P. have ongoing access to the
transcripts.

D.G., S.P. and A.D. designed the study. A.D. and J.K. carried out focus
groups and data analysis under D.G.'s supervision. A.D. and J.K.
prepared the first draft of the manuscript. All the authors critically
reviewed the paper and approved the final draft. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

The research was funded by the UK National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care
North Thames at Barts Health NHS Trust. AD is funded by the NIHR
Doctoral Research Fellowship (DRF-2015-08-071). D.G. and J.K. were
supported by the NIHR Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health
Research and Care (CLAHRC) North Thames at Barts Health NHS Trust. The
views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of
the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2020.70.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. _sec6:

.. _sec6-1:

Domains, themes and subthemes
-----------------------------

DomainThemeSubthemeWho or what is a carer?Caring in mental health is
distinct from physical healthDisagreement on when caring begins and
endsDiscomfort with dependencyNot all ‘carers’ are caringWhat is a
carer's role in hospital?The role of the hospital environmentFrightening
atmosphereInflexible systems: wards rounds and the medical modelPatients
and clinicians as gatekeepersThe roles allocated to carersA useful
resource, that requires careTroublemakersInvisibles

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.p.
