---
author:
- Keir Jones
- Asit Biswas
date: 2020-04
institute:
- "ST4 in Psychiatry of Intellectual Disability (formerly Consultant
  Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist), Leicestershire Partnership NHS
  Trust, email: <keir.jones@leicspart.nhs.uk>"
- Vice-Chair of Psychiatry of Intellectual Disability Faculty Executive,
  Royal College of Psychiatrists, Consultant Psychiatrist of
  Intellectual Disability, Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust, and
  Honorary Associate Professor, University of Leicester.
references:
- id: ref1
title: A brief history of the evolution of the Parliamentary Scholar
  Scheme
---

We were really pleased to read about the Parliamentary Scholar Scheme
and how successful it has become -- thank you for your thorough overview
of this invaluable opportunity for speciality trainees in psychiatry.^1^
The scheme can trace its origins back to a pilot scheme set up by
Baroness Hollins in 2012, when KJ was one of three trainees at higher
speciality trainee level in Psychiatry of Intellectual Disability or
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. He joined her team at the House of
Lords one day a week for four months as a special interest session in
Parliamentary affairs.

Similar to the current scheme, the role was to assist in the research
and preparation of Parliamentary business, including speeches and
written questions delivered by Baroness Hollins in the House of Lords. A
wide range of new skills were developed by trainees, including
understanding Parliamentary processes; developing communication skills
beyond the usual boundaries of medicine; and making alliances with
individuals and organisations from different professional and lay
backgrounds in order to accomplish shared goals for the benefit of the
vulnerable groups we support.

The work Baroness Hollins and her team did to represent the voice of
people with an intellectual disability and/or mental illness at a
Parliamentary level was truly inspiring, and the opportunity to be part
of this team, advocating for our patient groups at a national level, was
extremely rewarding and a great privilege. As you mentioned in your
article, the opportunity opened our eyes to the substantial influence
that medically trained professionals can have in contributing to
political and managerial discourse and decision-making, in the widest
sense.

AB, who was the Speciality Advisory Committee Chair, Intellectual
Disability Faculty, Royal College of Psychiatrists, at the time,
believes that this unparalleled and unique training opportunity and
experience had a long-lasting effect on the careers and overall personal
development of trainees who were successful in the selection process and
then went on to train, refine their skills, and learn about
Parliamentary processes and how to influence policy-making, supervised
by Baroness Hollins.

KJ feels it has influenced his subsequent decisions to pursue dual
training in Intellectual Disability (after a first CCT in Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry), act as trainee representative in the Royal
College Faculty Executive and more recently join the Royal College of
Psychiatrists Leadership and Management Scheme. Another colleague from
this early form of the scheme went on to join the Royal College of
Psychiatrists Westminster Parliamentary Committee.

We would like to take this opportunity to sincerely thank Baroness
Hollins for setting up this scheme and encourage all trainees with an
interest in this area to consider the scheme as a unique and invaluable
opportunity. We believe this pioneering scheme in all its iterations has
already left an important legacy within our generation of psychiatrists
and beyond.
