=============================================================
Critical psychiatry: an embarrassing hangover from the 1970s?
=============================================================



Duncan B. Double [1]_Correspondence to Dr Duncan Double
(dbdouble@dbdouble.co.uk)
:Date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   Critical psychiatry is associated with anti-psychiatry and may
   therefore seem to be an embarrassing hangover from the 1970s.
   However, its essential position that functional mental illness should
   not be reduced to brain disease overlaps with historical debates in
   psychiatry more than is commonly appreciated. Three examples of
   non-reductive approaches, like critical psychiatry, in the history of
   psychiatry are considered.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Critical Psychiatry Network has promoted critical psychiatry for the
past 20 years.\ :sup:`1` It is a small group of psychiatrists and
although psychiatrists in general may be aware of its critique, it
remains a minority perspective. In this sense, critical psychiatry still
seems marginal to mainstream practice. This may be because of its
association with so-called anti-psychiatry. Although the first modern
use of ‘anti-psychiatry’ was probably by David Cooper in his book
*Psychiatry and Anti-Psychiatry*,\ :sup:`2` the term has generally been
applied by mainstream psychiatry to denote criticism that it does not
accept. For example, Martin Roth, when he was the first president of the
Royal College of Psychiatrists, identified an international movement
against psychiatry that he regarded as ‘anti-medical, anti-therapeutic,
anti-institutional and anti-scientific’.\ :sup:`3`

.. _sec1:

Psychiatry's response to anti-psychiatry
========================================

Anti-psychiatry, perhaps most associated with the names of Thomas Szasz
and Ronald Laing, now tends to be seen as a passing phase in the history
of psychiatry.\ :sup:`4` In this sense it was an aberration, a
discontinuity with the proper course of psychiatry. However, it is
difficult to accept that there was no value in the approach and what may
be more beneficial is to look for the continuities, rather than
discontinuities, with orthodox psychiatry. In fact, anti-psychiatry is
not a single perspective; for example, Szasz equally rejected both
mainstream psychiatry and Laing's views.\ :sup:`5`

Part of how psychiatry was able to move on from anti-psychiatry was by
trying to make psychiatric diagnoses more reliable; for example, through
the American Psychiatric Association's publication of the DSM-III.
Another way was by avoiding ideological disputes engendered by
anti-psychiatry, by encouraging eclecticism in practice that includes
psychosocial as well as biological factors.\ :sup:`6` The challenge to a
narrowly biomedical model, which was of such concern for
anti-psychiatry, was thereby averted.

Mainstream psychiatry now tends to regard anti-psychiatry as a ‘straw
man’ argument. It was sustained by the counter-culture of the 1960s and
without this support it has waned away. Social cultural critiques, with
which anti-psychiatry was aligned, are no longer academically
respectable. Critical psychiatry, by apparently resurrecting
anti-psychiatry ideas, may therefore seem like an embarrassing hangover
from the 1970s.

.. _sec2:

Historical foundations of critical psychiatry
=============================================

The history of psychiatry can be understood as a conflict between two
factions of somatic and psychic approaches rather than a simple
chronological development. Critical psychiatry is part of this debate.
The essential position of critical psychiatry is that functional mental
illness should not be reduced to brain disease. Its challenge to
reductionism and positivism, including mechanistic psychological
approaches, creates a framework that focuses on the person and has
ethical, therapeutic and political implications for clinical practice.
This editorial focuses on conceptual issues, as the more practical
aspects of critical psychiatry could be said to follow from its
theoretical position. This is not meant to detract from these central
practical concerns of critical psychiatry, such as the political and
socioeconomic origins of mental illness.

The argument of critical psychiatry is that psychiatry can be practiced
without taking the step of faith of believing that functional mental
illness is owing to brain pathology. This anti-reductionism is primarily
explanatory rather than ontological and does not undermine the
importance of organic factors. Functional psychiatry could be said to be
doomed to a kind of descriptivism rather than being able to become a
mechanical natural science. Historically critical psychiatry may
actually be more integrated with mainstream psychiatry than is commonly
appreciated.

Modern psychiatry has its origins in the Enlightenment of the 18th
century.\ :sup:`7` The problem of knowledge began to shift away from
philosophy toward science. Critical engagement of reason with itself
created a descriptive approach to madness. Psychiatrists were originally
called alienists, identifying mental alienation.

Descartes had separated the soul from the body, and, reacting against
this Cartesianism, anthropology established itself as an independent
discipline, concerned with the study of man as a psychophysical unity.
In this context, medical psychology had its origin with two major
variants of anthropological thinking.\ :sup:`8` A medically orientated
anthropology represented by Ernst Platner, among others, was one
version, and can be seen as the root of biomedical psychiatry.
Physiological knowledge of humans seemed to create the possibility of a
natural scientific psychology. The other version was Immanuel Kant's
pragmatic anthropology, which may be seen as the origin of critical
psychiatry. Kant believed that a natural science psychology was
impossible to realise in practice. Applying a physico-chemical
mechanistic approach to life cannot accommodate the purposiveness of
living beings. Organisms, unlike machines, are self-organising and
self-reproducing systems. Kant was clear that it is futile to expect to
be able to understand and explain life in terms of merely mechanical
principles of nature.

Building on this proto-psychiatry, the first half of the 19th century
saw the development of anatomoclinical understanding. Relating symptoms
and signs to their underlying physical pathology was a major advance for
medicine and still underlies our modern understanding of disease.
Pathology emerged as a distinct discipline with autopsy findings of
lesions in organs and tissues being related to clinical examination at
the bedside. Histological studies established cellular abnormalities for
disease.

Applying this anatomoclinical method to psychiatry was not as successful
because it was not always easy to relate mental conditions to underlying
brain pathology. The enthusiastic search for anatomical localisation in
psychiatry led to fanciful notions later in the 19th century. For
example, Theodor Meynert (1833–1892) delineated various ‘fibre-systems’
in the brain and deduced functions for these ‘pathways’. Meynert's
research may have appeared so successful because it seemed to give a
material explanation of the basis of mental illness. Despite his skills
in brain dissection, his theories were not based on empirical findings.
They were eventually attacked and labelled as ‘brain mythology’,
particularly after his death.

It was eventually established that dementia paralytica was a late
consequence of syphilis. Senile dementia was also seen as having a
physical cause such as Alzheimer's disease. Focal abnormalities in the
brain were identified and physical causes of learning disability were
recognised. However, most psychopathology is functional, in the sense
that there are no structural abnormalities in the brain.

Wilhelm Griesinger (1817–1868) was dedicated to the idea of the
pathology and therapy of mental diseases as a mechanical natural
science, although he remained aware of the gap between this ideal and
reality. Nonetheless he set the trend for this positivist biomedical
understanding that has dominated psychiatry since the middle of the 19th
century. His aphorism that ‘mental diseases are brain diseases’ could be
seen as the origin of modern biomedical psychiatry with its wish to find
a physicalist basis for mental illness. Such a positivist reduction of
mental illness to brain disease is what causes such concern for critical
psychiatry.

This historical narrative is necessarily selective and schematic. It is
more of a genealogy, attempting to make the origins of critical
psychiatry intelligible. Psychiatry and its critical version had their
origins at the same time in medical psychology. Incorporating the
anatomoclinical way of understanding disease into psychiatry,
particularly following Griesinger, has eclipsed a more critical
understanding of mental illness. There have, nonetheless, been
non-reductive approaches in modern psychiatry that amount to a critical
position. For reasons of space, this editorial will consider just three
examples: Ernst von Feuchtersleben, Adolf Meyer and George Engel.

.. _sec3:

The forgotten psychiatrist Ernst von Feuchtersleben
===================================================

In the same year, 1845, that saw the publication in German of the book
that gave Wilhelm Griesinger his reputation in psychiatry, Ernst von
Feuchtersleben produced his psychiatric textbook\ :sup:`9` based on his
lectures. Following Kant, he recognised that the mind–brain problem is
an enigma, which can never be solved. He was aware of the somatic bias
in medicine and one of the aims of his lectures was to encourage young
physicians to study its psychical element. As far as he was concerned,
all physicians should have a clear understanding of the relationship
between mind and body.

Feuchtersleben took a holistic approach to medical psychology.
Materialism, in the sense of reducing mind to body, as far as he was
concerned, explains nothing because such reductionism leads to the loss
of meaning of human action. Mental illness is deduced rather from the
relationship of mind and body without necessarily being able to explain
this relationship. There is a limit to the natural scientific
understanding of mental life.

Philipp Carl Hartmann, his teacher and Chair of General Pathology,
Therapy and Materia Medica at the Vienna Medical School, influenced
Feuchtersleben.\ :sup:`10` Hartmann's understanding of disease as a
dynamic process was a corrective to the physicalist perspective.
Although both Hartmann and Feuchtersleben of course recognised that
mental activity has a physical basis, they were clear that physiology is
not able to derive the activities of the mind completely from the laws
of the physical world. Despite the success of Feuchtersleben's book,
biomedical approaches became more dominant and his psychosomatic
viewpoint had no impact in the second half of the 19th century.

.. _sec4:

Adolf Meyer's psychobiology
===========================

Adolf Meyer was regarded as the Dean of American psychiatry in the first
half of the 20th century. His approach, called psychobiology,\ :sup:`11`
has an integrated understanding of mind and brain. Meyer began his
career as a pathologist and moved into the clinical field, standardising
procedures for history-taking and mental state examination.
Psychopathology needs to be studied functionally in experiences and
social interactions rather than organically at the level of
neurobiology. Psychobiology was not an aetiological psychiatry, in the
sense of providing psychoanalytical mechanisms or Kraepelinian disease
entities.

Meyer viewed mental activity and brain activity as a single biological
response. Mental dysfunction, as much as brain disease, is a medical
condition resulting from pathological processes. As far as Meyer was
concerned, functional mental illnesses are failed adaptations, rather
than distinct brain diseases. He was fond of calling a ‘neurologizing
tautology’ any attempt to reduce mental illness to brain disease.

Meyer's ideas never really take hold as a systematic theory of
psychiatry. This was partly because of his pragmatic compromising
attitude. He was prepared to accommodate all perspectives in psychiatry
even if he disagreed with them. He recognised this himself in a
heartfelt note he wrote a few years before he died, saying, ‘I should
have made myself clear and in outspoken *opposition*, instead of a mild
semblance of harmony’.\ :sup:`12`

.. _sec5:

George Engel's biopsychosocial model
====================================

George Engel's biopsychosocial model\ :sup:`13` to integrate biological,
psychological and social factors in medicine and psychiatry was a
deliberate challenge to biomedical reductionism. Engel acknowledged the
historical significance for his integrated and holistic model of the
work of Adolf Meyer. He recognised the difficulties in overcoming the
power of the prevailing biomedical structure, whose dogmatism he thought
needed to be neutralised. As far as he was concerned, doctors had become
insensitive to the personal problems of patients and were preoccupied
with procedures. This was a crisis for the whole of medicine, not just
psychiatry. An integrated understanding of the whole person, including
emotional needs and life issues, forms the basis for patient-centred
medicine.

The biopsychosocial model accepts the inherent uncertainty in
psychiatric and medical practice. By contrast, the biomedical
perspective seems to have an advantage because of its perceived
potential for certainty in the understanding of mental disorder. The
biopsychosocial model can be seen as too vague by comparison.

Further, the biopsychosocial model is often used in an eclectic way in
current psychiatric practice. It is commonly said that biological,
psychological and social must all be taken into account in psychiatric
assessment, as though all three are more or less equally relevant in all
cases and at all times. This ill-defined basis for practice may create
theoretical inconsistency, such as viewing more minor psychological
disorder as psychosocial, whereas more severe mental illness is
identified as biological in origin. It may also lead to the combination
of psychotherapy and biological treatments without any systematic theory
to support such a strategy. This eclecticism has been
critiqued\ :sup:`14` and does seem to have outlived its usefulness.

In fact, Engel's original version of the biopsychosocial model was not
eclectic and eclecticism has more to do with the mainstream response to
anti-psychiatry.\ :sup:`15` The conflict created by the split between
biomedical and biopsychosocial models has encouraged the compromise of
eclecticism to avoid ideological argument.

.. _sec6:

Conclusion
==========

To be clear, critical psychiatry is encouraging the integration of mind
and body, not their separation. The brain is the origin of the mind and
minds are enabled but not reducible to brains. In other words, mental
disorders show *through* the brain but not necessarily *in* the brain.
Critical psychiatry argues that believing that functional mental illness
is a brain disease is more like a faith that doctors are obliged to
believe rather than a scientific position.

As demonstrated with three examples, this essential position of critical
psychiatry has been expressed in the history of modern psychiatry. At
the same time as Griesinger was steering psychiatry toward a positivist
understanding of mental illness, Feuchtersleben based psychiatry on
Kant's critical philosophy. Meyer's psychobiology provides a legitimate
theoretical framework for critical psychiatry, although any neo-Meyerian
position must take into account Meyer's tendency to compromise and
cannot simply be a restatement of his legacy. Engel's biopsychosocial
model also provides a valid anti-reductionist position for critical
psychiatry, although it should not be associated with the eclecticism it
has come to acquire in current psychiatry.

In summary, critical psychiatry should not be seen as an embarrassing
hangover from the 1970s. It can be understood as a non-eclectic,
biopsychosocial, neo-Meyerian approach to psychiatry based on Kant's
critical philosophy. This position should not be overly polarised in an
argument against the biomedical model and recognises that other models,
such as the psychodynamic and psychoanalytic, also emphasise psychic
aspects. An integrated mind–brain understanding needs to be enriched by
a biology that accepts the limitations of a mechanistic interpretation
of mental illness and life in general. Critical psychiatry has relevance
for modern psychiatry.

**Duncan B. Double** is a retired consultant psychiatrist. He blogs on
critical psychiatry at
`www.criticalpsychiatry.blogspot.com <www.criticalpsychiatry.blogspot.com>`__.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** D.B.D. is a founding member of the
   Critical Psychiatry Network.
