======================================================
Placing poverty-inequality at the centre of psychiatry
======================================================



Peter Byrne
Adrian James

:Correspondence: Peter Byrne (peter.byrne@nhs.net)

:date: 2020-10

:Abstract:
   We examine epidemiological evidence for the central role of
   inequalities (principally economic) in driving the onset of mental
   disorders, physical ill health and premature mortality. We locate the
   search for solutions in current UK contexts, and include known and
   likely effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Prevention of mental
   disorders and adverse outcomes such as premature mortality must begin
   with efforts to mitigate rising poverty-inequality.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We can't go on like this. As clinicians in the UK and elsewhere, we are
asked to treat rising numbers of people with mental health problems –
definitely not the ‘worried well’ but patients with life-changing mental
disorders. Rates of adult mental disorders and addictions are high, and
that ‘disease burden’ bears no relation to the resources allocated to
address it internationally.\ :sup:`1` Childhood mental disorders appear
to be increasing, with rates of diagnosed illness of 15% in one large
Danish cohort.\ :sup:`2` We see higher rates of psychological and
physical morbidity in older people and, despite many examples of good
professional practice, older adults’ teams do not receive the resources
needed to manage these.\ :sup:`3` Even if we receive the long-promised
extra funding to treat people with mental disorders across their
lifespan, our recent gains with #ChoosePsychiatry will not deliver the
numbers of psychiatrists we will need, let alone the nurses and other
health and social care professionals. And so we look to prevention.
Stopping these disorders from occurring, or reducing their severity,
will reduce the distress of becoming unwell and alleviate the
considerable costs to carers and wider society. Prevention is the first
duty of the health system and those who work in it, on moral, ethical
and sustainability grounds.

.. _sec1:

Where do we start with prevention?
==================================

Many would begin with adverse childhood experiences (ACEs). The original
concept arose from a prospective study of childhood obesity,\ :sup:`4`
but their wider predictive value merits study. Hughes et al\ :sup:`5`
demonstrate increased relative risks in adults with four or more ACEs:
doubled risks of heart disease (95% CI 1.66–2.59), alcohol misuse
(1.74–2.78), and cancer (1.82–2.95); tripled rates of chest diseases
(2.47–3.77) and anxiety (2.62–5.22); a four-fold increase in ‘low life
satisfaction’ (3.72–5.10) and depression (3.54–5.46); and a 30-fold
increased risk of a suicide attempt (14.73–61.67). For selective or
targeted prevention, we look at the other end of the (shorter) life of
someone with severe mental illness (SMI);\ :sup:`6` we might start with
smoking, obesity, alcohol and substance misuse. All four shorten life
expectancy and healthy years expectancy (life before multimorbidity
begins) and make our task of improving quality of life in SMI even
harder. Then there is a sixth area, fair access to medical care: current
national strategies to improve physical health outcomes in people with
SMI and treatment of all mental disorders focus on this. Older citizens,
who began life as ‘baby boomers’, have acquired the nastier metaphor of
a ‘ticking time bomb’ in terms of likely health and social care costs.
The prevention of many dementias (vascular dementia, alcohol-related
brain damage, head injury) is achievable.\ :sup:`7` Seven challenges
then, maybe for seven Royal College of Psychiatrists-led intercollegiate
Committees? No, there is a better way. Behind all seven of these,
Michael Marmot's ‘causes of the causes’, prevention has one major focus:
*poverty-inequality*.

.. _sec2:

What are the consequences of poverty-inequality?
================================================

‘Inequality exists in the stresses and strains on family life, which
shape the environment in which children grow up. It is the divergence in
life expectancy between deprived and affluent areas, and the growing
burden of poor mental health among disadvantaged groups’.\ :sup:`8` In
his accessible book, *The Health Gap*, Marmot\ :sup:`9` concludes that
‘the (health) gradient involves everyone, rich, poor and in between’ (p.
26). Poverty is not inevitable, and ‘in the US, after transfers and
taxes, child poverty is higher than Lithuania – 23% compared with 15% –
despite having similar levels of poverty pre-tax’ (p. 137). Life
expectancy, and specifically why this is falling in the UK (and was
falling before COVID-19) among older and poorer citizens, is key to
understanding why we need fundamental change. Marteau and
colleagues\ :sup:`10` studied the UK government's ambitions to reverse
this rising mortality: ‘the leading causes of years of life lost in
England are tobacco use, unhealthy diet, alcohol consumption, and
physical inactivity. All of these behaviours are socioeconomically
patterned’. The scientific literature has reached a consensus on the
health harms of poverty-inequality. In their study of multimorbidity in
the ethnically diverse London borough of Lambeth (where a third of a
million are registered with a general practitioner (GP)), Ashworth et
al\ :sup:`11` concluded that: ‘acquisition of multimorbidity is
patterned by socioeconomic determinants’, with depression and asthma as
early drivers of poor physical health. The US and the UK have similar
high levels of inequality, and their inhabitants can expect to lose 7–9
*healthy* years (free from physical disability) by the age of 50 if they
are poor, compared with their fellow citizens at the least deprived end
of the gradient.\ :sup:`12` All the evidence points to poor mental
health, from common mental disorders through to SMI, as the means
whereby poverty wrecks *physical* health.

.. _sec3:

But rich people get mental disorders too
========================================

Yes, they do. But they get better from depressive episodes faster and
relapse less, in contrast to people on lower incomes, who have higher
prevalence rates and worse outcomes.\ :sup:`13` We also concede that
most people who grow up in poverty do not develop a life-changing
episode of depression, let alone SMI. But the antecedents of SMI are
complex, and our understanding of why people develop psychosis is
changing, building on the seminal work of Jim Van Os on the toxic
effects of urbanicity\ :sup:`14` – with consistent evidence of the
cumulative effects of social disadvantage. Work with case–control groups
in south London showed odds ratios (ORs) for subsequent psychosis in
people below the poverty line of 4.50 (95% CI 2.89–7.00) and 2.95
(1.89–4.61), for 1-year and 5-year *pre-symptom onset*, respectively.
These ORs were the single highest predictors of psychosis, other than
the related but confounded OR of 12.05 (7.13–20.35) for being unemployed
on presentation to psychiatric services.\ :sup:`15` Outcomes in adults
with first-episode psychosis are complex and improving slowly in our
professional lifetimes (with adequately resourced early intervention
services); even at 5-year follow-up, Mattsson et al\ :sup:`16` showed
financial strain and social networks to be strong, independent
predictors of outcomes.

.. _sec4:

Lessons from history
====================

We cannot ignore poverty as a predisposing, precipitating and
maintaining factor in most of our patients’ disorders. Early in the
neuroleptic era, we knew that poorer people had worse outcomes in
schizophrenia, stayed in hospital longer, and were socially isolated
even if they achieved discharge,\ :sup:`17` but our textbooks called
this ‘social drift’ despite prior debunking of the drift
hypothesis.\ :sup:`18` Hindsight is easy, certainly, but perhaps we
should look to psychiatry's institutional bias. We still speak of a
problem of *stigma* (negative societal attitudes) rather than
acknowledging the reality that people with SMI have lower status
conferred on them and face institutional obstacles to achieving their
life goals, and calling this out as subcitizenship.\ :sup:`19` At the
time we started writing this, we welcomed the stated intention of the UK
government to reverse a decade of austerity, signalled first in October
2018\ :sup:`20` and often repeated during the first weeks of the spring
2020 lockdown. In advocating a broader role for busy psychiatrists in
opposing regressive social policies, we are echoing the ‘wake-up call’
to colleagues from 2008: ‘[it is] fully consistent … to think of
psychiatry as being the only specialty in which its practitioners are
fully trained doctors, incorporating psychology and social-based
knowledge and skills as major components of training’.\ :sup:`21` Not
‘social workers with stethoscopes’ but clinicians with public health
knowledge who understand the environments in which our patients live.
And die.

.. _sec5:

What we know about the effects of COVID-19 (so far)
===================================================

COVID-19 has changed how every health professional practises. Each
health specialty must play its part in mitigating and preventing further
adverse outcomes. The virus leaves a trail of delirium, depression and
anxiety, perhaps post-traumatic stress disorder in those who
survive,\ :sup:`22` and further misery for those bereaved. COVID-19 has
revealed and exacerbated inequalities. Examination of death rates in the
first 20 283 hospital deaths with proven COVID-19 in England and Wales
shows major differences between the richest and poorest regions: ‘people
living in more deprived areas [for example, the London boroughs of
Newham and Brent, in the context of an early first peak in London] have
experienced COVID-19 mortality rates more than double those living in
less deprived areas. General mortality rates are normally higher in more
deprived areas, but so far COVID-19 appears to be taking them higher
still’.\ :sup:`23` At the time of writing, recording of the proportions
of deaths among Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) groups was
incomplete, but preliminary figures, not least those for deaths among
our BAME colleagues working in health and social care, have shown an
excess. Health gradient differences are among the lessons of the
pandemic: the age-standardised mortality rate of deaths involving
COVID-19 in the most deprived areas across England was 55.1 deaths per
100 000 population, compared with 25.3 deaths per 100 000 population in
the least deprived areas.\ :sup:`23` We have yet to learn the full
extent of excess deaths from COVID-19 among our patients across age
groups, regions and specialties. It is too late for them, but we will
not dodge the hard questions. As mental health professionals, we cannot
remain as observers; we must now act on poverty-inequality.

.. _sec6:

Solutions in this issue
=======================

This issue opens with a contribution from two people with lived
experience of SMI. Smoking remains a challenge in mental health
services, and you will read about tobacco poverty and how to achieve
more ‘quits’. *Housing First* shows the evidence for changing how we
approach this issue. We feature the Glasgow perspective on how we might
progress, as well as an article on the cruelty of ‘reforms’ to the
safety net benefits system. There is a biomedical perspective too.

.. _sec7:

What have we left out?
======================

To name just five areas, we have not raised here the related premature
mortality of people with personality disorders and intellectual
disabilities, often worse even than that in people with SMI,\ :sup:`6`
nor the excellent work by patients, carers and professionals to reduce
high-dose prescribing of psychoactive medications in intellectual
disability.\ :sup:`24` Health inequalities drive the UK's obesogenic
environment, which is relevant to premature mortality in general but
specifically to COVID-19 deaths. Cuts to addictions services are
considered elsewhere, alongside the opioid crisis that has crossed the
Atlantic.\ :sup:`25`

.. _sec8:

Solutions beyond this issue
===========================

As we mature as clinicians, our goals of intervention adjust to
realities and hard-won experience. We do not see patients as a
collection of neuroreceptors (including subtype and putative phenotype);
we devise complex formulations to persuade patients towards
self-management and empowerment, consolidating their (real not virtual)
social networks and support systems. To achieve this, we will need to
practise *psychosocial education*. Communicating complex information
about the drivers of mental disorders might be easier if our patient has
just one, but aetiology (causes of the causes) is shared. Beyond your
wards and clinics, other health professionals also need to know what we
know. Do our GP letters communicate the individual drivers of someone's
misery (inadequate housing, precarious income, indeterminate status to
remain, no locally available stop smoking services, the pressures of
raising children when a parent has mental health or substance issues,
etc.), or is it easier to write about medications and risk? It is a
great start to identify what we can do better where we work\ :sup:`9,26`
– and we cannot dispense social prescribing unless we understand our
local communities.

.. _sec9:

From public education to public engagement
==========================================

Do you know who leads on inequalities in your local organisations? Are
there aspects of your practice where inequalities are making outcomes
worse, and are you in a position to influence mitigation for these?
Regional structures and local alliances have the potential to achieve
results beyond the ephemeral ‘levelling up’ of current public discourse.
Of course there will be political voices (of all shades and volumes) to
keep us quiet, but we are ‘following the science’. The Royal College of
Psychiatrists has joined with many partners in Equally Well
(`www.equallywell.co.uk <www.equallywell.co.uk>`__) to use the available
evidence to reverse rising SMI mortality. We hope this special issue of
the *BJPsych Bulletin* will get people thinking and talking. What will
*you* do to achieve a wider societal dialogue? Our College and others
are building resources to tackle poverty-inequality, but we need all the
help we can get.

**Peter Byrne** is a Consultant Liaison Psychiatrist at the Royal London
Hospital; Associate Registrar in public mental health, Royal College of
Psychiatrists; and Visiting Professor at the Centre for Health Policy,
University of Strathclyde. **Adrian James** is President of the Royal
College of Psychiatrists.

P.B. devised and wrote first drafts of this article to frame a special
issue of the *BJPsych Bulletin* on poverty. A.J. commented on these
drafts and enhanced the content on BAME inequalities and prevention.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

P.B. remains the lead for public mental health at the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, and represents the College in the Equally Well
collaborative, hosted by the Centre for Mental Health; he is also a
former Trustee of the Mental Health Foundation.

.. _sec10:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.85.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
