========================================================
The clinical fellows project: emergence of the FY3 year?
========================================================

Anirban Raha
Robert Heminway
:Date: 2020-04


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Since August 2017, Sheffield Health and Social Care have begun providing
a new non-training post in psychiatry. This was done with multiple aims,
including attempting to increase the uptake of core psychiatry training
jobs in South Yorkshire by giving a positive experience of working in a
psychiatric setting and improving local clinical care with an increase
in the number of doctors working at SHO/CT1 level. The non-training
posts were described as clinical fellowships and were open to doctors
who had not yet undertaken higher training in psychiatry.

We, Drs Raha and Heminway, were among the first people to take up these
clinical fellowship posts and were therefore in a prime position to
review how the project is being received and some of its outcomes. Since
August 2017, 15 clinical fellows have been recruited, largely in the
‘FY3 gap’ but with some coming from general practitioner (GP) training.
Dr Raha entered after having been a GP trainee and Dr Heminway from a
post-foundation training break.

The clinical fellowship consists of a non-training junior doctor post,
working at FY2/CT1-equivalent level in psychiatry. A number of
rotational placements were created, including those based in general
adult, older adult and addiction psychiatry, across both community and
in-patient settings. A key benefit that was felt by the clinical fellows
was that there were additional training opportunities given – a split of
80% clinical to 20% non-clinical time allowance, access to weekly
continuing professional development (CPD) sessions, weekly supervision
with a consultant psychiatrist and attending the core psychiatry
training course for MRCPsych examinations. Clinical fellows have also
since set up their own peer group to improve CPD and training
opportunities for future clinical fellows.

The experience has been invaluable, not just for ourselves but also for
other clinical fellows involved in the project; this has been borne out
by the increasing uptake of core psychiatry training posts by the
clinical fellows. Of the 2017–2018 cohort, half entered core psychiatry
training, one entered GP training and one left owing to long-term
sickness. Half the 2018–2019 cohort were also considering entering
psychiatric training at the end of the clinical fellowship posting.

The culmination of this experience was the opportunity to present this
project at the Choose Psychiatry meeting of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists earlier this year. It was well received, owing to the fact
that it was both improving access to psychiatry and improving junior
doctors’ opinion of psychiatric training and work (including those
leaving the post to take up GP jobs). It was also highlighted that many
junior doctors are no longer entering core training directly after
foundation training. This clinical fellowship has therefore been an
excellent way to accommodate this trend and provide a springboard for
increasing access to and awareness of psychiatric training.
