---
author:
- Richard Kerslake
- Scott Cherry
- Jessica Buckle
- Richard Harris
- Richard Caplan
date: 2020-12
institute:
- "Psychiatry Higher Specialist Trainee, RCPsych; email:
  <richard.kerslake@nhs.net>"
- Consultant Psychiatrist, Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust
- Psychiatry Core Trainee, <@sussexpartnership.nhs.uk>
- Psychiatry Core Trainee, <@sussexpartnership.nhs.uk>
- Medical Student, Brighton & Sussex Medical School
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
title: Clinical course of 12 patients on a Covid-19 dementia isolation
  ward
---

Older adults have been particularly vulnerable to outbreaks of severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (Covid-19), and mortality rates
increase with age.^1,2^ Physiological comorbidities and nutritional
status are contributory factors, but there is limited understanding of
the influence of mental illness, particularly for patients with
dementia.^3--5^ Furthermore, cognitive impairment may also increase the
risks of contracting Covid-19.^6^

We have summarised our experiences from a psychiatric in-patient unit to
describe the clinical outcomes of 12 patients admitted to a dementia
specialist ward, which later became closed to admissions after nine of
the patients were isolated with confirmed or suspected Covid-19. The
following patients, all over the age of 74, were selected to illustrate
the typical clinical course that was observed in the most unwell
patients. To ensure anonymity, patient initials, ages, and gender
identifiers have been removed.

In Case 1, the patient had diagnoses of mixed Alzheimer\'s and vascular
dementia, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension and previous traumatic
subdural haemorrhage. Isolation was commenced after a new cough, low
oxygen saturations and vomiting were observed. The patient was then
transferred to the acute hospital and treated with empirical
antibiotics. Despite this, the patient refused all oral food and fluids,
and a decrease of 24% of pre-Covid total body mass was recorded. The
patient later developed hypernatraemia and an ischaemic left leg and was
subsequently discharged to a palliative care hospice on an end-of-life
care pathway.

In Case 2, the patient with a diagnosis of mixed Alzheimer\'s and
vascular dementia and no relevant past medical history developed a cough
and oxygen saturations of 88% on air. The patient was transferred to the
acute hospital, diagnosed with lobar pneumonia, started on antibiotics
and returned to the ward 5 days later. Throughout the period of
isolation, food and fluid intake was observed as being minimal. Twelve
days after isolation, a serum sodium level of 147 mmol/L was recorded,
with a decrease of 12.7% of pre-Covid body mass. Features of pneumonia
and dehydration persisted, with the serum sodium level climbing to
152 mmol/L. Following three further episodes of care at the acute
hospital, the patient was treated on an end-of-life care pathway and
died 30 days after isolation. Of note, 4 days before isolation was
commenced, this patient was medically reviewed for a cough which was
thought not to be due to Covid-19. Causes of death were certified as
(1a) pneumonia, (1b) Covid-19 infection and (2) end-stage dementia.

In Case 3, the patient had a previous acquired brain injury and mixed
Alzheimer\'s and vascular dementia, with past medical history including
epilepsy and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Isolation nursing
commenced after a new cough was noted, 5 days after a possible cough was
interpreted as 'throat clearing'. Eleven days after isolation, the
patient was initiated on antibiotics at the acute hospital after a
significant drop in oxygen saturations was recorded. Serum sodium levels
were sampled at 151 mmol/L, corresponding with a limited fluid intake. A
decrease of 23% of pre-Covid body mass was recorded. Thirteen days after
isolation, the patient developed hyperactive delirium with clinical
signs of dehydration, serum sodium of 156 mmol/l and urea of
15.1 mmol/L. The patient was subsequently transferred to the acute
hospital and placed on an end-of-life care pathway.

In Case 4, the patient had diagnoses of Alzheimer\'s dementia and
treatment-resistant depression, having been admitted from the acute
hospital. Isolation was commenced, followed by transfer back to the
acute hospital, after oxygen saturations dropped to 90%. After
correction of hypokalaemia and commencing antibiotics for pneumonia, the
patient returned to the ward. Six days after the initial Covid-19
symptoms, the patient was readmitted to the acute hospital for
management of reduced oxygen saturation and refeeding syndrome. A
further 21 days later, the patient was placed on an end-of-life care
pathway. The cause of death was recorded as (1a) end-stage dementia in
Alzheimer\'s disease and Covid-19 infection and (2) urinary tract
infection (treated).

All isolated patients with reduced mobility were prescribed venous
thromboembolism prophylaxis. All isolated patients with a cough or fever
were prescribed prophylactic antibiotics in case of a secondary
bacterial pneumonia. All confirmed or suspected Covid patients were
prescribed additional nutritional supplements. These plans were
implemented with advice from acute hospital and dietician colleagues.

Of the remaining eight patients on the ward, one was asymptomatic
throughout the 14 days of isolation despite testing positive for the
virus, and four further patients tested positive, requiring various
levels of medical input before being safely discharged. A further three
patients did not record a fever, nor develop a cough, and did not test
positive on throat or nasal swabs and were nursed separately.

In summary, of the nine patients who were confirmed or suspected of
having contracted Covid-19, four subsequently received end-of-life care,
eight required admission to an acute hospital for medical input, and all
nine patients survived the period of isolation, which lasted at least 14
days.

All confirmed or suspected Covid patients were prescribed additional
nutritional supplements under the guidance of a dietician. Adherence to
these was variable but generally poor. Despite this, four patients
experienced a weight loss of between 13% to 24% during their period of
isolation. This weight loss was observed in the patients with the
poorest outcomes.

Six patients also experienced clinical levels of dehydration, identified
initially by raised serum sodium levels, despite best attempts to
encourage oral fluids while being nursed in isolation. These patients
also required the highest levels of medical input.

In our opinion, patients with dementia who contract Covid-19 are likely
to require high levels of medical oversight to monitor their physical
health, experienced nursing care to encourage adequate fluid and food
intake, and input from a dietician to ensure nutrition is optimised.

The clinical outcomes of patients with dementia who contract Covid-19
are variable and difficult to predict. It can be expected that patients
will require episodes of care in an acute hospital for physical
consequences of Covid-19 that cannot be addressed on a psychiatric ward.
Physical deterioration and death do not tend to occur during the 14 days
of isolation and are usually due to secondary consequences of Covid-19,
of which weight loss, dehydration and rising serum sodium are worrying
clinical signs.

Self-reporting of Covid-19 symptoms by patients with dementia can be
unreliable and can delay isolation nursing, putting other patients at
risk.

Management of symptomatic patients who have refused confirmatory swabs
must be carefully considered, balancing the risks and benefits of
treatment in the Covid-19 cohort area or treatment among well patients.

Early discussions related to ceilings of care, Do Not Attempt Cardio
Pulmonary Resuscitation orders and the application of end-of-life care
pathways were recognised as essential to ensuring that the patient\'s
prior wishes and best interests were considered.

We sincerely hope that the details we have included here will be of
interest and use to readers. We will happily respond to any questions
that may arise.

# Declaration of interest {#nts1}

None.
