=====================================================================================================================================
Emergency workers’ experiences of the use of section 136 of the Mental Health Act 1983: interpretative phenomenological investigation
=====================================================================================================================================



Mirella Genziani
Steve Gillard
Lana Samuels
Mary Chambers [1]_

:Correspondence: Professor Mary Chambers
(m.chambers@sgul.kingston.ac.uk)

:date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To explore the experiences of emergency workers dealing with
   incidents in which section 136 of the Mental Health Act 1983 is
   invoked by the police. Data from interviews with police officers and
   ambulance workers in a London locality were subject to interpretative
   phenomenological analysis.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Participants felt they were the first port of call and that training
   should be improved to help them deal with those experiencing mental
   health crises in the community. Police participants noted time
   pressures trying to gain individuals’ trust and described section 136
   detention as sometimes feeling like a betrayal of the individual.
   Most participants had negative experiences of admissions to the 136
   suite; several suggested ways of improving the admissions system.
   Several went beyond their expected duties to ensure that distressed
   individuals were supported before accessing mental healthcare
   services.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Improving training of emergency workers in dealing with mental health
   crises would also help with aftercare decision-making. Learning
   identified from the participants’ experiences lends support to
   collaboration between emergency and mental health services, an
   important step towards improving the section 136 process so that
   detainees can access help without unnecessary delay.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Section 136 of the Mental Health Act 1983 for England and Wales (amended
in 2007) permits police officers to legally detain someone who is in a
public place and is believed to be at risk to themselves or others and
to be requiring immediate care or control.\ :sup:`1` Detainees are taken
by police and the ambulance service to a designated place of safety for
assessment, with arrangements for treatment and aftercare.\ :sup:`1,2`
According to the Act, a ‘place of safety’ could be a police station, a
unit in a psychiatric hospital or another suitable residential place
willing to temporarily accommodate a detained person.\ :sup:`2,3`

Implementing section 136 not only requires quick thinking but can pose a
challenge for emergency workers with limited or no training in mental
health.\ :sup:`1,4,5`

Two papers\ :sup:`6,7` exploring police officers’ experiences of section
136 highlighted participants’ concerns about vulnerable individuals
being turned away from in-patient mental health services. There is a
paucity of research on the experiences of ambulance and paramedic
workers. This study aims to fill this gap by exploring emergency
workers’ experiences of section 136 and how they make sense of them.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Participants
------------

Emergency workers were purposively sampled on the basis of the roles
they undertake and their experiences of implementing section 136. Four
individuals from a police force and three from an ambulance complex in a
London locality participated. This sample size is consistent with the
interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA) literature, which
suggests the appropriateness of relatively small samples, for whom the
research questions are significant.\ :sup:`8,9,10`

Characteristics of the participants (who were allocated anonymised
identifiers such as PO1) are presented in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Table
1Participant characteristics at time of interviewParticipant
identifierRoleGenderPolice 1 (PO1)Police officerMalePolice 2 (PO2)Police
officerFemalePolice 3 (PO3)Police officerMalePolice 4 (PO4)Police mental
health liaison officerMaleAmbulance worker 1 (AMB1)Ambulance
workerFemaleAmbulance worker 2 (AMB2)Ambulance workerMaleAmbulance
worker 3 (AMB3)ParamedicFemale

.. _sec1-2:

Ethics
------

This research received ethical approval from the London South East
National Health Service Research Ethics Committee in 2011, reference
number 11/LO/1002. Participants were given a detailed information sheet
and completed a written consent form.

.. _sec1-3:

Data collection and analysis
----------------------------

Police officers (*n* = 4) and ambulance workers (*n* = 3), not known to
each other, participated in separate interviews (data were collected
between 2012 and 2014). In keeping with the IPA approach, open-ended
questions were used inviting participants to tell their stories in their
own words, with prompts where necessary.\ :sup:`8,11`

The following are examples of questions asked.

**Ambulance workers**: ‘Please could you tell us about your recent
experiences of taking someone under a section 136 from a public place to
a place of safety?’. Prompt: ‘How do you feel about dealing with
incidents of this nature?’.

**Police officers**: ‘Please could you tell us about a recent experience
of sectioning someone?’. Prompts: ‘What factors are involved in making
this decision? Did you feel that your action(s) were justified?’; ‘Have
your encounters with individuals in these kinds of situations affected,
if at all, the way you view people with mental illness?’.

Interviews took place at police stations or ambulance complexes and
lasted around 50 min. The third author (L.S.) took summary notes of the
interviews to supplement the audio transcripts. Responses were digitally
audio-recorded and transcribed into text verbatim by the first author
(M.G.).

A framework underpinned by the IPA literature was developed and used to
inform the analysis process.\ :sup:`5,8,10` Questions were asked of the
data by M.G. to aid the process of identifying themes: (a) What
experiences are being shared and how are respondents making these
meaningful to one another?; and (b) What are the consensus,
conflicts/contradictions and how these are being managed?\ :sup:`12,13`

Themes were deemed to be prominent if they occurred in approximately
one-third to half of participants’ accounts.\ :sup:`9,11` For example,
most participants referred to their experiences of interacting with
individuals in distress, how they felt about engaging and showing
empathy. This was deemed to be a shared experience and characterised by
the theme: ‘Making yourself human as first responders’.\ :sup:`14,15`

Quality checks were undertaken by M.G. and L.S., which involved
comparing a random selection of themes alongside verbatim quotes. This
was done to ensure that themes closely reflected the participants’
experiences and it fits with the epistemological approach.\ :sup:`9,16`

The findings are presented under the thematic headings below. Quotes
from the participants are interwoven with interpretative commentary that
encompasses emotions evoked as well as the language and text they relate
to.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Making yourself human as first responders
-----------------------------------------

Participants described themselves as the ‘\ *first* responders’ and
spoke of how they approached and communicated with the individuals
involved. Some were sensitive to the way a uniform or emergency vehicle
can be perceived. Communication was seen by these participants as
‘Essential for people who may be suffering from some sort of psychosis,
sort of gaining trust, turn your radios down, taking off your hat.
Essentially try and be the only person talking to them’ (PO3).

Police participants reflected that detaining and removing someone
against their will could generate feelings of betrayal towards the
person they were trying to build trust with. The main challenge for them
was in encouraging individuals to accept help voluntarily. Some of the
police officers felt that they did their best to demonstrate that their
role is not only about enforcing the law, but also supporting
individuals in difficult and sensitive circumstances: “‘It takes a good
few hours to build rapport with her, which can be difficult if someone
is going through an episode. You don't want them to feel humiliated or
mocked. Because you want them to know you are there to help’ (PO1).”

Participants tried to make sense of the barriers and pressures that made
it difficult for them to establish a rapport: “‘Making yourself more
sort of human to them. But the problem is your lifeline is your radio
and so by turning it down you are not hearing what's happening outside’
(PO2).‘We are under pressure from our radio, from our supervisors. So,
it sounds awful but it is time-consuming. In this day and age we do not
have 2 hours spare, which sounds awful to say. But you end up having to
build that rapport up, say “come on you know what, the best thing to
help you is to voluntarily go with the ambulance”. And probably 7 out of
10 it works’ (PO2).”

The excerpt below is a good example of the police officer involving a
family member to support a distressed individual. It brought about a
sense of reassurance for the parties involved in ensuring that the
person was supported in keeping themselves safe: “‘Like, the lady, she
was holding a knife to her throat. We ended up calling her son to say
“look, your mum, she's voluntarily said she can come to hospital. This
is what's happened. We just want you to be aware because I think she
could do with a loving face, like have someone from the family there”’
(PO3).”

.. _sec2-2:

The 136 suite
-------------

The place of safety or ‘136 suite’ was salient for the participants as
the transition point into in-patient mental healthcare. All of the
participants spoke less favourably of their experiences of trying to get
individuals admitted into the suite. Strong feelings were voiced
regarding the potential welfare of detainees in situations where there
were delays. Ambulance workers felt for individuals who had little or no
choice but to wait inside an emergency vehicle: ‘I find once you get to
[hospital X], I've waited 2 hours before to get into the 136 suite and
that can cause issues with the patient’ (AMB2).

When considering what the waiting might involve, the ambulance workers
reflected that ‘We're not allowed in the building. So, we just literally
sit outside in the ambulance or in the police van’ (AMB2).

Unlike ambulance workers, police officers were able to enter the 136
suite and liaise with staff there. Ambulance worker participants often
speculated on what goes on inside the facility, which may have generated
some friction between the ambulance workers and mental health workers at
the 136 suite. They wondered what happened to individuals who were
admitted and how they got on: ‘Once we take someone to [hospital X], we
don't see what happens’ (AMB2).

The exchange below illustrates the police liaising with mental health
workers at a 136 suite. There is a sense of the parties colluding with
each other, together with somewhat blurred boundaries around
responsibility. The liaison between police and hospital staff amplifies
a sense of being in an awkward position and of feeling overwhelmed, in a
situation in which there are no clear answers regarding care decisions:
“‘It went back and forth, our inspectors got involved. Hospital staff
basically turned around to us and said that if we left the hospital they
would let him walk out of the hospital and into the street, where he
would then become our responsibility again […] And that if he was to
attack someone it would be on the basis that the police left him and
that they washed their hands of him […] We explained that we had no
powers, essentially the only thing we had was a breach of the peace,
inside the facility whilst he was there […] This went on for about 2
hours, this debate’ (PO1).”

Most of the participants' experiences at the point of entry to the 136
suite were negative. However, there was a unique example in which an
individual under a section 136 was able to access the care they needed,
in a timely and seamless manner: “‘I think I had a positive one. We had
a gentleman who was out on the street. The police were already there
when we arrived on the scene. And it was called in by friends of his
because he was behaving erratically […] When we got there he was in the
back of a police van, but his behaviour was quite self-harming, even
though he was quite chatty […] And then what we've got in place was that
a paramedic travelled with the police in the van to ensure the safety
and the care for the patient. And actually we did take him straight to
the 136 suite on this incident and he was booked straight in. So that
worked really well. But that was during the day. It was early. It was a
weekday. So everything was in place on that incident’ (AMB1).”

.. _sec2-3:

Training and quest for collaboration
------------------------------------

When participants reflected on their skills in dealing with individuals
experiencing mental health problems, there was a unanimous view that
training and opportunities were somewhat limited. The participants
reflected on specific areas that they felt could influence their
practice, given their involvement in section 136 detentions. For
example, ambulance workers felt that they would benefit from a better
understanding of substance misuse and mental illness: “‘I'd like to have
more training […] Historically, our training has been a bit ad hoc […] I
think it's got to be around drugs and alcohol, what that impact is on
how we are assessing a patient. Because as you can imagine, probably 75
per cent will have drugs and alcohol on board’ (AMB2).‘There is no
training on what you might want to look for, how it might present itself
and different types of mental health, erm, issues. I don't think there
were any role-plays or anything like that, which I think could possibly
be helpful’ (PO3).”

Ambulance workers put forth some practical suggestions that they felt
would benefit professionals and detainees, with an emerging consensus
towards a more collaborative approach. One respondent referred to the
potential of a bed management system that he had found successful in
general accident and emergency (A&E) settings: “‘A bed manager in A&E is
always well versed on what beds are available. So ITU beds, neonate beds
[…] Why isn't that available in psychiatric healthcare?’ (AMB2).”

The same respondent speculated as to whether such a system could be
applied in the 136 suite to ease the transition into hospital care:
“‘So, we're on a job with someone who is going to get 136’d […] So
rather than waste half an hour with the police trying to ring the 136
suite, because they are obviously busy preparing for two to come in, why
don't we get someone to just say “There's no beds. Your nearest bed is
there”. Bang! Why can't we do that?’ (AMB2).”

Further suggestions were put forth to minimise waiting times and ensure
that detainees were promptly received and attended to at the 136 suite:
“‘It needs some immediate action. It's not something that can be delayed
[…] Can we go early with the information that we're going to be taking a
patient there?’ (AMB3).”

In some cases, there was a sense of commitment and willingness to go
beyond the remit of their roles, for example: “‘If we're going to be
spending this long with patients […] waiting to convey them to the 136
suite, if we can find out more information on the scene then let's do
it’ (AMB2).”

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

This research is the first of its kind to collectively explore and
combine findings from police and ambulance workers’ experiences of
detaining individuals under section 136 of the Mental Health Act
(England and Wales).\ :sup:`1` This piece of work highlights that lived
experience plays a key role in service development in a range of
settings. Two key aspects of experience emerged from the findings: (a)
therapeutic engagement in a crisis and (b) drawing on the expertise and
experiences of the parties involved in a section 136 admission.

.. _sec3-1:

Personal engagement
-------------------

Professionals felt that how they approached and engaged with individuals
had made some difference in those people's willingness to accept help.
Police participants felt pressured by their agency to prioritise other
emergencies over mental health incidents.\ :sup:`17,18` It is not
entirely clear how much time emergency workers can devote to situations
in which mental health problems are suspected. This was a source of
conflict for study participants. Therapeutically engaging and gaining
trust were seen by participants as an important first step and in the
detainee's best interests as a way of enabling them to access immediate
support.

.. _sec3-2:

Accessing the 136 suite
-----------------------

A pressing concern for participants was the inordinate amount of delay
regarding decisions on granting access to the 136 suite (the place of
safety). In some cases, detainees were having to wait for longer than
necessary inside an emergency vehicle or were refused entry, which
generated further distress. The findings also point to friction between
the emergency and mental health services regarding responsibilities of
care. The collusion between the parties can have implications for the
waiting time for detainees in need of immediate care and support. These
findings were similarly noted in Burgess *et al*\ :sup:`5` and Riley *et
al*\ :sup:`6` and is at odds with key recommendations from the Royal
College of Psychiatrists’ section 136 national guidance. According to
these guidelines: 136 suites should agree to accept an individual before
the emergency services begin their journey and have the necessary staff
on hand to receive individuals without delay or recourse to emergency
professionals.\ :sup:`2,17` In contrast, another finding conveyed an
emergency worker's experience where the section 136 journey for the
detainee in question was smoother and well supported. This finding
highlights what one can learn from personal experiences and consider how
these can inform future practice. A prominent aspect to this study was
that emergency workers wanted to be more involved in the section 136
process and to work jointly with staff at the 136 suite. This was
evidenced by their efforts to seek out practical solutions for the
dilemmas they experienced. The participants felt that this way of
working would enhance the quality of the experience for detainees
accessing mental healthcare.\ :sup:`10,19`

.. _sec3-3:

Training
--------

This study has shown that ambulance and paramedic workers play a pivotal
role in dealing with individuals experiencing mental health problems in
a community setting. Yet, training for this group of professionals is
somewhat limited. There was a general consensus regarding the
improvement of training to enable emergency workers to feel more
confident in recognising how mental health problems can present, dealing
with crises and engaging with individuals affected.\ :sup:`6,14,19`

Given this, future work needs to prioritise interdisciplinary training
to enable the various agencies to appreciate the roles and limitations
of their services. These different agencies can learn a lot from each
other.\ :sup:`20` In keeping with suggestions in previous work,
involvement of patients and carers could enhance the quality of the
training for emergency workers, by bringing in their lived
experiences.\ :sup:`7,20` This is another important area, which would
benefit from being further explored in future research.

.. _sec3-4:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

Interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA) captured emergency
workers’ experiences of the section 136 process and how they were
affected by it. Situating the study in a catchment area of a National
Health Service mental health trust in London could be seen as both a
strength and a weakness, since the views expressed only reflect those
who took part in the study. It is possible that the views of emergency
workers with different characteristics in other areas of England and
Wales will vary. Further research in other geographical areas could help
to ascertain whether this perspective of section 136 detainment could be
understood more widely.

We thank participants and organisations in the study catchment area.

M.G. obtained funding for the Doctoral Scholarship.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

Data are available from the authors.

M.C. and S.G. conceived and designed the study, contributed to
interpretation of the data, and critically revised the manuscript for
important intellectual content. M.G. contributed to study design,
acquired the data, led data analysis and interpretation and drafted the
manuscript. L.S. contributed to data acquisition and interpretation.

**Mirella Genziani**, BSc, MSc, PhD, PGDip CBT, is a Cognitive
Behavioural Psychotherapist in the Faculty of Health, Social Care and
Education at Kingston University and St George's, University of London,
UK. **Steve Gillard**, BSc, PhD, is a Reader in Social and Community
Mental Health in the Population Health Research Institute at St
George's, University of London, UK. **Lana Samuels**, is an Independent
Mental Health Researcher. **Mary Chambers**, RN, BEd, PhD, is Professor
of Mental Health Nursing in the Faculty of Health, Social Care and
Education, and Director of the Centre for Public Engagement, at Kingston
University and St George's, University of London, UK.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
