===========================================================================
The critique of psychiatry as we enter the third decade of the 21st century
===========================================================================
------------------------------------
: Commentary on… Critical psychiatry
------------------------------------



Mohammed Abouelleil Rashed [1]_
:Correspondence: Dr Mohammed Abouelleil
Rashed (m.rashed@bbk.ac.uk) [2]_

:date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   Critical psychiatry takes the position that ‘mental illness’ should
   not be reduced to ‘brain disease’. Here I consider whether this
   particular stance is outdated in light of more recent exchanges on
   reductionism, which consider questions raised by new mental health
   sciences that seek truly integrative and specific biopsychosocial
   models of illness.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

The anti-reductionist position of critical psychiatry
=====================================================

According to Duncan Double, the essential position of critical
psychiatry is that ‘functional mental illness should not be reduced to
brain disease’.\ :sup:`1` As it stands, this claim is ambiguous with
regard to the basis of the normative (ethical) prescription contained
within it: why does critical psychiatry maintain that we should not
reduce ‘mental illness’ to ‘brain disease’? We are provided with a clue
as to Double's view when he writes that ‘most psychopathology is
functional, in the sense that there are no structural abnormalities in
the brain’.\ :sup:`1` Accordingly, we should not engage in such a
reduction because we do not possess the evidence that it can be done. To
insist on this reduction, and on the treatments and practices it
entails, can therefore be construed as ethically problematic. Now this
sort of justification for critical psychiatry's essential position lands
us in indeterminate territory: it relies on establishing the presence of
‘structural abnormalities’, which depends on how we define this term, on
the state of the science and on the nature of evidence and its
interpretation. There will always be claims and counterclaims as to the
evidence for the biological basis of ‘mental illness’.

There is another more substantial argument that can be provided in
support of critical psychiatry's position: we should not engage in the
offending reduction because even if there were ‘structural abnormalities
in the brain’, the subject matter – ‘mental illness’ – requires an
altogether different approach for its classification, understanding and
management. Double seems to intend something like this when he argues,
along with von Feuchtersleben, Meyer and Engels, for a holistic,
non-reductionist and integrative conception of ‘psychopathology’. This
is a valuable analysis, and it is hard to disagree with the general
direction of Double's argument in this regard: mental health conditions
cannot be understood, treated or managed through radically reductionist
concepts and approaches. And radical reductionism is the villain that
critical psychiatry, on Double's account, is engaged in a fight with. It
is a reductionism that is so obtuse, it has no place for meaning, human
relationships or social context. And it was certainly evident in the
early days of psychiatry, through the wild goose chase prompted, in
part, by the discovery of the celebrated causal connection between
general paresis of the insane and the syphilis spirochaete. How far does
this view exist today?

We can quarrel endlessly about critical psychiatry's representation of
the views of its opponents, and it is unlikely that we can ever resolve
this to everyone's satisfaction. Instead, I shall introduce a more
recent exchange on reductionism, and from there we can discern where
things are at and what critical psychiatry has to say to us today.

.. _sec2:

Towards a truly integrated understanding of health
==================================================

In a paper published in the *BMJ* in 2012, White and colleagues argue
for an end to the distinction between mental disorders and brain
disorders in favour of a single overarching category: disorders of the
nervous system.\ :sup:`2` One of the arguments they make in support of
this proposal is that psychosocial factors ‘interact strongly’ with
neurological disorders, whereas ‘disorders of the mind are rooted in
dysfunction of the brain’.\ :sup:`2,3` Psychological, social and
biological causal and risk factors run across all medical conditions,
whether mental or physical.\ :sup:`2` If so, there might not be much
sense insisting on the distinction between mental disorders and brain
disorders, especially, they argue, considering recent advances in the
neurological and genetic bases of mental disorders. Standing in contrast
to White and colleagues’ proposal is a position paper by Bracken and
colleagues that rejects the suggested equivalence between psychiatry and
neurology: ‘Psychiatry is not neurology; it is not a medicine of the
brain. Although mental health problems undoubtedly have a biological
dimension, in their very nature they reach beyond the brain to involve
social, cultural and psychological dimensions’.\ :sup:`4`

These two papers, although they argue for opposite conclusions, are both
non-reductionist in the sense that they do not propose a radical
disavowal of non-biological causal and risk factors. Accordingly,
neither falls foul of critical psychiatry's essential position as
articulated by Double. A key point on which they differ is a question of
emphasis: White and colleagues emphasise genetic and neurological
factors, whereas Bracken and colleagues emphasise psychosocial factors.
Where should we stand on this point?

There is no doubt that mental health conditions and neurological
conditions demonstrate ‘multifactorial pathways’, as White and
Colleagues note. Nevertheless, psychosocial factors are more prominent
in mental disorders across a wide range of dimensions.\ :sup:`5` To the
extent that this is the case, psychiatry differs from neurology in that
it ‘has particular expertise in the management of psychosocial factors
as well as internal biological factors’.\ :sup:`5` We could take this
observation to support the view that, in order to preserve the emphasis
on psychosocial factors, we should not collapse the distinction between
mental disorders and brain disorders. Or we could decide that the terms
of the debate and the forced choice between them are out of keeping with
developments in the new mental health sciences. Here, gene–environment
interactions, social determinants of health over the life-course,
individual psychology and neuroscience are all relevant for an
integrated understanding of health. As Derek Bolton puts it: ‘[These]
new sciences do not work with ideological battles between the
biological, the psychological, and the social, the old parallel
universes with poor communication between them; rather they work with
all of these factors and the diversity of interplay between
them’.\ :sup:`5`

There is much work to be done, both empirical and conceptual, to
understand how social, psychological and biological factors interact in
specific conditions. However, that work applies across the board to all
conditions of health-related interest.\ :sup:`6,7` The aim is to move
beyond a biopsychosocial model that is integrative only in name and
towards one that can provide concrete risk and causal pathways across
the range of factors of relevance to a particular health condition.

.. _sec3:

Critical psychiatry may have run its course, but the critique of psychiatry continues
=====================================================================================

Where does this leave critical psychiatry? Double's editorial seeks to
advance two aims. On one hand, it wants to affirm critical psychiatry's
continuing relevance as the defender of the position that ‘functional
mental illness should not be reduced to brain disease’. On the other
hand, it acknowledges that it might be beneficial ‘to look for the
continuities, rather than discontinuities, with orthodox
psychiatry’.\ :sup:`1` On the first aim, we have seen that it is
possible to debate whether we should end the distinction between mental
disorders and brain disorders without falling into the radical
reductionism that critical psychiatry positions itself against.
Moreover, as suggested above, the new mental health sciences have moved
beyond the terms of this debate and seek genuinely integrative and
specific biopsychosocial models of health conditions. Accordingly, in so
far as critical psychiatry requires the continuing relevance of its
essential position, then it might have run its course. This leaves us
with the second aim of the editorial, from which, on Double's own
analysis, one gets the sense that there is very little that separates
critical psychiatry from ‘orthodox psychiatry’. And that is not a bad
thing, for it can be taken by critical psychiatry as a triumph, as
evidence that its message has got through.

But critical psychiatry does not exhaust the constructive critique of
psychiatry and society, which, as we enter the third decade of the 21st
century, is going strong. For example, there are continuing debates on
the boundaries of illness and on the definition of mental disorder
(e.g.\ :sup:`8,9`); there are attempts to resolve the classificatory
complexity of mental health conditions and to critique the validity of
existing classifications (e.g.\ :sup:`10–12`); questions continue to be
raised about the nature of mental disorders (e.g.\ :sup:`13,14`);
controversies remain surrounding the efficacy and risks of
antidepressant and antipsychotic medications (e.g.\ :sup:`15`); debates
continue on the ethical complexities raised by capacity assessments and
coercive interventions (e.g.\ :sup:`16,17`); and challenges to medical
concepts and approaches – to medicalisation more generally – are
experiencing a resurgence through mental health activism
(e.g.\ :sup:`18–22`).

In the midst of these exciting and still largely unresolved problems,
the version of critical psychiatry presented by Double in his editorial
is of historical value; it reminds us of a radically reductionist
position that now – in light of developments in the science and
philosophy of mental health – appears false and outdated.

**Mohammed Abouelleil Rashed** is a Wellcome Trust Institutional
Strategic Support Fund Research Fellow in the Department of Philosophy
at Birkbeck College, University of London, UK; a Visiting Lecturer in
the Department of Philosophy, King's College London; and a medical
doctor with postgraduate training in psychiatry.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.

.. [2]
   See this issue.
