===========================================================
Systemic racism and mental health services: the time is now
===========================================================

Roxanne Keynejad
Alice Debelle
Julia Ogunmuyiwa
Arleen Elson
Marilia Calcia
:Date: 2020-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The killing of George Floyd refocused global attention on racial
injustice. UK Covid-19 death rates are highest among Black, Asian and
minority ethnic (BAME) groups,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` with systemic racial
inequality a central cause.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Although BAME people face
many inequalities, Black people's unique experiences require particular
attention.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

In mental healthcare, we must consider links between psychiatric
symptoms and experiencing racism, systemic racism within services and
medico-legal interfaces. The *Delivering Race Equality in Mental Health
Care* (DRE) agenda\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` was prompted by the 1998 death of
David Bennett, an African–Caribbean patient, following in-patient
restraint. DRE prioritised reducing fear of services, developing
culturally appropriate therapies, and engaging BAME groups and patients
in training, policy development, service planning and provision.

A DRE progress review\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` advocated dedicated community
development workers, engagement projects, training, clinical
trailblazers and measuring progress. Patients, professionals,
campaigners and academics attributed continued race inequality in mental
healthcare post-DRE to institutional racism, inadequate training, poor
system design and lack of an empowering culture.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

In our experience, DRE is not prioritised. Core training competencies of
‘cultural diversity’, evaluating institutional prejudices, respect for
diversity and evaluating biases are neglected. Despite a strong position
statement,\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` racism is absent from MRCPsych examinations.
Static e-learning modules replace interactive, in-person training that
could stimulate engagement, discussion and reflection. Black leadership
and collaboration with Black community stakeholders are lacking in
mental health trusts serving largely Black populations.

Mental health service leaders must role-model, reflecting on personal
and workplace unconscious biases.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` We should each ask of
our own organisation, how equitable is provision? Do Black patients have
equal access to psychological therapies and specialist services? Are
their perspectives represented? Do we foster dialogue with local
communities? Do Black staff experience disproportionate bullying and
harassment? Can they speak up if safeguards are lacking? Identifying and
ameliorating clinical inequalities should drive research, so that
treatments meet Black patients’ needs.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`

‘We do not need another review, or report, or commission to tell us what
to do’ about race inequality in the UK,\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` nor in mental
healthcare. To address mistrust, services must acknowledge and address
inequalities experienced by Black patients. We welcome RCPsych's
appointment of presidential race equality leads and hope they will forge
multidisciplinary alliances to mainstream anti-racism across mental
health professionals.

It should not have taken a death to trigger the biggest race equality
focus in mental health services’ history, nor should it have been so
rapidly forgotten. Black stakeholders must be empowered to occupy
positions of influence, but it is not Black staff or patients’
responsibility to effect change; organisations must be accountable. In a
mostly White-led profession, tackling systemic racism will inevitably
cause discomfort. Mental healthcare, with its recognition of
transference and countertransference, and prioritisation of supervision,
reflection and psychotherapeutic skills, is well-placed to lead the
difficult discussions the health service needs. Silence is not neutral.
The time is now.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.
