======================================================================
Rethinking self-injury recovery: a commentary and conceptual reframing
======================================================================

Stephen P. Lewis
Penelope A. Hasking [1]_Correspondence to Stephen P. Lewis
(stephen.lewis@uoguelph.ca)
:Date: 2020-04

:Abstract:
   A growing body of research has focused on understanding what may
   contribute to cessation of self-injury. Although these efforts are of
   value, cessation represents just one component of self-injury
   recovery. Exclusive or primary focus on cessation may foster
   unrealistic expectations for those with lived experience of
   non-suicidal self-injury (NSSI). Accordingly, this commentary
   discusses the importance of expanding the concept of NSSI recovery
   beyond cessation in both research and clinical domains. We conclude
   by presenting a person-centred and non-stigmatising conceptual
   reframing of recovery.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Non-suicidal self-injury (NSSI), deliberate damage to one's body tissue
in the absence of conscious suicidal intent,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` is a
behaviour that is most often used to regulate intense or unwanted
emotions.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.c)` In community samples, 18% of
adolescents, 13% of young adults and 5% of adults (aged 25+) report a
history of NSSI,\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` with approximately one-third persisting
with the behaviour for longer than 1 year.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` Associated
with psychological distress, mental health difficulties (e.g.
depression, anxiety, eating disorders),\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.c)`
interpersonal difficulties\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.c)` and subsequent
suicide risk,\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` NSSI can also leave physical scars that
can represent both resilience and a source of shame for people who have
self-injured.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

Given its many adverse consequences, researchers have recently focused
on identifying factors that facilitate cessation of NSSI. In particular,
researchers have sought to delineate individuals who currently engage in
NSSI and those who report having stopped, with the aim of identifying
targets for intervention.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.h)–(n.d.i)` Clearly, there
is merit in these efforts. Yet, this approach may inadvertently
emphasise NSSI cessation, without equal attention to the many concerns
those with lived NSSI experience report in the broader context of
recovery. In keeping with a recent trend in the NSSI literature to offer
more person-centred views of NSSI,\ :sup:`(n.d.j)–(n.d.k)` the present
commentary discusses issues inherent in limiting focus to NSSI cessation
and offers a person-centred, non-stigmatising framing of recovery.

.. _sec1:

Recent trends in NSSI recovery research
=======================================

Notwithstanding the value of examining NSSI recovery, focus is often
circumscribed to desistance of the behaviour. Indeed, this is typically
the primary outcome measure in research.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.h)–(n.d.i)`
From a theoretical standpoint, NSSI has been situated within the context
of recovery-based models in which desistance of a behaviour is the
primary aim.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` For example, NSSI has been viewed in the
context of the transtheoretical stages of change model, which considers
individuals as ‘recovered’ (from the target behaviour) following a
6-month period of abstinence from that
behaviour.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)–(n.d.m)`

In contrast to these views are those of individuals with lived NSSI
experience, who have expressed concern that salient NSSI experiences may
be neglected if the primary focus is on the behaviour.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)`
Indeed, individuals discuss a range of concerns (e.g. scarring,
disclosure, coping) that extend well beyond NSSI
disengagement.\ :sup:`(n.d.f),(n.d.g),(n.d.o)–(n.d.p)` Taken together,
the totality of experiences expressed by individuals with lived
experience of NSSI may not consistently be represented in the extant
literature. Moreover, emphasis on cessation of behaviour may
inadvertently place NSSI in disease-based conceptualisations of
‘illness’. In particular, there has been a recent and growing movement
away from pathologising behaviour, including NSSI.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`
Notwithstanding the psychological and medical consequences of NSSI (e.g.
distress, scarring), using disease-based language to describe NSSI can
conflate illness with a behaviour, and exacerbate the already strong
stigma associated with NSSI.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` Specifically, the tendency
to conceptualise NSSI within models of infectious disease, including
borrowing language from this domain (e.g. contagion), can have an
‘othering’ effect in distancing people who self-injure from those who
are not ‘diseased’.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` This is reflected in recent research
eliciting views from individuals with lived NSSI
experience.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` Consistent with an emerging trend in the
field, researchers and clinicians may find it more helpful to adopt a
strengths-based and person-centred (rather than deficit- or
disease-based) conceptualisation of NSSI and recovery.

.. _sec2:

Moving beyond cessation
=======================

Cessation of NSSI represents just one element of an ongoing and
multifaceted recovery process. Although many would not disagree that
recovery is broader in scope, researchers typically focus on cessation
of the behaviour,\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.s)–(n.d.i)` with the implicit
argument that this is the desired outcome of any intervention effort.
However, it is not uncommon for people with lived NSSI experience to
mention ongoing NSSI thoughts or urges,\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.o)` learning
new ways to cope with difficult
emotions,\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.o),(n.d.p)` disclosure-related
concerns\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` and coming to terms with
scarring\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.u)` – even long after ceasing to
self-injure.

Attenuated focus on complete NSSI cessation may result in people
perceiving their own recovery as all-or-nothing. As ongoing NSSI
thoughts and urges are common, beliefs that people can be ‘cured’ or
fully removed from NSSI are unrealistic. Likewise, equating recovery
with a single outcome and viewing cessation as the sole indication of
success are unhelpful. Ultimately, considering cessation as ‘successful
recovery’ detracts from the multifarious paths people inevitably have.
Left with the impression that recovery is a linear path to cessation,
individuals are prone to become discouraged (even when progress is made)
or may view their own efforts as futile.

A more realistic expectation would be that many individuals *will*
continue to experience thoughts and even urges to self-injure in the
future. However, over time, these occurrences will abate in magnitude
and frequency. Moreover, as individuals begin to find and utilise
alternative strategies in lieu of NSSI, the pairing of NSSI with painful
emotions should correspondingly dissipate. By acknowledging and
ultimately adopting more realistic and holistic expectations,
individuals are apt to feel encouraged over the course of their NSSI
journeys.

.. _sec3:

Reframing recovery
==================

Following the above, we would encourage researchers and clinicians to
adopt a broad, multipronged conception of recovery to account for a
range of variables, including but not limited to NSSI cessation. Hence,
we propose that consideration be given to how: people respond to
difficult emotions and thoughts of NSSI (including coping
responses);individuals adapt to and live with having NSSI scars;the
process is non-linear and may involve setbacks (e.g. instances of
NSSI);recovery may be an enduring (at times life-long) process; andother
factors (e.g. disclosure, future coping, mental health difficulties) are
germane.By virtue of expanding beyond NSSI cessation, more realistic
expectations can be fostered. This not only acknowledges the multitude
of experiences people may have but stands to foster more resilience.

In keeping with the above, when working with people with lived NSSI
experience, it might be more helpful for researchers and clinicians to
strive to adopt and reflect back the precise language these individuals
use when referring to recovery. As the lexis of recovery is commonplace
in NSSI discourses,\ :sup:`(n.d.v),(n.d.m),(n.d.w)` the term ‘recovery’
is bound to be used. Yet, alternative referents (e.g. journey,
overcoming self-injury) may also be employed. Some people may even be
resistant to using the term ‘recovery’ as it may position NSSI within
disease-based (as opposed to behavioural) frameworks. As noted above,
such framings have been rendered stigmatising by those with lived
experience.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` Others may view the term recovery as
conceptually ill-suited, as recovery is defined as a return to a normal
or healthy state.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` Indeed, individuals may not view their
experience as a return but more an experience in which they view
themselves in a new light (e.g. more resilient);\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.p)`
additionally, some may view this definition as inferring that people who
self-injure are somehow ‘abnormal’. Ultimately, by using individuals'
own language researchers and clinicians can avoid unnecessarily
‘correcting’ those who are arguably experts in *their* experience;
further, this approach coheres with recommendations for discussing NSSI
in assessment and related contexts.\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.y)`

Nevertheless, irrespective of the phrasings used, it would be helpful if
conversations could underscore and foster realistic expectations
extending beyond NSSI cessation. This may necessitate ascertaining what
individuals mean by the particular term they use. Doing so can help
determine whether an individual's primary focus is on desistance of
NSSI. Although desistance may have value for some people (e.g.
acknowledging progress by the time elapsed since they last
self-injured), it would be important to ensure that individuals view
their trajectory realistically, cognisant of the manifold complexion of
recovery (e.g. persistent urges, set-backs).

.. _sec4:

Summary
=======

Recent trends in the NSSI literature have seen the emergence of research
on NSSI recovery, with a particular focus on factors related to
cessation of the behaviour. Hopefully, it is apparent from our
commentary that a primary focus on cessation in the context of
self-injury could detract from the myriad experiences people have and
may inadvertently lead to a sense of failure, as thoughts and urges
(among other features) are apt to continue long after a person no longer
self-injures. Instead, we call on researchers and clinicians to focus on
how people respond to intense or unwanted emotions and whether the
chosen strategies are meeting the desired aims. In this way, focus
centres on individuals and their experiences, with realistic
expectations about their own progress, while allowing the requisite
space to adopt alternative strategies that will best serve the functions
needed.

**Stephen P. Lewis**, PhD, is an associate professor in the Department
of Psychology, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada. **Penelope A.
Hasking**, PhD, is an associate professor in the School of Psychology,
Curtin University, Australia.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.y.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
