=========================================================
The place of free will and agency in psychiatric practice
=========================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------
: Commentary on … William James and British thought: then and now
-----------------------------------------------------------------



Steve Pearce [1]_

:Correspondence: Dr Steve Pearce
(steve.pearce@psych.ox.ac.uk) [2]_

:date: 2020-04

:Abstract:
   In psychiatric practice, professionals tend to split patients into
   those who are responsible for their actions, and those who are not.
   This approach does a disservice to both groups. Patients assumed to
   retain agency may be blamed, and those assumed to lack agency are
   disempowered. Professionals should adopt a more nuanced approach to
   agency and control, recognising that it is impaired in most
   psychiatric disorders, but absent in very few. This is possible
   without making stigma worse.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

William James’ views on free will
=================================

The article by Leary\ :sup:`1` encourages a reappraisal of William
James's contribution to the early study of psychology. He is best known
for his interest in, and lectures on, the psychology of religious
experience,\ :sup:`2` but Leary notes another central interest, in free
will. He notes James's doubts in his early writings that even ‘a wiggle
of the will’ is possible. James writes, for example, that addicts
(‘dipsomaniacs’) experience a compulsion [3]_ unlike anything
experienced by other people, an impulse that is irresistible (James
1890, quoted in Pickard\ :sup:`3`).The presence or absence of
responsible agency, meaning the ability to make choices and act upon
them (thus an expression of free will), is central to modern psychiatric
practice, and one of the ways in which James' interests continue to be
relevant.

.. _sec2:

Agency as an all-or-nothing concept
===================================

Interest in agency by mental health professionals has fluctuated. Ideas
such as locus of control and generalised self-efficacy have been the
subject of research, but refer to the person's beliefs about their
ability to choose and act, rather than their ability to make choices and
carry through the actions associated with them (agency). In psychiatry,
agency itself has been neglected as a subject for study,\ :sup:`4`
although in practice it is generally assumed either to be present or
absent. In other words mental health workers, like their peers in the
rest of society, have a tendency to split patients into those who have
agency – who have the freedom to choose to act differently – and those
who do not, and are powerless to control their behaviour.

The tendency to dichotomise agency in this way is not restricted to
psychiatry. The legal system treats people as either responsible for
their actions (having *mens rea*) or not, a dichotomy echoed in the
choice between two possible verdicts.\ :sup:`5` Addiction provides a
recent example of the way agency is dichotomised in mental health.
Before the 20th century addictions were generally considered character
flaws, consisting of unwise choices freely made. The adoption of the
illness model of addiction (a movement with a long history of which
James was a part, crystallising in 1939 with the birth of Alcoholics
Anonymous\ :sup:`6`) alters the formulation to that of someone who is
unable to resist their impulses to use, latterly formulated as owing to
changes in brain chemistry.\ :sup:`7` Thus agency is either retained,
along with fault, or lost, which allows for compassionate treatment. For
a discussion of the debate as it pertains to addictions, see
Pickard\ :sup:`3` and Pickard and Pearce.\ :sup:`8`

.. _sec3:

Agency in psychiatry
====================

The tendency to dichotomise agency in psychiatry leads to patients being
split into two groups. One consists of those who are thought to lack
agency (at least when suffering from an episode of illness), who cannot
recover by their own efforts, and who are unlikely to be able to
contribute significantly to their recovery. The other contains those who
retain agency, could act differently, but choose not to. For example,
patients with personality disorder are usually thought to retain agency
(they could choose to do things differently), whereas those ill with
affective disorders and psychoses are thought not to. Although, if
asked, mental health professionals may agree that the situation is more
nuanced, this ‘rule of thumb’ approach is widespread, and has negative
consequences. Control, or agency, when assumed to be fully present, can
make it difficult for professionals not to blame patients, since if you
are responsible for your actions, and some of those actions harm
yourself or others, you deserve to be blamed. This can lead to poor
treatment and stigma from the belief that the unpleasant and harmful
behaviours by the patient are a conscious choice. Box 1Dichotomising
agency in the clinical situationHelen has a family history of depression
and self-harm. She has become more suicidal following the break-up of
her marriage. She disclosed to her care coordinator that she had a rope
and is intending to kill herself on her wedding anniversary. She is
diagnosed with an exacerbation of chronic treatment resistant
depression. She is admitted and placed on general observations.Over the
course of the next few weeks she ties ligatures around her neck and cuts
herself with smuggled razors. As the perceived riskiness of her
behaviour escalates, her level of observations are gradually increased.
Staff find it difficult to tolerate her levels of distress and
aggression.Staff become split. Some feel she is severely depressed, and
that she cannot help acting in this way. They spend increasing amounts
of time with her. Others feel her problems are ‘behavioural’, by which
they mean they are under her control; they wonder if she has a
personality disorder, and advocate discharge.

.. _sec4:

The place of agency in recovery
===============================

An all-or-nothing approach to agency also has an adverse effect on those
deemed unable to exercise choice and control. The assumption is that
change is beyond the power of the patient, and is in the hands of
professionals, or in some cases down to chance. But symptoms (when they
are behaviours, as they often are in psychiatry) and maintaining factors
of a range of common psychiatric conditions include actions and
omissions. Examples include addictions, eating disorders, depression and
anxiety disorders, and the list could be expanded to include all
conditions for which there is treatment which requires concordance as,
if the patient decides not to take their medication, say, the omission
will affect their condition and act as a maintaining factor. Actions and
omissions that are either core features or maintaining factors of
psychiatric disorders involve a degree of control, and thus recovery
from these conditions requires the patient to have the motivation and
will to change their behavior.\ :sup:`9` An anxious patient who finds it
difficult to leave the house may eventually recover simply by taking a
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, but at some point they will have
to take the difficult decision to go out of the front door, and the
sooner they do (for example, as part of a treatment programme) the
sooner they will recover. Telling a patient, or implying, that they have
no control over their behaviours undermines their contribution to their
recovery, and, if they conclude from this that they should cease their
own efforts, may prevent recovery altogether.

.. _sec5:

The wedge model of responsible agency
=====================================

What is the alternative to the idea that patients are either subject to
compulsion, and therefore entirely lacking in agency, or easily able to
change their behaviours, but refusing to do so? It is the idea that
control comes in degrees. This is a concept with which we are familiar
when applied to ourselves, but have a tendency to forget in the clinical
situation. Thus we find it easier not to shout at the kids when we are
well rested and happy, more difficult when tired and stressed. The
ability to exercise control (responsible agency) may be reduced by
physical states like fatigue and pain, and emotional states like fear,
anger and anxiety. In other words, it bears some relation to
motivational and epistemic context;\ :sup:`8` the ability to exercise
control may vary with motivation, and with one's understanding of the
situation and consequences – a smoker may stop when she becomes pregnant
despite having previously attempted to do so without success.

Agency might also be impaired, to an extent, in a range of psychiatric
disorders. Henderson lists ways in which this might happen ‘through a
defect in consciousness, a change in mood, in perception, in the ability
to think or the content of thought’.\ :sup:`4` It may be more difficult
for an agoraphobic to leave their house than it would be for you or me,
for these reasons, but the impairment is one of degree, and although
leaving the house may be difficult, it is not impossible. This
understanding forms the basis of the behavioural treatment of
agoraphobia.

The tendency to think of behaviour in some psychiatric disorders as
compulsive (wholly without choice) is unsustainable also in view of the
way people suffering from these disorders behave in practice. People
with these problems quite commonly do change their behaviour. Some
interventions bolster the ability to choose; for example, buprenorphine
reduces the euphoric effects of opiates, and behavioural experimentation
improves the ability to tolerate phobic stimuli. Psychiatric treatments
change behaviours across a range of disorders and
interventions.\ :sup:`10,11`

It also appears to be the case that behavioural changes become
progressively easier as agency gradually increases. For example, the
theory of behavioural activation for depression suggests that completing
easier tasks leads to an improved ability to undertake more difficult
tasks, possibly related to the impact of increasing self-efficacy on
agency. This rationale is also seen in the graded exposure hierarchies
used in the behavioural treatment of anxiety. In addition, experiments
indicate that effortful practice appears to bolster willpower, the
so-called ‘muscle model’ of the will.\ :sup:`12`

.. _sec6:

Could retaining the idea of agency, and thus choice, invite stigma?
===================================================================

It is possible that widening the arena in which choice is considered a
factor could subject those who suffer conditions that may be less
subject to agency-related stigma, such as depression, to the additional
stigma that those suffering disorders thought to be more choice-based,
such as personality disorder, are subject to. Might professionals, and
the public, have more difficulty feeling compassion if we reconsider the
contribution made to mental disorders from patient choices?

This is possible, but is not a reason to retain an inaccurate approach
to agency. Maintaining that a person has no control over a situation,
when they appear to in fact retain some control, is not a viable
solution to stigma, and the folk are probably not convinced by this
anyway. Although people are generally willing to allow some slack to
people who are ill, they are also sensitive to when the sick person
appears to be ‘overstepping the mark’.\ :sup:`13`

.. _sec7:

Ways of avoiding stigma when a degree of agency is retained
===========================================================

How might we mitigate any negative effect of acknowledging the place of
will in the maintenance of mental disorder? ‘Responsibility without
blame’ is a concept observed by a philosopher when visiting democratic
therapeutic communities.\ :sup:`14` Blame used in this context refers to
affective blame, the negative feelings and attitudes that arise in
another when someone is responsible for an action with a negative
consequence. Pickard noticed that the staff of the therapeutic
communities were able to retain the idea that patients with personality
disorder were responsible for their decisions and actions – that they
retained agency – while not engaging in blaming behaviours, or adopting
a blaming attitude, that would be normal when those decisions and
actions have negative consequences. She concluded that responsibility
and blame can be separated, and should be for the purposes of good
clinical care. Blame is usually countertherapeutic, and makes providing
compassionate care more difficult, whereas the attribution of
responsibility is essential both in motivating change, and in
maintaining a mutually respectful therapeutic relationship (if your
patient is not responsible for their apparent choices, you should treat
them not as an equal moral being, but more like a child). Pickard
thought that paying attention to the patient's personal history was one
of the elements that make it possible to avoid blame, as this evokes
compassion and empathy, which make affective blame less likely.

The acknowledgement of choice and control should not be allowed to
affect treatment. This is already a problem, for example, when patients
who have self-harmed are treated poorly in emergency
departments.\ :sup:`15` The solution to this is not to maintain the
fiction that such behaviours are outside the patient's control, but to
train professionals to act with compassion and care no matter the cause
of the patient's distress.

.. _sec8:

What are the practical implications of this approach?
=====================================================

If the exercise of free will is essential to recovery from mental
disorders, we should treat people in such a way as to encourage the
development of agency, to improve their capacity for control. It is
possible to support patients through the difficult process of change,
without moving to a paternalistic position in which change and recovery
depends on us rather than the patient.\ :sup:`9` Our approach to
patients should thus be to acknowledge and bolster their power and
agency in relation to their condition. In practical terms, when a
patient tells us they cannot exercise control, such as to get out of bed
when feeling depressed, it is helpful to regard them as able to exercise
control, but to explore with them the degree to which this may be
reduced, and the reasons for this. We should also work to avoid
demoralising self-blame; for example, by emphasising that it is common
for someone in their position to have these problems, that there are
strategies for addressing it, and that it is okay to find it hard. It
will be important to be circumspect in how this conceptualisation is
used with regard to carers and relatives; the public is no less likely
to dichotomise agency than professionals, and may react to the idea that
agency is retained to a degree, by assuming that the patient is acting
this way ‘on purpose’, a perennial problem in psychiatric disorder.

There is an additional point to note. As conditions such as obesity and
addiction increasingly come to be seen as illnesses, or even diseases,
people see themselves as less responsible and less able to change, with
consequent increasing reliance on the efforts of professionals rather
than themselves.

.. _sec9:

Conclusion
==========

Most mental disorders probably affect agency, making it more difficult
to implement good choices. The extent to which this affects the patient
will depend on both the nature and the severity of the disorder.
Although it is probably true that people with even severe personality
disorders retain agency much of the time to a greater degree than people
with severe affective and psychotic disorders, agency is likely to be
retained to some degree in all but a small proportion of patients with
psychiatric disorders. Most psychiatric patients are able to contribute
to their recovery through the exercise of their will. For this reason,
treatment should emphasise the bolstering of control and willpower,
which should include working to improve patients' understanding of their
problems, and morale. In this way, we can avoid the twin mistakes of
disempowering the patient by assuming they have no meaningful power to
make choices that affect the course of their illness, and adopting a
blaming attitude, which can allow the correct attribution of agency to
detract from compassionate and energetic care.

Thank you to Richard Gipps for very helpful comments on the draft of
this paper.

**Steve Pearce,** Consultant Psychiatrist and Programme Director,
Oxfordshire Complex Needs Service, Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust,
UK

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.

.. [2]
   See this issue.

.. [3]
   The term compulsion is used here in its general usage, meaning that a
   person is compelled to act, having no freedom to do otherwise. In
   psychiatric use, such as in obsessive–compulsive disorder, a
   compulsion can sometimes be resisted.
