---
author:
- Omar Youssef
date: 2020-04
title: Hanafy Ahmed Youssef, DM, MRCS, FRCPsych
---

Formerly Consultant Psychiatrist, St Davnet\'s Hospital, Monaghan,
Ireland

Hanafy Youssef, who died at the age of 80 on 21 January 2019, was a
leading figure in Irish psychiatry. With his colleague John Owens, he
set up the first community-based psychiatric service in Ireland. He was
able to show that this pattern of service led to better outcomes for
patients and their families. As a result, a number of other
community-based services in Ireland and the UK were established.

Over a 20-year period in the 1980s and 1990s, he developed a highly
productive research relationship with Professor John Waddington of the
Royal College of Surgeons, Ireland. Together they published many papers
on aspects of psychotic illness occurring in patients referred to the
Cavan/Monaghan psychiatric services. Hanafy Youssef contributed to over
60 publications in the fields of psychotic illness, neurodevelopmental
psychiatry and psychopharmacology. The relationship between the
Cavan/Monaghan psychiatric services and the Department of
Psychopharmacology at the Royal College of Surgeons, Ireland, continues
to this day.

Hanafy had a strong interest in postgraduate psychiatric education. He
was clinical tutor at St Davnet\'s Hospital and a member of the Irish
Psychiatric Training Committee. He had a great capacity for explaining
difficult concepts to medical and nursing staff. Indeed, as an educator,
he was at the forefront of psychiatric education in Ireland. He was also
a mentor to many overseas doctors who worked with him. He was an
inspiration to them as they saw him become a leader in his specialty. He
was a particularly strong supporter of women in medicine at a time when
women doctors were still finding it difficult to climb the career
ladder.

He had a great interest in the development of psychiatric services in
less economically developed countries. In the 1970s he spent time in
Zambia, developing clinics in rural areas and helping to confront the
stigma often attached to psychiatric illnesses. From 1994, he spent 2
years in a professorial post in Trinidad and Tobago, where he helped
improve the quality and prominence of undergraduate psychiatry training.
He felt this was crucial if the finest doctors were to be recruited into
the specialty. He then returned to take up a consultant post in liaison
and general psychiatry at Addenbrooke\'s, a teaching hospital within
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. In addition, he
carried out voluntary work with charities in Yemen and Libya, providing
both general medical and psychiatric care in areas where there was a
shortage of doctors.

Hanafy was also a philanthropist, fiercely passionate about social
justice, who took seriously the welfare of the less privileged. Together
with his siblings he established Latifa\'s Orphanage House and a mosque
in the suburbs of Alexandria. He worked tirelessly for the
underprivileged and would offer free medical care to any in need.

Whether they spoke to him in person, heard him speak at international
conferences or were his patients, Hanafy Youssef left a lasting
impression on all he met. His knowledge, dedication to his field and
commitment to his patients were widely appreciated.

He came from humble beginnings. He was born on 14 January 1939 in
Alexandria, Egypt, to Ahmed Mahmoud and Latifa (née Taher). His father
ran a hunting and tackle store there. Hanafy studied medicine at
Alexandria University and undertook postgraduate training in the
Department of Psychiatry at the University of Cairo. At university, he
led an extremely active life, both in cultural pursuits and in sport. He
authored several published novellas in Arabic, won a national poetry
award and was the arts reviewer for the university paper. At the same
time, he was a member of the university football and wrestling teams. He
took an interest in science and politics, and became multilingual,
adding French and Russian to the Arabic and English he spoke before
entering university. After qualifying as a doctor, he spent 2 years as a
medical officer in the Egyptian Army, including service during the
Arab--Israeli Six-Day War.

He moved to Derry in 1971 to obtain further training in psychiatry and
fell in love with Ireland and its people. This is where he met his wife
Ann. He obtained a consultant psychiatrist\'s post at St Davnet\'s
Hospital, Monaghan, in 1975 and spent most of his career there.

Hanafy retired in 2001 and enjoyed his retirement years in Armagh. He
remained highly active, interested in medicine and writing about and
closely following the struggle of his Egyptian compatriots for freedom
and progress. He published several papers on the history of psychiatry,
reviewed books on psychiatry and had several letters published in
national broadsheets on a wide range of subjects. He was very proud of
his family and their achievements.

He passed away peacefully surrounded by his family. He leaves Ann, his
wife of 46 years, five children (Emma, Mahmoud, Latifa, Zahra and Omar)
and three grandchildren.
