---
author:
- Meta McGee
- Claire Potter
- Joseph Kane
date: 2020-10
institute:
- ST4 Old Age Psychiatry, Belfast Health & Social Care Trust, Northern
  Ireland
- Academic Clinical Fellow, Centre for Public Health, Queen\'s
  University Belfast, Northern Ireland
- "Academic Clinical Lecturer, Centre for Public Health, Queen\\'s
  University Belfast, Northern Ireland; email: <joseph.kane@qub.ac.uk>"
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
title: Are UK care homes ready for the telemedicine revolution?
---

The restrictions implemented by coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) have
reawakened discussion surrounding the use of telemedicine in routine
clinical practice.^1^ Nursing home residents have emerged as a
particularly vulnerable group, not only with respect to the virus
itself, but to the effects of social distancing^2^ and disruption to the
services in place to support them. In working to stop the spread of
COVID-19 within their facilities, many homes have found it difficult to
sustain the non-pharmacological mainstays of management of delirium and
behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia.^2^ Telemedicine, a
proposed solution to these difficulties, has been demonstrated to be
both valid and acceptable to patients with dementia and care home
staff^3^ but it does not appear to be part of routine practice in the
UK.^4^

We therefore aimed to determine nursing homes' capacity and enthusiasm
for telepsychiatry assessments. Over a 2-week period in June 2020, we
contacted senior staff at the 70 nursing and 'elderly mentally infirm'
homes falling within the Belfast Health & Social Care catchment area and
administered a short survey via telephone. Two questions; 'how would you
rate your facilities\' current capacity to participate in mental health
assessments via video link?' and 'how interested would you be in
establishing the capacity to participate in mental health assessments
via video link?', were answered using a five-point Likert scale.

Participating nursing homes (56/70; 80%) reported that reliable WiFi
connections and appropriate equipment (such as a tablet device, or
desktop or laptop computer with webcam) were available in 41/56 (73%)
and 40/56 (71%) facilities, respectively. Staff at 21/56 (38%) reported
that they already felt they had the capacity to facilitate such
consultations (answering '5' on the Likert scale); 16/56 (29%) felt they
had little (5/56; 9%) or no capacity (11/56: 20%) to currently do so.
Nursing home staff answering '3' (10/56; 18%) or '4' (9/56; 16%) on the
Likert scale indicated some capacity to participate in remote
consultations, although they felt they would not be able to do so on a
routine basis. Respondents were 'very interested' in establishing
capacity to use remote consultations in 44/56 (79%) of surveys.

Most nursing homes possess the appropriate equipment to facilitate
telemedicine, and the majority (84%) demonstrate an enthusiasm for doing
so. The failure to adopt telepsychiatry may therefore be more closely
related to factors within mental health services, such as our access to
appropriate equipment, than those within nursing homes. A survey of
American psychiatrists working in nursing homes reported widespread
support for telemedicine, but only 13% felt they had access to
appropriate equipment.^5^ It would appear, however, that obstacles to
telemedicine go beyond hardware; in spite of most respondents' access to
equipment, we observed considerable variation in their perceived
capacity to engage with remote consultations, perhaps suggesting a lack
of comfort or familiarity with the medium. We suggest that before
telemedicine becomes part of, as has been suggested, 'the new normal',
that more detailed exploration is conducted regarding the attitudes and
skills of professionals on both sides of the webcam.

# Declaration of interest {#nts1}

none.
