---
abstract: |
  Identifying the causes of psychiatric and physical symptoms in asylum
  seekers, refugees and other migrants and making definitive diagnoses
  can be challenging. Ethical and legal challenges in the UK include the
  likely deterrent effects of upfront charging for National Health
  Service (NHS) services. This paper focuses on the fictitious case of
  an asylum seeker presenting to a mental health service in England,
  highlighting some of the difficulties in assessing and treating this
  patient group and providing advice to clinicians on clinical and
  practical management. Current NHS entitlements for migrants are
  summarised and a list is presented in the online supplement of
  non-governmental organisations that can provide further support.
author:
- Lauren Z. Waterman
- Cara Katona
- Cornelius Katona[^1]Correspondence to Lauren Z. Waterman
  (<laurenzwaterman@doctors.net.uk>)
date: 2020-04
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 2Camden and Islington Mental Health NHS Trust, UK
- 3Helen Bamber Foundation, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
title: Assessing asylum seekers, refugees and undocumented migrants
---

# Clinical scenario {#sec1}

You are a psychiatry trainee at an inner-city 'place of safety' unit in
England. You have been called to see Mr S.T., a 30-year-old Tamil asylum
seeker from Sri Lanka, who has been brought in at 22.00 h by police. He
is reported to be 'responding to voices' and to have collapsed twice,
apparently losing consciousness. S.T. speaks minimal English and the
Tamil telephone interpreter does not appear to be translating everything
he is saying. Furthermore, S.T.\'s ability to use the telephone service
is limited owing to his distractibility and apparent guardedness towards
the interpreter.

S.T. had claimed asylum on arrival at the UK border in 2015. He
describes having fled Sri Lanka, where he had been detained and tortured
for many months. However, his asylum claim was refused a month ago
because of inconsistencies in his account. He was then evicted from
accommodation provided by the Home Office and has since been street
homeless. The timeline is difficult to establish and his story is not
fully coherent.

S.T. states that since his traumatic experiences he has been
experiencing frequent visual and auditory hallucinations, mood swings
and 'jumpiness' whenever there is a loud noise. He avoids being close to
anyone wearing a uniform and prefers being alone. He has not had a
physical health check since arrival in the UK 4 years ago. He explains
that initially he was unaware of how the medical services worked or what
he was entitled to. Since his asylum refusal he has been feeling
intermittently dizzy and has experienced several episodes of collapse,
about which he can remember little. He recently tried to register with a
general practitioner (GP); however, the GP practice refused to take him
on because he had no proof of address. S.T. stopped trying as he became
fearful that the GP would forward his whereabouts to the Home Office and
that he would then be sent back to Sri Lanka, where he believes his life
would be in danger.

After carrying out an initial assessment, you are uncertain whether
there might be an underlying organic cause to S.T.\'s presentation, as
he has not had any previous medical investigations in the UK. You also
feel that he would benefit from a period of in-patient assessment to
further clarify the diagnosis and risk. Furthermore, because he is
street homeless there is no safe place to discharge him to. He is
consenting to in-patient admission but has no funds to pay for National
Health Service (NHS) secondary care and you are unsure what NHS care he
would be eligible for. The key questions raised by this case are
presented in [Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}. Box 1Key questions
•What is this person\'s most likely diagnosis?•What are the possible
causes of his physical symptoms?•What NHS treatment is he eligible
for?•What management would you provide?•What political and social issues
may you need to consider?

# Assessment, differential diagnosis and formulation {#sec2}

## Could there be a non-psychiatric cause for S.T.'s physical symptoms? {#sec2-1}

Many migrants are not registered with a GP, for reasons described below.
It is therefore common to encounter someone such as S.T. who, despite
being at high risk for physical and mental illness, has not previously
accessed healthcare since arrival in the UK and may have multiple
undiagnosed and untreated illnesses. This adds significant complexity to
the diagnostic assessment as, although asylum seekers are more likely to
have physical symptoms as a result of psychological trauma, they may
also have undiagnosed physical illnesses and physical injuries as a
result of torture. It is therefore vital to complete a full physical
health workup, including screening for tuberculosis and sexually
transmitted infections where indicated, in order to identify and treat
medical conditions. Extra care should be taken during physical
examinations to avoid retraumatising the patient.

Dizziness and collapse are important features of S.T.\'s presentation.
Not only does he find these episodes distressing but his lack of
awareness during the episodes renders him vulnerable to injury,
exploitation and violence. When assessing patients who are in severe
distress it is important to be mindful of the potential for diagnostic
overshadowing and vital to identify possible medical causes for these
episodes. These could include epilepsy, non-epileptic attack disorder,
hypoglycaemia, dehydration and vasovagal syncope (fainting), and
potentially substance misuse. If a neurological cause is suspected,
referral to neurology may be indicated. Epilepsy is often difficult to
distinguish from non-epileptic seizures and the two may both occur in
the same individual. Important causes of non-epileptic seizures
(particularly in people who have been severely traumatised) include
panic attacks and dissociative episodes.^1^ Panic attacks are usually
rapid but not immediate in onset and are associated with prominent
autonomic symptoms such as palpitations, shortness of breath and
tingling in the extremities. Dissociation is a psychological defence
mechanism manifested as a perceived detachment of the mind from the
emotional state and the body. It often occurs in the aftermath of severe
trauma and may be triggered by reminders of the trauma. In our clinical
experience, episodes of dissociative 'unconsciousness' are particularly
common in people who have been subjected to sexual trauma and who have
an overwhelming sense of shame and revulsion about what has been done to
them.

A detailed history, including a collateral history (where possible),
neurological examination and simple investigations (such as blood sugar
and blood pressure, both during and after the episode) can be helpful to
distinguish between these causes.

## Psychotic phenomena in PTSD: a diagnostic challenge {#sec2-2}

S.T. was reported to be 'responding to voices'. This might initially be
thought to indicate a primary psychotic illness such as schizophrenia.
However, it is also important to consider whether the voices might be a
manifestation of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In PTSD,
individuals may hear voices as part of a flashback to past traumatic
events. Flashbacks may be triggered by reminders of the trauma or
stressful situations and could therefore be intensified when the person
encounters uniformed officers or is placed in a confined space (such as
in hospital). Victims may find it difficult to distinguish these vivid
phenomena from reality and may respond to them.

Ways in which flashbacks can be differentiated from primary psychotic
experiences include: by their close relationship to the past traumatic
experiences; by their transience; and by the preservation of some degree
of insight. However, many experts believe that some people with PTSD
also have more generalised psychotic experiences which are best
understood as part of the PTSD process. This has been termed 'PTSD with
secondary psychotic features'.^2^ A history of trauma is also common in
people with psychosis. Therefore, it can be challenging to make a
differential diagnosis of a psychotic illness in someone with comorbid
symptoms of PTSD and it is common for clinicians to disagree on the
primary diagnosis.

## Distinguishing complex PTSD from PTSD and emotionally unstable personality disorder {#sec2-3}

Complex post-traumatic stress disorder (complex PTSD) is a new diagnosis
included in the forthcoming ICD-11.^3^ Complex PTSD is more likely to
develop following exposure to prolonged or repeated traumatic events
from which escape is difficult (such as torture, slavery, human
trafficking, prolonged domestic violence and repeated childhood abuse),
whereas PTSD tends to develop following isolated traumatic events.^4^
Complex PTSD is also more likely to develop following interpersonal
trauma than following events such as a road-traffic accident.^4^ Complex
PTSD shares the same core features of PTSD (exposure to a threatening or
horrific event, re-experiencing of the traumatic event, avoidance of
traumatic reminders, sense of current threat and interference with
functioning) but includes three additional features, all of which must
be present for the diagnosis to be made. These are: interpersonal
disturbances, affect dysregulation and a persistent negative
self-concept. These additional features are believed to result from the
degradation of the person\'s self-identity and autonomy. Functional
impairment tends to be worse in complex PTSD than in PTSD, and standard
PTSD treatment may be less effective.^4^

It can sometimes be challenging to distinguish between complex PTSD and
PTSD with comorbid emotionally unstable personality disorder (EUPD),
since complex PTSD and EUPD may both stem from trauma in early life and
share disturbances in affect regulation, self-image and interpersonal
relationships. Although a pertinent feature of personality disorders is
that, by definition, they develop in childhood, it can be particularly
difficult to differentiate the disorders in someone who has experienced
traumas at an early age or for whom we know little about their premorbid
personality, like our patient S.T. However, there are some key
differences: in EUPD, the person\'s self-image and interpersonal
relationships tend to be unstable, whereas in complex PTSD the person is
more likely to avoid relationships and have a persistently negative
self-image.^5^

## Cultural idioms of distress {#sec2-4}

It is important to consider cultural idioms of distress when assessing
patients from different backgrounds. For example, perceptual
disturbances such as hearing voices might have a different significance
or meaning to that assumed in a Western medical model. As with any
symptom, asking the patient what it means to them is often illuminating.
The section on cultural formulation in DSM-5 has some useful questions
in this regard.^6^

## A challenge for assessment: memory deficits are common following trauma {#sec2-5}

Trauma and its associated disorders, including PTSD and depression, are
associated with relative deficits in autobiographical memory
retrieval,^7,8^ and there is evidence that other aspects of memory may
also be affected.^9^ As a result, asylum seekers who have experienced
trauma may tell a story that is convoluted and has an inconsistent
timeline, which can make eliciting a clear history challenging. It is
often helpful to check back frequently with the patient to make sure
that you have understood correctly and to reflect with the patient on
elements of the account that you find inconsistent or incomprehensible.
The process of recounting may be distressing for the patient; thus,
breaks may need to be taken and it is often not feasible to elicit a
full account in a single session.

Of note, it is therefore possible that S.T.\'s poor memory had affected
his asylum claim, since an inconsistent story or inability to recall
specific memories is often considered by immigration systems to indicate
poor credibility, despite this link between trauma and memory
deficit.^10^

## Decompensation since refusal of the asylum claim {#sec2-6}

S.T.\'s mental health worsened following the refusal of his asylum
claim. This is not surprising, since such refusals are often associated
with being discredited and disbelieved and with the threat of imminent
removal to a place where the individual believes themselves to be
unsafe. Refusal of an asylum claim is also often associated with loss of
accommodation and financial support. Even for those who are currently
awaiting a decision, the research evidence indicates that prolonged
immigration uncertainty is associated with a deterioration in mental
health.^11^

Many asylum seekers\' claims are refused because of inadequate legal
representation and/or lack of evidence to support their claim. These
individuals may present in crisis and healthcare professionals are often
unsure how to help people with such a precarious socio-legal situation.
A number of useful charities that provide psychological, social and/or
legal support are listed in online supplement 1 (available at
<https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2019.67>).

# Eligibility for treatment from NHS primary care, in-patient and community mental health services, and common access barriers {#sec3}

Is it important to note that it is not your job as a clinician to make
decisions about who should receive NHS treatment free of charge. This
responsibility lies with the NHS trust. According to General Medical
Council guidance, the clinician\'s primary duty is to treat the patient.
However, you may be asked by your NHS trust about the clinical urgency
of providing treatment for patients who the trust has deemed otherwise
'ineligible' for free treatment (as highlighted below). Additionally, it
is important to be aware of the eligibility for NHS services of
different migrant groups so that, in making your management plan, you
have an idea of potential barriers to access for these patients and can
advocate for them as necessary.

## Access and barriers to treatment in general practice {#sec3-1}

### Eligibility for primary healthcare {#sec3-1-1}

According to guidance issued by NHS England in November 2015, anyone in
England can register with a GP and receive GP services without charge
and 'GP practices are not required to request any proof of identity or
of immigration status from patients wishing to register'.^12^

### Barriers to registering with a GP {#sec3-1-2}

GP practices often mistakenly believe that prospective patients need to
provide proof of address and residency, even though that is not legally
required. This can result in vulnerable migrants being turned away. For
example, of 1717 migrants who approached a charity following
difficulties registering with a GP, 20% were still wrongly refused GP
access even when supported by a charity case worker.^13^ Some GP
practices register migrants as temporary patients,^14^ even though they
are eligible to be registered as permanent. Migrants such as S.T. may
not have a fixed address or may not have access to identity documents or
proof of address.

## Data protection and confidentiality issues {#sec3-2}

An additional barrier is that refused asylum seekers and undocumented
migrants may be afraid to give personal details to a GP practice in case
these details are accessed by the Home Office, which could in turn lead
them to be arrested, detained and/or deported. Some try to get around
this by registering using an alias.^15^ Their fears are well-founded.
Non-clinical information about patients may be disclosed to the Home
Office by NHS services in certain situations, such as if a patient who
is ineligible for free treatment does not pay their treatment bill
within 2 months. Their debt to the NHS may also affect their future
immigration applications.^12^ Previously, a memorandum of understanding
(MoU) stated that NHS Digital could also disclose confidential patient
information to the Home Office for the purpose of assisting immigration
enforcement.^16^ However, this MoU was withdrawn for amendment in May
2018 and it has not yet been re-released.^12^ At the time of writing, it
is unclear how confidential information will be shared with the Home
Office in the near future.

## Access and barriers to treatment in secondary care (including community mental healthcare) and in-patient services {#sec3-3}

### Asylum seekers, refugees and victims of torture are exempt from NHS charges across all services {#sec3-3-1}

All NHS services in England are currently free of charge for asylum
seekers (those who have claimed asylum in the UK and are awaiting a
decision from the Home Office), those with a rejected asylum/human
rights application but who have officially appealed their rejected
claim, refugees (those whose asylum claim has been approved) and
suspected victims of human trafficking, among a number of other
categories.^12^ Also, refused asylum seekers can continue, free of
charge, with any course of treatment already underway before their
application was refused.^12^ Additionally, a category of NHS services
that is currently free of charge irrespective of immigration status is
'services for the treatment of a physical or mental condition caused by
torture, female genital mutilation, domestic violence, or sexual
violence',^12^ which would apply to S.T., whose reported history of
undergoing torture may have contributed to his current illness.

However, for those belonging to these exempt categories, the lack of
clarity and misinformation about who is eligible for free care has had a
deterrent effect and made many vulnerable individuals reluctant to
present to services. These individuals often have complex legal
situations or are unable to provide the documents requested.
Furthermore, administrative staff rarely receive sufficient training in
immigration law to adequately determine eligibility for care.^17^

### New upfront eligibility checks and upfront charging regulations {#sec3-3-2}

Following new government regulations introduced in October 2017, all
hospital departments in England are legally required to check patients\'
eligibility for free NHS healthcare. If a patient is unable to prove
that they are exempt from charges, they are required to pay upfront in
full before receiving any treatment.^18^ This requirement has now been
extended to all NHS community health organisations, including community
mental health services.^19^ If a patient cannot prove that they are
entitled to free care, they have to pay the estimated price for their
treatment upfront, unless it is considered 'urgent' or 'immediately
necessary'. Doctors will have to review each case to decide whether care
is 'immediately necessary' or 'urgent': if it is deemed immediately
necessary/urgent, treatment can be offered and the patient will be
charged later; however, any treatment deemed non-urgent can be refused
until the patient is able pay upfront.^20^ However, this does not apply
to GP care, which is currently free to all, as described above.

### The effects of upfront charging {#sec3-3-3}

Even though the treatment needed is often deemed immediately necessary
or urgent, the worry about being charged upfront can deter vulnerable
patients from seeking help. A recent analysis of case notes from a
Doctors of the World clinic found that 46 patients (over a third of all
chargeable cases) had delayed seeking necessary healthcare owing to
concerns related to charging, including concerns that their information
would be shared with the Home Office.^20^ A number of the UK\'s medical
Royal Colleges have released statements about the upfront charging
policy, warning of its risks.^21^

### What is 'urgent' or 'immediately necessary' treatment? {#sec3-3-4}

There is a lack of clarity from NHS England about what constitutes
'immediately necessary' or 'urgent' treatment, resulting in confusion
and inconsistency between and within services. 'Immediately necessary'
is usually taken to signify treatment that is life-saving or is needed
immediately to prevent a condition from becoming either damaging to the
person or life-threatening. Urgent treatment is usually taken to signify
treatment that, owing to pain, disability or the risk of the condition
worsening without treatment, cannot wait until the person returns to
their country of residence (it is usually expected that an undocumented
migrant will not return to their home country for at least 6
months).^22^ Treatment is deemed 'non-urgent' if 'it can wait until the
patient can reasonably be expected to return to their country of
residence'.^12^ Many clinicians and healthcare providers believe that
the vast majority of healthcare treatment can be legitimately considered
to be at least 'urgent', given that most physical and mental health
conditions could deteriorate without timely treatment.

### Treatment under the Mental Health Act and Mental Capacity Act {#sec3-3-5}

Those who are detained and/or treated under the Mental Health Act 1983
or Mental Capacity Act 2005 are also exempt from charges for
treatment.^12^ Therefore, S.T. would not be charged for his treatment if
we decide to detain him.

### What treatment would S.T. be eligible for without charge? {#sec3-3-6}

S.T. is consenting to an informal admission and would not be appropriate
for community treatment (as he is street homeless). However, would he be
eligible for an informal in-patient admission without charge?

S.T. is not currently legally classified as an asylum seeker as his
asylum claim has been rejected and he has not yet launched an appeal.
However, it could be argued that he still would be eligible for free
voluntary psychiatric treatment, both as an in-patient and in the
community, as a victim of torture.

Regardless, he should be eligible for voluntary psychiatric treatment
(as an in-patient and in the community) without being charged upfront,
on the grounds that the medical team consider his treatment to be
'immediately necessary' or 'urgent'. If he does receive treatment on
this basis, it is important to note that he would still get a bill for
this after his treatment and, if he is unable to pay that bill, his
details could be shared with the Home Office, putting him at risk of
being detained or deported.

It is vital that this eligibility is clearly explained to him so that he
does not become confused and frightened when the hospital conducts its
compulsory eligibility checks.

### How about if he were in Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland? {#sec3-3-7}

The above guidelines only apply to NHS England. Separate guidelines
apply to Scotland^23^, Wales^24^ and Northern Ireland.^25^ In Northern
Ireland, the eligibility guidelines are similar to in the UK. Key
differences are that in Northern Ireland not all migrants are eligible
for free GP care, and refused asylum seekers who have had their asylum
claim refused since 2015 have the same entitlements as any other
ordinary resident. Undocumented migrants (who do not meet the other
exception criteria, such as being a victim of human trafficking) are
liable to be charged for GP, inpatient and secondary care, but are not
charged for A&E treatment, compulsory detention in hospital or treatment
for some infectious diseases and HIV.^25^ In Scotland and Wales, asylum
seekers and refused asylum seekers are entitled to free primary and
secondary healthcare on the same terms as any other ordinary
resident.^23,24^ Please see the relevant guidance for further
information.

# Management of S.T.'s case {#sec4}

## Which treatments are effective for someone in such a precarious social situation? {#sec4-1}

In an acute situation such as S.T.'s, the priority should be to allow
the patient to feel as safe and comfortable as possible. Measures should
be taken to provide a quiet and private space in which to talk to the
patient. Short-term use of benzodiazepines should be (cautiously)
considered if the patient is acutely agitated or anxious. If in-patient
admission is thought to be indicated, clinicians should be mindful of
how an acute in-patient psychiatric ward could be distressing for
someone with a history of trauma.

Regarding longer-term management options for S.T., psychological
treatments appear to have the greatest benefit in reducing PTSD
symptoms.^26^ For example, there is robust evidence supporting the use
of narrative exposure therapy (NET).^27^ Although a sense of safety is
often considered to be a prerequisite for psychological therapies to be
effective, NET (which was developed for use in conflict zones) may be
beneficial even for patients whose immigration status and social
circumstances remain unstable. The humanising effect of having someone
trusted to talk to regularly, in a safe space and without judgement, can
be an especially helpful aspect of talking therapies. There is emerging
evidence to suggest that arts-based therapies can be effective for those
who find it more difficult to express themselves verbally about their
trauma.^28^

Psychotropic medication can also be used to treat PTSD-related symptoms.
Antidepressants can be helpful in treating depressive symptoms in people
who have been severely traumatised: mirtazapine is often used because of
its hypnotic effect. Antipsychotic medication (such as quetiapine, which
is widely used) can be of benefit, particularly in the context of vivid
flashbacks or hallucinations or in the management of persistent anxiety
and agitation.^29^

## Practicalities and primary needs {#sec4-2}

S.T. has been made street homeless since the refusal of his asylum
claim. This will also have implications for discharge planning if he is
admitted to a psychiatric hospital for treatment. It is important to
carry out a comprehensive needs and risks assessment as soon as possible
and to generate a care plan in which these needs are prioritised
appropriately.

If S.T. launches an appeal against his asylum application rejection, he
would become eligible for support such as accommodation and certain
other benefits; therefore, providing him with information on
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) that provide legal advice may be a
priority. A number of NGOs also support asylum seekers by providing
therapeutic services, English language courses, social inclusion
projects, housing and general advice. For example, NACCOM provides a
useful list of charities/services that help destitute migrants across
the UK (<https://naccom.org.uk/projects/>). Further information on some
of these NGOs is given in online supplement 1.

Online supplement 2 gives advice on working with and assessing capacity
via interpreters, which might help in further assessment of S.T.

It is also important to consider that, even if S.T. has a telephone, he
might not have credit with which to make outgoing calls.

## Suggested management plan for S.T. {#sec4-3}

•Informal psychiatric admission for further assessment and
formulation•Obtain collateral history from friends or relatives if
possible (and if S.T. consents to this)•Thorough physical assessment to
identify and treat any non-psychiatric illnesses•Early and proactive
assessment of spectrum of needs: including prioritising housing,
finances and referral to relevant charities for psychosocial and legal
support•Consideration of short-term use of benzodiazepines if highly
agitated•Consideration of anti-depressant and/or antipsychotic
medication•Referral for talking therapy with a trauma focus (if
available locally or via a charity)

# Conclusions {#sec5}

Diagnosing the causes of psychiatric and physical symptoms in asylum
seekers and torture victims and making definitive diagnoses can be
challenging. It is often difficult to determine whether psychotic
symptoms in this group of patients relate to a primary psychotic
disorder or to PTSD; and a new diagnosis of complex PTSD in ICD-11 adds
to the pool of diagnostic options. Psychological distress is a common
aetiological factor in physical symptoms such as dizziness and chronic
pain. However, medical causes should not be excluded without sufficient
physical health assessment as migrants may also have undiagnosed and
untreated physical illness because of difficulty in accessing medical
care.

S.T., the patient discussed in this paper, is fictitious and his case
study was constructed to depict a realistic scenario based on our
clinical experience of working with refugees and asylum seekers.
Although his case may appear to be a particularly complex one, it is
very common for migrants to encounter many of the barriers to accessing
healthcare highlighted here. This can be very stressful for the
healthcare team involved, especially if they are unclear about the
frequently changing healthcare access requirements. Charities such as
the Health Foundation, Doctors of the World, Medical Justice, Freedom
from Torture, Medact and the Helen Bamber Foundation regularly release
updated guidance that can be helpful.

There remain many ethical and legal issues that need addressing
nationally, including the sharing of patient data between NHS services
and the Home Office and the likely deterrent effects of upfront charging
for NHS services. An urgent assessment is needed into the impact on
vulnerable groups of extending charging into NHS community services.
There is often confusion for both patients and healthcare staff about
eligibility for free NHS care. This can result in patients who are
eligible for free healthcare being denied this care, disengaging from
healthcare services or not seeking care in the first place.

We thank R.M., our patient contributor, for her useful reflections on
this case. She particularly emphasised how difficult it is for asylum
seekers to tell an autobiographical story and the effects of prolonged
immigration uncertainty on mental health.

# Supplementary material {#sec6}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2019.67.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::

**Lauren Waterman** is an ST4 higher trainee in psychiatry at South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and an Academic Clinical Fellow
at the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King\'s
College London, UK. **Cara Katona** is an ST6 higher trainee at Camden
and Islington Mental Health NHS Trust, London, UK. **Cornelius Katona**
is Medical Director of the Helen Bamber Foundation, Emeritus Professor
of Psychiatry at the University of Kent and Honorary Professor in the
Division of Psychiatry of the Faculty of Brain Sciences at University
College London, UK.

[^1]: **Declaration of interest:** None.
