============================
Kenneth Kendler: fully human
============================



Claire McKenna [1]_

:date: 2020-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

“‘We shall not cease from explorationAnd the end of all our
exploringWill be to arrive where we startedAnd know the place for the
first time.’T. S. Eliot, ‘Little Gidding’ (from *Four Quartets*), 1942”

Born the son of two experimental psychologists (his father a ‘classic
New York Jewish character’, his mother a ‘very intellectual, incisive’
woman who ‘overcame a lot of prejudice about being a woman in
academia’), Professor Kenneth Kendler's parents were initially sceptical
about his choice of a career in psychiatry: ‘In my parents’ days (they
would have trained in the late 1930s and early 1940s), the smart people
went on to get a PhD and the physicians were sort of second class. They
basically were either psychoanalysts or they went to state hospitals and
gave lots of people ECT … My father, for example, worked in the mental
health system during the Second World War. So he had a lot of contact
with psychiatrists and was not, on average, very impressed’. He thinks
he made them proud in the end though: ‘I think eventually I convinced
them one could do rigorous research in this area’.

At the time of writing, Kendler is the second most highly cited
psychiatric researcher in the world. Already a renowned expert in
psychiatric genetics, he diverged later in his career to become an
eminent scholar in the philosophy, and latterly the history, of
psychiatry. He has gone to the lengths of employing a German speaking
translator for the past few years, so he can read Emil Kraepelin's
writings in the original. These later interests were in part an attempt,
it seems, to resolve his own *sturm und drang* about classification in
psychiatry: ‘You cannot understand where we are in psychiatric nosology
without understanding the historical context within which it exists’, he
told me. In thinking about the arc of his career, I was reminded of the
T. S. Eliot quotation in the epigraph to this piece.

His new book *Toward a Philosophical Approach to Psychiatry*\ :sup:`1`
is a compendium of his most important philosophical papers, as well as
some of his historical and genetics papers (necessary to understand his
thesis about the nature of psychiatric illness). He is an exceptionally
clear and engaging writer, which makes the book an accessible read for
psychiatrists who are not academic philosophers.

When I talked to Kendler via Skype in March 2020 he seemed pretty serene
in his quarantine. Holed up in his home in Virginia because of COVID-19,
he remained hard at work. It seems a labour of love for him. ‘That's
what my kids say,’ he laughs, ‘This isn't work for you, Dad!’ His eyes
wrinkle quickly and frequently into mirth throughout the interview. His
formidable intelligence combines with a warm and easy manner, which
transmitted through the ether. In his scholarly search for what ails us,
he seems more aware than many of the humanity that gives meaning to this
suffering.

Kendler's philosophical stance is poetically summarised (in a riff on
Gerard Manley Hopkins) in the title of his 2015 paper, ‘The dappled
nature of the causes of psychiatric illness: replacing the
organic–functional/hardware–software dichotomy with empirically based
pluralism’.\ :sup:`2` His philosophical approach to psychiatry is very
much of the pragmatic kind. He examined my more speculative questions
briefly during this interview (about mysterianism for example) and, in a
manner I imagined might be born of his decades long habit of daily
meditation, let them float away like flotsam of the mind, finding them
unhelpful to advance his project.

‘It's been a wonderful and fulfilling career,’ he says, but it is one
that's far from over yet. Now aged 69, he still directs a research
institute at Virginia Commonwealth University, he teaches, edits the
journal *Psychological Medicine*, serves on the DSM steering committee
and is very active in several psychiatric genomic consortia groups. The
fifth in the series of his books (edited with Joseph Parnas and Peter
Zachar), based on presentations at the philosophy of psychiatry
conferences in Copenhagen that they organise, is just coming
out.\ :sup:`3` He has also raced out a series of papers this year based
on a close reading of Kraepelin's original textbooks. ‘I can't write it
fast enough,’ he says, as he chips away at the great edifice of our
ignorance, one flake at a time.

This conversation has been condensed and edited.

**What are you most proud of in your prolific career?**

That's a really hard question. I think I've managed to show how careful
methodological approaches can clarify how the familial influences on
psychiatric illness act. I think they're quite strong, if you had to
rank all the other components, but they're subtle and we tend to have
very simplistic solutions, i.e. it's all genetic or it's all our
environment. So, I think in the research I've done, I've laid some
foundations for a kind of sound, rigorous empirical approach to these
questions. And I think in the philosophy work, which has been later in
my career, it's been closely related to the empirical work, of trying to
provide a contextual framework for thinking clearly about these
conditions and human behaviour.

Because, of course, it's our academic discipline, but we're also
studying ourselves and our own behaviour. It's especially hard to think
clearly and avoid previous biases. Its complexity is simply
overwhelming. And although overly simplistic, one human reaction to
great complexity is to develop tunnel vision. That's one way to get
closure. But that's a bad way to do psychiatry. It's a bad way to do it
clinically and a bad way to do it research-wise. So, I'm trying to
provide a framework to think clearly and rigorously. I guess that would
be the most important. I think I contributed a bit.

**I read two lovely papers\ 2,4 of yours about a philosophical framework
for psychiatry, which I thought were really good primers. I wanted to
ask you a bit about the importance of philosophy for psychiatrists. It
can sometimes seem to psychiatrists quite arcane and not necessarily
applicable to their day-to-day practice.**

Well, I have to say that this is not novel. We all make philosophical
assumptions about the things we do and think. And you can either examine
them or you can't. But it's not that they're not there. And in
psychiatry, they're legion. Like, how does the mind relate to the brain?
You cannot begin to practise psychiatry without thinking about those
questions. How do you interpret evidence from different layers of
science? So, we might study personality theory, we might study
parent–child relationships, we might study molecular genetic variants,
we might study signals in the amygdala or the nucleus accumbens. How do
we put those all together? How do they relate to one another?

**What you've just highlighted is that it's very difficult to do
psychiatry well, because of the different styles of thinking we need.
And humans tend to think in heuristics, so we tend to default to that
more categorical thinking. And it's oftentimes really hard, actually, to
hold in mind all of that pluralism whenever you're with patients. For
example, when I'm talking about a patient to colleagues and I'm thinking
about a psychosis spectrum, at the end of it the question is, well, ‘Is
it psychosis or is it not?’ So, we default to a binary. I wonder whether
it's the nature of our brains that we think like this?**

I think you're probably right, that goes back to my concerns that, in
the face of overwhelming complexity, it's very understandable to
simplify. I do believe rather deeply in pluralism, both in our research
and in our clinical perspective. The best of psychiatrists, we have to
wear a range of glasses: when we see someone acutely in an emergency
room setting, versus in long-term therapy, those are not the same
approach.

You know, ‘Beware the man with only a hammer, as he will see only a
world full of nails’. And some people are like that. I grew up at a time
when they were full of the hubris of biological psychiatry. And people
would say things – they were not bad human beings – but they'd say
things like, well, you wouldn't talk with an individual with
schizophrenia, any more than you want to work with a broken computer.
Just give them their medicines. And I think that's stunningly arrogant.
People with schizophrenia have all the fears and wishes that we have.
And providing good care is a very human process. That doesn't mean I
don't try to think rigorously about dopamine pharmacology, but I think
that's a stunning misdeed to only think about that. And it's not
terrifically different from the psychoanalyst who used to say that
thinking about the person as a working brain as well as a mind was
somehow a defensive reaction. So, we're full of these in this field of
mental health of ours.

**That analogy that you just used about seeing nails everywhere –
similarly, I sometimes feel that as psychiatrists we're using a
sledgehammer to crack a nut. Psychotropic medication is so non-specific
in it's mode of action. Do you ever get that kind of cognitive
dissonance?**

The short answer would be yes. In my practice, I try to develop a
nuanced and collaborative approach. I mean, I didn't ever have to do
very high-productivity kind of out-patient work. So, I think I was
probably a bit spoiled. I hardly ever made any money at it, so I was not
very good!

Yes, I agree. It's truly a challenge. And especially, you know, there
are certainly quite ill individuals, with schizophrenia for example,
where medical models are needed. The traditional psychological therapies
really have very limited effectiveness, but what helps is to provide
support, often on quite practical matters, to your patients. But again,
in those situations, the level of trust is a very important thing. In
caring for people with psychosis, when their psychosis starts coming, do
they feel that they can call you? So, I think those human things matter
a whole lot in addition to getting the psychopharmacology right.

**Did you coin the term ‘patchy reductionism’? I learned it from your
writings.**

No, that's from Ken Schaffner.

**I think it's a helpful concept that we proceed in psychiatry by
incrementalism.**

Correct.

**And in terms of your career progression, I've asked you about some of
the high points, but do you have any wrong turns or regrets about how
you've proceeded in your career at all?**

I wish I had studied way more statistics. I did a fair amount. So, for a
psychiatrist, I know a good bit. As a research physician, you make a
bargain. So I spent my 20s, while most of my PhD colleagues were getting
trained in research, going to medical school and getting psychiatric
training. It means that there are limits. I will never be as good as
they are in some particular areas. I try to compensate for that with a
broader vision and understanding.

I did have this naive idea when I was travelling around the back roads
of Roscommon County in particular, Tyrone, Fermanagh and other places
[for the Roscommon family study of schizophrenia], that we were going to
crack and definitively solve the genetics of schizophrenia. And that was
certainly naive. I was naive along with many other people. But we're
making real progress now, real progress. But it's not at all simple.

**I was fascinated to read that you'd considered graduate school in
religious studies at one point. Your positivist approach to psychiatry
and then theology are quite different approaches.**

I continued with my Biblical studies throughout my adult life. I meet
with a nearby Rabbi on most weekends for an hour and a half of study.

I got very interested in religious studies but I think I made the right
decision. But those broader issues about human existence have been an
important interest to me. And I think it's not unrelated to the
philosophical issues.

**How do you square the metaphysics and theology with the empiricism?**

Intellectually, I am a hard-nosed agnostic. But emotionally, there's no
question that there are theistic elements within me, and that's been
true my whole life, which my parents were very puzzled about. I don't
really feel I need to apologise for that.

We've been working on the Book of Genesis now for about three and a half
years and I find those very meaningful comments on human experience. I
mean, I love Homer and I think one can learn tremendous amounts about
humans in Tolstoy and others. There is a descriptive approach to the
nature of human experience in high-quality poetry that I have always
found to be useful. It's a different way of knowing, absolutely. But
they are mutually enriching. So, I am quite intolerant of the Richard
Dawkinses of the world. It's so full of hubris to feel that so much
wisdom and human struggle, which has been articulated in a religious
context – to sort of wipe that away with one sweep as if that's just,
you know, silliness. I have very little patience for that.

**That kind of tallies with what Noam Chomsky has written – that there
are limits to what we can understand with science. I have a quote from
him here: ‘It is quite possible – overwhelmingly probable, one might
guess – that we will always learn more about human life and human
personality from novels than from scientific psychology’.**

Well that's a question of epistemology. That is the ways of knowing.
That's not very different from Karl Jaspers’ ‘of explanation and
understanding’ actually. It's actually very similar to that. And does
clinical psychiatry rely on both of those? Absolutely. Good psychiatry
is always going to involve first-person, empathic understanding and that
is our *craft*.

**I worry that for people like Richard Dawkins, scientism has become a
bit of a religion. Do you think that?**

Well, with the following exception. If you were to ask me what is the
best way to get to know about the mechanistic features of any part of
the universe, I would say science is. Now, when you're talking about the
human mind and its emotions, that's a different business. So in the
sense that one can have hubris that science can explain things that it's
not very good at, like the meaning of life or the origin of the
universe, then yes, I would agree, that's scientific hubris, perhaps.

And it's funny the way that we sometimes slip as psychiatrists. I'm
certainly not comfortable with the role that society calls for us. You
know, as religion has gone down for people, now it's the psychiatrist
who goes on talk shows. And boy, that bothers me a lot. And then, of
course, they want us to comment on political figures and all that stuff.
That is a big mistake.

**It's kind of like psychiatrists have become the priests of
scientism.**

That's really a misunderstanding and it's amazingly widespread.

There's this attribution to us of some special form of human wisdom.
It's amazing how intelligent people tend to have these feelings. It's
just so strange the things that we get projected upon us as
psychiatrists.

**Were your parents religious?**

Not at all. They were very Jewish, but not at all religious. I mean, if
you've seen Woody Allen movies, yes? That's my father. But they grew up
at a time when being religious they thought was superstition.

**And if we were going to be psychoanalysts about this, do you think
that you might have had some unconscious urge to rebel?**

Well, I don't actually think that my interest in religion was primarily
rebellion. It was something much more deep. You know I read a lot of
Walt Whitman and William James's *Varieties of Religious Experience*
when I was a teenager. I was reading Alan Watts, reading a lot of Gary
Snyder poetry and other ‘Pacific Poets’. I was trying to make sense out
of life in the way that I emotionally came toward it.

**Is it mainly poetry that you read in terms of the arts?**

I certainly would read poetry more than I would read fiction nowadays. I
certainly started out with it. I mean, Gary Snyder is probably my
paradigmatic poet of interest, and Kenneth Rexroth.

I always have several books of poetry on my table that I read.

**What do you get out of those?**

The best kind of poems are just like little prayers, little senses of
pulling on the special, the contingent, even – if you want to use the
word – ‘sacred’ out of our everyday life experience, which as we know
kind of rushes by us. Poetry is kind of grabbing this potent observation
and thinking through the emotional implications of often very small
things in our lives.

.. [1]
   **Claire McKenna talks to Kenneth Kendler**, psychiatric polymath,
   about the consolations of philosophy, poetry and theology
