.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

One of the most difficult things about writing a book for general
readers on mental health (and, more particularly, psychiatry) is knowing
how to structure it – and where to begin. The authors of this very
comprehensive book, a liaison psychiatrist (Ellen) and a writer–comedian
(Deveny), have both experienced depression and they share their tales
with considerable frankness and humility. However, instead of beginning
with these engaging stories, they choose to start with a section on
diagnosis and classification – which might unfortunately deter some from
continuing.

There are really useful sections on how to talk to friends who you think
might need help and what happens when you go to see a mental health
professional. However, my particular favourite has to be ‘clues your
shrink is a dud’, which warns against those who claim excessive
certainty, have a guru mentality and are excessively expensive. And
therein lie clues that this book doesn't originate in the UK, but hails
instead from Australia. The text has clearly been edited for the UK
edition, with reference to clinical commissioning groups, mental health
trusts and a list of UK organisations from which further help can be
sought. However, there is, for example, no reference to the problems
faced by those from UK ethnic minorities, the section on drugs mentions
neither ‘skunk’ or ‘legal highs’ and the classification system is, of
course, DSM.

Readers of this book would learn a great deal about mental health and
illness from a biopsychosocial perspective. They might, however, be left
with an idea that there is considerably more choice of professional and
therapist in the National Health Service than in reality – although this
may of course be true if they can pay. Personally, I don't see any
problem in asking your GP if they are good at mental health, and I wish
it was easier to ask for second opinions. The authors tell us ‘remember
you are in charge!’ but for many people seeking help it rarely feels
that way.
