===============================================
William James and British thought: then and now
===============================================

David E. Leary [1]_Correspondence to David E. Leary
(dleary@richmond.edu)
:Date: 2020-04

:Abstract:
   The American psychologist and philosopher William James drew
   inspiration from British evolutionary theory, neurology, psychiatry,
   psychology and philosophy. Trained in anatomy, physiology and
   medicine, he developed a physiological psychology that offered acute
   analyses of consciousness and of the relations between mind and
   brain, habit and thought, cognition and emotion and other aspects of
   psychology. One of his insights, regarding the relation between
   attention and will, was based upon his own experience of panic
   anxiety, which was resolved through his reading of several British
   authors. The story of his psychiatric experience, practical response
   and later theoretical conclusion offers a potential contribution to
   contemporary therapeutic practice.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

William James (1842–1910) was and remains one of the leading academic
and public intellectuals in American history. A founder of modern
scientific psychology, he was also instrumental in orienting
contemporary clinical psychology. While establishing the pragmatic
tradition in American philosophy, he became an inspiring and popular
public lecturer, addressing topics like the will to believe and what
makes life worth living. Although a psychologist and philosopher, he had
a much broader background that included other fields in the sciences and
humanities, but for all of that, the only degree he ever received was an
MD from Harvard Medical School. His first job at Harvard, before
transferring to its Department of Philosophy, was as an Instructor of
Anatomy and Physiology.

James's significant contributions to the history of psychology and
philosophy depended upon his knowledge of German philosophy and
experimental psychology as well as his familiarity with French
philosophy and clinical psychiatry, but just as important was his
intimate connection with British philosophy and psychology, and his
earlier study of British physiology, medical psychology and psychiatry.
Beyond that, Charles Darwin provided the larger conceptual framework for
his work, British neurologists helped him understand the workings of the
brain and many other British thinkers, including literary authors,
contributed insights that he integrated into his monumental *Principles
of Psychology* (1890)(n.d.a) as well as into his later philosophical
work. Indeed, he explicitly stated that his psychology represented a
continuation, albeit with important revisions, of the tradition that
began with John Locke's empirical psychology, and he dedicated his
ground-breaking philosophical work, *Pragmatism* (1907),(n.d.b) to ‘the
Memory of John Stuart Mill’, from whom he had learned ‘pragmatic
openness of mind’.

It was from Britain, too, that James received an invitation to deliver
lectures, in Edinburgh, that led to his *Varieties of Religious
Experience* (1902),(n.d.c) which is still the starting point for
empirical studies of the subjective aspects of religious belief, feeling
and action. And just a few years later, Oxford invited him to deliver
the lectures on *A Pluralistic Universe* (1909)(n.d.d) in which he
called for respectful awareness and acceptance of the diverse array of
people, phenomena, perspectives and persuasions that compose this world
of ours. (He had earlier denounced ‘blindness’ to the valuable
distinctiveness of those unlike ourselves, citing Robert Louis Stevenson
as well as Wordsworth to bolster his argument.)

Bringing together German, French and British sources was not the only
act of integration that made James's *Principles of Psychology* such a
landmark achievement. He also joined the scientific with the humanistic
dimensions of psychology. His central argument was that the human mind
depends upon, but is not reducible to, its physiological and
neurological conditions. To the contrary, it is an essential factor in
the evolution and operation of those conditions, a proposition that is
once again being entertained by many, after decades of neglect.
Ironically, James's conjoining of physiology and neurology with a
careful and precise phenomenology of consciousness drew innumerable
readers to his work, but also set the scene for the future dismemberment
of what he had brought together. For he was so successful in drawing
attention to the significance of the nervous system for an understanding
of psychological phenomena that he helped to generate a thriving
tradition of neuropsychological research that, until recently,
overlooked the reciprocal influence of consciousness on the human
organism, which was equally important to James. Similarly, James's acute
analysis of habit helped to inspire generations of behaviourists who
proceeded, until the past quarter-century, to ignore the essential role
of thought in the development and modification of habits, which James
had strongly emphasised. And, on the other side of the coin, those who
loved his masterful descriptions of consciousness, thinking, emotion and
self came to neglect topics, this time neurophysiology and habituation,
which James had shown to be intimately related to them. In addition,
with ever-increasing specialisation within psychology, researchers came
to ignore the relations among consciousness, thinking, emotion and self,
which James had highlighted. As a result, it is only in the past few
decades, with the advent of ‘interdisciplinary studies’, that cognition
and emotion have been studied once again in terms of their significant
overlap, as they were by James more than 100 years ago. And after a
similarly long lapse, the role of attention is again a vital topic of
research, even leading to explorations of its relation to will, which
was a central interest of James.

In this context, returning to James's work can yield dividends, for
there are many other insights that James has to offer; this is also true
with regard to James's philosophical work, but that is beyond the scope
of this essay. Because those insights often entail connections between
different subfields of psychology, my own recent book on James's
*Principles of Psychology* focused intentionally on some of the more
important relations within his thought: between his treatments of mind
and body, habit and thought, perception and conception, imagination and
memory, cognition and emotion, consciousness and subconsciousness,
attention and will, and self and others, not to mention psychology and
philosophy, all of which make his work so timely to explore.

The revisions James made in traditional empirical psychology involved
changing the Lockean model of the mind from the passive mode, as
exemplified in Herbert Spencer's work, to the active mode, as
accomplished by the introduction of subjective interest and individual
choice into psychological dynamics, a crucial addition that James traced
to insights from the British philosopher Shadworth Hodgson as well as to
his own American mentor Chauncey Wright. James's subsequent radical
empiricism, which included subjective experience as its leavening
element, placed James at odds with the kind of mechanistic psychology
that was later advanced by John B. Watson and all those who banished
subjectivity from psychology.

With this in mind, we can consider one possible contribution that
James's non-mechanistic psychology could make to current understanding
of the relations between psychiatric conditions – in particular,
depression, anxiety and panic of the sort suffered by James himself in a
critical period of his life – and consciousness. To do so, we need to be
aware of some additional facts, the relevant episode in James's life and
the role played by two additional British people, the 17th century
writer John Bunyan and the mid-19th century physiologist William B.
Carpenter. Bunyan, as we shall see, suggested to James a practice that
changed his life for the better – in fact, a practice that saved his
life, as far as he was concerned – and Carpenter proposed an idea that
helped James explain the efficacy of that practice, thus influencing his
construction of a psychology that began with a focus on brain processes
but ended with an affirmation of consciousness, indeterminacy and free
will: not a radically free will independent of natural conditions, but a
will possessing sufficient personal agency to make life worth living,
for James and many others. James's notion of will, of voluntarism, of
being able to make a difference in the world by virtue of his own
capacities for resistance, participation and collaborative creation, was
grounded upon his conviction that we live in a moral universe in which
human action, however limited and pressed upon, can still have some
sway, with each of us potentially ‘in the game’, as he put it. For if
human life is truly the struggle that it feels like, as James remarked,
it is vitally important for us to believe that the results of that
struggle are not foreordained. The difference each of us makes may be
small, but it nonetheless makes all the difference for us.

James struggled in his 20s and 30s with poor health, depression,
neurasthenia, suicidal thoughts and other related conditions, both
before and during the first years of his commitment to the development
of psychology. His reading of the French philosopher Charles Renouvier,
along with his reading of Wordsworth and Browning, helped him survive
and intermittently to emerge from his depressive state. (Less well
known, but also significant, is the role that his meditations on
Shakespeare's *Hamlet* played in the alleviation of his condition.) Not
surprisingly, the variety of causes that fed his depression and ill
health are somewhat less understood. He himself feared that inherited
physiological factors were at the root of his problems. This generated
an understandably fatalistic anxiety, exacerbated by his inclination to
accept the deterministic assumptions that undergirded modern science.
This nexus of anxiety and supposition led him to the unhappy conclusion
that ‘we are nature through and through’ and that ‘not even a wiggle of
our will’ occurs without some cause outside of our control. This threw
into jeopardy his earlier hope to ‘leave a trace’ in human history, one
that only he (through his own self-determination) could leave. And it
made him question the very possibility of what he called ‘the moral
business’ by which he had hoped to make his ‘nick’, thereby contributing
his small but real ‘mite’ to the common good. As he agonised about all
of this, he realised that what was at stake was the thought of ‘my
having a will’. Renouvier had offered an argument, effective for James
only on an off-and-on-again basis, that no one can prove or disprove
free will, but if free will does exist, its verification would lie in
the personal act of freely willing to believe in it. Knowing that he was
miserable when he did not believe in it, James committed himself to
believe for a year and observe whether that belief made a positive
difference in his life.

This is all background to an experience of massive anxiety and panic
that was a turning point in James's life, almost certainly in 1870. This
momentous incident was described, as if drawn from someone else's
experience, in his *Varieties of Religious Experience*. It occurred,
according to this ‘anonymous report’, during a period of ‘the worst kind
of melancholy’ that took ‘the form of panic fear’. It consisted of ‘a
horrible fear of my own existence’ that ‘came out of the darkness’,
accompanied by ‘the image of an epileptic patient whom I had seen in the
asylum, a black-haired youth with greenish skin, entirely idiotic, who
used to sit all day on one of the benches…with his knees drawn up
against his chin’, moving ‘nothing but his black eyes and looking
absolutely non-human’. And here was the barb at the centre of his panic:
‘This image and my fear entered into a species of combination with each
other. *That shape am I*, I felt, potentially. Nothing that I possess
can defend me against that fate, if the hour for it should strike for me
as it struck for him’. The horror of him and the fear for himself – and
the sense of his own ‘merely momentary discrepancy from him’ – left
James ‘a mass of quivering fear…with a horrible dread at the pit of my
stomach’ that he managed to escape only by clinging to scripture texts
like ‘The eternal God is my refuge’, ‘Come unto me, all ye that labor
and are heavy-laden’, ‘I am the resurrection and the life’, and so
forth. At the end of his description of this harrowing incident, James
asserted: ‘Without clinging to these phrases rather than submit to the
image of the idiotic patient, I think I should have grown really
insane’.

I have written two articles about this episode, one providing new
information about its immediately precipitating cause (namely, James's
reading of the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer, with its pessimistic
message about the illusion of individual personhood and of the
associated belief in the indeterminacy of individual will) and the other
identifying the source of its resolution. How James came to this
resolution and how he came to understand and integrate its significance
into his psychology is an interesting and relevant story.

In the months preceding the probable date of his fearful encounter with
the idiotic, green-skinned phantom, James was not only depressed, but
also reading John Bunyan's *Pilgrim's Progress* (1678–1684).(n.d.e) As
discovered fairly recently, his mother had given him a copy of this book
(in a revised and simplified edition) in late January 1870. She did so
purposefully, one assumes, since James was then in the midst of the same
bout of suffering that eventually led to his ‘touching bottom’ during
his hallucinatory panic attack. But in any case, James had clearly read
the chapter entitled ‘The Fight’ in this revised version of Bunyan's
work, as evinced by a dog-eared page within an extended passage that
begins with Christian being ‘full of fear’ as he is confronted by the
‘foul fiend’ Apollyon, and then suffers even greater fear as he
approaches the Valley of the Shadow of Death. At this point, Christian
has a dream, not unlike James's own apparition, in which he comes to the
edge of the ‘dark as pitch’ Shadow of Death. There he sees ‘ghosts and
imps and fiends of the pit’, and hears ‘howls and yells as of men in
great pain, who sat bound in woe and chains’. Despite his terror,
Christian trudges on, seeing and hearing ‘dread things’ until ‘at last’
he hears ‘a band of fiends’ coming to torment him. In trembling fear, he
considers ‘what he had best do’. And here, on that dog-eared page in
James's recently discovered personal copy, is where Christian's tale
touches James's life: “At times he had half a thought he would go back;
but then he knew that he might be half way through the vale. He thought,
too, of all that he had gone through, and that it might be worse to go
back than to go on. So he made up his mind to go on, but the fiends drew
near. But when they had come at him, as it were, he cried out with all
his might, ‘I will walk in the strength of the Lord God’. (pp. 94–95)”

Then, as Christian went on with his mind riveted on the strength of God,
he was comforted by a voice saying, ‘Though I walk through the
Valley-of-the-Shadow-of-Death, I will fear no ill, for thou art with
me’. And with that, shrouded by these protective verses from Psalms 71
and 23, Christian ‘came to the end of the vale’.

It is not difficult to connect Christian's experience with James's.
Similarly full of fear, James confronted his own nightmarish apparition
and escaped his own spectre of damnation through the recitation of
biblical verses, just like Christian. Although his fear of impending
insanity was different from Christian's fear of punishment by ‘fiends of
the pit’, the analogy is easy to see. And James himself, always a
perceptive and thoughtful reader, would have seen it. Indeed, in a
letter to his brother Henry on 7 May 1870, he wrote that ‘I have I think
at last begun to rise out of the slough of the past 3 months’. Slough
is, of course, a clear reference to the ‘Slough of Despond’ in *The
Pilgrim*'*s Progress*.

We can now consider how James translated this experience into a usable
psychological proposition: how, in psychological terms, repeating
biblical phrases helped James endure his journey through the Valley of
the Shadow of Death without utterly breaking down. This is where the
work of William B. Carpenter enters the story. Four years after his
devastating experience, as he was beginning to formulate his own
psychology, James read Carpenter's *Principles of Mental Physiology*
(1874).(n.d.f) In a published review, he specifically noted Carpenter's
notion of ‘ideo-motor action’, which applied to some ‘curiosities of our
mental life’, instances in which a dominating (we would say obsessive)
idea gives rise to repetitive motor (behavioural) actions. What James
came to realise was that ideo-motor action is, in fact, a more general
principle of mental life, not confined to idiosyncratic clinical cases.
Indeed, he concluded that the evolutionary function of all ideas is
precisely to serve as intermediaries between sensory stimulation and
behavioural movement, all of which occur without the intervention of the
will. Ideas are naturally ‘impulsive’, as James put it. So the question
is not why ideas lead to action (sensation-ideation-action being the
normal course of events), but rather, why some ideas do not.

This is where James's Bunyan-related experience melded with his
Carpenter-inspired realisation. Why had the image of the idiotic patient
not led to a breakdown in his sanity as James had fully expected? He
came to believe that the impulsive efficacy of the image was thwarted
when his mind was distracted by more powerful ideas: when images
associated with the biblical phrases became more dominant in his
consciousness by means of his wilfully attending (or ‘clinging’) to
them. James was well aware that the mind sometimes entertains multiple
ideas, with the strongest taking precedence over the weaker ones. Now he
added that selective attention could change the relative strength of an
idea, bringing it to greater intensity in the centre of consciousness,
while other ideas recede as a consequence to the margins of awareness.
In short, James made Carpenter's observation about occasional ideo-motor
action into a full-blown ideo-motor theory, with an important codicil
about how ideas come to be, or not to be, in the centre of one's
consciousness. This is precisely where subjective interest and wilful
attention come into play, James concluded. Will, in this rendition, is
equivalent to enhanced selective attention, which is directed by our
interests. (James later clarified that our interests can be aesthetic
and moral as well as intellectual and practical.) Will creates nothing;
it does not directly affect action, it can only do so indirectly by
increasing the prominence of one idea over others, thereby ‘loading the
dice’ for one action over others. (Another way to say this is that we
cannot will a movement independently of thinking about it.) In this way
only do dominant ideas bring about ‘voluntary action’ as opposed to
involuntary, instinctive or habituated responses.

This psychological explanation, giving a restricted yet significant role
to personal interest and selective attention, provides the essential
framework for James's chapter on ‘The Will’ in his *Principles of
Psychology*. In that chapter, he explains and defends his ideo-motor
theory and outlines ‘Five Types of Decision’ according to the
prominence, conflict or absence of competing ideas. He also discusses
extreme cases of ‘The Explosive Will,’ in which the impulsive power of
ideas is not sufficiently repressed by countervailing ideas, and ‘The
Obstructed Will,’ in which the repression of ideas is excessive.
Clearly, what James offered was primarily a phenomenological description
of the experience of will. Simple though it is, it bears consideration
as contemporary research re-opens the matter of selective attention and
its relation to will or willpower. The proof of its theoretical adequacy
will depend, of course, upon the accumulation of scientific evidence,
but its practical utility will be judged best by psychotherapeutic
outcomes. Can a focus on certain ideas or images facilitate behavioural
change, whether immediately or after repeated occurrence, whatever might
be going on ‘behind the scenes’ in terms of biochemical transformations
and neurological processes? Research on meditation suggests that it can.
What about therapeutic success? More should be made of this, especially
among those who typically emphasise biomedical factors in treatment
settings. More particularly, it might be useful to explore James's claim
that, although individuals cannot directly will a change in their
psychiatric condition, they can and should maintain a focus on the idea
of an alternative, keeping that idea forcefully in mind during the
course of whatever kind of therapy might be taking place. It cannot
hurt, and it might well prove to be beneficial. A good deal of research,
after all, has shown that the mind is much more powerful, in a variety
of ways, than was once assumed.

This is all reminiscent of Viktor Frankl's comment, very possibly made
with James's views in mind, that even when all other means of changing a
situation are blocked, as in a concentration camp or a severe
psychiatric condition, one can at least posit one's own attitude toward
what is happening in one's life.(n.d.g) That attitude, expressing a
firmly held idea or wish for another state of affairs, may well
contribute, along with other remedies, to a positive change. William
James, the grateful recipient of many British ideas, certainly thought
so.

Interested persons can find additional information about James and his
work, relevant to this essay, in
references(n.d.h)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.i)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.j)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.k).
The title of the last reference, ‘A moralist in an age of scientific
analysis and skepticism', is used to describe James, but it comes, in
fact, from James’s own description of the British novelist George Eliot,
indicating yet another link between James and British authors.

**David E. Leary** is University Professor Emeritus at the School of
Arts and Sciences, University of Richmond, USA.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
