=========================================================================================================================================
Understanding increasing rates of psychiatric hospital detentions in England: development and preliminary testing of an explanatory model
=========================================================================================================================================



Luke Sheridan Rains
Scott Weich
Clementine Maddock
Shubulade Smith
Patrick Keown
David Crepaz-Keay
Swaran P. Singh
Rebecca Jones
James Kirkbride
Lottie Millett
Natasha Lyons
Stella Branthonne-Foster
Sonia Johnson
Brynmor Lloyd-Evans\ **Correspondence:** Brynmor Lloyd-Evans. Email:
b.lloyd-evans@ucl.ac.uk
:Date: 2020-09

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background
      :name: sec_a1

   The steep rise in the rate of psychiatric hospital detentions in
   England is poorly understood.

   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a2

   To identify explanations for the rise in detentions in England since
   1983; to test their plausibility and support from evidence; to
   develop an explanatory model for the rise in detentions.

   .. rubric:: Method
      :name: sec_a3

   Hypotheses to explain the rise in detentions were identified from
   previous literature and stakeholder consultation. We explored
   associations between national indicators for potential explanatory
   variables and detention rates in an ecological study. Relevant
   research was scoped and the plausibility of each hypothesis was
   rated. Finally, a logic model was developed to illustrate likely
   contributory factors and pathways to the increase in detentions.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a4

   Seventeen hypotheses related to social, service, legal and
   data-quality factors. Hypotheses supported by available evidence
   were: changes in legal approaches to patients without decision-making
   capacity but not actively objecting to admission; demographic
   changes; increasing psychiatric morbidity. Reductions in the
   availability or quality of community mental health services and
   changes in police practice may have contributed to the rise in
   detentions. Hypothesised factors not supported by evidence were:
   changes in community crisis care, compulsory community treatment and
   prescribing practice. Evidence was ambiguous or lacking for other
   explanations, including the impact of austerity measures and
   reductions in National Health Service in-patient bed numbers.

   .. rubric:: Conclusions
      :name: sec_a5

   Better data are needed about the characteristics and service contexts
   of those detained. Our logic model highlights likely contributory
   factors to the rise in detentions in England, priorities for future
   research and potential policy targets for reducing detentions.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Rates of detention in psychiatric hospital have more than doubled in
England since 1983 and risen faster than almost anywhere else in Europe
during the past decade.\ :sup:`1` Detention in hospital is inherently
coercive: it is experienced by most patients as such,\ :sup:`2,3` and 3
months after detention many patients still disagree with the decision to
detain them.\ :sup:`4` Involuntary hospital admissions are typically
longer and more costly than voluntary admissions. Patients experience
only limited improvements in health and social circumstances following
detention.\ :sup:`5` Understanding and addressing the rising rate of
detentions is therefore a priority for mental healthcare in England,
which prompted the recent Independent Review of the Mental Health Act
(MHA Review), which reported in December 2018.\ :sup:`6` To support the
review, an expert topic group was convened, supported by the National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Mental Health Policy Research Unit
(MHPRU). This group was tasked with exploring why rates of detentions in
psychiatric hospital in England have risen since the introduction of the
Mental Health Act 1983 (MHA), and most rapidly over the past decade.
This work is reported here.

We sought to identify hypotheses for the rise in detentions in England,
test their plausibility in relation to available evidence, and then
develop an explanatory logic model for the rise in detentions in England
between 1983 and 2016. The term ‘detentions’ is used here to include
compulsory admissions to psychiatric hospital and detentions of people
in psychiatric hospital following a voluntary admission, including civil
and forensic MHA detentions, for people of all ages. We excluded uses of
the MHA that direct conveyance to a place of safety or to permit
short-term detention (72 h or less) for the purpose of assessment only.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

The study comprised: (a) generating hypotheses to explain the rising
rate of detentions; (b) rapid scoping for evidence relevant to each
hypothesis; (c) testing each hypothesis (in so far as data permitted)
and rating its plausibility as an explanation for rising rates of
detention; and (d) developing an explanatory model of the rising rate of
detentions in England.

.. _sec1-1:

Hypothesis generation
---------------------

A list of potential explanatory factors for the rising rate of
detentions was generated from three sources. Reports and literature,
chiefly the recent report from the Care Quality Commission\ :sup:`7` and
the evidence submitted to the MHA Review,\ :sup:`6` which included over
50 focus groups with patients and carers, evidence submissions from over
200 mental health organisations, practitioners, patients and carers, and
seven public workshops across England.Consultation with an expert topic
group convened for the MHA Review. This comprised eight academics, six
of whom were psychiatrists, one a social worker and one a researcher
with lived experience. The group included two women and two members of
Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) communities, one of whom
co-chaired the Mental Health Act Review African and Caribbean Group
(MHARAC), which supported the MHA Review.Consultation with 14 members of
the Lived Experience Working Group of the Mental Health Policy Research
Unit (MHPRU), all with lived experience as a mental health patient or
family carer. All members of this group were adults; the group was
demographically varied with respect to age, gender and ethnicity.

Through discussion in the MHA Review topic group, all proposed
explanations were considered and clarified into hypotheses where
necessary, describing how proposed explanatory factors might contribute
to an increase in detentions. Types of information that could support or
contradict each hypothesis were agreed.

.. _sec1-2:

Evidence gathering
------------------

Relevant data sources were sought for variables relating to each
hypothesis, with advice from academics with epidemiology, health
economic and health services research expertise. We investigated the
relationship of each variable to the rising rate of detentions in
England through the following process.

First, an ecological study explored the associations over time between
national population-level indicators for a range of explanatory
variables and the rate of detentions. Where more than one relevant data
source was identified for a proposed explanatory variable, the most
appropriate variable was selected through discussion in the study team,
with priority given to well-established measures used in previous
research or national reports, and variables with the most years of data
available. Annual data for all explanatory variables were collected from
1983 onwards, where available. Descriptive data from each variable were
reviewed to assess whether exposure to the explanatory variable appeared
to have changed over time (in the direction compatible with contributing
to a rise in detentions). The association between each indicator
variable and rates of involuntary hospital admission was assessed using
regression analyses. Following guidance,\ :sup:`8,9` only indicator
variables with at least 10 years of annual data were included in the
analyses, to avoid reporting imprecise statistical results based on
limited data. Breusch–Godfrey tests were used to identify the presence
of serial correlation (in which the model residuals are correlated over
time). Such correlation can be present in time series data and can
result in biased estimates if inappropriate regression methods are used.
When there was evidence of serial correlation, Prais–Winsten
regression\ :sup:`10` was used; otherwise simple linear regression was
used. Analyses were performed using Stata version 15 for Windows. The
outcome variable in all analyses was annual number of detentions per
100 000 population, derived from publicly available English KP90
detentions data.\ :sup:`11` If prevalence of exposure to an explanatory
variable was unchanged or was not associated with detention rates in the
expected direction, it was considered less plausible as a contributory
factor for the rise in compulsory admissions.

Second, available research was scoped by MHPRU researchers (L.S.R.,
N.L., L.M.) for additional evidence relevant to our hypotheses,
including: studies exploring predictors of detention at individual
patient, local area or international level, and qualitative literature
regarding perceived changes in explanatory factors over time. Relevant
literature was identified through: (a) a programme of systematic reviews
and data analysis conducted for the MHA Review by the MHPRU.\ :sup:`6`
These provided a range of types of evidence from quantitative and
qualitative research, and included systematic reviews of social and
clinical predictors of detention, interventions to reduce detention,
qualitative literature on patients’ and carers’ experience of detention,
an international comparison of detention rates and factors associated
with detention rates, and an analysis of routine health records data
regarding the nature of changes over time in patterns of detention in
two London National Health Service (NHS) trusts; (b) keyword searching
for relevant terms in electronic databases (MEDLINE and PsycInfo); and
(c) asking subject experts in the MHA Review topic group, authors of
this paper and others (acknowledged at the end of this paper) to
identify other relevant literature.

.. _sec1-3:

Assessing the plausibility of hypotheses
----------------------------------------

Findings for each hypothesis were synthesised and summarised. The
likelihood of any hypothesised or observed ecological relationship
between explanatory variables and rates of detentions being causal in
nature was assessed, where applicable and as far as evidence was
available, with regard to established criteria for causality,\ :sup:`12`
including the strength and consistency of associations, their perceived
plausibility as causal mechanisms and, where possible, the specificity
of relationships to populations at increased risk of detention, and
temporality, i.e. evidence that rises in explanatory factors preceded
rises in detentions. Hypotheses were then graded by the study team for
plausibility as a contributory factor to the rising rate of detentions
in England: 0, contradicted by available evidence; 1, lack of evidence
or available evidence is ambiguous or mixed; 2, supported by the balance
of available evidence. Two factors were considered in grading each
hypothesis: evidence for change over time in the direction expected; and
evidence, or self-evident face validity, that the hypothesised factor
was causally related to risk of detention. Ratings were made initially
by the lead authors of this paper (L.S.R, B.L.-E.), then reviewed by all
authors and revised if necessary following discussion.

.. _sec1-4:

Logic model development
-----------------------

Following guidance,\ :sup:`13` we developed a visual logic model to show
how plausible proposed contributory factors (i.e. hypotheses rated as 1
or 2 for plausibility) might contribute to the rising rate of detentions
in England and might interrelate. In developing the model, we worked
backwards from the final outcome to be explained (the rising rate of
detentions) to identify proximal outcomes, mental health service
activities, inputs and contextual factors. We differentiated elements of
this explanatory model that were supported by available evidence from
hypothesised elements with ambiguous or absent evidence. Proposed causal
pathways and mechanisms of change in the rate of detentions were
illustrated in the model with arrows. An initial draft of the logic
model was developed by B.L.-E., informed by a preliminary draft of
relevant data tables and evidence reviews (supplementary Appendices 1
and 2, available at https://doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2020.64). This was then
discussed with the study co-authors and revised with feedback and
reference to additional retrieved evidence in five iterative stages.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Rates of detention in England
-----------------------------

Data for the number of detentions in England were not available from NHS
Digital before 1988. National detention data collection methods changed
from April 2016,\ :sup:`11` so data after this point are not comparable
with previous data.

The annual rates of detentions per 100 000 population in England from
1988 to 2016 are shown in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__. Detention rates more than
doubled during this period, from 52 to 114 per 100 000 population. A
1-day census of the number of people per 100 000 population detained at
year-end each year also rose, from 26.0 in 1998 (the first year for
which data are available) to 36.5 in 2016. The rise in the rate of
detentions was steepest in the periods 1988–1996 and 2011–2016,
plateauing in between. Increases in detentions were greatest at the
point of admission. Overall detention rates, and detentions for
assessment (section 2 of the Mental Health Act 1983, MHA), rose
significantly during the study period. Rates of detention for treatment
(s.3 MHA) and use of forensic detentions did not change significantly
(supplementary Appendix 1). Use of legal powers by the police to bring
people to a hospital-based place of safety (s.135 or s.136 MHA) for
assessment – which were not included in our overall detention rate
variable – also increased significantly during the study period.
Individual patients are not distinguished in government KP90 detentions
data, which therefore cannot distinguish to what extent the rise in
detentions reflects more people being detained, or the same number of
people being detained more frequently. The data also cannot identify in
which clinical or demographic groups the rise in detentions occurred.
Fig. 1Rates of involuntary detentions per 100 000 population in England
1988–2016. Inv hosp, involuntary hospital admissions; s., section of the
Mental Health Act 1983; CTO, community treatment order; MHA, Mental
Health Act 1983; NHS, National Health Service.

.. _sec2-2:

Proposed explanations for the rising rate of detentions in England
------------------------------------------------------------------

Seventeen hypotheses for the rising rate of detentions in England were
generated. These are presented in the Appendix (immediately preceding
the References), with a brief description of the proposed mechanisms of
effect on detention rates. Consistent with previous work\ :sup:`7` we
have grouped the hypotheses as: social factors, service provision, legal
factors and data recording problems.

Available data relevant to each hypothesis are summarised in `Table
1 <#tab01>`__, along with results of statistical tests of association
with detention rate, where undertaken. Serial correlation was present
for all but one indicator variable, so Prais–Winsten regressions were
used. Full descriptive data and illustrative graphs showing change over
time for each explanatory variable are provided in supplementary
Appendix 1. Research evidence regarding the nature of the relationship
of each of these factors to detention rates is summarised below and
reported fully in supplementary Appendix 2. Table 1The relationship of
potential explanatory factors to detention rates: exploration of
available national dataHypothesis numberPotential explanatory variable
(measure)Data sourceData points,yearsMean annual increase,variable
unitsMean annual change,standardised unitsRelationship to detention
rate,coefficient (95% CI), *P*\ Significant association corroborates
hypothesis?1Relative poverty UK (% people earning <50% median national
income)OECD\ :sup:`14`\ 20−0.10−0.120.36 (−1.55 to 2.26), 0.695Not
significant1Income inequality (Gini
coefficient)ONS\ :sup:`15`\ 28−0.05−0.04−0.38 (−1.88 to 1.12), 0.605Not
significant1Rate of evictions per 100 000 populationMortgage and
landlord possession statistics\ :sup:`16`\ 18−3.44−0.120.02 (−0.04 to
0.08), 0.512Not significant1Unemployment rate (over 16 years old and
seasonally adjusted)Labour force survey\ :sup:`17`\ 29−0.10−0.06−1.56
(−3.74 to 0.62), 0.153Not significant1Number of racial hate crimes
recorded by the police per 1000 populationGOV.UK hate crime
statistics\ :sup:`18`\ 60.080.42n.a.1Number of reported racist incidents
per 1000 population (England and Wales)4−0.04−0.53n.a.1Proportion of
people in England and Wales reporting experience of racial
prejudiceBritish social attitudes survey\ :sup:`19`\ 20−0.24−0.060.13
(−0.07 to 0.33), 0.192Not significant1Fear and exclusion of people with
mental illness, 1994–2014Time to Change Attitudes to Mental Illness
Research Report (2014)\ :sup:`20`\ 14−0.23−0.08−1.38 (−2.70 to −0.07),
0.04No1Understanding and tolerance of mental illness,
1994–201414−0.01−0.01−0.47 (−2.30 to 1.35), 0.58Not
significant1Integrating people with mental illness into the community,
1994–2014\ `a <#tfn1_2>`__\ 140.210.080.06 (−1.50 to 1.61), 0.94Not
significant1Causes of mental illness and the need for special services,
1994– 201414−0.05−0.028−0.37 (−1.95 to 1.20), 0.62Not significant2Any
drug use (proportion of population)Crime survey for England and
Wales\ :sup:`21`\ 22−0.12−0.08 0.02 (−2.77 to 2.81), 0.99Not
significant2Alcohol use in general population (proportion using alcohol
in past week)ONS\ :sup:`22`\ 13−0.55−0.21−0.81 (−2.56 to 0.96), 0.335Not
significant2Rate of cannabis use per 100 000 hospital admissionsNHS
Digital hospital-admitted patient care
activity\ :sup:`23`\ 190.080.139.43 (4.29 to 14.56), 0.001Yes2Rate of
substance use excluding alcohol (ICD-10 F11– F19) per 100 000 hospital
admissions19−0.08−0.03 0.26 (−0.26 to 0.90), 0.256Not significant2Rate
of alcohol use per 100 000 hospital admissions192.410.11−0.02 (−0.11 to
0.07), 0.632Not significant3Proportion of males in
populationONS\ :sup:`17,24`\ 280.020.1154.48 (28.44 to 80.52)
<0.01Yes3Proportion of working-age adults in population28−0.13−0.10−0.66
(−8.31 to 6.99), 0.861Not significant3Urbanicity (UK)World
Bank\ :sup:`25`\ 290.170.109 (4.60 to 13.39), <0.01Yes3Proportion of
population from BAME groupsONS\ :sup:`17,24`\ 280.300.104.86 (2.28 to
7.45), <0.01Yes3Proportion of the population not born in the
UK280.270.11 5.13 (2.60 to 7.65), <0.01Yes4Rate of all consultation
episodes involving psychosis diagnoses per 100 000 populationNHS Digital
hospital admitted patient care activity\ :sup:`23`\ 19−0.73−0.120.02
(−0.12 to 0.17), 0.738Not significant4% of people reporting symptoms of
severe common mental disorder in the past
weekAPMS\ :sup:`26`\ 40.100.11n.a.4Number of people per 1000 population
assessed as having a psychotic disorder40.140.09n.a.5Social support
(Congdon social fragmentation index median)National census
data\ :sup:`27`\ 3−0.01−0.09n.a.6Number of people in contact with
secondary mental health services per 1000 populationNHS Digital Mental
Health Bulletin\ :sup:`28`\ 141.800.261.2 (−0.11 to 2.51), 0.068Not
significant6Mental health spend (inflation adjusted) per capita
(£)\ `a <#tfn1_2>`__\ NHS reference costs\ :sup:`29`\ 132.210.19−0.07
(−0.16 to 0.03), 0.162Not significant6Mental health spend per person in
contact with secondary mental health services (£)13−50.90−0.10−0.01
(−0.02 to 0.00)Yes6Mental health nurses number per 100 000 populationNHS
Digital Mental Health Bulletin\ :sup:`28`\ 9−1.57−0.30n.a.6Nurses in
community psychiatry number per 100 000 population90.080.10n.a.6Nursing
support staff total number per 100 000 population9−0.37−0.28n.a.6Nursing
support staff in community psychiatry per 100 000
population9−0.09−0.25n.a.6Number of psychiatrists per 100 000
population9−0.16−0.35n.a.6Number of CMHT patient contacts per 1000
population62.550.22n.a.6Number of CMHT contacts per person in contact
with mental health services6−0.09−0.20n.a.7,8Number of CRT contacts per
1000 population62.240.33n.a.7,8Number of CRT contacts per person in
contact with secondary mental health services6−0.00−0.01n.a.9NHS
psychiatric beds per 100 000 populationNHS Digital Mental Health
Bulletin: bed availability and occupancy
data\ :sup:`30`\ 28−3.24−0.12−0.55 (−0.75 to −0.3), <0.01Yes9Detentions
in non-NHS hospitals per 100 000 populationNHS Digital MHA statistics –
annual figures\ :sup:`11`\ 280.440.133.6 (2.43 to 4.78),
<0.01Yes12Percentage of all detentions in non-NHS hospitals280.370.123.7
(2.23 to 5.17), <0.01Yes12Antipsychotic depot prescriptions (in
1000s)NHS Digital prescription cost
analysis\ :sup:`31`\ 16−4.00−0.250.17 (−0.06 to 0.40), 0.137Not
significant12Clozapine prescriptions (in 1000s)160.080.061.41 (−0.80 to
3.62), 0.188Not significant14Readmissions to hospital following
revocations of CTO per 100 000 populationNHS Digital  MHA statistics –
annual figures\ :sup:`11`\ 80.320.35n.a.15All place of safety orders per
100 000 population281.430.121.01 (0.61 to 1.42), <0.01Yes15Number of
conversions from s.135 or s.136 to s.2280.210.136.74 (4.22 to 9.26),
<0.01Yes15Number of conversions from s.135 or s.136 to s.3280.020.098.2
(−5.68 to 22.09), 0.235Not significant [1]_ [2]_

.. _sec2-3:

Social factors
--------------

We considered whether the rise in detentions was related to: increased
social and economic hardship, reduced social support, demographic
change, increasing psychiatric morbidity, and increasing drug and
alcohol use in the population.

Internationally, wealthy countries tend to have higher rates of
detention.\ :sup:`1` However, at individual level, poverty and economic
hardship, and lack of social support, are associated with increased risk
of detention.\ :sup:`32` The two periods of economic recession in the UK
during the study period (1991 and 2008–2009)\ :sup:`33` coincide with or
immediately precede periods of steepest rise in detentions in England.
However, many established markers of economic hardship, including
unemployment rate, poverty/relative poverty and income inequality, do
not show clear evidence of change nationally over the study period
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Evidence of reduced informal social support or
increased social discord during the study period is also limited: median
scores for social fragmentation – an established indicator of informal
social support,\ :sup:`34` collected every 10 years through national
census data – have changed little. More specific indicators of social
discord and discrimination, such as recorded hate crimes and racist
incidents, have available data only for recent years and provide an
inconclusive picture. Public attitudes to mental illness also appear to
be unchanged or to have become more positive, based on available data
from 1994 to 2014 (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__).

Men, younger adults (age 18–35) and people from Black, Asian and
minority ethnic (BAME) groups are at increased risk of detention in
England.\ :sup:`35,36` The proportion of the population in England from
all BAME groups has more than doubled between 1988 and 2016, as has the
proportion of non-UK-born people in the population. The proportion of
the population who are male has risen marginally. These rises may
contribute to a rise in detentions (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Conversely,
the proportion of the English population who are adults aged 18–35, the
highest-risk age group for detentions, has fallen as the number of older
adults has increased.

Available data suggest that psychiatric morbidity in England has
increased during the study period, consistent with our fourth
hypothesis. Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey (APMS) data collected
every 7 years indicate a consistent rise in prevalence of people with
common mental disorders with severe symptoms from 1993 to 2014, and a
possible recent rise in prevalence of people with psychosis.\ :sup:`26`
A clear causal pathway between increased overall psychiatric morbidity
and more detentions is lacking, however. The increasing number of people
seen in secondary mental health services (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__) may
reflect increased numbers of people with a severe mental health problem,
who are also at risk of detention. Alternatively, however, it could
reflect increases in help-seeking or service accessibility, which do not
influence rates of detention.

Contrary to our hypothesis, rates of drug and alcohol use in the general
population in England have fallen over the past 20 years). However,
psychiatric hospital admissions for people with substance use disorders
have risen since 2010 (supplementary Appendix 1), with a significant
association with detention rate across the whole study period for
cannabis use (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Three potential, not mutually
exclusive, explanations for this discrepancy are: (a) drug use has
increased among people accessing mental health services, in contrast to
the general population; (b) the greater availability of potent drugs,
including forms of cannabis such as skunk,\ :sup:`37` and novel
psychoactive substances with mental health risks\ :sup:`38` has
increased the risk of detention among drug users with mental health
problems; and (c) changing attitudes among mental health practitioners
to risk and safety and perceived treatability have led to more
detentions of people with mental health problems who use drugs,
independent of changes in patterns of drug use. We lack evidence to
definitively support or reject any of these explanations, and the causal
association of drug use and detention rates is uncertain (supplementary
Appendix 2, section 2).

.. _sec2-4:

Service provision
-----------------

Changes in the availability or quality of (a) in-patient care, (b)
community crisis care, (c) longer-term community care, (d) reduced
continuity of care during assessment for compulsory admission, (e) staff
attitudes to risk and safety and (f) changes in prescribing practice
were all considered as potential contributors to the rising rate of
detentions.

.. _sec2-4-1:

In-patient care
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The rise in detentions has coincided with a dramatic reduction in NHS
psychiatric beds in England (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Plausible mechanisms
have been proposed for why reduced bed availability may lead to more
detentions.\ :sup:`39` Offer of in-patient admission may be delayed
until illness becomes more acute. Relapse and re-detention may be more
likely if patients are discharged prematurely because of bed pressures.
Patients may not accept voluntary admission if the only available beds
are far from home or because levels of disturbance in in-patient wards
have increased, as only the most severely unwell, mainly non-consenting
patients are admitted. Some psychiatrists report a perceived need to
(unlawfully) detain patients who could have been voluntarily admitted,
in order to secure prompt access to a bed.\ :sup:`40` P.K. and
colleagues\ :sup:`39` found that the association between bed reductions
and detention rates at local level in England was strongest with a
1-year time lag, i.e. increases in detentions follow bed cuts. This
suggests a possible causal relationship.

However, the same study found that a moderate correlation remained
between NHS bed reductions and rises in detentions, both
contemporaneously and with a time lag in the other direction, i.e. bed
reductions following rises in detentions,\ :sup:`39` which less clearly
indicates that bed reductions cause detentions. Increasing use of
private beds (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__) and increasing access to community
crisis alternatives\ :sup:`41` may mitigate some pressures caused by NHS
bed reductions. A recent systematic review found no studies that had
demonstrated a relationship between detention rates and bed occupancy
rates, another indicator of pressures on available beds.\ :sup:`32` An
even more recent study has reported no significant association between
in-patient bed numbers and detention rates in a multivariate model, for
the period from 1999 to 2016.\ :sup:`42` Internationally, greater
in-patient bed availability is associated with higher, not lower, rates
of compulsory admissions.\ :sup:`1`

.. _sec2-4-2:

Community crisis care
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Specialist community crisis care has proliferated in England following
the national mandate in 2000 to introduce crisis resolution teams in the
NHS Plan,\ :sup:`43` and the accessibility of community crisis care may
have increased further since 2011.\ :sup:`41` However, no community
crisis service models have been shown to reduce compulsory
admissions.\ :sup:`44` Improvements in service quality in crisis
resolution teams had no impact on rates of compulsory admissions in a
recent English trial.\ :sup:`45` Hypotheses that reduced availability or
quality of community crisis services has contributed to rising detention
rates are not supported by available evidence.

.. _sec2-4-3:

Longer-term community care
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We have limited evidence about how the quality of care in community
services has changed since 1983. Over the past 15 years, the number of
patients seen by mental health services has increased substantially,
while overall mental health funding has increased only slightly and
community mental health service staffing has remained relatively stable.
Similar resources, spread across a larger patient group, have therefore
led to a reduction in mental health spend per patient in secondary care,
and in the number of contacts provided per patient in recent years in
some service settings, for example community mental health teams (`Table
1 <#tab01>`__).

The extent and quality of community mental health service provision may
relate to rates of detentions, although the relationship is complex.
Interventions delivered in longer-term community care are best supported
by current evidence as promising means to reduce detentions.\ :sup:`44`
Weich and colleagues\ :sup:`35` found that higher spending on community
mental health teams in England was associated with lower local detention
rates, but that health service areas with community teams assessed as
lower quality than others also had lower rates of detention. As their
reach increases, community mental health services, especially
higher-quality teams, may be getting better at detecting the need for
detention, but at the same time becoming less able to provide intensive
support to individuals where necessary to prevent detentions, as their
resources are spread more thinly across a larger patient group. Adult
social care spending has fallen since 2010–2011::sup:`46` this could
further reduce available support to prevent mental health crises and
subsequent detentions.

.. _sec2-4-4:

Changes in prescribing practice
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Regarding prescribing practice, reductions in use of clozapine and depot
injections were proposed as factors that might increase patients’ risk
of relapse and therefore of detention. However, there has been no clear
reduction in the prescription of clozapine since 2007.\ :sup:`47`
National prescription cost data suggest that the number of items of
depot antipsychotic medication prescribed has reduced marginally since
2000. However, although the association between depot prescriptions and
(reduced) detentions was in the anticipated direction, this association
was not statistically significant (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Furthermore,
given variable dosing schedules, fewer prescriptions do not necessarily
reflect a reduction in the number of people for whom depot medications
are prescribed. Finally, there is some evidence that depot injections
may not increase adherence in any case.\ :sup:`48`

.. _sec2-4-5:

Staff attitudes to risk and safety
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Risk and safety are important considerations for mental health
staff,\ :sup:`49` and clinicians’ attitudes and responses to risk are
highly variable and subjective.\ :sup:`50,51` Perceived risk has
consistently been identified as the strongest predictor of outcome of
assessments for involuntary admission in English studies.\ :sup:`52–54`
The amendments to the MHA in 2007 extended the reach of coercion in
response to perceived risk by broadening legal definitions of mental
disorder and treatability, and introducing community coercion through
community treatment orders, and has been characterised as reflecting a
more general societal preoccupation with risk minimisation.\ :sup:`55`
Szmukler & Rose\ :sup:`49` identify an increasing salience for risk
assessment in mental healthcare internationally. It is plausible that
increasing focus by mental health staff on risk and safety may have
contributed to the rise in detentions since 1983. The increase in
detentions for assessment under section 2 of the MHA, rather than
treatment under section 3, may be consistent with an increasing
willingness by mental health staff to detain people in the context of
potential perceived risks, not just established known risks. However, we
cannot quantify any such change in attitudes or its impact on detention
rates.

.. _sec2-4-6:

Continuity of care
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We found little evidence regarding how changes in the continuity of care
at MHA assessments may affect the outcome of assessment and thus
detention rates. One small study suggests that presence of a community
professional, such as the patient's care coordinator, may reduce the
risk of a formal assessment for compulsory admission resulting in
detention.\ :sup:`54` However, we lack information about the extent of
any changes over time in the involvement in MHA assessments of
practitioners, including general practitioners, who know the patient
being assessed.

.. _sec2-5:

Legal factors
-------------

Three legal factors potentially relevant to detention are: (a) changing
legislative approaches to patients who lack decision-making capacity but
do not actively object to hospital admission; (b) the introduction of
compulsory community treatment; and (c) the police's use of legal powers
to bring people with suspected mental health problems to a place of
safety for assessment.

.. _sec2-5-1:

Capacity and consent to treatment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since the Human Rights Act 1998 came into force in England in 2000,
enshrining the European Convention on Human Rights, it has been unlawful
to admit anyone to psychiatric hospital on a voluntary basis who lacks
the capacity to consent to this treatment. This requirement has been
reinforced by subsequent English case law, most notably the ‘Bournewood
judgment’ in 2004 and the ‘Cheshire West’ case in 2014. Deprivation of
liberty safeguards (DoLS) were introduced in 2008 as an addition to the
Mental Capacity Act 2005 (MCA): DoLS provide a legal framework for
approving in-patient admission and treatment for people who lack
decision-making capacity, without using detention under the MHA. It is
hypothesised that the rising rate of detentions in England may reflect
increasing compliance with human rights law through the application of
the MHA rather than DoLS to those who might previously have been
admitted voluntarily.

Available research suggests that, prior to the introduction of DoLS, as
many as 20% of in-patients were non-objecting and voluntarily admitted,
but lacked capacity to consent to admission.\ :sup:`56` In 2017–2018,
however, fewer than 4000 DoLS applications were completed for patients
in psychiatric hospitals,\ :sup:`57` i.e. only about 4% of roughly
100 000 admissions per year in total.\ :sup:`58` The uncertainty in
extrapolating from one small research study's findings is acknowledged,
and we do not know whether, in practice, some non-objecting patients who
lack decision-making capacity may still be (unlawfully) admitted to
hospital voluntarily. However, if detention under the MHA is always now
used to admit the remaining non-objecting patients who lack capacity but
are not subject to DOLS, this could explain a substantial proportion of
the rise in detentions in the past decade.

.. _sec2-5-2:

Compulsory community treatment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The introduction of community treatment orders (CTOs) in 2008 has been
proposed as a potential contributor to the rising rate of detentions,
either by lowering the bar for readmission of patients subject to a CTO
(through the use of recall to hospital) or by increasing the risk of
relapse by facilitating earlier, premature hospital discharge following
the index admission leading to the CTO. The use of CTOs in England
increased year on year from 2008 to 2016, with the numbers of people
readmitted to hospital from a CTO rising correspondingly (`Table
1 <#tab01>`__). However, a recent systematic review\ :sup:`59` provides
clear evidence that internationally and in England, compulsory community
treatment has no effect on raising or reducing readmission rates. This
hypothesis is therefore not supported by available evidence.

.. _sec2-5-3:

Police use of place of safety powers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Police use of legal powers (s.135 or s.136 MHA) to convey someone to a
health-based place of safety has risen markedly during the study period.
This has led to a corresponding increase in the number of people
admitted to psychiatric hospital following use of a police place of
safety order (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). It is unknown what proportion of
these people might otherwise have been detained via a different pathway,
but it is plausible that police are becoming better at identifying
people who meet criteria for detention in hospital and bringing them to
the attention of health services. Some of those who are now detained via
a place of safety order may previously have been arrested or left in
public spaces or at home.

.. _sec2-6:

Data recording
--------------

The Care Quality Commission proposed that more complete reporting of
detentions by provider organisations may have led to an artefactual rise
in recorded detentions over the study period.\ :sup:`7` An analysis of
patient records from 2007 to 2016 in six London boroughs\ :sup:`60`
found substantially lower increases in detention rates in these boroughs
than those observed nationally. However, the extent of missing data in
the routine nationally collected KP90 data on detentions, and whether
this has changed over time, are unknown.

‘Double-counting’ in official statistics may contribute to a rise in the
recorded rate of detentions. Detention episodes within one provider
organisation are reported in the KP90 data used for this paper as a
single detention, even if a person is transferred from one form of
detention to another during this episode (e.g. transfers from a MHA
section 2 detention for assessment to section 3 detention for
treatment). However, recorded detentions in the KP90 data are inflated
by double-counting of transfers in care, where a patient is moved during
detention from one hospital to another run by a different provider
organisation.\ :sup:`36` This may account for between 12 and 20% of all
detentions recorded in the data, and accounts for the big drop in
English national detention records in 2017, when a new reporting system
was adopted.\ :sup:`34` The increase in the use of private hospitals
during the study period is associated with the rise in detentions
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__) and suggests that transfers of care during
detentions might have increased, leading to more double-counting and an
artefactual rise in reported detentions. However, the extent of any such
rise over time is unknown.

.. _sec2-7:

Development of an explanatory logic model
-----------------------------------------

From the evidence summarised above, and presented more fully in
supplementary Appendices 1 and 2, ratings were made regarding the
strength of evidence for each proposed hypothesis to explain the rise in
detentions (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). Table 2Strength of evidence ratings
for hypothesised explanations for the rise in detentionsExplanatory
factorEvidence for temporal relationship with change in detention
rates\ `a <#tfn2_2>`__\ Evidence for, or self-evident plausibility of,
causal relationship to risk of
detention\ `a <#tfn2_2>`__\ Rating\ `b <#tfn2_3>`__\ (1) Social and
economic hardshipEquivocalEquivocal1(2) Increased drug and alcohol
useEquivocalEquivocal1(3) Demographic change (increased numbers of those
at risk of detention)SupportedEquivocal2(4) Increasing rates of mental
illnessSupportedEquivocal2(5) Reduced informal social
supportEquivocalSupported1(6) Reduced availability and quality of
community mental health servicesEquivocalSupported2(7) Reduced
availability of alternatives to admissionContradictedEquivocal0(8)
Reduced quality and/or responsiveness of crisis
servicesEquivocalContradicted0(9) Reduced in-patient bed
capacitySupportedEquivocal1(10) Less continuity of care at MHA
assessmentsEquivocalEquivocal1(11) Greater aversion to risk among mental
health professionalsEquivocalSupported1(12) Changes in prescribing
practiceContradictedEquivocal0(13) Changes in legal and clinical
practice in respect of capacitySupportedSupported2(14) Introduction of
CTOs (and earlier discharge)SupportedContradicted0(15) Police more
likely to bring people to a health-based place of
safetySupportedEquivocal2(16) Better data reporting in recent
yearsEquivocalSupported1(17) Increase in transfers between hospitals
during admission leads to
double-countingEquivocalSupported1 [3]_ [4]_ [5]_

An explanatory logic model was then developed (supplementary Appendix
3). Hypotheses contradicted by available evidence were excluded from the
model. Bold and dashed text boxes were used to distinguish components of
the model supported by available evidence, and those for which available
evidence was ambiguous or lacking. Arrows highlighted possible
relationships between components of the model.

Following reviewers’ feedback on the full logic model described in
supplementary Appendix 3 and the initial paper draft, we decided to
develop a second visual explanatory model for the observed rise in rates
of detentions from 2010 onwards. The rationale for this second model is
that more data are available for potential explanatory factors in this
period. This complementary but simpler and clearer explanatory model
distinguishes two overarching pathways to the rise in detentions during
this decade: an increase in perceived need for detention; and an
increase in actual need. This second model is shown in `Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__. Fig. 2Two proposed pathways to the rising rate of
detentions in England 2011-16: a provisional explanatory model.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec3-1:

Main findings
-------------

Our explanatory model shows that societal, service-related and legal
factors may all contribute to the rise in detentions in England since
1983. Changes in legal approaches to safeguarding the rights of patients
who lack decision-making capacity are a probable major contributor to
the rapid increase in detentions in this decade. Rising levels of mental
illness and demographic change in the population may both contribute.
Mental health services and the police may be getting better at
identifying people who meet criteria for detention, while in some
community mental healthcare settings, increasingly stretched resources
may reduce the availability and intensity of the preventive support that
can be provided to patients to avert relapse or subsequent detention.

Other factors may be important, but we lack confirmatory evidence. These
include: increased exposure of vulnerable groups to economic and social
hardship, reduction of available informal social support, changes in
drug use among the patient population, changes in public and
practitioners’ attitudes to risk and safety, and reduced NHS in-patient
bed availability. The reported rise in detentions may have been inflated
by the unreliability of available data.

Available evidence suggests that reductions in the availability or
quality of community crisis care and the introduction of community
treatment orders have not contributed to the rise in detentions. We also
found evidence that public fear and exclusion of people with mental
illness has decreased in England during the study period, in
contradiction to a hypothesis that reduced tolerance of people with
mental health problems has driven the rise in detentions.

.. _sec3-2:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

Our paper collects and appraises the available evidence for and against
17 hypotheses for the rising detention rate, finding evidence to support
4 and reject 3 hypotheses. It thus provides the most comprehensive and
informed exploration to date of the rising rate of detentions in
England. We identify ten limitations of this paper. First, reported
detention rates are based on routinely collected national data that are
not wholly reliable. Second, our list of hypotheses to explain the
rising rate of detentions may not be exhaustive. For example, the impact
on detention rates of changing practices in discharge and transfer of
patients with mental health conditions from accident and emergency and
general hospitals was raised during the peer review process for this
paper. The selection and framing of hypotheses, and ratings of the
strength of evidence supporting each hypothesis, will inevitably reflect
the perspectives and biases of those involved. Both the MHA Review topic
group and the paper's authors comprised a range of mental health
stakeholders, but the most represented group in both was academic
psychiatrists. Third, because of the breadth of the topic, searches for
available evidence were not systematic, and relevant data or research
may have been overlooked. Fourth, our evaluation has highlighted
hypotheses for which corroborating evidence from explanatory variables
is available. However, hypotheses for which we lacked any relevant data
to explore associations with detentions may be equally important – for
example, changes in attitudes to risk and safety and risk assessment
practice among mental health professionals. Fifth, for some hypotheses
for which potential explanatory variables were identified, we lacked
sufficient data points to allow statistical exploration of their
relationship to detention rates. For variables with at least ten data
points for which we did conduct analyses, these were not informed by
power calculations: potentially important relationships may not have
achieved statistical significance. Sixth, identified associations
between explanatory variables and detention rates do not determine
whether relationships are causal. With the exception of in-patient bed
numbers, we were rarely able to establish temporality to inform
consideration of the direction of causation in associations. For many
hypotheses, additional available research was insufficient to
confidently infer or reject causality or establish mechanisms. For
example, it is unclear why men and people from BAME ethnic groups are
detained more often, and many proposed explanations lack empirical
support.\ :sup:`61` Seventh, for many of the explanatory variables that
we examined, data regarding changes over time were only available at
whole-population level, not specifically for those people who are
detained, or vulnerable to detention, thus creating risks of ecological
fallacies. This may have particularly limited our exploration of the
impact of social and economic factors on detention rates. For instance,
falls in overall poverty levels in England have not been experienced
equally among all demographic groups,\ :sup:`62` while the measure of
income inequality used in our analyses (the Gini coefficient) has been
criticised as being insufficiently sensitive to change.\ :sup:`63` We
have been unable to locate evidence specifically for people with mental
health problems regarding change over time in levels of unemployment,
work precarity, disposable income, benefits sanctions, living alone or
similar variables, with which to interrogate our hypotheses in more
depth. Eighth, we used a single source of data for each population-level
indicator used as potential explanatory variables, to allow comparisons
of change over time. However, for some indicators, there were changes
during the study period in data-reporting methods or acknowledged
concerns about data quality, which may limit the validity of comparisons
over time. Where identified, these are reported for each variable in
supplementary Appendix 1. Ninth, for mental health service provision,
staffing and funding, we have relied on available national data for
mental health services in general. Specific changes or pressures for
children's or older adults’ services may be obscured. Last, we have
mainly looked at the relationship between proposed explanatory factors
and detention rates individually. We were limited in how far we could
explore interrelationships between explanatory factors and cumulative
effects of exposure to several factors.

For these reasons, our proposed explanatory logic model has limited
empirical support. It does not offer certainty, but does illustrate
likely and possible contributory factors to the rising rate of
detentions in England between 1983 and 2016. We have looked specifically
for evidence to explain the rise in detentions in England during this
time period: our explanatory model may have less validity for other
countries and time periods.

.. _sec3-3:

Implications for research
-------------------------

This study was limited by the limited information available from routine
data about detentions in England. The complete KP90 data held by NHS
Digital, which allowed us to compare rates of detention over time, could
not yield answers to basic questions regarding in which clinical or
demographic groups the rise was occurring. Better routine data are
required. The change by NHS Digital in 2016–2017 to collecting complete
data about detentions at individual patient level\ :sup:`26` may address
this need to some extent over time. The development of local NHS systems
that allow researchers to access detailed, anonymised records for all
patients using local secondary mental health services\ :sup:`64` also
enables more sophisticated understanding of risk factors for detention
and changes over time.

Our study highlights numerous areas where further research is needed
regarding the relationship of potential explanatory factors to rates of
detention, especially for social and economic factors, and attitudes to
risk and safety.

Public health research indicates that increasing psychiatric morbidity
in England may be a result of increasing social deprivation,\ :sup:`65`
and that specific social and administrative measures may also influence
mental health outcomes: for instance, increases in ‘fitness for work’
tests being associated with more suicides.\ :sup:`66` We need a clearer
and more nuanced understanding of the extent of exposure to social and
economic stressors among people with mental health problems, how this
may change over time and how, if at all, it relates to changes in rates
of detention.

Practitioners’ attitudes to risk and safety are variable and highly
important regarding decisions to detain,\ :sup:`48–51` but changes over
time in clinical culture and practice are not easily evaluated
empirically. More qualitative research to understand the nature and
extent of practitioners’ biases and group-level stigma has been called
for, to aid understanding of the rise in detentions and the
disproportionately high rates of detention for people from BAME
groups.\ :sup:`61` A better understanding of what drives clinicians’
decision-making regarding detention is desirable, as is development and
evaluation of interventions to improve the quality of risk assessment
and encourage appropriate positive risk-taking.

In this context, three elements of the legal processes for detention are
priorities for further research. First, there is a need to understand
the causes and consequences of the specific rise in the use of section 2
of the MHA for assessment, rather than section 3 for treatment. Although
this may simply be an appropriate response to more new people requiring
detention,\ :sup:`60` the MHA Review expressed concerns that section 2
is being ‘overused’,\ :sup:`6` either through a growing perception that
it is less restrictive than a detention for treatment, or because it can
be easier to complete, as does not require a place of treatment to be
identified. Exploration of patient-level data is desirable regarding
circumstances and rates of conversion from assessment and treatment
sections, and their relationship to subsequent readmission rates.
Second, research is required to understand clinicians’ decision-making
processes in using MHA or MCA DoLS processes to detain patients who are
not objecting to admission but lack decision-making capacity, and how
this choice affects patients’ experiences and outcomes. Third, research
is needed to understand the circumstances in which patients are
discharged from detention following appeal to a tribunal. This may help
identify uses of detention that were unwarranted or avoidable, and how
these may contribute to the rising detention rate.

.. _sec3-4:

Implications for policy and practice
------------------------------------

There is considerable uncertainty about many of our proposed
explanations for the rise in detentions in England. Furthermore,
interventions might help to reduce detentions, even if they are
unrelated to the reasons for the rise: for example, improving community
crisis care. For these reasons, implications from our study for policy
and practice should be proposed with caution. However, we suggest three
areas of priority for reducing detentions.

First, an increase in detentions appears to have been an unintended
consequence of legislation and English case law regarding safeguarding
the rights of non-objecting patients who lack decision-making capacity
and require hospital admission. Clear guidance and training are required
for practitioners regarding assessment of capacity and when detention
under the MHA is indicated rather than use of DoLS provisions under the
MCA. Sufficient staff, appropriately trained in both processes, are
required to ensure that the most appropriate course of action can be
used in each case.

Second, the past decade has seen a large increase in the number of
people treated by secondary mental health services (in addition to the
expansion of psychological services in primary care), and a
corresponding reduction in the amount of care offered to each individual
patient in some service settings. This appears to have been a *de facto*
change in mental healthcare over the past decade rather than one
explicitly planned in policy. Within any level of total investment,
achieving the optimal balance between breadth and depth of care involves
weighing many different aims and priorities. Consideration should be
given by policy planners and commissioners to the share of healthcare
funding provided to mental health services, and to the potential effect
on detention rates of spreading mental health resources increasingly
widely, and thus away from the high-need, low-number group of patients
most vulnerable to detention.

Third, our study shows that not all the rise in detentions in England
necessarily relates directly to mental health service provision: wider
societal factors may be equally important to address. Potential
contributory factors such as increasing psychiatric morbidity and social
deprivation and inequalities require a broader public health and
governmental response. More attention to the potential mental health
impact of wider social policy is desirable.

.. _sec3-5:

Lived experience: commentary by Stephen Jeffreys and Stella Branthonne-Foster
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Collectively, we have personal experience of community and in-patient
mental health services. We commented on drafts of this paper but did not
contribute to the design and scope of the project.

The authors highlight gaps in detentions data: lack of individual-level
data and failure to differentiate between frequent individual detentions
and detention of more people, plus limited monitoring of Equality Act
2010 protected characteristics.

The paper suggests that detaining more patients lacking capacity, who
were previously admitted informally, is a major factor. However, this
hypothesis relates only to the second period of steepest rise in
detentions. Furthermore, it would be interesting to specifically examine
child and adolescent mental health services data for similar trends.

The children and young people's landscape is vastly different from that
of their adult counterparts and needs specific consideration. We regret
that data on children and young people are merged into the overall
national data-set; it is important to note the differences in services
(both in-patient and community), and the needs and presentations of
under-18s. We anticipate that absence of these data obscures factors
specific to that age group.

The biggest increases in detention rates have coincided with two periods
of recession, but the authors were unable to demonstrate the impact of
austerity or find data specific to those with mental health problems. We
suggest widening this investigation to encompass other and more
intangible factors associated with austerity and neoliberal ideology,
such as individualism, cuts in local services and financial uncertainty.
As there has also been a substantial increase in demand on community
mental health teams, this work should not be limited to rates of
detention.

The paper reveals that MHA section 2 detentions have increased, with
section 3 figures remaining stable. Are hospitals discharging patients
more quickly and perhaps too quickly owing to pressure on beds, are they
finding swifter methods of support and treatment, or are more people
being detained under the MHA unnecessarily?

Dr Gareth Owen, Professor Paul McCrone and Joe Botham from King's
College London helped to identify relevant data or research papers for
some of the evidence summaries in this paper. We thank Stephen Jeffreys
and Stella Branthonne-Foster, both members of the Lived Experience
Working Group in the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)
Mental Health Policy Research Unit, for their commentary on this paper.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2020.64.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The data supporting the findings of this study are available within the
article (and/or its supplementary materials).

This paper presents independent research commissioned and funded by the
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Policy Research Programme,
conducted through the NIHR Policy Research Unit in Mental Health
(PR-PRU-0916-22003). The views expressed are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the NIHR, the Department of Health and Social
Care or its arm's length bodies, or other Government Departments. S.P.S.
is part-funded by the NIHR Collaboration for Leadership in Applied
Health Research and Care West Midlands (NIHR CLAHRC WM).

B.L.-E., C.M., S.S. were members of the Working Group for the
Independent Review of the Mental Health Act 1983. B.L.-E., C.M., S.S.,
D.C.-K., P.K. and S.P.S. were members of the expert topic group on
understanding the rising rate of detentions, which supported the
Independent Review of the Mental Health Act. The topic group was chaired
by S.W., and topic group members helped generate and refine study
hypotheses. B.L.-E., S.W., C.M., S.S., S.J. and L.S.-R. designed the
study. J.K. advised on relevant data sources. L.S.-R., L.M., N.L. and
B.L.-E. extracted data, scoped relevant research papers and drafted
hypothesis summaries for supplementary Appendix 2. L.S.-R. conducted
data analyses, with advice from R.J.. B.L.-E. and L.S.-R. drafted the
manuscript. All authors (L.S.-R., S.W., C.M., S.S., P.K., D.C.-K.,
S.P.S., R.J., J.K., L.M., S.B.-F., S.J., B.L.-E.) helped interpret
findings, revise the manuscript and approved the submitted version.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

B.L.-E., C.M., S.S. were members of the Working Group for the
Independent Review of the Mental health Act 1983. B.L.-E., C.M., S.S.,
D.C.-K., P.K. and S.P.S. were members of the expert topic group on
understanding the rising rate of detentions, which supported the
Independent Review of the Mental Health Act. S.W. chaired the topic
group.

ICMJE forms are in the supplementary material, available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2020.64.

.. _sec4:

.. _sec4-1:

Proposed hypotheses for the rising rate of detentions in England since 1983
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

We hypothesised the following 17 potential contributory factors to the
rising rate of detentions, listed here with possible mechanisms for the
hypotheses (how might exposure to the hypothesised risk factors cause or
modify the risk of detention?)

.. _sec4-1-1:

Social factors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Social and economic hardship: increased exposure to social stressors
leads to more frequent relapses in the patient population and/or
increase in rates of people developing a mental illness, leading to more
detentions (social stressors could include: poverty, unemployment,
social inequality, benefits sanctions, exposure to discrimination or
hate crime).Increased drug and alcohol use: increased substance misuse
leads to increased risk of relapse in the patient population and/or
increased rates of mental illness.Demographic change (increased numbers
of those at risk of detention): some demographic groups are at higher
risk of detention than others (i.e. men, people from BAME groups and
young adults age 18–35): if the proportion of the population from these
groups increases, we would expect higher rates of detention.Increasing
rates of mental illness: a proportion of those with mental illness
become so unwell that detention is required: higher rates of mental
illness lead to more detentions.Reduced informal social support: the
absence of informal support (and perhaps the increase in people living
alone) leads to higher rates of relapse; it also makes delivery of
community-based crisis care difficult, and admission more likely; bed
pressures result in the eventual need for detention.

.. _sec4-1-2:

Service factors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reduced availability and quality of community mental health services:
reductions in the reach (number of patients seen) by community mental
health ongoing care services leads to reduced capacity to prevent
detentions. Reductions in the quantity and quality of care provided to
current patients (possibly due to reduced investment in community mental
health services) lead to increased rates of relapse, leading to more
detentions.Reduced availability of alternatives to admission: reduced
availability of less restrictive community alternatives to admission
leads to more compulsory admissions for patients not prepared to go into
hospital.Reduced quality and/or responsiveness of crisis services: later
intervention, or the lack of home treatment services, will result in
more patients needing to be admitted.Reduced in-patient bed capacity:
lack of availability of beds (evidenced by reduction in bed numbers or
increased bed occupancy rates) means that patients have longer to wait
for a bed and are therefore more unwell at the time of admission; or are
detained when voluntary admission was possible, in order to secure a
bed; or are discharged prematurely to free beds, leading to more
frequent relapse and re-detention.Less continuity of care at Mental
Health Act (MHA) assessments: assessment of risk may be more
conservative (and overestimated) by professionals who do not know the
patient.Increased focus on safety and risk among mental health
professionals: section 12 doctors and approved mental health
professionals (AMHPs) have become more likely to detain patients with a
risk and clinical presentation that would not have led to detention in
the past, owing to changes in professional culture and attitudes to
patient safety and risk management.Changes in prescribing practice:
reduced use of depot medication over time has led to reduced medication
adherence, resulting in more relapses and subsequent detentions. Reduced
use of clozapine over time has led to more relapses and subsequent
detentions.

.. _sec4-1-3:

Legal factors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Changes in legal and clinical practice in respect of patients who lack
decision-making capacity: following the *Bournewood* judgment (*HL v.
UK* [2004] ECHR 471) in 2004, non-objecting patients who lack
decision-making capacity, who might previously have been admitted to
hospital informally, must now be subject to a ‘lawful process’, i.e.
detention under the Mental Health Act 1983 or the Mental Capacity Act
2005 deprivation of liberty safeguards (DoLS).Introduction of community
treatment orders (CTOs) (and earlier discharge): (a) there is a lower
threshold for CTO recall than for admission following an MHA assessment,
so CTO patients are recalled to hospital who would not otherwise have
been detained, leading to an increase in compulsory admissions since
introduction of CTOs in 2008; (b) CTOs are used as a means of
facilitating early (premature) discharge, leading to frequent relapse
and recall/readmission.Police more likely to bring people to a place of
safety under section 135 or 136: increasing mental health awareness and
use of MHA sections 135 and 136 by the police lead to patients being
brought to a place of safety and subsequently detained, who would
previously have been arrested or left at home/in public places and not
have ended up detained through other routes.

.. _sec4-1-4:

Data-recording factors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Better data reporting in recent years: over time, service providers are
submitting more complete data returns regarding detained patients, so
underreporting of detentions in official statistics reduces.Increase in
transfers between hospitals during admission leads to double-counting:
increasing bed pressures lead to an increase in transfers between
hospitals for patients during a detention (out-of-area NHS placements
and use of private hospitals), leading to increased double-counting of
detentions in KP90 data.

.. [1]
   OECD, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; ONS,
   Office for National Statistics; n.a., not applicable; BAME, Black,
   Asian and minority ethnic; APMS, Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey;
   NHS, National Health Service; CMHT, community mental health team;
   CRT, crisis resolution team; MHA, Mental Health Act 1983; CTO,
   community treatment order; s., section (of MHA).

.. [2]
   Linear regression was conducted for this variable, not Prais–Winsten
   regression, as there was no evidence of auto-correlations.

.. [3]
   MHA, Mental Health Act 1983; CTO, community treatment order.

.. [4]
   Contradicted, contradicted by current evidence; equivocal, absent or
   ambiguous evidence; supported, supported by current evidence.

.. [5]
   0, hypothesis is contradicted by available evidence; 1, lack of
   evidence or available evidence is ambiguous or mixed; 2, hypothesis
   is supported by the balance of available evidence.
