========================================================
Are UK care homes ready for the telemedicine revolution?
========================================================

Meta McGee
Claire Potter
Joseph Kane
:Date: 2020-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The restrictions implemented by coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) have
reawakened discussion surrounding the use of telemedicine in routine
clinical practice.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Nursing home residents have emerged
as a particularly vulnerable group, not only with respect to the virus
itself, but to the effects of social distancing\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` and
disruption to the services in place to support them. In working to stop
the spread of COVID-19 within their facilities, many homes have found it
difficult to sustain the non-pharmacological mainstays of management of
delirium and behavioural and psychological symptoms of
dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Telemedicine, a proposed solution to these
difficulties, has been demonstrated to be both valid and acceptable to
patients with dementia and care home staff\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` but it does
not appear to be part of routine practice in the UK.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

We therefore aimed to determine nursing homes’ capacity and enthusiasm
for telepsychiatry assessments. Over a 2-week period in June 2020, we
contacted senior staff at the 70 nursing and ‘elderly mentally infirm’
homes falling within the Belfast Health & Social Care catchment area and
administered a short survey via telephone. Two questions; ‘how would you
rate your facilities' current capacity to participate in mental health
assessments via video link?’ and ‘how interested would you be in
establishing the capacity to participate in mental health assessments
via video link?’, were answered using a five-point Likert scale.

Participating nursing homes (56/70; 80%) reported that reliable WiFi
connections and appropriate equipment (such as a tablet device, or
desktop or laptop computer with webcam) were available in 41/56 (73%)
and 40/56 (71%) facilities, respectively. Staff at 21/56 (38%) reported
that they already felt they had the capacity to facilitate such
consultations (answering ‘5’ on the Likert scale); 16/56 (29%) felt they
had little (5/56; 9%) or no capacity (11/56: 20%) to currently do so.
Nursing home staff answering ‘3’ (10/56; 18%) or ‘4’ (9/56; 16%) on the
Likert scale indicated some capacity to participate in remote
consultations, although they felt they would not be able to do so on a
routine basis. Respondents were ‘very interested’ in establishing
capacity to use remote consultations in 44/56 (79%) of surveys.

Most nursing homes possess the appropriate equipment to facilitate
telemedicine, and the majority (84%) demonstrate an enthusiasm for doing
so. The failure to adopt telepsychiatry may therefore be more closely
related to factors within mental health services, such as our access to
appropriate equipment, than those within nursing homes. A survey of
American psychiatrists working in nursing homes reported widespread
support for telemedicine, but only 13% felt they had access to
appropriate equipment.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` It would appear, however, that
obstacles to telemedicine go beyond hardware; in spite of most
respondents’ access to equipment, we observed considerable variation in
their perceived capacity to engage with remote consultations, perhaps
suggesting a lack of comfort or familiarity with the medium. We suggest
that before telemedicine becomes part of, as has been suggested, ‘the
new normal’, that more detailed exploration is conducted regarding the
attitudes and skills of professionals on both sides of the webcam.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

none.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.
