====================================================================================================================================================
Psychoeducation and motivational interviewing to reduce relapses and increase patients’ involvement in antipsychotic treatment: interventional study
====================================================================================================================================================



Gabriella Bröms
Lindah Cahling
Anders Berntsson
Lars Öhrmalm
:Correspondence: Lars Öhrmalm (lars.ohrmalm@prima.se)

:date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To assess whether the combination of motivational interviewing and
   psychoeducation affects relapse rate and stimulates involvement of
   people with psychosis in their treatment. We conducted an
   interventional study including patients with schizophrenia or
   schizoaffective disorder treated with oral antipsychotics, without
   previous experience of long-acting injectable antipsychotics (LAIs).
   They were randomised to either psychoeducation with motivational
   interviewing or a control group. Hospital admissions 18 months before
   and after the intervention, and switches to LAIs 18 months after the
   intervention, were recorded.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   The two groups each comprised 101 participants. Fourteen from the
   intervention group and seven from the control group switched to LAIs.
   Five in the intervention group instigated the switch themselves,
   compared with zero controls (*P* = 0.06). Fourteen in the
   intervention group were readmitted to hospital during follow-up,
   compared with 23 in the control group (*P* = 0.14).

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Psychoeducation with motivational interviewing may increase patients'
   involvement in their treatment and reduce the relapse frequency.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Adherence to pharmacological treatment by people with psychotic
disorders is one of the major challenges in psychiatry, and its lack is
an important predictor of relapse, even with small gaps in treatment,
regardless of formulation.\ :sup:`1,2` However, in observational studies
long-acting injectable antipsychotics (LAIs) reduce the risk of
discontinuation when compared with oral treatment.3 Patients are seldom
encouraged to participate in the choice of antipsychotic medication and
formulation,\ :sup:`4` which is unfortunate, as it is known that their
attitude to treatment becomes more positive with increased knowledge and
experience of the treatment.\ :sup:`5` Psychoeducation alone is not
enough to improve adherence,\ :sup:`6` but a combination of
psychoeducation and motivational interviewing seems to be more
promising.\ :sup:`7,8`

We studied switches from oral antipsychotics to LAIs as a proxy for
patients' involvement and adherence and hospital admissions as a proxy
for relapse rate.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

We included 202 people with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder
on oral antipsychotic treatment and no earlier experience of LAIs who
were part of an earlier study conducted by our group.\ :sup:`9` In the
earlier study, apart from the individuals on oral treatment included in
this study, we also included people currently on LAIs and questioned all
participants on their perceptions and knowledge of antipsychotics in
general, using semi-structured interviews.

The participants in the current study were block-randomised by diagnosis
(schizophrenia/schizoaffective disorder), gender and age into two
separate groups: either the intervention with psychoeducation and
motivational interviewing group or a comparison group with no
intervention. Participants in the intervention group were enrolled on
giving written informed consent to participate in an intervention and to
grant access to their own medical chart. If an individual refused to
participate or was excluded for another reason, their matched comparator
was excluded as well. The study was approved by the Regional Ethical
Review Board in Stockholm (ref. 2015/47-31).

.. _sec1-1:

Psychoeducation
---------------

As part of our earlier study, participants in the intervention group
underwent a single semi-structured interview by a study nurse
specialised in mental health (L.C.), in which perceptions and knowledge
of antipsychotic formulations were examined.\ :sup:`9` In summary, the
earlier study revealed that participants lacked knowledge regarding
differences in plasma concentration, side-effects and risk of
readmission to hospital between LAIs and oral treatment. At the end of
the interview, the study nurse provided psychoeducation, discussing and
correcting misconceptions of the differences between oral and LAI
antipsychotics. The risk associated with gaps in medication was also
discussed.

.. _sec1-2:

Motivational interviewing
-------------------------

The semi-structured interview, which included questions on beliefs and
attitudes to treatment, was followed by an adapted form of motivational
interviewing based on the original principles of the
technique.\ :sup:`10` L.C. had received training from a professional
trainer on motivational interviewing in a 3-day course prior to the
study. Participants were encouraged to discuss their personal ideas and
ambivalences regarding their illness and treatment. Focus was on
relapse-preventing factors, quality of life, exploring their own
personal goals and treatment strategies, with no preference for either
oral or LAI antipsychotics.

.. _sec1-3:

Follow-up
---------

Data on admissions were extracted from the participants' medical records
during the 18-months before and after the intervention. Participants
were not called for extra visits during the follow-up, and clinical
events were noted as they appeared in the medical charts. Hospital
admission was considered a proxy for relapse. We observed the frequency
of participants in each group with a hospital admission before and after
intervention respectively. During the follow-up period, we also measured
the number of participants who switched from oral to LAI antipsychotics.
We noted whether the switch had been instigated by the participant, by
clear indication of this in the medical chart, as opposed to it being
described as a decision made by the treating psychiatrist or not
described at all. The former was considered a proxy for increased
patient involvement.

.. _sec1-4:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

Anonymised data were analysed using Prism 5.03 for Windows. Sample
comparisons were made using Fisher's exact test for categorical
variables.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

In total, there were 101 participants in the intervention group and an
equal numberof comparators. Characteristics for both groups were
proportionately matched regarding gender (46% females) and diagnosis
(70% schizophrenia). The median age was 50 years for both groups, but
the ranges differed slightly (21–84 years and 24–79 years for the
intervention group and the comparator group respectively).

.. _sec2-1:

Switching
---------

After 18 months, 14 participants (14%) from the intervention group had
switched to LAIs, compared with 7 (7%) in the comparison group
(*P* = 0.17, `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). Five out of 101 participants (5%) in
the intervention group suggested a switch themselves, compared with zero
in the comparison group (*P* = 0.06). Regarding switching by decision of
the psychiatrist, there was no significant difference between the groups
(9 *v.* 7, *P* = 0.80). Fig. 1Hospital admissions before and after
intervention and switches to a long-acting injectable antipsychotic
(LAI).

.. _sec2-2:

Hospital admission
------------------

In the intervention group, 20 participants (20%) were admitted to
hospital at least once during the 18-month period before intervention,
compared with 19 (19%) of the comparators (*P* = 1.0, `Fig.
1 <#fig01>`__). The numbers of participants admitted during the 18-month
follow-up period after intervention were 14 (14%) and 23 (23%)
respectively (*P* = 0.14).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

In this interventional study, we found that a single session of
psychoeducation and motivational interviewing in combination may promote
patients' involvement in treatment choices of oral and LAI
antipsychotics and reduce relapse frequency.

The higher number of participants switching to an LAI in the
intervention group could reflect less resistance to changing their
medication after psychoeducation and motivational interviewing. However,
as at least five participants in the intervention group actively
initiated the discussion of switching, the higher switching rate could
also be explained by increased involvement in their treatment. This
supports results from an earlier study by Barkhof et al, in which a
targeted use of motivational interviewing seemed to improve medication
adherence at least for certain groups of people with
psychosis.\ :sup:`11` Their adapted form of motivational interviewing
had an active provision of psychoeducation, which makes it to some
extent comparable to our interview, although their intervention included
several sessions and included people with a recent relapse.

The number of participants admitted to hospital at least once in the
18-month period before intervention was comparable between groups, with
only one more participant in the intervention group being admitted. In
the follow-up period after intervention the corresponding analysis
showed, however, nine fewer admissions in the intervention group. This
could indicate an effect of psychoeducation and motivational
interviewing on admission frequency, which in turn could be a result of
increased adherence and involvement in antipsychotic treatment. This is
in line with previous studies, which have reported positive effects of
the combination of psychoeducation and motivational interviewing on
adherence.\ :sup:`7,8,11`

Exploring patients' fears is a less frequently used technique, as
reported in our earlier study, and participants in the same study lacked
knowledge.\ :sup:`9` Moreover, other research groups have reported
reluctance among medical professionals to initiate the discussion of
treatment.\ :sup:`4,12` The possible positive effect of psychoeducation
and motivational interviewing may encourage a more exploring approach in
treatment discussion with the patient.

.. _sec3-1:

Limitations
-----------

Our study has several limitations. Individuals with cognitive disorders
and acute relapse at the time of inclusion were excluded from the study,
and generalisations to these patient groups cannot be made. Not all
targeted individuals were included in the intervention group, either
because they could not be reached or they opted out, and their
respective comparators were then not included.\ :sup:`9` The
participants were enrolled during regular visits, which are scheduled at
least yearly, so the 18 months before intervention should be enough for
most eligible participants. One could argue that patients who agreed to
participate and had a least one visit in connection with the
intervention represent a group with more commitment to their treatment
and less prone to relapse at baseline than patients in general, creating
selection bias. However, the number of admissions was comparable between
the intervention group and the comparison group in the 18 months before
intervention, suggesting similar illness characteristics. We lacked
information on confounders such as socioeconomic status, illness
duration and substance misuse. However, their potential impact on the
results was limited by the randomisation process. All intervention
visits were conducted by the same person, assuring consistency across
visits. We used hospital admissions and switch to an LAI as proxies for
relapse and for patient involvement respectively, which may be
questioned. However, these outcomes were readily available hard outcomes
in the medical charts,

.. _sec3-2:

Clinical and research implications
----------------------------------

A combination of psychoeducation and motivational interviewing may be a
valuable tool in the care of people with schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder, stimulating their involvement in treatment and
reducing the frequency of readmissions, but further study is needed to
corroborate the findings of this study.

**Gabriella Bröms**, MD, PhD, is a post-doc in the Department of
Medicine, Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. **Lindah
Cahling**, is a specialist nurse with PRIMA Child and Adult Psychiatry,
Stockholm, Sweden. **Anders Berntsson**, is a psychiatrist and head of
clinic at PRIMA Child and Adult Psychiatry, Stockholm, Sweden. **Lars
Öhrmalm**, PhD, is a psychiatrist with PRIMA Child and Adult Psychiatry,
and a researcher in the Department of Medicine, Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

Data associated with the manuscript is available with the corresponding
author.

G.B., L.C., A.B. and L.Ö. contributed to the overall study design. L.C.,
A.B. and L.Ö. planned the logistics and L.C. did all the interviewing
and stored raw data. G.B. and L.Ö. compiled data and carried out
statistical analyses. G.B., L.C., A.B. and L.Ö. interpreted the results
and wrote the manuscript.

This work received financial support from H. Lundbeck AB and Otsuka
Pharma Scandinavia AB via an Investigator Sponsored Study Agreement to
the study.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

L.Ö. has received speaker honoraria from Otsuka Pharma Scandinavia AB
and H. Lundbeck AB, and has accepted travel and hospitality payment from
Otsuka Pharma Scandinavia AB.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.28.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
