=============================================
Disclosing mental illness: a doctor's dilemma
=============================================

Rebecca LawrenceCorrespondence to Dr Rebecca Lawrence
(rebeccalawrence@nhs.net)
:Date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   There is increasing evidence that doctors have high levels of mental
   illness, and there are concerns that, for some, this may be
   exacerbated by their working environment. It can be difficult for
   doctors to disclose mental illness, either to senior or junior
   colleagues, and perhaps even harder to know what, if anything, to say
   to patients. Many doctors may be unsure of their position as regards
   disclosing to governing bodies; others may disclose widely on social
   media. I am a psychiatrist who also has a significant mental illness,
   and refer both to my personal experience and the literature to
   explore some of these issues.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

I became a consultant psychiatrist 14 years ago. When I started life as
a psychiatric trainee, some 9 years prior, I had already been advised
that this was not a good idea, as it would probably be too stressful for
me. You might wonder why, given that I had previously completed general
practitioner (GP) training; but I had also had the misfortune to have
been a psychiatric patient. Briefly, I became ill in my GP trainee year,
with what was almost certainly a perinatal mood disorder. I was in and
out of hospital over the following 2 years, and had several courses of
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), before finally recovering sufficiently
to return to work.

This was one of the hardest times of my life. I had minimal help with
this return, and just had to apply for locums, at which I failed, and
then 6-month junior hospital posts. There was no phased return, and I
did full resident on-call from the start. I was determined and driven –
I had to be. Just your average doctor, really, and with the usual tunnel
vision. I regret this time, when I was a new mother, and recovering – it
should have been gentler – but I felt that unless people saw me as
tough, there was little hope of ever returning to work.

I was diagnosed with psychotic depression, and subsequently with bipolar
disorder. After that first episode, I believed that I would never be ill
again, until it became apparent, even to me, that this was a long-term
condition, something that would probably never go away entirely. I have
indeed had relapses, and my most recent encounter with ECT was this past
year.

The high risk of anxiety, depression and suicide in doctors,
particularly anaesthetists, general practitioners and psychiatrists, has
been highlighted by Clare Gerada, and a link made between fear of
exposure and suicide.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` A recent survey by the British
Medical Association (BMA) has emphasised the concerning levels of mental
health problems in doctors and students, and how their working
environment may have contributed to these.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Some of the
reasons for these difficulties have been examined in Caroline Elton's
book, *Also Human: The Inner Lives of Doctors*,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` which
explores the stresses unique to medicine, the way doctors can be treated
and what happens when they can no longer carry on.

Over the years I have chosen at times to disclose my illness, and at
times to keep silent – probably more often somewhere in between, leaving
out the nasty bits. My first really public disclosure was a *BMJ*
article in 2012,\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` but I had always been fairly open with
colleagues. Interestingly, doctors do not always behave as they think
they will, with younger doctors and doctors in training less likely to
disclose mental illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`

How one decides when to disclose, and how much should be said, often
depends on the context. Initially I felt that I was the only doctor to
whom this had happened, and only when a kind supervisor gave me an
article by the late Belinda Brewer\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` did it occur to me
that this was unlikely. That brief article affected me profoundly, and I
have found reading personal accounts hugely helpful, as both a patient
and doctor. *Doctors as Patients*, edited by the late Petre
Jones,\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` contains many different accounts, as well as
guidance and advice, and is a book I have come back to when unwell. It
is sobering to reflect on the loss of both of these doctors, and I want
to acknowledge their courage.

Rees et al have acquired a considerable amount of qualitative data from
interviewing doctors, and have commented on the importance of the
reaction to the first disclosure of mental illness, whoever this is made
to.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` This has obvious implications for the training and
support of those who actually support junior doctors and medical
students.

.. _sec1:

Disclosing to patients
======================

Disclosure of one's own illness to patients is a thorny area, and I do
not think I have ever done it, although I have at times been tempted.
But I have always thought this will make it more about me than them. It
will close down the channels of communication, as my feelings become
theirs. I work in a chronic pain clinic, and do not share my sciatica
woes either. However sore I am, I cannot actually feel their pain.

De Vos et al discuss the use of disclosure by therapists in recovery,
and make the important point that this must be done thoughtfully,
without specific details of symptoms, and with support.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`
There are growing numbers of blogs about the experience of mental
illness, including those by doctors and psychiatrists. It is clear upon
reading them that there is no one answer, implying that a great deal of
consideration must be taken to ensure good patient care while treading
sensitively. Howe specifically explores self-disclosure in
psychiatrists, and concludes that a psychiatrist should only disclose
what they are comfortable with, and what will benefit the
patient.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)`

As a patient, I do not think that I would want my psychiatrist to
disclose anything too personal to me. If they told me that they had been
depressed, I think I would, in a peculiar way, feel out-manoeuvred, that
there was no point in describing things further, as they already knew.
Yet there can also be the odd sense that one's psychiatrist does not
actually exist as a person themselves, leading to curiosity and
sometimes alienation, which may be stronger when the patient is also a
doctor.

As a doctor, my hope is that my experience will come through, that I
will show rather than tell, and that this may influence my interactions
with patients. I know that there is a school of thought that
demonstrating one's own vulnerability may provide hope to a patient.
Even then, I think the time to do so would be when the patient is better
and less vulnerable themselves, as there is always a power imbalance in
the patient–doctor relationship.

There is, of course, the reality that a patient may ask about your
personal experience, particularly if you write or talk about it. I have
always done this to some extent, but have expanded my efforts recently,
both on Twitter and by blogging, and was interviewed on television
earlier in 2019.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` It is perhaps easier for me as an
established consultant, with supportive colleagues and managers, but my
main reason for speaking out is that my children are older now, and
understand more about my illness and why I would speak about it. As
regards to patients, I would always tell them if they asked a direct
question. I might say that the focus should be on them, and I might say
that I would rather not discuss it in any detail, but I would not deny
it.

.. _sec2:

Disclosing to colleagues
========================

Applying for training is both harder and easier now. I applied to
several local training schemes, resulting in one outright rejection and
two interviews. At both, I told them of my illness; one offered me a
shorter contract in case I was not up to it, but the other just offered
me the job. I was, and am, very glad that they knew of my illness from
the beginning, and I experienced no stigma during my 2 years there, only
support. But one would not now mention this at interview, which would,
in any case, be done nationally. This lessens prejudice, but it also
lessens your chance of discovering the right place to work, which I was
fortunate to do. In other words, not being politically correct can, at
times, be a bonus.

Throughout my training, I mostly worked with great consultants who knew
my history, but I also tried to seek such people out whenever I could.
There will always be those who, for whatever reason, are less able to
support a trainee with difficulties, and my advice would be to avoid
them whenever possible. The Royal College of Psychiatrists has resources
for doctors and trainees returning to work,\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` as does the
Psychiatric Trainees Committee,\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` which can be helpful
both for those returning and those supporting them.

Perhaps I share too much, but I would advise trainees to definitely tell
their educational supervisors, and usually their clinical supervisors,
of any significant mental illness (definitely if not entirely well). My
own problems had been rather public, being an in-patient in the local
hospital, so I felt I had little option. You do not have to tell
everyone with whom you work, any more than you have to tell them about
other conditions, but sharing with your supervisors can make life
smoother. Sometimes it is hard to do this face to face; I would then
consider emailing what you want them to know, explaining that it can be
difficult, and this can give both some time to reflect before speaking.

.. _sec3:

Disclosing to governing bodies
==============================

The main body that governs doctors is the General Medical Council (GMC),
and this can become very frightening when unwell. Unless a doctor is
attempting to work against medical advice, the GMC should not become
involved and the doctor should receive local support and treatment. This
can include taking time off, but a reduction in hours or a phased return
may also be recommended, and occupational health are well placed to help
with this. There is no automatic need to inform the GMC unless there are
legal issues, such as a drink driving charge, or other probity issues,
when self-disclosure for health assessment should first be
encouraged.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)`

Those doctors who are seen for health assessments face a number of
possible outcomes, including not working for a period or working under
supervision. I work as a health examiner and supervisor, and have seen
how difficult this can be; there is undoubtedly much fear and stigma,
but doctors often do very well, and many return to work. The GMC
continues to work hard to dispel these fears as much as possible, and to
provide more support, particularly following the concerns around
increased suicide rates;\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` but it is vital that doctors
also receive support and validation from other sources, given that this
can threaten the very meaning and identity of being a doctor.

When medical students apply to join the medical register, they too need
to disclose any health conditions that may affect their fitness to
practise.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` Medical schools have processes to manage
students’ fitness to practise, and should be able to provide help and
advice for those with pre-existing conditions.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`

There are services available, such as the Psychiatrists’ Support
Service,\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` which provides anonymous telephone support to
all grades of psychiatrist, and NHS Practitioner Health,\ :sup:`(n.d.s)`
which launched an immediate crisis text line this year, available to all
doctors in England and Wales. Others include the BMA Doctor Support
Service\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` and the Doctors’ Support
Network.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` DocHealth is a brief psychotherapy service
available across the UK, staffed by medical consultant psychotherapists,
and subsidised by the BMA and Royal Medical Benevolent
Fund.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)`

.. _sec4:

Disclosing being a doctor
=========================

It is extraordinary that saying one is a doctor can sometimes be harder
than saying one has a mental illness. I was once part of a patient and
carer group at the Royal College of Psychiatrists; it was a good
experience, but I left because I did not really fit in, being a doctor
as well as a patient. It is probably even harder being a doctor when an
in-patient on a psychiatric ward, but this was not something that I ever
broadcasted. I remember a patient shouting at me when, as a junior
doctor, I visited a ward where I had previously been a patient: ‘You
used to be one of us [patients], and now you're one of them [doctors]
and how did that happen?’ At times I felt like a combination of a fake
patient and an incompetent doctor.

.. _sec5:

Disclosure to the wider community
=================================

More recently I have posted on Twitter, making it obvious I am both
doctor and patient. The same things that garner support for a patient
can enrage the online community when a doctor is involved. For me, one
obvious example has been ECT, which I had this past year and have had
previously. However, I recognise that although I am trained as a
psychiatrist, my personal experiences are anecdotal and I try to present
them as such, rather than generalising. I think this does take the heat
out of things, although not always. I would, however, advise others not
to post on Twitter when less well; there are many other gentler online
forums that can provide helpful support. I have used the Doctors’
Support Network forum, which is completely anonymous, and a specific
group for doctors with bipolar disorder.

I have started to speak and write more publicly about my
illness,\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` although I find that it is actually quite easy
to hide behind a pen or a lens. I have also spoken directly to both
trainees and retired psychiatrists, which is more daunting, but also
more rewarding; and I hope to continue to tell my story to others, both
to help them know that they are not alone and to highlight what support
is out there.

.. _sec6:

Receiving disclosures
=====================

Inevitably as a psychiatrist and trainer I have received disclosures
from others regarding mental illness and other sensitive issues. I find
this hard, and I think it is right to find it hard, not least because it
has usually been very difficult for the trainee to raise. Acknowledge
it, make no assumptions and ask how much the trainee wants to say. Ask
them if they want to talk about it again, and think about what they have
told you. Most importantly, remember that they are not you. Treat them
normally, and do not make them feel that they have become ‘special’ or
‘different’. Help them, and guide them to find treatment if necessary,
but do not be their doctor. Getting the balance can be very difficult,
and it can sometimes be useful to discuss this confidentially, and with
consent, with other senior colleagues involved in training.

When trainees are aware of my own illness, I sometimes worry that it
makes it harder for them to talk of theirs. They may feel mine is
‘better’ or conversely ‘worse’, and that their illness is less
important. So I try to open up generally about mental illness, in the
hope that it will make it easier for them, particularly in the way that
I talk about patients and other trainees.

‘Why?’ is a common question to ask, when doctors, nurses and others
choose to work in psychiatry after an episode of mental illness, and
there is no one answer. It is very hard to predict who will cope, who
will shine, even, and who will find it hard. I can see, with hindsight,
why I was advised against another long period of training and grinding
exams, given the length and severity of my illness, and I now feel
minimal resentment about this. I did feel angry with those who asked if
I was trying to cure myself, but on the whole, they were not
psychiatrists. And now, when I talk to others, I know it is important
not to blind oneself with preconceptions, to know that there is not one
route for all. Because I did, it does not mean all others should.

My illness has had a profound effect on my life and my work. I worked
much harder and was far more organised during my psychiatric training
than I had been previously. I had to be – there was always this thing at
the back of my mind, this thing over which I had little control. I was
determined to pass exams, even doing a Master's degree during my
maternity leave. I felt that if I did not do well, my abilities would be
questioned and put down to mental illness. I still think this is a
difficult area; we all have times when we may perform less well, and
there is little doubt that supervisors may wonder about mental health in
a trainee with a history of illness, when they otherwise would not.

This is reasonable, and hopefully not punitive in any way. But as a
trainee you fear assumptions, even if they are based on some truth. So
supervisors must be alert, yet resist jumping to conclusions, and the
way to manage this is to get to know your trainees well. It can be
difficult, I know this now as a trainer; sadly, there is often nowhere
where trainers and trainees all meet for coffee or lunch, the kind of
things that make this happen.

.. _sec6-1:

Living and surviving
--------------------

It is unsurprising that I have always been interested in doctors’
accounts of mental illness. They make me feel less alone, they inspire
me, and above all they are all different. The accounts by Linda
Gask\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` and Cathy Wield\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` are moving and
human, and lifted me out of my self-obsessions. They, too, are real
people, things happened to them, and they are doctors. The recognition
that you can recover, succeed and then get ill again was also important
– these are not always stories with a happy ever after. Kay Redfield
Jamison's account of having bipolar disorder is a wonderful book,
describing the experience of changing moods, as well as combining this
with a remarkable career researching and treating the very illness that
nearly destroyed her.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` Mike Shooter, past president of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists, describes becoming better able to
recognise the warning signs of illness, and knowing when to
stop.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)`

.. _sec6-2:

For better or for worse
-----------------------

But the big question, for me, is whether my experiences make me a better
doctor and psychiatrist, or even a better person. There is much written
about the importance of lived experience, and it can all get a bit
competitive. I trained in general adult psychiatry, but work in
addiction psychiatry. I think I knew that working in general adult would
potentially be harder, with reminders and triggers of what had happened
to me, and that it would be very easy for me to become over-involved in
a way that would be good for neither me nor patients. I am still drawn
to occasional patients, where I think, ‘that could be me’, and I have to
remind myself that no-one is exactly like another, no-one can experience
the thoughts and suffering of someone else.

When I first started working in psychiatry, I think that I did feel that
my lived experience made me better than others, and that I could more
easily understand what patients were going through. I am much less sure
now. There was a lightbulb moment for this, when I lost a baby late in
pregnancy, early in my training. I was devastated. But it suddenly came
to me that everyone's experiences are personal, that I had no idea what
another mother would feel. It was a short step to realising that my
experiences of altered mood, of side-effects and drugs, was only mine. I
think what happened made me more alert to suffering, hopefully more
empathetic and more prepared to listen. But I would never now say to
someone, ‘I know exactly how you feel’.

Whether I am a better psychiatrist because of my experiences is
difficult to say, as I can never know what the alternative would have
been. One thing I am fairly sure of is that I am a far worse patient. I
question and doubt, and my knowledge, particularly of psychiatric
medication, is very unhelpful. Obviously I want to think I am a better
psychiatrist, but I do not think you need to have experienced
psychiatric illness to be excellent. Most of us will experience
difficulty and sorrow in our lives, and these will change us and make us
what we are. There is no one prescription for empathy.

I would like to thank Dr Cate Bailey for inviting me to write this
article, and for her very helpful comments regarding content and
structure.

**Rebecca Lawrence** (MPhil, MSc, FRCPsych) is a Consultant Psychiatrist
at Ritson Clinic in Royal Edinburgh Hospital, Scotland, UK.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.z.
