==============
Kevin Mitchell
==============

Claire McKenna [1]_
:Date: 2020-04


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Professor Kevin Mitchell has a few pet peeves with the way neuroscience
is represented in the media. To start, he highlights the siren call of
fMRI scans that often adorn any remotely psychological article: ‘People
demonstrably find that same article more convincing if it has a glowing
brain in one corner of it than if it doesn't. So people are a bit
susceptible, I think, to what we affectionately term “neuro-bollocks”’.

Mitchell is Associate Professor in Developmental Neurobiology and
Genetics at Trinity College Dublin, where he is also Dean of
Undergraduate Studies. His mission is to make complex neuroscience more
accessible while resisting the temptations of neuro-reductionism. In his
blog ‘Wiring the Brain’
(`www.wiringthebrain.com <www.wiringthebrain.com>`__), he writes
spirited and forensic take-downs of overly hyped neuroscience research,
as well as thoughtful philosophical explorations of the nature of the
brain and mind. Blog titles include: ‘Is your future income written in
your DNA?’ and ‘The murderous brain – can neuroimaging really
distinguish murderers?’.

In 2018 he published *Innate*, an engaging popular science book
exploring ‘how the wiring of our brains shapes who we are’, which has
been praised by Stephen Pinker as a ‘new landmark’ in the old nature
versus nurture debate.

Any other neuromyths he'd like to bust? He laughs, ‘There are so many!’.
He is a critic of ‘blobology’ generally (the tendency to use blurry
pictures of the brain to illustrate articles of little scientific value,
such as ‘Your brain reacts to love like cocaine’), in part because it
reflects a modular understanding of the way the brain works that bears
no resemblance to reality.

One of his key messages is that nature is not obliged to make biology
simple enough for us to understand. He does, though, think that public
engagement by neuroscientists is vital, as ‘we see the effects of
scientific illiteracy in lots of public policy’. He has several popular
public talks on YouTube (including a TED talk titled ‘Who's in charge?
You or your brain?’).

Mitchell fizzes with infectious enthusiasm for his subject. Two and a
half hours later we're still talking and I feel I've just skimmed the
surface. The themes of outdated traditions in neuroscience that try to
localise brain functions (telling us nothing about the connectivity of
the brain) and the lack of an underpinning philosophy of neuroscience
are ones he continually comes back to. The way that neuroscience is
taught explains the appeal of things like the decorative fMRI to
professionals and public alike, he thinks. He emphasises that these
scans are very indirect measures of neural activity on a background of
constant endogenous activity. There is also the intuitive appeal of
finding a ‘biomarker’ for mental illness.

.. _sec1:

Biomarker research
==================

Mitchell dismisses the idea that we have biomarkers for any
neurodevelopmental or psychiatric conditions: ‘All that literature [on
biomarkers] is polluted with false positives’. Small samples, lack of
replication, statistical ‘fishing’ in an exploratory fashion are all
major problems that undermine the validity of biomarker research. And,
he says, ‘it gets worse if you add in the dimension of genomics to that,
because now you have the enormous genomics space in which to search for
covariates of neural activity or structure’.

So, no scans as diagnostic tests for mental illnesses then? He is
bracingly sceptical: “‘There's not going to be a blood test. There's not
going to be a brain scan. There's not going to be any other biomarker
that captures those things, because they're looking at the wrong level.
[Those conditions] are defined at the level of human behaviour […] Even
if there's a dynamic neural state that underpins some aspect of
psychosis that we both share, the way that that state looks in your
brain may be very different from the way it looks in my brain because
our brains are not the same. So I don't hold out much hope for, you
know, getting to diagnostic biomarkers from that kind of imaging.’”

.. _sec2:

The neuro-hype of epigenetics
=============================

We turn next to epigenetics, a mechanism in molecular biology by which
genes are ‘switched’ on and off and which is at risk of becoming
‘neuro-hype’. Epigenetics as a mode of intergenerational trauma
transmission is very much a buzzword at present. Mitchell cautions
against invoking sciency-sounding mechanisms to lend credibility to
‘nurture’ as a cause of psychological distress: ‘So people look at two
fields – neuroplasticity/brain plasticity and now epigenetics – as some
kind of a “get out of genetics free card”. I think people don't like the
idea, some people anyway, that we are born with certain predispositions
that are hard to change’.

Mitchell finds the concept of trauma transmission through epigenetic
mechanisms implausible primarily because it suggests an overly
simplistic relationship between genes and our psychological traits. Our
experiences, he says, are expressed through changes in our neuroanatomy,
not in our patterns of gene expression.

He sees in such flimsy claims a cautionary tale about the need for a
different approach in science publishing: ‘There is a hype industry
around science, which I think is corrosive. And I think scientists are
willing participants in it in a way that I find more and more
distasteful the older I get, because it does a massive disservice
cumulatively to how science is understood by the general public because
we have this constant hype’. He thinks his cynicism reflects a growing
awareness in the research community of the need to focus on
replicability and reproducibility and is hopeful things are changing for
the better.

.. _sec3:

‘Biology is not just complicated physics’
=========================================

Mitchell is most passionate when discussing the need to bring about a
sea-change in the way neuroscience is taught and thought about. At this
stage in his career he sees this as the biggest contribution he can make
to his field.

By and large, he says, biological research is conducted in a theoretical
vacuum, which means that a mechanistic understanding of how brains and
minds work has become entrenched. Much neuroscience research is, he
feels, linear and reductionist as a result: “‘We have one theory, which
is the theory of evolution, which is great. And it does underpin
everything. But it doesn't really explain how biological systems work
and what they do […] There are lots of engineering principles and
dynamic systems principles that we could be applying from those fields
[from engineering and physics] that most biologists don't think about.
It's just not the way that we approach things.’”

He emphasises the need to get away from a modular understanding of how
the brain works – the old ‘find the lesion’ trope – which works in
neurology but not in psychiatry. ‘The connectivity across circuits is
what's really important’, he says.

He thinks an understanding of neuroscience *is* important for
psychiatrists but needs to be taught alongside complexity theory
(understanding the dynamics of change in systems) so that we don't see
brains as ‘passive stimulus–response machines’. He has a gift for the
memorable tagline: ‘Biology is not just complicated physics!’, he quips.

.. _sec4:

Undergraduates
==============

Mitchell's genetics background influences his approach to his role as
undergraduate dean. He says, ‘IQ scores, for example, are I think a
measure not of potential but of achievement’. So two people with the
same biological potential will perform differently depending on whether
their environment allows them to thrive. He talks about the so-called
‘Matthew effect’ – the positive feedback loop between socioeconomic
privilege, exam success and later career success that gets amplified
across generations. Trinity College Dublin has pioneered novel
approaches to making admissions criteria more equitable by accounting
for social factors that affect a student's exam grades.

He is critical of commentators in the British press who use the partial
heritability of intelligence to suggest that we live in a meritocracy
and even to lend credence to eugenics: ‘It's a very Ayn Randian kind of
idea that. Most of the people who've done well may have had some genetic
capital in terms of talents and natural abilities but, of course, many
of them also had lots of social capital and cultural capital’.

.. _sec5:

Innate
======

In his book *Innate*, Mitchell argues strongly against the idea of the
mind as a *tabula rasa* but he distinguishes his book from the work of
people such as Robert Plomin, who also writes about the influence of DNA
on our psychological traits. He agrees with Plomin that our traits are
partly heritable but differs in how predictive he thinks that is.

He explains that the precise statistical meaning of ‘heritability’ is
commonly misunderstood. It refers to the variance in a particular trait
being due to genetic differences. This variance or ‘heritability’ is
meaningful at a population level, but less useful when it comes to
individuals. If, for example, intelligence is 50% heritable, it does not
mean that 50% of your intelligence comes from your genes.

He is sceptical of the idea that genomic analysis or ‘polygenic risk
scores’ in individuals can be used as a prediction of, for example, how
intelligent that person will be, because of the massive spread in
distribution of a particular trait across people with the same polygenic
score.

Polygenic scores also have poor predictive value because of the nature
of genetic variation. They capture a background of common mutations,
each with a tiny effect on a trait, which account for about half of
genetic effects, but ‘the rest will be from really rare newer mutations
that have bigger effects but that kind of wink in and out of existence
in a population because they get selected against’.

Another key theme in his work is that our DNA has distal and very
indirect effects on the development of our brain. It is the
multitudinous ‘noisy’ developmental processes between the transcription
of the program encoded in our genome and the ‘wiring’ of our brain that
are responsible for much of the variation in our traits. He says: “‘So
one of the main points, I guess, of *Innate* that I was trying to make
was that there's this source of variation in our psychological make-up
that has gone largely unappreciated. It's not just genes and
environment. There's this third source, third component of variation,
this developmental variation that isn't due either to genetics or to
environment. It's just the way that the development plays out during
embryogenesis, during gestation and the way that it continues to play
out over life.’”

.. _sec6:

Psychiatric genomics
====================

All of this ‘noise’ in developmental variation is one of the reasons
that Mitchell is guarded about the potential for genomics research to
directly influence psychiatry. He points out that schizophrenia risk is
only about 50% heritable but that doesn't necessarily mean that the
other 50% of the variation is environmental: ‘A lot of the outcome may
just be the random chance actually during development’.

Mitchell mistrusts much of the early work in psychiatric genetics, in
particular the candidate gene association studies, in which researchers
studied one or two genes at a time. He describes the statistical
acrobatics in data analysis and publication bias towards positive
results that threw up spurious associations between individual genes and
psychological distress. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
shown candidate gene studies to be unreliable. The effects of genes
implicated in the development of mental illness are mediated by the sum
of interactions between probably thousands of different genes with
different biochemical pathways.

So, has genetic research added to our understanding of the causes of
mental illness? Mitchell thinks it has, but not in the way we'd hoped
for. He cites the example that 80–90% of the variance in who develops
autism is down to genetics, but most of the contributing variants are
not inherited – so-called *de novo* variants.

Another key finding is that genetic risk factors overlap and are shared
between multiple psychiatric and neurodevelopmental morbidities: ‘One of
the things we've learned is that those sorts of [*de novo*] mutations
can give rise in different people to autism or ADHD or epilepsy or
intellectual disability or schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, depression
or a whole range of things. So, they don't respect the diagnostic
boundaries that we have’.

He feels that genetics research adds weight to the need to think about
psychiatric disorders in dimensional terms but also in developmental
terms: ‘You have two identical twins. As their brain is developing, what
is the trajectory that leads one to develop schizophrenia and the other
not? We can't just look at the genes and say these are genes for
psychosis because that's not what the genes are doing’.

So far, so gloomy for a brave new world of psychiatric genomics leading
to personalised medicine and new therapeutic targets. Genetics research
will be useful for psychiatry in a probabilistic kind of way but he
finds it difficult to see how it could be used to predict outcomes or
therapies with certainty in individuals.

.. _sec7:

Towards a unifying theory for neuroscience
==========================================

Where then does the future lie for genetics research into psychiatric
disorders? Mitchell stresses that genes are algorithms for making
proteins. Human behaviour is not directly resultant from the activities
of proteins; instead we perceive and think and feel with our neural
circuits: ‘So, the way the neural circuits are organised is, for me, the
proximal biological underpinning of the conditions. The genetic
variations that led to those things being organised in that way are
extremely distal causes […] So I think what we need to do is hand off to
the neuroscientists’. Basically, he sees the biological causes of
psychiatric disorders as a neuroscience problem: ‘I'm more optimistic
about the idea of using genetic findings as a starting point to get at
the neuroscience’.

He is particularly excited by the new field of optogenetics to help us
study how discrete neural circuits work to influence animal behaviour in
real time. He also hopes that the field of computational psychiatry will
develop ‘so that we can develop a kind of a mature theory of what these
circuits are doing in a complex dynamical systems kind of framework’.

He seems to bristle slightly at my suggestion that his approach to
understanding the mind could be criticised as epiphenomenalism, and the
associated problems with rooting thoughts, feelings and behaviours in
biology. He appeals to holism: ‘I wouldn't use the word epiphenomena
because that sounds a bit dismissive actually, but I would say emergent
phenomena’. He emphasises that our cognitive and social development are
crucial in understanding these phenomena: ‘We shouldn't think of nature
and nurture as independent from each other, but highly interactive’.

He thinks neuroscience may be in the midst of a paradigm shift due to
new technologies and mathematical tools that let us model the brain in a
way that reflects its complexity.

So, I ask him, how long before the fruits of this new approach to
neuroscience will benefit patients in psychiatry clinics? ‘Maybe if you
ask me again in 5 years I'd be giving you, I think, a much more positive
view of the importance of that. And if you ask me in 10 years, I'd be, I
hope, pointing to areas where that understanding has led to some
difference in the clinic’. He pauses. ‘Maybe 10 years is still too
optimistic. Give me 20 years. Give us 20 years’. Not quite a headline
that plays well to the gallery but a tonic in our era of spin.

.. [1]
   **Claire McKenna talks to neurogeneticist Kevin Mitchell** about
   ‘neuro-hype’, psychiatric genomics and a unifying theory for
   neuroscience.
