==================================================================================================================================
Child psychiatry: a model for specific goals for in-patient treatment linked to resources and limitations in out-patient treatment
==================================================================================================================================

Simon R. WilkinsonCorrespondence to Simon Wilkinson
(simonrwilkinson@gmail.com)
:Date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   I present a rationale for two different types of in-patient child
   psychiatric unit: 24/7 intensive units and 24/5 child and family
   units. Intensive units address safety requirements. The developing
   personality of young people is at the centre of in-patient approaches
   on the child and family units. This requires attachment-informed
   practice. Families must always be involved and placement of units
   must facilitate their participation. The primary skill characterising
   these units is use of the milieu for therapy and combining this with
   family therapy. In other words, nurses and allied professionals need
   to be the dominant force in unit development, under the reflective
   guidance of consultants and clinical psychologists.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Sitting beside a nurse from a county in California at an international
conference I realised for the first time that areas in the USA provide
third-world levels of child psychiatric treatment. She was the only
clinical worker for children and adolescents with psychiatric problems
for a county with a total population close to 100 000. She arranged for
patients to fill out forms, which were then sent to an adult
psychiatrist, who prescribed medication over the phone. My concern is
that general UK provision has for a long time been critically vulnerable
because of the extremely low staffing levels and lack of obligation to
provide a comprehensive service within each health trust. I do not
believe that the UK model of service provision is conducive to making a
leap forward with services tied to a tiers model. Yet there is no
evidence of what ingredients might promote a healthier service. Even
though we have evidence that in-patient treatment can give
benefits,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` we have no conceptualisation of how the
complex interconnected processes on an in-patient ward might be working.
Instead I will present here an analysis of how need can be formulated to
suggest an alternative service model which can identify the elements
that need addressing. Although I have been working within the
well-endowed Norwegian health service, and there is no chance of the UK
approaching the same level of provision in the near or distant future
(we have over ten times the resources compared with the UK and other
wealthy countries\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`), analysis of what is required is no
different. Having worked outside the taken-for-granted world of UK child
psychiatry, a different perspective can be generated which maybe leads
to new possibilities.

.. _sec1:

Safety first – 7 days a week (24/7)
===================================

The top priority has to be given to ensuring safety, when, by virtue of
the young person's mental state, the patient or their VIPs (I will use
‘very important person’ to cover the adults responsible for ensuring the
patient's care – biological parents, foster parents, etc.) have been in
danger. This has to be available 24/7 and it requires a mix of
out-patient provision and emergency out-of-hours service in liaison with
a unit available to admit patients 24/7. The issue of whether it is
desirable to provide more than 09.00–17.00 h out-patient provision to
enable both VIPs and patients easier access to specialist services needs
to be debated. Or could emergency services be staffed with child and
adolescent psychiatric expertise? (In Oslo there is a psychiatric
emergency department which is staffed until 23.00 h, covering the time
after out-patient departments cease their obligation to evaluate
emergencies at their closing time. Some privileged populations in the UK
have access to services with such out-of-hours specialist cover.) Why is
it not expected that all emergency departments should be catering for
the second highest cause of mortality among our adolescents after
accidents?

Rather than going into the pitfalls of evaluating potentially suicidal
behaviour, as only one potential reason for acute referral, I will only
remind us here that those with greater experience refer fewer patients
for admission because of potential suicide. This underlines why
highest-quality expertise is needed in the front line.

It is not the Axis I diagnosis that determines the need for admission,
but the necessity of an alternative ‘containment’ of the patient to that
available at home. Two factors operate here: the state of the child and
the processes at home. The ICD-10 system's Axis V diagnoses of the
psychosocial context were included as of prognostic importance and
needed to be addressed in treatment plans. Context matters as much as
the young person's ‘state’ – and it is entwined in the same complex
causal system, such that states evolve to ‘traits’ depending on the
maintaining influence of context processes. No admission should occur
without the possibility of integrating approaches to the child's state,
as well as addressing precipitating and maintaining factors in the
context of the episode. The younger the patient, the more important the
context factors in treatment. Here, planning for young people differs
from that for adults. Out-of-region ‘refuse recirculation’ is
detrimental to patient recovery and welfare and can be expected to be
associated with need for more frequent readmissions. Every such unit
needs to be able to work with family, school and local resources – and
that means fathers as well as mothers.

The critical elements concern ensuring highest expertise during
out-patient evaluations, with ideally similar levels of expertise
available ‘out of hours’, and an in-patient resource that is equipped to
address the patient's state as well as the context factors. The level of
staffing needs to be high – and, importantly, consist of a stable group
of nurse therapists (use of locums is countertherapeutic to the teamwork
required). A higher level of staffing and greater stability of staff
leads to reduced needs for restraint or emergency medication. [1]_
Staffing needs to include other therapists working in the patient
‘milieu’ [2]_ who are expert in childcare issues, such as residential
social workers. They need to be used to working with complicated family
dynamics, where abuse of power – both verbal and physical – may well be
a problem. Safety is primarily ensured by these staff, to a greater
degree than by doctors and clinical psychologists, who provide the
back-up understanding of the treatment needs and reflection on the
treatment dynamic as it evolves. The high staffing levels enable the
intensive approach required, and this suggests that the proposed 24/7
acute admission units should be called intensive units, as in UK adult
psychiatry. Because transfer of patients between units and therapists
creates lacunae of security, such intensive units should be able to keep
treating their patients who require longer than an acute admission. This
most vulnerable group of patients needs help to set up their transfer
back to the context from which they were admitted, so that a return to
their out-patient department will succeed without the patient isolating
themselves in connection with the transition. An adequate model for
practice needs to include an ambulant service from the intensive unit to
anchor the patients in meaningful activities at home – school, clubs,
sports, etc. – so that any tendencies to isolation can be mitigated.

.. _sec2:

Working with personality – 5 days a week (24/5)
===============================================

There is another group of patients who can also benefit from admission,
albeit not the intensive kind with a focus on security. Often these have
been referred for diagnostic evaluation and treatment. But in principle
there is little to suggest that an admission should be used for
diagnosis, given the skills that need to be available on an out-patient
basis (in my practice the costs of 1 year's admission was the equivalent
of 4–5 full-time out-patient clinicians). What cannot be done there?
Out-patient clinicians cannot easily evaluate problems arising at
bedtime and during the night! Usually such referrals for diagnosis are a
‘cop out’. Any referral precipitated by lack of progress in out-patients
requires that the covering letter identifies the barriers preventing
progress – and how these might be more successfully addressed during an
admission. In my experience this does not happen. Additionally, on
admission, objective criteria should be decided as to how far treatment
needs to have come before transfer back to out-patient provision can
occur successfully.

Do we know what the barriers are likely to be? They are not the Axis I
diagnoses, as all of these can potentially be treated outside
institutional services. I have my experience to go on from Norway, and
it may be very different in the UK. My guess is that the barriers are
universal, but seldom acknowledged. The elephant in the room, the
dimension not talked about in child psychiatry, is personality, both
that developing in the patient and in the VIPs. Progress in treatment
depends on working with both the patient and the VIP and establishing an
alliance with them that facilitates their ability to take chances in
doing things differently. But this is easier for some than others. The
more insecure a VIP or patient the greater their need to do things to
feel in control of the situation. These individuals can be impulsively
dramatic. And they take fewer chances to do things differently – for the
VIP to read the child's signals differently, to understand their
vulnerabilities in new ways, or for the child to respond to their fears
as much as to fight their way out of a corner, to take chances to tell
others what they are going through. In such control-focused meetings
things continue to happen impulsively with little reflection, according
to well-worn strategies. As Peter Cook replied to Dudley Moore when
asked what he had learnt from his mistakes: ‘I could repeat them
exactly’. This tendency to impulsiveness associated with lack of change
can easily suggest to the therapist that they are missing something and
that a diagnostic admission is required. Instead I suggest there is a
need for an admission to a totally different sort of unit than the
intensive unit. There will be no sole focus on the Axis I diagnosis,
Axes II–V being at least as significant for the admission – and assuming
that Axis VI scores (Children's Global Assessment Scale, CGAS) are at
least under 40. Admitting patients with primarily personality problems
to an intensive unit is expected to be counterproductive.

A child and family unit can have a lower staffing level. It is not
apparent to me that it should be a 24/7 unit, as there are advantages of
the patients being at home at weekends. Therefore a 24/5 unit would be
better. It needs to be able to address the impulsive responses to which
the patients and their VIPs are disposed, fuelled from their implicit
memories. The milieu staff would interact with patients in the ‘here and
now’, allowing response patterns characteristic of the dispositional
representations\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` of the patients’ personalities to be
revealed, and would set up situations to create optimal learning
opportunities. The staff would be grounded in understanding of
personality, a field with which child psychiatry is only slowly coming
to grips. My suggestion is that adapting Clarkin's\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`
conceptualisation of personality and informing it with knowledge about
child development will give us personality as reflecting factors present
at birth or by the end of the first years of life (Clarkin used the
short-hand ‘temperament’, as if it were an obviously genetic factor) in
interaction with attachment strategies, and influenced by experiences of
trauma and loss. This would have given us the personality dimensions
suggested, but not adopted, for DSM-5.

The advantage of such a unit operating 24/5 is that the focus is
continually on patterns that recur in the home environment. Has the
treatment week led to different patterns at the weekend? During the week
it is necessary to work with the patient, but also with parental
responsiveness and the parent's ability to identify precipitating and
maintaining factors in their child's disturbance. Each weekend is not a
break from treatment, but a time for renewal and update of the treatment
contract, refreshing and refining the focus for all concerned. With
clarity preceding admission in what needs to have changed before
out-patient treatment can resume, the approaching discharge timing will
be clear to all involved ‘en route’. If issues of security arise during
the weekends then a temporary move to an intensive unit may be required,
but the priority is a thorough analysis of the sequences that
precipitated the situation by the staff from the 24/5 unit.

These units will often find they are working in the no man's land
between child-protection services and medicine. Child psychiatric
services will always need to have close liaison with social services and
make use of consultation from child-protection services – and provide
corresponding consultation to child-protection services.

.. _sec3:

A plea
======

From my position across the water it is indefensible to be bussing young
patients out of region. Every patient should be getting eventual need
for admission met within easy travel distance of home so that family
approaches can be integrated with the in-patient treatment. If a unit is
designated as an intensive unit it should not be allowed to close its
doors to local acute admissions. It should be under an obligation to
provide the 24/7 service required even if it means temporary beds. Any
other arrangement rewards keeping patients longer than required to
enable the unit to avoid the crushing work of new admissions; and frees
the out-patients from pressure to ensure a rejuvenated service for the
returning patient. Tier 4 expertise should be available primarily on an
out-patient basis. An admission is not to a hierarchically superior
service, but to one of two possible treatment units providing distinctly
different provision, where the role of the milieu staff has primacy in
the treatment strategy.

**Simon Wilkinson**, MD, FRCPsych, has run the adolescent in-patient
units at the National Centre for Child Psychiatry, Oslo, Norway. He has
retired from clinical practice although is still employed by Oslo
University Hospital and Akershus University Hospital to provide
psychotherapy supervision for junior doctors in training.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.29.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

.. [1]
   The Norwegian adaptation of the Quality Network for Inpatient CAMHS
   (QNIC), known as KvIP
   (`www.akuttnettverket.no/kvip-barn-og-unge <www.akuttnettverket.no/kvip-barn-og-unge>`__),
   has found that an emergency sedation regime has not proved necessary,
   and it was recently removed from the list of standards. This is
   attributed to the higher levels of stable qualified staffing.

.. [2]
   In Norway the staff are collectively known as milieu therapists, and
   include both nurses, childcare workers and other professionals,
   besides the non-milieu psychologists and child psychiatrists.
