===============================================
Ciaran Mulholland: the Psychiatrist's Manifesto
===============================================

Claire Mckenna [1]_
:Date: 2020-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

London-based neuropsychologist Vaughan Bell recently mused on Twitter:
‘I'm always slightly mystified why the situation in Northern Ireland
gets ignored by the wider UK mental health community. Thirty plus years
of armed conflict, highest prevalence of mental health problems in the
UK, shockingly low level of investment in services’ (@vaughanbell, 2 Feb
2020; Tweet reproduced here with permission). I confess, I myself have
wondered.

Inequality is indeed writ large in the mental health of Northern
Ireland's populace. The statistics are alarming: deaths by suicide have
doubled since the ceasefire heralded by the Good Friday Agreement in
1998 and are now the highest in the UK; there is a 25% higher prevalence
of mental health problems in Northern Ireland compared with England; and
Northern Irish people are prescribed more psychotropic medication than
any other European population.

Professor Ciaran Mulholland took time out to talk to me during a 2019
conference on ‘Psychiatry and Conflict’ in Belfast, where he was
speaking in his role as clinical director of Northern Ireland's unique
Regional Trauma Network. Set up in 2017 as a fitting legacy for the 3700
killed and 55 000 injured in the conflict, it aims to provide a
world-leading mental health service, across a network of voluntary and
statutory sectors, for victims of all forms of trauma in Northern
Ireland.

.. _sec1:

A legacy of conflict and deprivation
====================================

Mulholland's first posting as a consultant adult psychiatrist was in
1998, the year the worst of the violence stopped. His base was the
socially deprived area of Newtownabbey on the Northern outskirts of
Belfast: “‘There was a lot of paramilitary activity in the area. There
were also parts of the catchment area where many ex-soldiers,
ex-policemen and ex-security forces were living, who clearly had their
own experience […] A lot of what I dealt with was trauma related, where
the individuals in some way have been impacted by the Troubles.’”

Newtownabbey is a microcosm of Northern Ireland's more deprived
communities. Many moved there to get away from the violence in Belfast
in the 1970s, some involuntarily: “‘That means the local community is
quite atomised and not as cohesive as you might get in some parts of
Northern Ireland, which is one of the reasons Newtownabbey has quite
high rates of psychiatric problems.’”

Northern Ireland has higher rates of mental illness than the rest of the
UK across all types of mental health conditions. Why have so many people
not seen the dividends of peace reflected in their mental health?
Mulholland says the causes are complex: socioeconomic deprivation is
strongly associated with mental illness; there is a long legacy of
underfunding of mental health services (half the proportion of health
funding compared to England); there is a tribal political structure,
leading to impasses in policy decision-making; and the psychological
ripples of the Northern Ireland civil war continue to reverberate 23
years after it ended.

And then there are those stark suicide statistics: 143 people died by
suicide in Northern Ireland in 1996. When last recorded in 2015, the
figure had more than doubled to 318. It's tempting to attribute the
lower rates in wartime to a protective ‘Blitz-spirit’, which bonds
people together through shared adversity. Mulholland thinks this could
be a factor in more deprived communities, but we have to be careful not
to over-interpret.

He points out that during the years of the Troubles, paradoxically,
policing by paramilitaries kept drug misuse in Northern Ireland lower
than anywhere else on these islands – which is now not the case. There
is also some evidence that, for people in their 50s or 60s, who lived
through the worst years of violence, their untreated trauma was a factor
in their suicide decades later. Most people who die by suicide in
Northern Ireland don't have contact with mental health services, so
tackling it can't be addressed by mental health services alone.

.. _sec2:

PPE: politics, psychiatry and economics
=======================================

We're talking in the Harland Bar, named after the local shipyard, in the
shadow of the four hulking steel prows of Belfast's Titanic building. It
seems an apt place to meet, for a man whose political life has been
bound up with the struggles of the blue-collar worker: “‘Well, I mean, I
am a socialist, you know. I'm on the left and my version of socialism is
avowedly anti-sectarian. So, I've not needed to be in either camp. I've
a very clear, distinctive view about there being a third tradition in
Northern Ireland, which is kind of around labour and socialist
politics.’”

Northern Irish psychiatry is a small community, where reputations travel
by word of mouth. Mulholland seems to plough his own furrow, more or
less. Genial and unassuming in manner, the only signifiers of
non-conformity are the Dr Martens boots he wears with his suit. There is
no evidence of the reputed (possibly apocryphal) Trotskyite student
streak.

Mulholland says that doctors in Northern Ireland have always had strong
links with the socialist tradition. The nascent socialist and labour
movement was stymied by the eruption of the civil war in 1968–1970.
Sectarianism has dominated the political discourse ever since. He
describes the influence of these socialist roots on his professional
life: “‘It was just central to my work from the day I began working as a
doctor, even before I trained in psychiatry. Perhaps that was of
assistance to me that I wasn't as focused on the biology as a causative
factor and as a sole explanatory factor, as maybe some other doctors
were.’”

In the Northern Ireland context, he thinks socialism has a unique
ability to straddle the sectarian divide: “‘I think socialism properly
speaking is neither Unionist nor Nationalist and seeks to unite people
[…] And it's around issues like health and education. That's how you
unite people in terms of what they have in common as opposed to dividing
them.’”

Although for some people socialism is conflated with the ‘Red Peril’,
Stalinism, et cetera, Mulholland is at pains to stress that
fundamentally it's about creating a more equal society: ‘That's
[Stalinism], not my version of socialism. It has to be democratic or
it's not socialism’.

Mulholland sees the current resurgence of socialism (among young people
in particular) as a renunciation of individualism. He detects a growing
public awareness that collective purpose is needed to reduce social
inequality and to improve our mental health: “‘I think it's the impact
of the global crisis of 2007, 2008, 2009 […] that led to people who
hadn't previously questioned the system, how it operated, asking
profound questions. And I think that's now magnified by other
developments, for example the question of the future of the planet, the
environment […] if you study that particular threat carefully, and you
think about what the alternatives are, it does suggest transformational
change is required.’”

.. _sec3:

What is at psychiatry's cutting edge?
=====================================

No, it's not the sexy neuroscience. ‘I suppose I've always been
interested in prevention and early intervention’, Mulholland explains,
‘in the sense that if psychiatry has a cutting edge it's about: How
early can we intervene?’

If circumstances hadn't changed suddenly in 2012 he might have stayed in
his first consultant job in Newtownabbey. He collapsed at work, was
rushed to theatre with a haemoglobin of 3 and was diagnosed with a rare
form of stomach cancer. There was no Damascene moment, but after 9
months off, with time to take stock, he came back to find a small pot of
money available to do some innovative work.

One of the earliest advocates in Northern Ireland for early intervention
in psychosis services, he now works as a consultant psychiatrist with
STEP (Service, Treatment, Education and Prevention), Northern Ireland's
only early intervention service for the ‘at-risk mental state’, which he
helped set up in the Northern Trust area. He is also one of the
clinicians who has done most to fertilise the ground for mental health
research in Northern Ireland. He co-leads the mental health special
interest group in the Northern Ireland Clinical Research Network.

His research interests primarily focus on first-episode psychosis,
prevention of transition to psychosis and the impact of trauma on mental
health. Northern Ireland has higher rates of psychosis than most places
in the UK (excepting parts of London with a high African–Caribbean
population).

There is a burgeoning evidence base that early intervention can improve
outcomes for young people with psychotic illness and even prevent
transition from at-risk mental states in some cases. Though as
Mulholland says, it can be quite difficult to prove a negative.

.. _sec4:

The Belfast fixator
===================

Northern Irish medicine has some grim claims to fame because of medics'
unique war-zone experience. The ‘Belfast fixator’, for example, was
designed here by an orthopaedic surgeon to heal injuries from beatings
and explosions.

Four out of ten adults in Northern Ireland have been directly or
indirectly affected by Troubles-related trauma, Mulholland says.
According to data collected between 2004 and 2008, 8.8% of the
population met criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) at
some point in their lifetimes (higher even than in other, more intense
conflict zones such as Lebanon and Israel).\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` The
methodology of that paper has been pored over since, but he backs up its
findings: “‘It is clear and demonstrable that other places have higher
rates of trauma with lower rates of PTSD. Some other factors must be at
play […] one of the areas which we are compared to, for example, is
Israel […] but there is evidence that Israeli society is particularly
cohesive. That's a protective factor and perhaps our society is not
quite so cohesive and that's how rates [of PTSD] have crept up.’”

How then does a trauma history affect the trajectory of severe mental
illness such as bipolar disorder and psychosis? When Mulholland was
training, the dominant paradigm was a biomedical one, but he says, “‘I
was always interested in the idea that actually psychological trauma was
more central to the aetiology and the course of schizophrenia than was
allowed for. And it was around that time in the 1990s […] that evidence
began to emerge from groups all over the world, that psychological
trauma can actually cause psychosis.’”

Although this is more widely accepted now, he allows that there is much
work to do to develop causal models of psychotic illness.

The Northern Ireland Regional Trauma Network, of which he is clinical
director, was set up with a research focus from day one. Randomised
controlled trials looking at epigenetic factors in the intergenerational
transmission of trauma and psychological treatments of trauma are in the
offing.

Mulholland discusses the emerging evidence that psychological trauma
causes brain damage, particularly to the hippocampus and amygdala. He
says there is evidence that damage can be repaired with medication and
psychological therapy: ‘So a psychological insult causes brain damage
and psychological therapy causes brain repair. I think that's very
exciting and it opened up an entirely new way of looking at the brain’.

How does he respond to critics who, on the basis of the association
between trauma and mental illness, question the validity of a biological
contribution to psychiatric disorders? He suggests that we avoid
ideological entrenchment: “‘I would have an issue with the individuals
who practise biological determinism […] but I think equally now we have
strident voices where it's psychological determinism, where it's your
psychology that determines everything, and that's clearly not always the
case.’”

.. _sec5:

Media and mental health
=======================

Mulholland has long had an interest in the portrayal of mental health in
film and media. He helped organise a symposium on ‘Film and the politics
of mental health’ in 2016, with a focus on two countercultural figures,
Franco Basaglia and R.D. Laing. I wonder whether I've caught a glimpse
of the radical psychiatrist within, but he remains elusive.

Mental health anti-stigma messages sometimes seem at saturation point in
the media, but it's not the ‘worried well’ Mulholland wants to target:
“‘I think it's one role of psychiatrists to ensure that there's greater
understanding that there is such a thing as a mental illness. I think
that actually is important. You could say it's a concept or a construct
and it is in a sense, of course, but I think it's important for us to
make the case that sometimes there is demonstrable pathology, which
means that a person's way of being is different, which meets all the
criteria for illness and that ought to be addressed.’”

In a socially conservative society like Northern Ireland he thinks this
is especially crucial. The BBC's Countryfile programme shone a spotlight
on mental health problems among gay farmers last year. Mulholland was
involved with the episode, which interviewed a Northern Irish farmer who
had suicidal feelings as a result of repressing his sexual identity.

Since then he has been working with the BBC on a Horizon programme
(screened in spring 2020), about prominent 1990s comedian Tony Slattery.
In particular, he wants to highlight the genesis of mental illness
through trauma: “‘He [Slattery] received a diagnosis of bipolar
affective disorder after his parents died. He went into the media and
began to talk about a traumatic experience at the age of 8 and once he
began to talk about it, he wanted to explore it further. So we worked
with the producers of Horizon and made a programme all around this,
about his life trajectory, his life course, but going beyond that to
examine bipolar disorder as a concept – what the biological
underpinnings of bipolar disorder might be and the role of trauma in
bipolar disorder.’”

.. _sec6:

Not another brick in the wall
=============================

Early-life adversity remains the fulcrum of Mulholland's interests.
Northern Ireland has higher levels of multiple deprivation (defined as
an inability to access three or more basic necessities) than the rest of
the UK. The most deprived areas are also those most affected by the
Troubles.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` He references the zeitgeisty book *The Spirit
Level*,(n.d.c) which made a compelling case that socio-economic
inequality, rather than poverty per se, drives poor mental health: “‘So
in the United States and the United Kingdom, where neoliberal ideas were
most to the fore, appear to have higher rates of mental problems
compared to more cohesive societies like the Scandinavian countries
where there are lower rates of social division.’”

We discuss economist Lord Layard's seminal 2006 report, which led to the
Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) programme in England.
Among the criticisms of Layard was his framing of anxiety and depression
as discrete illnesses that, when individually treated could return
people to economic productivity, rather than formulating these problems
as people's responses to the difficult socioeconomic circumstances in
which they find themselves.

Mulholland demurs: “‘I think in the main it's [IAPT] been an excellent
initiative that has brought psychological therapies to large numbers of
individuals who've benefited and who wouldn't have received such
treatment. I think Northern Ireland would benefit from a similar
initiative.’”

In the manner of Sophie's choice, I ask him to pick one thing that would
have the biggest impact on mental well-being in Northern Ireland. A
glimpse of the radical psychiatrist emerges at last: “‘Our society is
dysfunctional. It's a function of the level of division in society that
we are literally divided by walls, physical walls [the incongruously
named ‘peace walls’ that separate Catholic and Protestant communities],
but we're also divided by metaphorical walls in various ways. There's
clear evidence that those who live close to the physical walls, the
‘peace lines’ that separate our communities, have higher rates of mental
health problems.‘So, in Northern Ireland […] in my working lifetime, the
number of consultant psychiatrists has doubled. Where's the demonstrable
impact on the rates of mental health problems? Can we prove that we are
effective? I think there's a real challenge there. Whereas we can
demonstrate that if you make real changes to societal structures, that
*will* have an impact on rates of mental health problems.’”

Long live the (democratic, peaceful) revolution.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

.. [1]
   **Claire Mckenna talks to Ciaran Mulholland**, clinical director of
   Northern Ireland's Regional Trauma Network about the legacy of ‘the
   Troubles’ and why psychiatry is inherently political
