---
author:
- Adam G. Van Hagen
date: 2020-04
institute:
- "A learning designer and education writer at Hubble Studios, Cape
  Town, South Africa. Email: <adam@hubblestudios.com>"
---

As interest in psychedelic research continues to increase, it is clear
that a new conceptual framework is needed to investigate phenomena
associated with altered states of consciousness. While research has
focused primarily on their psychotherapeutic and entheogenic uses, few
studies have dared to consider psychedelics as potent tools for
enhancing cognition, conducting conceptual research and improving
complex problem-solving. Sensing an opportunity to kick-start an
intellectual revolution, Roberts introduces 'multistate theory' as a
potential framework to guide new exploration of altered states of
consciousness.

A core tenant of multistate theory is the rejection of the 'singlestate
fallacy', which Roberts defines as the erroneous assumption that all
worthwhile skills, abilities and knowledge reside in our default waking
state. He argues that our default state is simply one of many possible
states of consciousness (or 'mindbody states') that the mind can produce
and operationalise. Directly criticising mainstream science and
philosophy\'s understanding of intelligence and consciousness, Roberts
provides ample evidence that cognitive processes qualifying as
intelligence reside in other mindbody states.

*MindApps* explores a simple analogy -- as apps are to smart devices,
'mindapps' are to the brain--mind complex. Therefore, any agent of
psychological change (both drug and non-drug) that produces a mindbody
state can be considered a mindapp. Different kinds of mindapp, of which
psychedelics are perhaps the most potent, ultimately produce disparate
mindbody states. Consequently, Roberts challenges the reader to consider
a new age of 'mind design', where mindapps are used in combinations to
investigate mindbody states, create new ones and uncover the full extent
of the human mind. As transhumanist and transpersonal perspectives begin
to intersect, could it be possible to design minds that far surpass the
functions and capabilities of our current ones?

Multistate theory is a novel conceptual framework that sits at the
crossroads of science, philosophy, spirituality, humanities and the
arts. Considering the evidence illustrating the efficacy of psychedelics
and other mindapps as catalysts for substantive psychological change,
multistate theory can serve as a guide not only for systematically
investigating mindapps and the cognitive processes that characterise
mindbody states, but also for conducting conceptual research.

While he is clearly optimistic about the future, Roberts is quick to
highlight that *MindApps* is merely the start of a new conversation
about what it means to have a mind. However, given his contributions to
psychedelic research and education over the past 30 years, Roberts\'s
conclusions are deserving of a wider audience. As we shift from the age
of information to the age of experience, his clarion call for bold
innovation should be heard by all who wish to pioneer the development of
new research questions, creative methodologies and engaging education
for future generations of mind-designers.
