===================================================================================
Feasibility and utility of enhanced sleep management on in-patient psychiatry wards
===================================================================================



Chloe Novak
Emma Packer
Alastair Paterson
Ambrina Roshi
Rosie Locke
Patrick Keown
Stuart Watson
Kirstie N. Anderson

:Correspondence: Kirstie N. Anderson
(kirstie.anderson@nuth.nhs.uk)

:date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Sleep disturbance is common in psychiatry wards despite poor sleep
   worsening mental health. Contributory factors include the ward
   environment, frequent nightly checks on patients and sleep disorders
   including sleep apnoea. We evaluated the safety and feasibility of a
   package of measures to improve sleep across a mental health trust,
   including removing hourly checks when safe, sleep disorder screening
   and improving the ward environment.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   During the pilot there were no serious adverse events; 50% of
   in-patients were able to have protected overnight sleep. Hypnotic
   issuing decreased, and feedback from patients and staff was positive.
   It was possible to offer cognitive–behavioural therapy for insomnia
   to selected patients.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Many psychiatry wards perform standardised, overnight checks, which
   are one cause of sleep disruption. A protected sleep period was safe
   and well-tolerated alongside education about sleep disturbance and
   mental health. Future research should evaluate personalised care
   rather than blanket observation policies.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Normal duration and timing of sleep is vital for mental and physical
health and yet the majority of patients on a psychiatric ward experience
sleep disturbance.\ :sup:`1` Sleep disturbance is an independent risk
factor for suicide.\ :sup:`2,3` Poor sleep is often attributed to the
psychiatric disorder requiring in-patient treatment, but is also
attributable to the ward environment. Noise, light and regular,
typically hourly, overnight observations disturb patients independent of
the psychiatric diagnosis.\ :sup:`4` Primary sleep disorders, including
obstructive sleep apnoea and restless legs syndrome, are increased in
psychiatry patients and also disturb sleep.\ :sup:`5` For a subgroup of
patients, insomnia-specific cognitive–behavioural therapy can be
effective within an acute psychiatry ward.\ :sup:`6`

Nursing observations are designed to enhance care and reduce risk, but
may paradoxically increase sleep disturbance. To date, little research
has focused on the effect of and need for regular overnight observations
within psychiatry. Understandable concern about patient safety is one
reason for frequent physical checks, despite no direct evidence that
fixed timing checks reduces risk.\ :sup:`7,8`

After review of current observation policy across a large mental health
trust, a pilot scheme to enhance sleep was introduced (the SleepWell
programme). This was a package including reduction of overnight noise
and light, formal staff education about sleep and sleep disorders, a
protected sleep period for those deemed safe and screening for sleep
apnoea and restless legs syndrome for all in-patients. There was a
service evaluation of adverse events, including harmful behaviours
before and during the change in night-time observations, alongside
detailed patient, staff and carer feedback over the assessment period.
Cognitive–behavioural therapy for insomnia (CBTi) was made available to
two of the seven wards that undertook the pilot. Issuing data of
hypnotic medication was assessed before and during the pilot period.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

This was a service evaluation of a pilot scheme to enhance sleep and
adjust overnight nursing policy. As such, formal ethical approval was
not required, but the design, safety and existing trust operating
procedures were reviewed before commencement, by the medical staff
committee, the trust board and an existing trust safety programme
‘positive and safe’, which was aimed at reducing restrictive
interventions while managing challenging or violent behaviour. Seven
adult wards across one large mental health trust (Cumbria,
Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust) were used for the
pilot. To ensure a range of patients they included a 16-bed male and two
16-bed female adult acute in-patient units based on two separate sites,
a 26-bed long-stay rehabilitation unit with shared house, a 16-bed mixed
neurorehabilitation ward, a 12-bed in-patient dementia service and an
18-bed psychiatric rehabilitation and recovery unit.

.. _sec1-1:

Staff training
--------------

Two designated staff representatives from each unit were identified as
sleep leads to facilitate development and delivery of the necessary
practice changes. Before implementation there was education about sleep
and sleep disorders from K.N.A., and creation of an educational package
labelled as SleepWell. The service evaluation was designed as a 6-month
intervention, with 3 months to identify and educate sleep leads and then
3 months of the SleepWell programme in place with protected sleep during
this time. Project supervision and clinical governance came within
‘positive and safe’, with monthly reports from all sleep leads.

.. _sec1-2:

Ward environment and protected sleep time
-----------------------------------------

The ward environment was assessed for all pilot wards and all staff
reported weekly during the 3-month pilot on night noise reduction
measures. Eye masks and ear plugs were offered to all suitable patients.
The trust estates department were involved for wards that required any
adjustment to soft-closing bins and doors. Non-caffeinated drinks were
offered to the patients in the evening. Set wake-up and bed times and
reduction in large meals before bed was encouraged. An agreed addition
to the assessment tool was developed to highlight those safe for
protected sleep time after at least 72 h on the ward. This was set at
00.00–06.00 h. There was in addition screening for obstructive sleep
apnoea, using the validated STOPbang screening questionnaire.\ :sup:`9`
A score of >3 indicates an >50% chance of having obstructive sleep
apnoea. Screening for restless legs syndrome was undertaken with a
single validated screening question with additional prompt to
differentiate from drug-induced akathisia.\ :sup:`10` The SleepWell
pathway is shown in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__. This included asking all
patients ‘Is sleep a problem for you?’. On every pilot ward, information
about the SleepWell project was displayed and all patients and carers
were informed about the change in policy on admission (shown in
Supplementary Appendix 1 available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.30). For those with persistent insomnia
on two of the acute wards (with adequate and trained psychology
provision), CBTi was offered on a weekly basis as a small group therapy
and, following existing published protocols developed from the Oxford
Ward Sleep Solution study, this is modified to allow for the in-patient
setting and encompasses education about sleep, sleep hygiene, sleep
scheduling and relaxation, but does not use sleep restriction.\ :sup:`6`
Fig. 1SleepWell algorithm used on all wards. CBTi, cognitive–behavioural
therapy; MDT, multidisciplinary team; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors.

.. _sec1-3:

Feedback and review of incidents and hypnotic prescribing
---------------------------------------------------------

The quantity of hypnotics (zopiclone, temazepam, melatonin and
promethazine) issued to each ward was examined across two time periods:
January to March 2019 (the SleepWell pilot time period) and January to
March 2018 (before the SleepWell intervention). The specific number of
patients deemed safe for protected sleep time and the number who
completed sleep disorder assessments were also recorded. Interviews with
staff and patients across all wards provided feedback for qualitative
analysis of the intervention. Incident rates are routinely recorded
within the trust by incident report forms (IR1) via an electronic
incident reporting system. The number and type were looked at during the
time of the pilot and for a further 5 months after this period, and
compared with a similar 8-month period before the SleepWell pilot. A
comparison between incidents recorded over 24-hour periods and
specifically during the protected sleep time was made. Ongoing review of
the incident data continued after the service evaluation for an 8-month
period in total, as all pilot wards elected to continue protected sleep
time. No patient-identifiable data were used at any stage.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Protected sleep time
--------------------

After assessing those who needed more frequent observations for reasons
of physical health or safety, an average of 50% of patients were able to
have protected sleep time during their in-patient stay (range 44.3–60%);
the data for the different wards is summarised in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__.
The psychiatric rehabilitation and recovery ward was excluded from the
data below because patients were not on hourly observations as standard,
but instead had established protected sleep time of 00.00–07.00 h living
within long-stay flats and houses. Table 1In-patients on the six wards
during the 3 month SleepWell pilot where there was a change to
night-time observationsWardTotal number of patients on the wardNumber of
patients on protected sleepPercentage of patients on protected sleepAll
wards combined25011646.4%Acute adult male793544.3%Acute adult female
1201260%Acute adult female 21255644.8%Dementia
service10550%Neurorehabilitation16850%

.. _sec2-2:

Adverse events during protected sleep time
------------------------------------------

Incident data was compared between 1 January 2018 to 31 August 2018 and
1 January 2019 to 31 August 2019, which included the SleepWell protected
sleep period. Far fewer incidents occurred at night in any of the
different incident categories both in 2018 and 2019. No serious adverse
event, suicide attempt or suicide occurred as a result of the overnight
protected sleep period. The deaths that occurred were in-patients on the
psychiatric rehabilitation and recovery and dementia wards and were
attributed to an expected decline in physical health conditions. A
single death occurred in an elderly patient overnight, but this was
off-site in an acute medical ward and was attributable to perforated
bowel. Across all seven pilot wards, the total number of patients absent
without leave or absconding decreased during the SleepWell pilot.
Serious incidents requiring security decreased and self-harm decreased
during the night, although not during the day, as did inappropriate
patient behaviour at night. Aggression and violence increased between
2018 and 2019, with most of the incidents reported on the male
high-dependency unit (264 of 781 incidents). It should be noted that
there was a trust-wide implementation of a no-smoking policy at the
beginning of 2019, and an increase in aggression and agitation was noted
(mostly related to wanting to smoke on the trust premises). The results
are summarised in `Table 2 <#tab02>`__. Table 2Adverse events before and
during the SleepWell pilotIncidentNumber of incidentsNumber of incidents
during 00.00–06.00 hJan–Aug 2018Jan–Aug 2019Jan–Aug 2018Jan–Aug
2019Aggression and violence4837814684Absent without leave and
absconded17317443Self-harm1561932617Inappropriate patient
behaviour7611154Substance use/misuse/prohibited items (excluding
smoking)54103 (64)18Death3511Security877665

.. _sec2-3:

Hypnotic issuing before and during the SleepWell pilot
------------------------------------------------------

Review of hypnotics use (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__) showed a 25% decrease in
the quantity of hypnotics ordered to the wards during the SleepWell
pilot period. There were specific decreases in zopiclone 7.5 mg and
3.75 mg tablets, promethazine hydrochloride 10 mg and 25 mg tablets and
melatonin 2 mg modified release tablets. There was an increase in
temazepam 10 mg and 20 mg tablets, but the total number of all
prescriptions issued decreased. Specific ward issuing data highlighted
that six of the seven wards ordered less hypnotics from pharmacy. Table
3Hypnotic issuing during the SleepWell pilot compared with a similar
time period before the pilotDrug descriptionQuantity of hypnotics
issuedJan 2018–Mar 2018Jan 2019–Mar 2019Zopiclone 7.50 mg
tablets796421Zopiclone 3.75 mg tablets828590Promethazine hydrochloride
25 mg tablets814630Promethazine hydrochloride 10 mg tablets1120Temazepam
10 mg tablets336366Temazepam 20 mg tablets14160Melatonin 2 mg modified
release tablets278240Total31782407

.. _sec2-4:

Sleep environment
-----------------

The input from estates varied upon the different wards, but included
blackout blinds and dimmer lights to ensure light levels throughout the
night were kept to a minimum. Soft-closing doors were fitted on two
wards. Loud-closing bins were identified and replaced. Eye masks and ear
plugs were available on request for all wards. The Rehabilitation and
Recovery Unit was structured in bungalows, with fewer noises and
disturbances, and so little adaptation was therefore necessary. The
volume of night nurse calls was reduced to a minimum and staff were
encouraged to report any issues relating to noise/light promptly during
weekly meetings.

Posters were put on walls to remind staff and patients about the need
try to keep the noise levels to a minimum at night-time. Carers and
staff were invited to feedback on changes and given information about
sleep and sleep hygiene (included in the Supplementary Appendices).

.. _sec2-5:

Staff and patient feedback
--------------------------

.. _sec2-5-1:

Before
~~~~~~

One key theme running throughout the feedback collected before the pilot
was about the negative effect the ward environment had on patient sleep.
The main environmental factors noted were noise, temperature, lighting,
bedding and other patients.

.. _sec2-5-2:

After
~~~~~

Post-pilot feedback from ward staff was universally positive and many
commented that the ward environment was more peaceful and settled. A
focus on bed-time routines was perceived by staff as helping better
sleep and, overall, this was well-supported by staff, although there was
initial anxiety before implementation about not checking on patients and
assessing risk caused some disagreement about which patients were safe
to go onto protected sleep. More standardised sleep assessments were not
possible within the framework of a service evaluation primarily
assessing safety and feasibility. Making this a documented,
multidisciplinary team decision helped to reassure staff alongside
involving the night coordinators.

Patients who did comment preferred being on protected sleep time: some
did not notice a difference and had not been woken, but others expressed
feeling safer without people looking into the room, and those who had
been readmitted described it as better than previous admissions. All
carers were positive about the intervention, with none asking for more
frequent observations to be restarted. No patients or carers had
concerns about the protected sleep time. All in-patients were asked
about the SleepWell programme and typical comments from patients from
all of the wards are summarised in Supplementary Appendix 2 but included
‘better than last admission’, ‘I feel safer now’ and ‘I don't worry
about people looking into my room on a night’.

.. _sec2-5-3:

Screening for sleep disorders
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The numbers documented as screened were small on the acute wards despite
encouragement throughout the period of SleepWell. A total of 39 out of
125 and 37 out of 79 patients were assessed for obstructive sleep apnoea
and restless legs syndrome on the acute adult wards, respectively, with
nine positive screens for obstructive sleep apnoea (STOPbang score >3).
Using the screening tools, no sleep disorders were identified on the
rehabilitation wards or the dementia unit.

.. _sec2-5-4:

CBTi
~~~~

CBTi was implemented on two adult acute wards (one male and one female),
with 25 patients assessed as suitable based on length of stay,
problematic insomnia and ability to attend therapy. Thirteen (52%) then
accepted therapy and attended at least four sessions.

A total of 85 admissions came to the two wards during the 3-month
assessment period; only 27 were suitable and approached, 18 accepted and
13 completed. The majority not suitable were either transferred or due
for imminent discharge, but 15 had decline in mental state and were
unable to engage in therapy. All treated had either paranoid
schizophrenia, psychosis or depressive disorder, reflecting the typical
case mix of the two wards. Mean insomnia severity index before treatment
was 18 (range 6–28), and completion insomnia severity index was 14
(range 6–16).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

In this pilot study, a protected sleep time and improved education
around sleep were safely incorporated into a personalised care plan for
adult psychiatric in-patients. There were no serious adverse events or
deaths related to the change in policy, ward demands for hypnotics were
reduced and both staff and patient feedback was positive.

For psychiatry patients, sleep disturbance is an independent risk factor
for suicide,\ :sup:`2,3` and has been shown to independently predict
lower quality of life, higher symptom severity and less benefit from
treatment, with Kallestad et al suggesting that sleep should be seen as
a ‘stand-alone therapeutic entity, rather than an epi-phenomenon of
existing diagnoses’.\ :sup:`11` However, there have been few systematic
studies of the factors that adversely affect sleep on in-patient units.
A large, questionnaire-based survey showed 66% of in-patients had poor
sleep quality independent of gender or diagnosis.\ :sup:`1` Previous
work from our acute in-patient, psychiatry wards demonstrated high
levels of objective sleep disturbance and suggested that a number of
environmental factors within the ward, including noise levels at night
and hourly observations, were disruptive and therefore paradoxically may
be worsening mental health and delaying recovery.\ :sup:`4` Measures to
stabilise sleep by using a high-intensity, modified version of CBTi has
been shown to be possible and highly effective in acute psychiatry
in-patients,\ :sup:`6` although it was carried out maintaining overnight
hourly observations.

The need to protect sleep as part of treatment has to be set against the
importance of a safe level of observations for those at high risk of
harm from mental or physical health problems. The National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence guidelines define various levels of
observation determined by a risk assessment, especially for severe
self-harm, suicide, violence and absconding.\ :sup:`12` Within physical
health units, this initial assessment is rapidly followed by a
personalised care plan, allowing for a step down to a protected sleep
period where possible. This is shown to balance prevention of acute
physical health deterioration with a minimum of intrusive night-time
observations. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
defined the purpose of observation as to ‘provide a period of safety…
with observation levels set at the least restrictive level, for the
least amount of time’.\ :sup:`12`

With specific regard to suicide risk, sleep deprivation owing to
frequent checks may still be justified if it can be shown to reduce the
frequency of suicide or severe self-harm. However, 91% of those who
commit suicide do so while under intermittent observation,\ :sup:`13`
and the most recent review from the National Confidential Enquiry into
Suicide\ :sup:`8` emphasised the avoidance of routine, non-personalised
checklists. A recent review of the timing of suicide data highlighted a
far lower risk of suicide occurring overnight during the night periods
of 23.00–07.00 h\ :sup:`7` and challenged the perceived benefit of
frequent observations. Despite these recommendations, frequent and
typically hourly checks throughout the night remain widespread across
acute mental health trusts throughout the UK.

Psychiatric nursing observations remain fundamental to the emotional and
physical support of the patient, and current guidelines advise
‘minimising the extent to which patients feel they are under
surveillance, while encouraging communication, listening, and conveying
to the patient that they are valued and cared for’.\ :sup:`13,14` This
guidance is somewhat in contrast to typical night-time observations,
which require the staff member to clearly see the patient is breathing.
This can involve opening the window hatch in the door or entering the
bedroom and shining a torch on the patient's face, switching on a light
or physically waking the patient.\ :sup:`15` Patient and staff feedback
highlighted complaints about the intrusive nature of checks and dislike
of the observation policy. During the pilot, support for nursing staff
was vital so that staff felt protected and supported to change a policy
that might expose them to criticism. In practice, only 50% of patients
were deemed safe to be placed on protected sleep, with others requiring
more regular observation and input for physical or mental health needs.
This still allowed a greater level of necessary engagement for night
staff for patients requiring more support or observation for their
safety. However, the detailed work required to reassure staff before
implementing the policy took an average of 3 months alongside the
monthly meetings during the project. It is of note that all wards
elected to continue the protected sleep period after the initial service
evaluation.

A wide range of incident data is collected across the trust, and the
main aim of the pilot was to use this data to show that serious adverse
physical or mental health events were not increased in those on
protected sleep time, and that there were no serious adverse events in
those patients on protected sleep as an important safety measure. It
would remain important to have ongoing monitoring of safety for those on
protected sleep time and a flexible protocol that allows for any patient
to have increased frequency of observation if there was clinical
concern. Longer-term assessments would be required to assess for a
consistent change in behaviour or any sustained improvements in
night-time agitation.

High rates of obstructive sleep apnoea are found in those with severe
mental illness, with a prevalence of 25% reported across all psychiatric
disorders and the highest frequencies seen in major depressive
disorder.\ :sup:`5,16` Risk factors for obstructive sleep apnoea include
male gender, age >55 years, reports of sleepiness and obesity and the
STOPbang questionnaire has recently been validated as an effective
screening tool in the psychiatric population.\ :sup:`17` An in-patient
admission is an opportunity to assess physical health, with increasing
recognition of the poor cardiometabolic health of many patients with
psychiatric disease.\ :sup:`18` Obstructive sleep apnoea screening
should ideally be part of this screening or at least considered as a
modifiable cause of poor sleep. Use of the STOPbang questionnaire in our
pilot remained challenging, with small numbers of STOPbang scores
recorded in records. This may reflect acutely unwell patients or the
number of other assessments also required for this group; however, those
who were screened were often at risk, which allowed further
investigation and lifestyle advice.

Hypnotics carry a risk of diversion and respiratory depression in
overdose. Those issued hypnotics while on a psychiatry ward in the UK
will typically remain on them at discharge, with a substantial
percentage still using them at 12 months.\ :sup:`19` A recent review of
the side-effects and benefits of a range of hypnotics highlights the
limited evidence base of antihistamines in particular, and the potential
for dependency. There is also a falls risk in the elderly.\ :sup:`20`
The total number of hypnotics issued to the wards decreased by 25%
during the 3-month pilot period. This may reflect some hypnotic
prescribing being partly attributable to a noisy environment and the
observations themselves. However, the analysis did not include
patient-level data, so future work would be needed to look at individual
prescriptions over longer periods of time. The change in prescribing may
also reflect increased knowledge of non-pharmacological strategies to
manage poor sleep and the improved ward environment.

There are several limitations to this small study. Standardised sleep
assessments were not undertaken, partly because of the variable ward
populations and need to assess initial feasibility of protected sleep
time. It was not possible to assess any effect on duration of in-patient
stay or whether different mental health diagnoses were more or less able
to have protected sleep time. Although a small number were able to have
CBTi, many were excluded because of short-stay rehabilitation,
highlighting the need to communicate to community teams for follow-up
therapy. No cases of restless legs syndrome were detected, which likely
reflects the lack of recognition of this syndrome and the need for more
training. This pilot was designed to evaluate patient safety first and
foremost, but a future, much larger trust-wide research study is
underway to address patient-level data regarding diagnoses,
patient-level prescribing data and patient stay for those on protected
sleep time compared with those not on protected sleep time. Although
some categories of incident increased, including aggression, this was
felt to relate to factors outside of SleepWell, including the particular
patient group on the high-dependency male rehabilitation ward and the
implementation of the trust-wide smoking ban. It should be noted that
even within this increase, far few incidents of any type occurred during
the 00.00–06.00 h time window.

In summary, this is the first pilot trial within a UK adult psychiatry
unit to formally evaluate the feasibility and safety of a protected
sleep period. A trust wide review of the observation policy is now
underway, but any personalised care plan for a patient should include an
evaluation of the patient's sleep. Improving and stabilising sleep
disturbance should be part of routine in-patient psychiatric care, with
a personalised assessment of the risk versus the benefit of waking the
patient at night.\ :sup:`21`

**Chloe Novak** is a psychology undergraduate in the Department of
Psychology at Newcastle University, UK. **Emma Packer** is an
undergraduate in biomedical sciences in the Department of Psychology at
Newcastle University, UK. **Alastair Paterson** is a pharmacist in the
Department of Psychology at Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS
Foundation Trust, UK. **Ambrina Roshi** is a speciality trainee in
psychiatry in the Department of Psychology at Cumbria, Northumberland,
Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Rosie Locke** is a psychology
research assistant in the Department of Psychology at Cumbria,
Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Patrick
Keown** is a consultant psychiatrist and Associate Medical Director at
In Patients South in the Department of Psychology at Cumbria,
Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Stuart
Watson** is a consultant psychiatrist and academic clinical senior
lecturer in the Department of Psychology at Cumbria, Northumberland,
Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust and in the Department of Psychology
at Newcastle University, UK. **Kirstie N. Anderson** is a consultant
neurologist and honorary clinical senior lecturer with the Regional
Sleep Service at Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and
in the Department of Psychology at Newcastle University, UK.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.30.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

Data are available from the author.

C.N. led on project design and development of all SleepWell material and
CBTi. E.P. analysed incident data and contributed to manuscript writing.
A.P. contributed to analysis of all prescribing data, manuscript
preparation and review. A.R. contributed to project design,
dissemination of SleepWell and data analysis. R.L. contributed to
qualitative feedback and data analysis. P.K. contributed to project
design, implementation and assistance with manuscript preparation. S.W.
contributed to project design and implementation, supervision of
students and manuscript preparation. K.N.A. contributed to project
conception, design, development of SleepWell material, supervision, data
analysis and manuscript preparation.

.. _nts6:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

ICMJE forms are in the supplementary material, available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.30.
