==============
Authors’ reply
==============



Rachel Gibbons
Fiona Brand
Anne Carbonnier
Alison Croft
Karen Lascelles
Gislene Wolfart
Keith Hawton

:date: 2020-04


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

**Authors’ reply:** We are grateful for Professor Morgan's engagement
with our paper,\ :sup:`1` and that we have stimulated debate in this
important area. We do, however, feel it necessary to respond to two
fundamental misinterpretations of our discussion about the
predictability and preventability of suicide.

First, the letter states that we were asserting there is ‘no evidence
that suicide risk assessment in clinical practice can usefully guide
clinical decision-making’, whereas we actually said that our ability to
predict patients at the highest level of risk is limited and that
despite the ubiquity of advice to use suicide risk assessment in
clinical practice, the positive predictive value is low and there is no
evidence that these assessments can usefully guide decision-making.

Second, Prof. Morgan asserts that we were advocating ‘ignoring the value
of suicide ideation’, which was not indicated at any point in the paper.

Suicidal thoughts are very common; however, completed suicide is rare.
The process that leads any individual to take their life is often poorly
understood. Given this, identifying the specific individuals most likely
to die by suicide is a very a challenging task. An overly high personal
and systemic expectation of a clinician's capacity to predict suicide in
any individual case is unreasonable and can lead to increased feelings
of distress and blame following a death. The distorted focus on
psychiatrists’ role to prevent suicide obfuscates their important role
in working to alleviate mental pain, encourage recovery and improve
quality of life.

We strongly advocate dynamic formulation of risk as part of clinical
care but question an over-reliance on risk assessment tools that have
little or no face validity. There is now a general
consensus\ :sup:`3,4,5` that these tools do not predict likelihood of
suicide. Indeed, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
guideline on self-harm from 2011, based on reviewing evidence, states:
‘Do not use risk assessment tools and scales to predict future suicide
or repetition of self-harm’, nor ‘to determine who should and should not
be offered treatment or who should be discharged’.\ :sup:`6`

We agree with Prof. Morgan that there is much to affirm the important
role of assessing suicidal ideation in guiding clinical decision-making.
Suicidal ideation is important not only as an indicator of potential
suicide but also as a clear sign of mental distress. Self-destructive
thoughts are a key symptom in various types of mental disorder,
including depression and personality disorders. These thoughts need to
be assessed in the context of other factors, as recommended by various
agencies, including the National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and
Homicide,\ :sup:`7` such as previous self-harm, social circumstances,
patients’ relationship with their mental health team, access to means
and early follow-up. We also endorse the current move away from
primarily focusing on trying to identify patients at most risk to
individualised safety planning for all patients.

We thank Dr Calcia for her supportive letter.\ :sup:`8` We particularly
agree with her focus on the need to prepare trainees for the experience
of a patient death by suicide. In this respect, we include the following
quotes from psychiatrists in our survey.

‘Start training the trainees early on suicide and suicide prevention. Do
not neglect the impact it will have on level of functioning and on
career choices. Building resilience is essential to help doctors sustain
the possibly repeated events of patient suicide.’

‘I think the training on this subject should be part of core and higher
training and higher trainees should have some mentoring and exposure to
this process.’

While the above comments may seem counter to the current focus on a zero
suicide policy, in our opinion they do reflect the reality of
psychiatric practice. Preparation for this often painful event is likely
to decrease personal trauma and reduce the risk of losing valuable staff
from our profession.
