=================================================================
Supporting people in mental health crisis in 21st-century Britain
=================================================================



Andrew Molodynski
Stephen Puntis
Em Mcallister
Hannah Wheeler
Keith Cooper [1]_
:Correspondence: Andrew Molodynski
(andrew.molodynski@oxfordhealth.nhs.uk)

:date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   Recent years have seen a surge in interest in mental healthcare and
   some reduction in stigma. Partly as a result of this, alongside a
   growing population and higher levels of societal distress, many more
   people are presenting with mental health needs, often in crisis.
   Systems that date back to the beginning of the National Health
   Service still form the basis for much care, and the current system is
   complex, hard to navigate and often fails people. Law enforcement
   services are increasingly being drawn into providing mental
   healthcare in the community, which most believe is inappropriate. We
   propose that it is now time for a fundamental root and branch review
   of mental health emergency care, taking into account the views of
   patients and the international evidence base, to ‘reset’ the balance
   and commission services that are humane and responsive – services
   that are fit for the 21st century.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Recent years have seen a surge of interest in mental healthcare. Media
columns, royal endorsements, prominence in policy and legislative agenda
all point to the gradual erosion of stigma surrounding mental illness.
However, the most recent Care Quality Commission report on mental health
services showed that services still struggle to provide people with the
help they need, with 40% of National Health Service (NHS) providers
being rated as poor or requiring improvement in the most fundamental
domain of all, safety.\ :sup:`1` Although this is widely acknowledged,
it has not as yet been remedied and is particularly problematic in the
management of so-called mental health crises.

Emergency medical services still operate on the historically established
principles developed during the birth of the NHS, with a single means of
emergency transport to large accident and emergency (A&E) departments
staffed and equipped to largely deal with physical problems. This was
entirely understandable in an era when few treatments were available for
mental health crises and few people presented to services, but it has
become increasingly outdated over time. A significant and rising
proportion of A&E attenders come with a mental health crisis of some
sort.\ :sup:`2,3` Many community mental health services (for all age
groups) are increasingly stretched owing to a period of significantly
rising demand, and the relatively flat workforce is leading to more
people presenting in crisis as we are less able to intervene early and
avoid such presentations. It is important to bear this wider picture in
mind while thinking about emergency mental healthcare.

There have been welcome developments in emergency mental healthcare,
including crisis teams,\ :sup:`4,5` but these are generally restricted
to those already under secondary mental healthcare, with only one
service in England to our knowledge being genuinely ‘open access’, with
people able to just turn up and be seen. Otherwise, people must go
through a general practitioner, the police, or A&E. Indeed, many crisis
services have shrunk in recent years, with providers being ‘freed’ from
adhering to the evidence-based care of the national service framework
and operating under reduced funding.\ :sup:`6` Many struggle to offer a
fast and flexible service to those in need in the face of increasing
demand, and many people are discharged early from hospital or not
admitted owing to chronic NHS mental health bed shortages.

Other developments have included police street triage
services,\ :sup:`7` which despite their name often support people in
mental health crises in their own homes as well as in public places.
Their introduction has come alongside a welcome drop in the use of
police custody for up to 24 h under section 136 of the Mental Health
Act, although overall section 136 use has not seen such
reductions.\ :sup:`8` However, these welcome reductions in police
custody use are not universal and cannot solely be attributed to triage
services, as both legislation and policy have also substantially
changed.\ :sup:`9` Street triage services vary markedly; while being
part of a crucial safety net, they operate alongside police officers,
which consumes significant police time and means that for many the
response to their health crisis comes in a police car – a marked
contrast to physical care, and distressing and stigmatising for many.

Other welcome initiatives include places where people in crisis can drop
in and receive support, generally from staff employed in the
charity/third sector. Terminology varies (crisis café, safe haven,
etc.), as do mode and hours of operation. Again, provision is variable
and few such places, if any, are open 24/7. We could find no empirical
evidence for their effectiveness or specific service models or
components of models.

The result of all the above is a patchwork of provision developed during
isolated attempts to patch up the problem of mental health crisis
response rather than developing system-wide solutions. They make crisis
care hard to negotiate for anyone, let alone people in distress and
their families. It is widely agreed that the current evidence base is
poor.\ :sup:`2,10–12` We need to ask ourselves some fundamental and
difficult questions. Are busy A&E departments the right place for those
in crisis, such as those at risk of suicide or self-harm, or those with
symptoms of psychosis? Are uniformed police officers the correct
response to people in distress who have not acted unlawfully? Why are
there so many cracks in provision that people can, and do, fall through
during crisis?

We believe a root and branch review of crisis services based upon
evidence from this country and overseas is needed. This should be guided
by those who receive services and their families, alongside those who
provide them. Such a process could move our mental health crisis
services (belatedly) into the 21st century. We need to be bold. Initial
evaluations of dedicated mental health ambulances in Sweden that work on
a similar basis to their physical counterparts are encouraging, with
much demand and favourable reports of patient experience.\ :sup:`13` In
Australia, projects of peer-to-peer support with care packages to avoid
hospital admission have shown encouraging results.\ :sup:`14` We need to
evaluate the current movement of crisis cafes and safe havens
rigorously, both in terms of effectiveness and of models that work (or
don't).

The NHS long-term plan
(`www.longtermplan.nhs.uk <www.longtermplan.nhs.uk>`__) has an ambitious
vision for emergency mental health services in particular, with improved
access and greater patient focus. It also promises a bolstering of
services for people with severe and enduring mental illnesses, and that
out of area placements (OAPs) will end. Unfortunately, a very recent NHS
report\ :sup:`15` has shown that OAPs are actually rising again.
However, detailed analysis of spending commitments and the current
worsening workforce problems in all disciplines makes it clear that
these worthy ambitions cannot be realised without a step change in our
thinking about and our valuing of mental healthcare. This, alongside the
review of mental health legislation and the universal acknowledgment
that services are inadequate, means that now is the time to invest in
the future by taking a considered and evidence-based approach to decide
what should be available to provide the best experiences of care and the
best outcomes. To continue with our ongoing *ad hoc*, piecemeal approach
does our patients a disservice.

**Andrew Molodynski** is the mental health policy lead for the British
Medical Association Consultant Committee and a full-time NHS clinical
psychiatrist, Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust and Oxford University,
Oxford, UK. **Stephen Puntis** is a senior researcher with an interest
in mental health service provision in the Department of Psychiatry,
Oxford University, Oxford, UK. **Em Mcallister** is a Lived Experience
Advisor, UK. **Hannah Wheeler** is a Metropolitan Police Service officer
seconded to Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and
Rescue Services, London, UK. **Keith Cooper** is a senior staff writer
at The Doctor Magazine, British Medical Association, London, UK.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
