===================================================================================================================
The HCR-20 and violence risk assessment – will a peak of inflated expectations turn to a trough of disillusionment?
===================================================================================================================



Edward Silva [1]_Correspondence to Edward Silva
(ed.silva@merseycare.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   The HCR-20 has taken on a life of its own. In forensic services it
   has been elevated from helpful aide-mémoire into a prophetic tool
   worthy of Nostradamus himself. Almost every outcome is interpreted
   through it. Despite the evidence of its limited utility, the
   difficulties of predicting rare events, the narrative fallacies and
   other heuristic biases it creates, and the massive opportunity costs
   it entails, commissioners and services alike mandate its use. Yet in
   routine practice the problems are not acknowledged, multiple
   conflicts of interest lie unobserved and other opportunities are
   neglected.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Violence risk assessment is a core part of forensic psychiatry. It has
evolved from an unstructured clinical and anecdotal exercise, through
the use of actuarial tools and is now dominated by a variety of
structured professional judgement (SPJ) instruments. Of these the
Historical Clinical Risk Management-20 (HCR-20) is pre-eminent. It has
itself evolved: first published in 1995, it is now in its third
iteration. Initially it was used as an aide-mémoire to assist clinicians
and others to systematically assess what were believed to be risk
factors for violence across time: historical (ten items), clinical and
risk management (five each). In 2001 further materials were added,
including scenario planning.

The HCR-20 is the most widely used violence risk assessment tool in the
world,\ :sup:`1` and in the UK it has become the ubiquitous gold
standard for the risk assessment of violence in forensic services. NHS
England commissioners of secure services for forensic patients mandate
an HCR-20 assessment, updated every 6 months, even when there is no
history of violence. As can be the case with many expert
judgements,\ :sup:`2` any outcome can be seen through its lens. In cases
of disaster, ‘the HCR-20 was completed incorrectly’, ‘the
recommendations were not followed’, ‘it was not updated on time’ and,
most seriously, ‘there was no HCR-20’. When there is success then the
merits of the risk assessment and assessor are praised. Fearing blame in
the event of failure, my psychologist colleagues spend dozens of hours
reading through volumes of notes and the outputs are so long as to be
unreadable. Explanations of previous violence are formulated, estimates
of risk made and future risk scenarios hypothesised. The tool is
over-relied on to guide patient management through complex systems of
care, a task it cannot achieve. Curiously, updates are frequently done
after clinical decisions about management have been made. But the
limitations are not acknowledged and they are legion. Some are relevant
to violence risk in general and others specifically to SPJ tools and the
HCR-20 in particular.

.. _sec1:

Limitations to SPJ tools
========================

•There is no grade 1 randomised controlled trial (RCT) evidence for the
effectiveness of SPJ tools in reducing violence; the only RCT tested the
Short Term Assessment of Risk and Treatability (START) and gave a
negative result.\ :sup:`3`\ •Most items in structured risk assessment
instruments, especially the Psychopathy Checklist –Revised (PCL-R), and
many in the HCR-20 do not predict violence.\ :sup:`4`\ •Random
combinations of risk factors are as useful as those assembled in
standardised instruments.\ :sup:`5`\ •The HCR-20 ignores pertinent facts
regarding the importance of adherence to specific drug treatments and
risk.\ :sup:`6`\ •The area under the curve (AUC) measure of utility
bears very little relevance to use in clinical practice and ignores the
difficulty of prediction when base rates are low.\ :sup:`7` It is a
concept rarely used in other areas of medical practice, where positive
predictive value (PPV) is the usual measure.•As with any attempt to
predict rare events\ :sup:`8` (p. 170) the PPV of the HCR-20, as with
other risk tools, is poor and it produces many more false- than
true-positive findings.\ :sup:`9`\ •High-quality negative evidence
regarding the utility of multiple risk tools is not noticed, is refuted
and as yet has had no impact on commissioners or
services.\ :sup:`9,10`\ •Intellectual and financial conflicts of
interest in the publications on various SPJ tools are not
mentioned.\ :sup:`11` Those who submit research papers on the HCR-20 and
other risk instruments rarely, if ever, declare an interest in receiving
fees from training in its use. Yet it is a ‘product’, like a
pharmaceutical agent, and one for which they stand to gain financially
if it is promoted. Similar conflicts may exist for those who conduct
serious adverse incident reviews recommending improved use of risk
assessment if this is also a service they provide on a commercial
basis.•The narrative explanations of risk formulations and future risk
scenarios are accepted. They are not seen as rhetorical devices
requiring empirical validation, unlikely to be correct in systems too
complex for analysis. To make sense of the world humans require stories
that examine concrete events, ignoring chance and the things that did
not happen. Any recent salient event is a candidate to become the kernel
of a narrative explanation.\ :sup:`12`\ •Narratives combined with recent
or high-profile events feed heuristic biases, including
representativeness, availability and, most important,
affect.\ :sup:`13,14` In forensic services our patients have often
violated basic human norms: rape, incest, murder, mutilation and losses
of control.\ :sup:`15` At times we will be disgusted. This is rarely
acknowledged and instead there is a serious risk that an emotionally
driven sense of disgust\ :sup:`14` will result in the immediate
generation of opinions for which the supporting evidence is subsequently
found, with risk assessment becoming confused with the assessment of
outrage\ :sup:`16` and becoming a moral exercise.\ :sup:`17`\ •Whatever
our organisations may tell us, it feels as if there is only punishment
for failure and so an increasing tendency to risk aversion is
inevitable.\ :sup:`18`\ •The definition of violence used in the HCR-20
is so broad (including verbal threats) as to be meaningless in the
services we work in.

.. _sec2:

The consequences of ignoring these limitations
==============================================

Ignoring these difficulties is not just a failure of a tool. It has
enormous consequences for patients, professionals, the public and those
who pay for our services. The patients we care for face prolonged
detention and the opportunity cost of professional time that could be
spent delivering interventions. The patients we do not care for face
delays in accessing care, often untreated and in inadequate facilities
in prison. As professionals we become preoccupied with avoiding failure
instead of achieving improvement and it often feels like the risk that
is being managed is the risk to ourselves and to, or even from, our
organisations. An explicit analysis of risk will be an important part of
a patient's treatment, but in the context of deficiencies in treatment
and access to care, an HCR-20 will not protect us, or our organisations,
from litigation or public criticism. Instead of trying to determine what
the prospective risk is given the facts and the base rates, we
anticipate how failure will be perceived in hindsight. Those that fund
our services complain that too many are detained,\ :sup:`19` while
removing funding from objective research.\ :sup:`20` Inquires\ :sup:`21`
continue to recommend interventions that do not work – case
management,\ :sup:`22` risk assessment and community treatment
orders\ :sup:`23` – and themselves can fuel narrative
fallacies.\ :sup:`24` Through our overvalued ideas regarding risk
assessment, forensic services are left caring for a tiny percentage of
mentally disordered offenders, who we dare not part company with, and at
vast expense.\ :sup:`25`

.. _sec3:

What can we do?
===============

The argument is not that risk assessments should be abandoned, only that
we should be much more circumspect about their power, utility and
explanatory value, and recognise how narratives may mislead as well as
explain. This is now the position in the related field of suicide risk
assessment. In stark contrast to the requirements for secure services
and the use of the HCR-20, the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) advice is: ‘Do not use risk assessment tools and
scales to predict future suicide or repetition of self-harm’\ :sup:`26`
(p. 8), for the simple reason that we cannot stratify risk using the
tools available. The information they provide regarding the likelihood
of the outcomes we are really concerned about is of no practical
use.\ :sup:`27` But it is very hard for systems to change and for
professionals to give up their sincerely held beliefs. This is the case
throughout medicine. It takes an average of 17 years to translate
research findings into practice.\ :sup:`28` Although short structured
assessments would be helpful, our attempts to stratify risk of violence
are not useful and should be abandoned, as should narrative explanations
of the past and hypothesising future scenarios. It is not particularly
useful to say that a man who has been violent in the past might be
violent in future if intoxicated, threatened, feeling disrespected or
aggrieved, lost to follow-up, non-adherent to antipsychotic or mood
stabilising medication and in contact with a vulnerable potential
victim.

Some hope that technology will provide a solution. But it took the
resources of Deep Mind's artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities,
combined with a vast sample of over 700 000 patients, to develop a
system to predict the highly specific outcome of acute kidney injury
within the tight window of 48 h in highly monitored in-patient
environments.\ :sup:`29` So why do we think that we can predict violent
behaviour over timescales of weeks, let alone months or years, on the
basis of human analysis, or that in future AI will be able to make
longer-term predictions about far more complex human behaviours? Even if
such analytic systems are developed, it is questionable whether
clinicians, patients or the legal system would accept them. It is likely
that highly discriminatory variables would be key factors in AI
algorithms – gender, age, ethnicity, residence in a high crime area,
peer group criminality – and there would be fears that the scenarios of
*The Minority Report* would emerge.\ :sup:`30` Instead the approach
adopted by NICE regarding suicide and self-harm should be taken, with
the emphasis on the delivery of effective treatments, ensuring services
are adequately resourced and developing better habits regarding
quality.\ :sup:`31`

.. _sec4:

A hint of change?
=================

A quick search using Google Trends shows that online interest in the
HCR-20 has fallen dramatically, from a peak in September 2007 to date.
The Gartner Hype Cycle,\ :sup:`32` with its phases of a technology
trigger, a peak of inflated expectations, a trough of disillusionment, a
slope of enlightenment and then a final plateau of productivity, is held
as an example of the boom, bust and then stabilisation of new
technologies. But perhaps this is what is happening already?

**Edward Silva** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist at Ashworth
Hospital, Mersey Care NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK. He has worked
in secure services since 1998 and has been involved in the use of SPJ
tools throughout as part of the routine clinical care of many detained
patients.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** E.S. is involved in the use of SPJ tools
   as part of the routine clinical care of detained patients.
