===================================================
Attitudes of care staff towards video consultations
===================================================



Rory Shadwell
Colin Hemmings
Max Pickard

:date: 2020-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We read with interest the excellent article by Johns et al on video
consultations in mental health services.\ :sup:`1` Such video
consultations can also be used with key informants such as care staff.
In our specialist mental health service for people with an intellectual
disability (also known in UK health services as learning disability) in
Kent we have just completed a quality improvement project on attitudes
towards video consultations among the staff in care settings.

We found that the majority of the care staff interviewed felt that video
consultations would not have a negative impact on access to (67%) or on
the quality of care (69%) provided by our mental health service for
people with intellectual disability. Additionally, we asked care staff
if they would consider using video consultations in place of
face-to-face consultations beyond the time frame of the coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Again, we found that the majority
(66.7%) said they would.

Around a third of care staff stated that video consultations could be a
good alternative to face-to-face appointments as they would allow them
to still go ahead even if the service users declined to leave their
accommodation. Other care staff explained that video consultations would
allow clinicians to see the service users in their own environment and
that they may make it easier to involve multiple healthcare
professionals in an appointment. The most frequently cited benefit of
video consultations was the potential to alleviate the worry and anxiety
that some service users experience when going to a clinic appointment.

The attitudes towards video consultations among care staff were overall
positive but they were not uniformly so. For example, it was mentioned
that having a video consultation may mean that the service user is more
likely to become distracted. Another respondent mentioned that for their
service users, much of the information needed is derived from non-verbal
communication and observed behaviour, which may be more difficult to
assess over video. One carer stated that it would be too difficult to
get their service user to cooperate with using the communication device.

These findings may be of particular significance in the world we face
post-COVID-19 lock-down where individuals may experience increased
anxiety associated with healthcare settings. The month of April 2020 saw
a 48% fall in attendances to accident and emergency departments when
compared with the previous year, and the fall was 72% for minor injury
units and urgent care centres.\ :sup:`2` There may be some long-lasting
public fear surrounding healthcare settings that disproportionately
affects the most vulnerable patients and telepsychiatry may prove
critical in reaching those individuals as well as the staff who care for
them.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
