===================================================================================================
Dismantling the social safety net: social security reforms, disability and mental health conditions
===================================================================================================



Jed Boardman

:Correspondence: Jed Boardman (jedboard@atlas.co.uk)

:date: 2020-10

:Abstract:
   This article examines the effects of UK welfare reform since 2008 on
   people with mental health conditions and disabilities. The results
   have been profound, particularly during a time of economic austerity,
   damaging the social safety net and pushing many vulnerable people
   into poverty and hardship. It has perpetuated inequalities and
   increased the social exclusion of disabled groups. The holes in the
   safety net require repair, alongside extensive social policy reform
   to both protect and empower people with disabilities and long-term
   conditions.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In his report following a visit to the UK in 2018, the UN special
rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, Philip Alston, said that
‘the social safety net has been damaged by drastic cuts’ and that the
net ‘has been systematically and starkly eroded, particularly since
2010’.\ :sup:`1` His report highlighted the effects of social service
cuts, welfare reforms and austerity on poverty in the UK. This followed
comments by the UN's Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities that the welfare reforms had led to ‘grave and systematic’
violations of disabled peoples’ rights.\ :sup:`2`

I examine here the results that this damage to the safety net has had on
people with disabilities and mental health conditions in the UK with
reference to the changes in welfare benefits that have taken place over
the past 12 years.

.. _sec1:

Disabilities and mental health conditions
=========================================

I have chosen to examine the effect of UK welfare reforms across all
disability groups for several reasons. The first of these is practical,
as many official statistics do not separate people with disabilities
into those with mental or with physical problems. The groups of people
and their conditions that are contained in the category of ‘disability’
is fluid and has changed over time.\ :sup:`3` Recent shifts have
broadened the scope, adding people with mental health conditions,
intellectual disabilities, developmental disorders and sensory
impairments. This is reflected in our anti-discrimination laws: the
Equality Act 2010 defines disability as ‘a physical or mental impairment
which has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on the ability to
carry out normal day-to-day activities’. The terminology is also
reflected in the term ‘long-term conditions’, which applies to many of
the people who are receiving sickness and disability benefits and are
commonly users of health and social services. People with long-term
mental health conditions are likely to be: living in households below
the poverty threshold, to be in debt or have financial problems, to be
in receipt of benefits, to be without a paid job and to live in social
housing, and they are about three times more likely to have multiple
social disadvantages than the general population.\ :sup:`4` Many people
who have mental or physical disabilities are on low incomes, they share
common difficulties and are vulnerable to the effects of benefit
changes.

.. _sec2:

Welfare reforms in the 21st century
===================================

The provision of services and income transfers by the state to meet the
welfare needs of the UK population and the concomitant expenditure grew
in the 20th century. These provisions include personal social services,
services for healthcare, education and housing and income transfers such
as pensions and out of work payments. One function of the welfare state
is to protect people in times of hardship.

Most agree that the golden age of the British welfare state occurred
after the Second World War, with rapid reforms to create a more
comprehensive and universal welfare state with an increase in resources
to extend benefits and coverage.\ :sup:`5` This was associated with a
commitment to economic growth and full employment. The development of
the modern welfare state has been a driver for the improvements in
provisions for people with disabilities, including those for people with
mental health conditions and intellectual disabilities.\ :sup:`6`

The golden age declined in the 1970s, and the 1980s saw a period of
retrenchment and recalibration, with an abandonment of full employment
and cuts to welfare provision, despite continuing growth in public
expenditure.\ :sup:`5` This was set against a background of increasing
income and wealth inequality. In the late 1990s and most of the 2000s,
the New Labour government's vision for welfare was for a system that
enabled rather than provided. The challenge was to reduce worklessness
and introduce new benefits and tax credits as well as introducing work
support schemes. The recession in 2008 and the election of the coalition
government in 2010 brought in a period of austerity and the introduction
of further welfare reforms in 2012. The squeeze on expenditure and the
roll out of the new benefits continue to this day, and the welfare state
may face further retrenchment following the COVID-19 pandemic.

.. _sec3:

Changes in sickness and disability benefits
===========================================

The two main direct payment benefits that are specifically aimed at
people with ill health and disability are those that provide out of work
payments (Employment and Support Allowance – ESA) and those that cover
the extra costs of disability (Personal Independence Payment –
PIP).\ :sup:`7`

ESA was introduced in 2008 as a result of the Welfare Reform Act 2007
and replaced Incapacity Benefit. Claimants for ESA are assessed through
the process of the Work Capability Assessment (WCA) that includes
face-to-face contact with a clinical assessor, who determines their
ability to manage a variety of daily activities (physical and mental).
The WCA process assesses whether a person is entitled to ESA based on
their ‘limited capability for work’ (LCW) and their ‘limited capacity
for work-related activity’ (LCWA). Those found to have LCW and not LCWA
are placed in the work-related activities group (WRAG) and are expected
to engage with job centre staff in seeking work. Those found to have LCW
and LCWA are placed in the Support Group and are not expected to engage
with work-related activity. For those in the WRAG, failure to engage
with Job Centre staff can result in sanctions that may reduce or suspend
benefit payments.

PIP, designed to replace the Disability Living Allowance (DLA) for
people 16 years of age and over, was introduced as part of a range of
benefit changes in the Welfare Reform Act 2012. Assessments for PIP,
unlike those for DLA, are done by face-to-face interviews with a
clinical assessor. Payment is given depending on the degree of
difficulties experienced in activities of daily living and mobility.

Although these benefits represent the main direct payment to people with
a range of disabilities, the 2012 Act also introduced further changes
that have a significant effect on people with low incomes. These
include: Universal Credit, the under-occupancy charge (‘bedroom tax’), a
benefit cap and the up-rating of local housing allowance rates by the
Consumer Price Index.

Universal Credit was introduced in an attempt to simplify the delivery
of benefits and is a single monthly payment that applies to people who
are looking for work or are on a low income. It brings together six
working-age benefits: ESA, along with the income-based Jobseeker's
Allowance, Income Support, Child Tax Credits, Working Tax Credits and
Housing Benefit. It rapidly hit the headlines because of its delayed
payments, and its full roll-out has been delayed.\ :sup:`8`

.. _sec4:

Disability and poverty
======================

Changes to the welfare state have effects on almost the entire
population, but it is those on low incomes that are often
disproportionately affected.\ :sup:`9` This includes many with mental
health conditions and disabilities. The latest figures on poverty in the
UK (2017–2018) show that, of the 14 million people who live in poverty,
4 million have a disability and a further 3 million live with someone
who has a disability. An estimated 13 million adults and children in the
UK have a disability, 31% of whom live in poverty (the poverty rate
among the non-disabled population is 20%). Nearly half of those who are
disabled have a disability due to a mental health condition – for this
group the poverty rate is 39%, compared with 30% among those with a
physical disability.\ :sup:`10` These figures have changed little over
the past 8 years.

These figures reinforce the UN rapporteur's findings and point to a
significant number of people with disabilities falling through the
poverty safety net. It seems that benefits may not necessarily protect
people with disabilities from falling into poverty.

.. _sec5:

Financial impact of welfare reforms on people with disabilities
===============================================================

Since 2012, organisations have warned about the impact of the cuts in
benefits on people with long-term conditions.\ :sup:`11,12` Recent
economic modelling examining the impact of the benefit changes since
2008 shows that disabled people have lost, on average, £1200 each year,
compared with £300 for non-disabled people.\ :sup:`13` The benefit
changes have most impact on those with intellectual disabilities, social
interaction difficulties and mental health conditions.

.. _sec6:

Problems with benefit assessments
=================================

From the start of its implementation, the WCA process was reported to
present difficulties for those being assessed. The Citizens Advice
Bureau (CAB) reported that the assessment was not effectively measuring
fitness for work, often ignored independent clinical evidence and was
producing inappropriate outcomes.\ :sup:`14,15` Claimants reported
rushed assessments, inaccurate recording of their accounts and poor
recognition of mental health problems.\ :sup:`14` Many people report the
process to be anxiety-provoking and a cause of deterioration in their
health. The WCA remains widely condemned and seen in need of
review.\ :sup:`16,17` Official Department for Work and Pensions (DWP)
reviews of the WCA have questioned whether descriptors are fit for
purpose and whether the assessment is sufficiently fair and
effective.\ :sup:`18`

The Court of Appeal in 2013 judged the WCA to substantially disadvantage
people with mental health problems and said that the DWP had failed to
make reasonable adjustments to ensure that people with mental health
problems were treated fairly by the system.\ :sup:`19` Disadvantages for
people with mental health conditions include: finding it difficult to
report on the nature of their condition or the way that it affects their
functioning; difficulty in attending for interviews or expressing
themselves at interview; the fluctuating nature of their conditions,
symptoms, impairments and functioning, which may be difficult to
describe or to assess; the subjective nature of many mental health
conditions; and the presence of coexisting physical health conditions.

The actual rate of incorrect decisions made at ESA and PIP assessments
is not known. People can appeal their ESA and PIP decisions, but first
they must ask for a mandatory reconsideration from the DWP. Few of these
mandatory reconsiderations lead to a change in the award (around 15% for
PIP). However, for those who go on to be seen by an independent appeals
panel, the majority win their appeals. In 2019, 73% of ESA appeals and
68% of PIP appeals were won by the appellant.\ :sup:`20`

The failure of the WCA and the assessments for PIP to reliably identify
those who are eligible for benefits is costly, not only in financial
terms but also in human terms.\ :sup:`21` Removal of benefits is
experienced by claimants as rejection, with applicants feeling
mistrusted and invisible, coupled with the stress of being in a cycle of
assessments, rejections and appeals.\ :sup:`22` People describe
experiences of their difficulties being trivialised or seen as
fraudulent. Overall, people with mental health conditions are relatively
disadvantaged when applying for PIP. For people transferring from DLA,
the likelihood of being found not entitled to PIP was almost two and a
half times greater among people with mental health conditions than among
claimants with physical disorders.\ :sup:`23`

Many anomalies with the specific details of the assessments for PIP and
ESA have been dealt with through the court system. In 2017, the High
Court quashed the new government PIP regulations for mobility activities
as they discriminated against people with mental health
difficulties.\ :sup:`24` In 2019, the Supreme Court ruled on the scope
of the term ‘social support’ in relation to the PIP activity of
‘engaging with others’.\ :sup:`25` In 2020, the Court of Appeal upheld
two successful High Court challenges brought by individuals and found
that the government had unlawfully discriminated against people with
severe disabilities who had moved onto Universal Credit.\ :sup:`26`

One high-profile result of the financial insecurity experienced by
people on welfare benefits is the rise of food banks in the UK. Prior to
the current COVID-19 pandemic, many of the people using food banks were
those who had been affected by the recent welfare reforms, particularly
those with disabilities, lone parents and large family households. A
large-scale survey of people using food banks in 2016–2017 found that
two-thirds had a health condition and almost one-third had a mental
health condition.\ :sup:`27` Half of the households included someone
with a disability – these households were three times more likely to use
foodbanks than other low-income households.

Perhaps the most serious outcome of the WCA process is its relationship
to suicide. It is known that the occurrence of completed suicide
increases during recessions, but there is also good evidence that the
government's programme of reassessing for ESA is independently
associated with an increase in suicides.\ :sup:`28` There are also
several case reports of the deaths of people by suicide or neglect whose
benefits had been removed,\ :sup:`29` including the death of Errol
Graham, a man with long-term mental health problems.\ :sup:`30`

A recent report from the National Audit Office\ :sup:`31` has revealed
69 suicides linked to the DWP's handling of benefit claims in the past 6
years. This is likely to be an underestimate, as the information held by
the DWP on suicides is not exhaustive. The DWP is looking to improve the
data collection and review process.

.. _sec7:

Conditionality and sanctions
============================

The principle of conditionality (the attachment of behavioural
conditions to the receipt of benefits) has long been part of welfare
policy. It was, however, usually applied to recipients of unemployment
benefits, who were expected to seek work. This has now changed, and
under ESA regulations, conditionality is applied to sick and disabled
people, many of whom are expected to engage in ‘work-related activity’
and who may receive sanctions, including the reduction of benefits, if
they do not. The aim of conditionality for these groups is to help move
people off sickness benefits into work. This has been combined with
schemes to support people into work, such as the Pathways to Work and
Work Programme schemes. The use of conditionality is widely debated and,
as a policy, it ignores the barriers that people with disabilities face
in getting into employment.\ :sup:`32,33` It is unpopular, often
regarded as punitive, undermines social citizenship, is ineffective in
moving people into work and can damage people's health, thus making
employment less likely.\ :sup:`34–37` Disabled unemployment claimants
are more likely to be sanctioned than non-disabled claimants.\ :sup:`34`

.. _sec8:

Benefit stigma
==============

Not only do people with disabilities associated with physical and mental
conditions experience prejudice and discrimination linked to their
conditions, they may also experience the stigma associated with claiming
benefits and the shame associated with poverty. Overall, the UK public
have low levels of understanding of the benefits system and people see
the bulk of what the welfare state does as providing handouts to those
who do not work.\ :sup:`9,39` The largest proportion of the UK welfare
budget is spent on pensions (42%), with 1% spent on unemployment
benefits and 10% on incapacity, disability and injury
benefits.\ :sup:`40` Overall, the public's impression is one of a system
involving ‘Them and Us’.\ :sup:`9` These dichotomies have pervaded the
language of welfare. Traditionally, for the poor the division is between
the ‘deserving’ and the ‘undeserving’ poor. In contemporary government
policy. the rhetoric has been one of ‘a culture of welfare dependency’,
‘making work pay’, ‘scroungers’, ‘benefit cheats’ and the ‘hard-working
majority’, which has been reinforced by newspaper headlines and
television programmes such as *Benefits Street*. It appears that in the
21st century we have shifted our gaze from the ‘deserving’ and
‘undeserving’ to ‘strivers’ and ‘shirkers’.\ :sup:`41`

.. _sec9:

Effects on health and social services
=====================================

Several recent reports have shown that dealing with people's benefit
problems is putting increased pressure on mental health services and
benefit and financial advice agencies\ :sup:`42,43`. Community mental
health teams are spending increased time managing patients’ practical
problems, including benefits, debt, housing and employment.
Practitioners are aware that it is difficult to treat people's mental
illness without finding solutions to their practical problems, which are
in turn having a significant impact on the patients’ mental health. Many
of these problems require assistance beyond what can be provided by
mental health practitioners, but accessing alternative forms of help and
advice can be difficult, especially in the complex world of financial
and welfare benefit systems. Nevertheless, access to help to resolve
these practical issues is important to the patient's recovery and
continuing engagement with health and social services (`Box
1 <#box1>`__). Box 1Useful information sourcesFurther information about
social security benefits and mental health conditions can be found on
the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ webpages on social inclusion
(https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/improving-care/campaigning-for-better-mental-health-policy/other-policy-areas/social-inclusion).
Advice to clinicians regarding assisting patients in their application
for benefits can also be found on those pages.Other useful organisations
are: •Mind: https://www.mind.org.uk/\ •Rethink Mental Illness:
https://www.rethink.org/\ •Money and Mental Health Policy Institute:
https://www.moneyandmentalhealth.org/

.. _sec10:

Conclusions
===========

This article has documented some of the problems faced by people with
mental health conditions and disabilities resulting from the changes
that have emerged from welfare reforms instituted over the past 12
years. These changes, rather than enhancing support for people with
disabilities, have been unjust and ethically unsound, undermining
citizenship and damaging to peoples’ health and well-being. It
reinforces the extent to which many people with long-term mental health
(and physical health) conditions are stigmatised and socially excluded
and highlights the ways in which they are vulnerable to falling into
poverty. This is not inevitable and can be changed by improving the
social policies that determine our present welfare state. In narrow
terms this means overhauling the current system of the provision of
welfare benefits, starting with the ways in which people are assessed
for ESA and PIP, removing sanctions for people with sickness and
disability, increasing the actual benefit payments and improving the
employment support offered to people on ESA. More generally, the broader
aspects of welfare state provision (health, education, housing, social
services) must become more sensitive to the needs of the range of people
with disabilities. At present, the system appears at worst to be
punitive and at best to provide an inadequate sticking plaster. The
system needs to ensure that people with disabilities are not just
supported but encouraged to thrive.

The welfare reforms have had a negative effect on our already stretched
mental health and social care services. If we are to provide 21st
century mental health services we need to acknowledge the role they play
in our welfare state and in the treatment and care of people who live in
the hinterlands of low income and poverty. We must also recognise the
role of broader social and economic factors in the causation and
exacerbation of mental ill health. At the minimum we must find ways of
providing people who use services with access to good financial and
welfare advice, but more broadly create a benefits system alongside
health and social services that addresses the very problems that exclude
many people with long-term conditions from playing an active role in
society. We anticipate a further economic recession, this time with high
levels of unemployment, following the COVID-19 pandemic. This may mean a
further tightening of the screw for people with disabilities and
long-term conditions. On the other hand, there exists a glimpse of a
better world that offers the possibility of improving the social and
economic environment for those vulnerable to the vicissitudes of
economic, political and social forces.

**Jed Boardman** is a senior lecturer in social psychiatry at the
Institute of Psychiatry Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London
and the Lead for Social Inclusion at the Royal College of Psychiatrists
London, UK.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec11:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.79.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
