=============================
The one, the few and the many
=============================



Norman Poole
:Correspondence: Dr Norman A. Poole
(BJPBulletin@rcpsych.ac.uk)

:date: 2020-10

:Abstract:
   Inequality is a significant and reversible risk factor for mental
   disorders which demonstrates the essentially political nature of
   psychiatry. The *BJPsych Bulletin* is pleased to make space for those
   at the frontline of this inequality. Two experts by experience
   explain how financial concerns exacerbated their distress and the
   benefit of social interventions.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Psychiatry's great appeal is also its Achilles’ heel. It embraces a
multitude of perspectives which can appear mutually incompatible,
drawing accusations of vagueness and incoherence. This themed edition of
the *BJPsych Bulletin* will, I hope, demonstrate that such criticisms
are wrongheaded. It has been a pleasure to work with Peter Byrne to
produce this edition on inequality, a recognised but still
under-appreciated driver of mental illness about which he is passionate
and persuasive. Although epidemiological studies can feel rather
detached or aloof, they have identified some of the most significant and
well-replicated risks for developing mental disorder, something that
cannot be said for the majority of experiments in neuroscience, despite
its glossy allure. Nevertheless, accommodating psychiatry's various
perspectives involves somehow tethering known risk factors to plausible
biological mechanisms, whether one considers the suffering a disorder or
not. For clinicians, it is the individual patient who must be the focus,
but too often our concern with odds ratios and objective data can come
across as alienating. These different and incommensurate levels of
analysis remind me of the various forms of government – by the one, the
few or the many – and that psychiatry is inextricably political.
Inequality is a reversible cause of mental disorder, and inequality is a
political choice. If doctors find it hard to be heard in the political
realm, how much harder must it be for those who suffer the consequences
of inequality? I am especially pleased to include in this article
contributions from two experts by experience, Nikita Egan and Ben
Russell, both from Equally Well UK (https://equallywell.co.uk/), a
collaborative – led by Centre for Mental Health in partnership with
Rethink Mental Illness – that champions parity of esteem. Their moving
accounts of illness and alienation underscore why we do what we do and,
I hope, establish the Bulletin's increased focus on co-production and,
in our own small way, sharing the levers of power. Over to you, Nikita
and Ben.

.. _sec1:

Nikita Egan, Expert by Experience, Equally Well UK
==================================================

‘We as a species are not very good at asking for help. In doing so, we
are admitting, to ourselves at least, that we aren't as independent as
we might have hoped – that we're fallible. If we consider this natural
discomfort felt when asking for help, is it any wonder that applying for
benefits such as UC [universal credit] and PIP [personal independence
payment] can often seem like a humiliating ordeal?

‘It was a previous CPN [community psychiatric nurse] who advised me to
apply for PIP, stating that I shouldn't see it as a benefit, but more to
put me on an equal playing field with my peers who didn't face a daily
struggle with their mental health. When the form did arrive it seemed
condescending, but also forced me to look inwards to my own daily
difficulties. When the form was complete, I asked my CPN to read it. Did
she think I'd exaggerated? Did she not really think I should apply?
Thoughts like this were a daily monologue in my head, but having read
horror stories from other applicants, I didn't hold out much hope
anyway. Being awarded the higher rate for daily living and lower for
mobility was such a contradictory feeling, especially as I didn't have a
face-to-face assessment. Is this my life now, living on benefits?
Accepting handouts?

‘The time to apply for UC didn't arrive until 2018 when my marriage
ended. I had nothing except my PIP and no choice but to apply online for
UC. In my head all I could think of was ‘going on the dole’. As I filled
in my disability, details of the emotions of the PIP application process
came flooding back.

‘The face-to-face assessment was terrifying, especially finding out that
my date and time were the same as the letter given to 12 other people.
The paranoia was terrible, and so many obscure ideas ran through my
mind. I began to panic as I scanned the room; everyone else seemed to
have a physical impairment. As it turned out the assessment was with a
compassionate nurse. My form and records had been checked; I just had to
confirm some details and give a copy of my prescription.

‘PIP and UC – based on the decision that I have limited capacity to
undertake paid work – allow me to pay my rent and bills, and also to
enjoy an albeit thrifty life with my children. Many others are not as
lucky, and don't have the support to make and endure application
processes.

‘Personally, I don't think of myself as living on benefits. I think of
myself as living, however I can.’

.. _sec2:

Ben Russell, Expert by Experience, Equally Well UK
==================================================

‘It's difficult to focus cause I'm being harangued from all sides. I run
from room to room to escape, but they follow me. I turn around suddenly,
hoping to catch them in the act, but there's no one else there. I am
alone. I realise, all of a sudden, that I'm ill again. I hear a hissing
sound and spin around and see a fox standing there with blood-red eyes
and its hackles raised. I scream and *run* to the next room, but the fox
is already in there. In fact, it's in every room I run to waiting for
me. It's difficult because knowing I'm ill doesn't stop me being ill. I
go into town hoping that the fresh air will do me good, but there are
people following me. If they catch me, they'll do experiments on me, so
I run back to my flat and lock the door behind me. I don't know how long
I've been ill for, but there's a mound of envelopes in my letterbox.
More than likely bills. But I can't function, let alone pay them. I also
don't remember the last time I ate. Nothing makes sense.

‘I've also not been paying my bills. The mortgage company send me
threatening letters, as do the council. I'm also unable to work. My
phone is vibrating on the coffee table. There're seven missed calls. I
answer warily, ready to be berated some more. It's my nurse. She says
that she's been trying to contact me for days. I tell her that I'm not
right in the head. An indeterminable amount of time passes before my
nurse comes to my flat. She says that I need to be in hospital, but I'm
worried about my flat. I get personal independence payments, but they're
not enough to cover my mortgage. I was working as a hod carrier, but
then I became unwell with my mental health and no longer have a job. My
nurse is insistent anyway. I go to hospital. On the ward, my family are
contacted. They arrange to help pay my bills, which is the luckiest
thing, because I was about to lose my flat. The important thing, they
said, was getting well. And so many people in my position don't have
that chance. The crisis team also help me get in touch with my creditors
and arrange payment plans.’

Many thanks to Nikita Egan and Ben Russell for agreeing to share their
experiences. Their contributions are invaluable.

**Norman A. Poole** is Editor of the *BJPsych Bulletin* and a consultant
neuropsychiatrist at St George's Hospital, South West London and St
George's Mental Health NHS Trust, UK.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
