=========================================================================================================================================================
Efficacy of a dementia intensive support (DIS) service at preventing admissions to medical and psychiatric wards: qualitative and quantitative evaluation
=========================================================================================================================================================

Judy S. Rubinsztein
Catherine Hatfield
Liam High
Ramesh Krishnan
Nikitas A. Arnaoutoglou
Panagiota Goulia
Robert Dudas
Shamim Ruhi
Karel Wildschut
Leonidas Chouliaras
Benjamin R. UnderwoodCorrespondence to Judy S. Rubinsztein
(judy.rubinsztein@cpft.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To establish whether a dementia intensive support (DIS) service that
   is part of a crisis resolution and home treatment team for older
   people is preventing admissions to acute hospital and psychiatric
   wards. The number of referrals in 2017 to the DIS service was
   established and those admitted to hospital ascertained. Senior
   doctors examined 30 sets of notes in detail and reached a conclusion
   on whether DIS had contributed to admission prevention. This
   information was then re-examined in two meetings with at least eight
   senior psychiatrists present. A consensus opinion was then reached as
   to whether DIS had contributed to admission prevention in each case.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Over 12 months, 30/171 patients (18%) referred were admitted to
   hospital. For the subset of 30 referrals examined in detail, DIS
   contributed to admission avoidance in 21 cases (70%).

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Our evaluation demonstrates that the DIS service is an effective way
   of preventing admission.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Dementia has become a major health concern in older people, with
prevalence rates in those over 65 years of age estimated at 7.1%. The
overall economic impact of dementia in the UK was costed at £26.3
billion, with an average annual cost of £32 250 per person, in
2013.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`

A quarter of hospital beds are occupied by people with
dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Admissions to hospital for patients with
dementia are not always preventable but should be avoided where
possible, as they are associated with increased length of stay,
morbidity and mortality.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

The efficacy of crisis resolution and home treatment teams (CRHTTs) in
general adult services is reasonably well established, with a Cochrane
review confirming that crisis care was acceptable and less expensive. In
addition, repeat admissions were avoided and users of crisis services
showed greater improvements in their mental state and reported greater
satisfaction than those who received standard care.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`
However, the evidence base is much slimmer for older people and for
people with dementia specifically.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)`

Cambridge and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust (CPFT) covers the county
of Cambridgeshire (including Peterborough) and some small areas of
adjacent counties in England. The total population served by CPFT is
approximately 1 million people, of whom 165 000 were over the age of 65
at the last census in 2016. There were an estimated 8600 people with
dementia in 2016, a number expected to increase to 16 110 by
2031.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` We have two regional CRHTT services for older
people across the county (CRHTT-OP North and CRHTT-OP South), each
covering approximately half of the county. To reduce or prevent hospital
admissions, our dementia intensive support (DIS) service in CPFT was set
up in its current format in 2016. The DIS service forms part of CRHTT-OP
South. The role of the CRHTT-OP service is to support both people with
dementia and people with functional health problems in crisis at home or
in their community settings. The overall aim of CRHTT-OP South/DIS is to
reduce or prevent hospital admissions of older people and to facilitate
their discharge from hospital.

In this service evaluation, endorsed by management (authors B.R.U. and
R.K.), we sought to examine the effectiveness of the DIS service in the
South of CPFT, since additional funds were given to the service in 2016.
In 2017, the period covered in this study, the team received referrals
mainly from general practitioners who referred to a triage hub, from the
first response service (FRS) – a 24-hour trust-wide telephone triage
service which accepts self-referral from individuals of all ages – and
from liaison psychiatry services. The minimum guaranteed response time
by CRHTT-OP South is 24 h and the maximum is 5 days. CRHTT-OP South
usually provides contact with patients for between 2 and 6 weeks.
Patients may then be referred onto community mental health teams for
ongoing support or back to their general practitioner. Two old age
consultants share the work of this team (0.9 whole-time equivalents to
CRHTT-OP South) and also share the in-patient work of the functional
ward. All clinicians in the team have several years’ clinical
experience. The team works from 08.00 to 20.00 h, 7 days a week, and
operates with two shifts a day; each shift comprises 3–4 community
psychiatric nurses, 1–2 community support workers, a team leader
(working 09.00–17.00 h on weekdays) and full-time administrative support
for the team from 08.30 to 17.00 h on weekdays. Non-medical clinicians
usually undertake the initial assessment of all patients referred to the
service, with medical support provided as needed. All patients seen
receive a comprehensive psychiatric assessment and risk assessment
recorded on our electronic notes. In addition, the interventions by the
DIS team are noted in the patients’ electronic progress records and
letters to the general practitioner (GP). Pharmacological (antidementia
drugs, antipsychotics, benzodiazepines and antidepressants) and
non-pharmacological interventions for behavioural and psychological
symptoms of dementia (BPSD) (typically, exploration of the reasons for
the behaviour and suggestions of ways to address it, as well sensory and
music stimulation and assistive technology, as described in NICE
guidelines from 2018\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` and Alzheimer's Society guidance
from 2011\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`) are employed.

We evaluated, using qualitative and quantitative methodology, whether
the involvement of the DIS team did lead to prevention of admission to
hospital for older people with dementia.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

This service evaluation was approved by the CPFT governance committee
and did not require ethics approval.

We first examined the total referrals to the DIS service over the year
(2107) and recorded the number of admissions to medical and psychiatric
wards. Exclusion criteria were referrals that the DIS team felt to be
inappropriate (e.g. the patient needed a referral to social care or was
not deemed to be in a crisis and was referred to the community
psychiatric team) or where the patient was not seen because they were
admitted to acute hospital before CRHTT-OP South engagement. All
patients had a diagnosis of dementia.

We then invited eight senior psychiatrists (consultants and specialist
trainees) to support this retrospective study and to examine the notes
to see whether the DIS service had prevented admission to hospital. At
the time the patients were seen by CRHTT-OP South, some of these doctors
were working in CRHTT-OP South but others were working in the community
teams or liaison service or had not joined CPFT yet. All patients
referred to and contacted by the DIS team in June 2017 (*n* = 12) and
November 2017 (*n* = 18) were included and the outcome of that contact
with the CRHTT during that episode of care was noted, together with the
number of days in contact with the DIS. The months were chosen at
random. Basic demographic data were collected on the patients and the
average length of time spent with the DIS team was calculated. In
addition, notes were examined by J.S.R. and L.C. to identify the main
reasons for referral and the main interventions offered by the team for
each of the 30 patients. The frequencies of these reasons for referral
and main interventions recorded were noted. The eight senior
psychiatrists were asked to evaluate each patient's notes following
referral to CRHTT-OP South in these 2 months to assess whether the DIS
team had helped to avoid hospital admission (medical or psychiatric).
The notes themselves were not anonymised, but J.S.R. ensured that the
clinicians were not given patients from areas that they usually covered
clinically, to try to avoid bias in their interpretation, and when these
patients were discussed by the group this was done in an anonymous
fashion to avoid bias as far as possible. Clinicians had to summarise on
a pro forma the issues pertinent to the DIS contact and then reach a
conclusion as to whether the DIS service had contributed to ‘admission
prevention’. In cases where patients had been admitted to hospital, it
was straightforward to conclude that admission had not been prevented.
In cases where the patient had not been admitted, a qualitative
judgement had to be made as to whether, from the type of interventions
provided by the DIS team (psychosocial or medical), hospital admission
had been avoided. The pro formas regarding the DIS team's involvement
were then re-examined collectively in two group governance meetings to
provide an ‘expert consensus opinion’ on whether CRHTT-OP South had
contributed to admission prevention, with eight senior psychiatrists
present at each meeting.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

`Figure 1 <#fig01>`__ shows the total number of patients referred to the
DIS service from January to December 2017 and the number of admissions
to medical and psychiatric wards from those referrals. There were 171
referrals during that period, 30 of whom (18%) were admitted, i.e.
approximately 1 in every 5 patients referred to the DIS was admitted.
Fig. 1Total referrals accepted by the dementia intensive support (DIS)
team over 2017 and numbers admitted to psychiatric and acute (medical)
hospitals.

The demographics of the patients whose records were examined in detail
by the expert panel are shown in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. The average
length of stay with the DIS team was 19 days (range 4–43 days). The
ICD-10 diagnoses were: Alzheimer's disease (14 patients), vascular
dementia (5), Alzheimer's of mixed type/atypical (4), dementia not
otherwise specified (3), dementia with Lewy bodies (2), alcoholic
dementia (1) and frontotemporal dementia (1). Four of the patients with
Alzheimer's disease were noted to also have delirium and one patient
with Alzheimer's of mixed type was noted to have delirium and alcohol
dependence. Table 1Demographics of patients with dementia seen by the
dementia intensive support team over 2 months in 2017MonthSample size,
*n*\ MaleMean age, yearsAge range,
yearsJune1268370–96November1898166–98Combined30158266–98

The main reasons for referral to the DIS team and their frequency are
noted in `Table 2 <#tab02>`__. Aggression (verbal and physical) was the
most common reason for referral but often several reasons were noted.
The key interventions that were recorded in the electronic notes and the
frequencies of these are also summarised in `Table 2 <#tab02>`__.
Combinations of interventions were often offered. Table 2Reasons for
referral to the dementia intensive support (DIS) team and key
interventions offeredFrequencies reported\ *Main reasons for referral to
DIS (usually a combination of reasons)*\ Aggression (physical and
verbal)18Agitation11Shouting out/disruptive behaviour/entering other
residents' rooms10Worsening hallucinations or delusions4Sexual
disinhibition3Depression2Supporting discharge from ward (acute or
psychiatric)2Safeguarding issues2Delirium management1Suicidal in the
context of a new diagnosis of dementia1Carer burnout/stress1\ *Key
interventions offered by DIS team (usually a combination of
interventions)*\ Advice and support for carers20Pharmacological
interventions for BPSD17Non-pharmacological interventions for
BPSD16Referral for increased social support/different care
home/respite9Supportive counselling/advice to the patient4Recommendation
of a change to physical health medication4Admission to psychiatric
ward4Admission to acute hospital4Recommendation of a move to a higher
level of care in the same care home1Fall prevention1Delirium assessment
management1Educational programme for care home1Benefits advice to
carers1 [1]_

`Table 3 <#tab03>`__ shows the number of patients for whom admission was
considered to have been avoided by DIS engagement, as well as the
average across both months. There were some discrepancies (three in
total) between the initial assessor's views and those of the group in
deciding whether an admission had in fact been prevented by DIS
engagement with the patient. The group view prevailed and is quoted in
`Table 3 <#tab03>`__. In our qualitative judgement, the DIS service
contributed to admission avoidance for 21/30 patients referred (70%),
averaged over the 2 months. Table 3Admission avoidance over 2 months in
2017JuneNovemberCombined (June and November)Admission avoided (group
decision)11/12 (92%)10/18 (56%)21/30 (70%)

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

Our service evaluation shows that over a 1-year period only few
referrals received by the DIS service were admitted to medical or
psychiatric wards (18%). We conducted a qualitative review of patients
referred in 2 months of the year using a panel of senior doctors. These
doctors examined 30 referrals to DIS in detail to judge whether DIS had
contributed to admission prevention. The panel felt that the DIS service
contributed to admission avoidance for 70% of patients referred to the
service in these 2 months.

.. _sec3-1:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

Previous criticism of crisis and home treatment studies centres on the
definition of a ‘crisis’ and whether all referrals would in fact meet
‘thresholds’ for admission. This study sought to circumvent this issue
to some extent by examining whether patients in crisis who were seen by
CRHTT-OP South had received an intervention from the team which
contributed to admission prevention. However, we acknowledge that the
discussions that took place among the panel of senior clinicians were of
a qualitative nature and subjective. However, the strength of this
methodology was that the decisions were not left to a single clinician
but were examined by a group of senior clinicians and decision makers in
the service.

Although we tried to minimise bias by giving the assessing clinicians
patients not from their own teams and by anonymising data when discussed
as a group, sometimes clinicians may have recognised the patient under
discussion from the particulars of the clinical history, which could
have introduced some bias. A further limitation is that this is a
naturalistic study and it is possible that not all of the interventions
offered were recorded. Only the major interventions identified by the
authors examining the notes (J.S.R. and L.C.) have been noted.

.. _sec3-2:

The wider evidence base
-----------------------

We acknowledge that case–control studies are needed to be sure of the
efficacy of DIS services. Such studies are very difficult to set up as
most services now have some form of crisis or intermediate care service
to prevent admission of people with dementia to hospital, and services
frequently change structure or function over time.

The most recent systematic review of the literature on crisis team
management of dementia in older people, from 2017, describes the results
of six cohort studies and one case–control study.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`
However, several studies include both patients with functional and
psychiatric disorders, making direct comparisons with our study more
difficult. A positive effect on factors such as reducing the number of
hospital admissions, readmissions, length of stay and mortality rates
was reported in these studies. However, caution needs to be exercised in
interpreting the review's findings as the studies were small, of
variable design and sometimes lacking in statistical
rigour.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` There was only one case–control study (from the
USA) in which a non-randomised concurrent control treatment outcome
trial was conducted.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` This study reported a lower
mortality rate, a significant decrease in hospital readmissions (with
people remaining in their homes for longer), significant improvements in
caregiver outcomes (*P* < 0.001) and fewer neuropsychiatric symptoms for
those in the intervention group. It is difficult to be sure how
reproducible this service would be in the UK. In addition, the control
group did not seem to be similar to the intervention group as they were
more likely to die in the first year, suggesting that they may have been
a more physically ill group from the outset. Further case–control
studies in the UK are needed to establish whether DIS teams are
effective in reducing admissions. Our own previous cohort study is one
of the few to examine this question before and after the introduction of
an ageless CRHTT in the UK,\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` but it did not examine
crisis services for patients with dementia specifically (all crises for
older people were included) and other service changes may have affected
the result.

.. _sec3-3:

Service implications
--------------------

Commissioners of our service have enthusiastically endorsed the approach
of crisis and home treatment: indeed, ‘at home is best’ is the top
priority for the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Sustainability and
Transformation Partnership (STP).\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` This has been
reflected in additional investment in DIS teams as one of the key areas
for the STP investment fund. This study shows that very few patients
referred to our service over the year required hospital admission.
Admission cannot always be prevented and of course the reasons for
in-patient admission to psychiatric or acute hospital are notoriously
complex to analyse (and beyond the scope of this study), involving
specifics of particular patients, carers and clinicians. Supportive
measures (such as care packages, medication and explanation about the
management of delirium) may help to support carers and prevent acute
hospital admissions. However, these patients were all referred in crisis
and, although some were excluded by our expert panel as not reaching the
threshold for the DIS team having contributed to admission prevention,
many were helped by interventions from the team. The DIS team has
therefore proved to be a worthwhile asset to our service.

We thank Dr Ian Rowbotham, CRHTT consultant in the North of CPFT, for
advice and discussion in the early phase of the project, and Christie
Walker for administrative support. We thank the librarians at Fulbourn
Hospital Library for help with the literature search and sourcing paper.

**Judy S. Rubinsztein** is a consultant psychiatrist at Cambridgeshire
and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge; and Department of
Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, UK. **Catherine Hatfield** is a
consultant psychiatrist at Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK. **Liam High** is a personal assistant
at Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK.
**Ramesh Krishnan** is CRHTT team leader at Cambridgeshire and
Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK. **Nikitas A.
Arnaoutoglou** is a consultant psychiatrist at Cambridgeshire and
Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK; Department of
Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, UK; and Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Greece. **Panagiota Goulia** is a consultant psychiatrist
at Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK.
**Robert Dudas** is a consultant psychiatrist at Cambridgeshire and
Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge; and Department of
Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, UK. **Shamim Ruhi** is a consultant
psychiatrist at Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust,
Cambridge, UK. **Karel Wildschut** is an ST at Cambridgeshire and
Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK. **Leonidas
Chouliaras** is a clinical lecturer and ST at Department of Psychiatry,
University of Cambridge, UK. **Benjamin R. Underwood** is a consultant
psychiatrist and Clinical Director at Cambridgeshire and Peterborough
NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge and at the Department of Psychiatry,
University of Cambridge, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The data associated with the manuscript are available from the
corresponding author.

All authors made substantial contributions to the conception or design
of the work or to the acquisition, analysis or interpretation of data
for the work. All authors helped to draft the work or revise it
critically for intellectual content. All authors gave final approval of
the version to be published and agreed to be accountable for all aspects
of the work in accordance with ICMJE criteria.

None.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.24.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

.. [1]
   BPSD, behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia.
