======================================================
Sabyasachi (Sab) Bhaumik, OBE, MD, DPM, FRCPsych (Hon)
======================================================

Regi Alexander
Sheila Hollins
:Date: 2020-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

**Formerly Medical Director, Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust, and
Honorary Chair in Psychiatry, Department of Health Sciences, University
of Leicester, UK**

Sabyasachi (Sab) Bhaumik, who died of a massive cardiac infarction at
the age of 66 years on 8 November 2019, was a leading figure nationally
and internationally in the psychiatry of people with developmental
disabilities. He served as Chair of the Faculty of the Psychiatry of
Intellectual Disability at the Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych)
between 2006 and 2010, and before that as Chair of the Trent Division.
In 2007, he established an international links group that brought
together all the activities related to intellectual disability
undertaken internationally by RCPsych members. Members of this committee
have undertaken numerous educational, research and service development
projects in India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Egypt and other parts of
Africa and East European countries. More recently he had taken on the
role of the World Psychiatric Association's Intellectual Disability
Taskforce Lead. On the national scene he was appointed an expert advisor
to both the National Institute for Health Research and the National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence.

Having recognised a real gap in the body of knowledge on the use of
prescribed medications with people with intellectual disabilities, he
and David Branford developed the *Frith Prescribing Guidelines for
People with Intellectual Disability* (now in its third
edition)\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` and started the annual conference on
Therapeutics in Intellectual Disabilities, now in its 11th year. He
published over 100 articles and book chapters in his field on a wide
range of subjects, including the development of a competency-based
framework in intellectual disability psychiatry, the relationship
between autism spectrum disorder and visual impairment in individuals
with intellectual disabilities, and health promotion in people with
intellectual disabilities. Most recently he had (with R.A.) edited the
*Oxford Textbook of the Psychiatry of Intellectual
Disability*\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` and, with others, was in the process of
editing a textbook on the psychiatry of intellectual disability across
cultures.

He had a leadership role among UK psychiatrists belonging to ethnic
minorities and served as President of the British Indian Psychiatric
Association and Chair of the RCPsych's Diaspora Groups Committee. He
spent a considerable amount of time abroad on visits to India training
doctors in the psychiatry of intellectual disability and, in recognition
of his academic contribution, was appointed Visiting Professor of
Psychiatry at SRM University, Chennai, and the Father Muller Medical
College, Mangalore, India.

Sab was born in Calcutta in 1952 to Gopal Bhaumik, a well-known Bengali
poet, and Uma Bhaumik. After primary and secondary education in
Calcutta, he graduated in medicine from R.G. Kar Medical College,
Calcutta, in 1978. He then went to work in Khatra, a remote rural area.
Equipment, medication and infrastructure were lacking but Sab made up
for these with his commitment, compassion and honesty. When he left
after 3 years to join an MD programme in pharmacology at Benares Hindu
University, there were at least 200 people there waiting to see him off.
Moving to the UK in 1985, Sab worked first on a psychiatric rotation in
north Wales. He joined the Leicester Frith Hospital as a consultant in
intellectual disability in 1992. Subsequently, he was appointed to
various senior roles at the hospital – lead clinician, clinical director
and medical director. After his retirement in 2013, he worked as a
consultant psychiatrist and senior medical advisor to the hospital's
board.

Sab was a man of extraordinary energy, generosity and kindness. He was
always a powerful advocate for his patients, whom he saw as a
marginalised group of people with developmental disabilities who often
had neither equity of access nor equity of treatment. His Saturday
mornings were spent at the hospital surrounded by people wanting his
help and advice – psychiatrists preparing for the RCPsych membership
examinations, registrars getting ready for consultant interviews and
consultants seeking guidance on a range of assorted issues.

In 2005, he was awarded the Hospital Doctor of the Year award at the
London Hilton on Park Lane, where his colleagues spoke warmly of his
multidisciplinary approach. In 2006, his enormous contribution was
recognised with an OBE for services to medicine. In 2012, he was
appointed to an Honorary Chair in Psychiatry in the Department of Health
Sciences at Leicester University, a reflection of his contribution to
research and teaching. In 2015, the RCPsych awarded him its highest
honour – an honorary fellowship.

Soon after his unexpected demise, his wife Susmita Hoare wrote
eloquently about how Sab had a ‘magnetic quality to attract people’ and
how ‘his honesty, compassion and ability to rise above petty jealousies
made him one of a kind’. She spoke for many when she said, ‘Like a comet
he blazed into our lives, touching everyone with love, laughter and hope
– the world darkening as he left’.

Sab Bhaumik is survived by Susmita and his son Sugato, a junior doctor.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.
