=====================================================
Online psychotherapy: trailblazing digital healthcare
=====================================================



Annabel McDonald
Jessica A. Eccles
Sanaz Fallahkhair
Hugo D. Critchley [1]_
:Correspondence: Dr Annabel McDonald
(jinny.mcdonald@nhs.net)

:date: 2020-04

:Abstract:
   Advances in digital technology have a profound impact on conventional
   healthcare systems. We examine the trailblazing use of online
   interventions to enable autonomous psychological care which can
   greatly enhance individual- and population-level access to services.
   There is strong evidence supporting online cognitive–behavioural
   therapy and more engaging programmes are now appearing so as to
   reduce user ‘attrition’. The next generation of autonomous
   psychotherapy programmes will implement adaptive and personalised
   responses, moving beyond impersonalised advice on cognitive and
   behavioural techniques. This will be a more authentic form of
   psychotherapy that integrates therapy with the actual relationship
   experiences of the individual user.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

As in many other countries, the UK is looking to expand digital
technology to control burgeoning healthcare costs. These plans are
articulated in recent government publications such as *The NHS Long Term
Plan*.\ :sup:`1` The top level of this ambitious scheme refers to a
system that might offer seamless care across all aspects of the National
Health Service (NHS) and associated services. A second level proposes
enhancing access to clinicians though digital platforms such as video
conferencing channels. A third level is the ambition for broad
implementation of technological monitoring services for patients in
their homes, enhancing care in the community through high-quality
information. However, this long-term plan also illustrates that,
particularly in general medicine, the implementation of autonomous
computerised treatment remains a distant goal. In mental health, by way
of contrast, psychotherapy is trailblazing this field. The recent Royal
College of Psychiatry recommendations accompanying the NHS long-term
plan\ :sup:`2` recognise the value of extending therapist-led
psychotherapies through technology, for instance by using avatars to
explore client identity. However, even here there is limited recognition
of progress toward autonomous psychotherapy treatments where digital
treatment programmes are established NHS-approved referral options.
Examples of such programmes include *FearFighter* (UK),\ :sup:`3`
*MoodGYM* (Australia; https://moodgym.com.au/) and *SPARX* (New Zealand;
https://www.sparx.org.nz/). We refer to these programmes in our
appraisal of current digital psychotherapy services, which we then
compare with the next generation of autonomous therapies that will offer
a truly individualised form of therapy, informed by the user's personal
profile and experience.

.. _sec1:

Advantages associated with an online medium for psychotherapy
=============================================================

Online therapy offers a number of potential advantages compared with
other therapies. Perhaps the most obvious are broad accessibility and
low treatment cost; however therapists also refer to the fact that
patients often find it a less inhibiting medium, enabling greater
disclosure and interaction.\ :sup:`4` There is, in addition, a belief
that young patients are generally more willing to engage with digital
interfaces, as explicitly noted by the team working on a gaming
application in New Zealand (*SPARX*).

.. _sec1-1:

Accessibility
-------------

Specific groups may particularly benefit from the improved accessibility
of psychotherapy when offered through an online medium. These include
those in low- and middle-income countries, the financially disadvantaged
individuals without access to a free health service, full-time
employees, people who cannot physically visit therapists and those who
are not deemed ‘ill enough’ to meet a threshold to be offered services.
Nevertheless, accessibility would not be augmented for those who are
unable to engage with a digital service due to a lack of equipment,
physical constraints or poor online confidence. Such individuals are
over-represented in psychologically vulnerable groups.

In low- to middle-income countries, the responses to psychotherapy for
depression are high, and there does not appear to be a requirement for
the therapy to be adapted to local situations.\ :sup:`5` These effects
appear larger than in the high-income countries; this may partly reflect
less-efficacious ‘standard treatments’, resulting in limited improvement
in comparison control groups. There is ample scope to access the
online-therapy format as ownership of mobile phones has high priority in
these communities: 67% of African people owned a mobile phone in
2018.\ :sup:`6`

In high-income countries, free provision of psychotherapy is by no means
universal. Psychotherapy is a relatively expensive service, often
provided on an individual basis in predefined sessions typically
totalling 6–20 h. Financial costs limit access to those who can afford
treatment but, even where free-to-user services exist, access tends to
be rationed according to symptom severity and degree of functional
impact. Thus, individuals who are functioning reasonably well, in
particular those who are working, are rarely eligible for psychotherapy
even if quality of life is low. An online service could reach many of
those individuals who cannot afford high therapy costs, and those
individuals judged to be below the arbitrary threshold of clinical
severity for access to standard delivery of psychotherapy.

Physical constraints compromise engagement with multisession therapies
and may have medical, social or psychological origins (e.g. physical
disability, imprisonment or agoraphobia). Among mental health symptoms,
Community Mental Health Teams in the UK recognise agoraphobia and social
anxiety as a common barrier to accessing and delivering therapy.
However, community patients can also struggle to access psychotherapy if
they are perceived as having anger problems and are implicitly judged a
risk as emotionally challenging issues are explored during therapy.
Large geographical areas with sparse populations can limit access to
specialised psychotherapy. In Australia and New Zealand, geographical
access has motivated the priority development of online psychotherapy.

.. _sec1-2:

Financial costs
---------------

Online psychotherapy encompasses multiple modalities and approaches,
including online contact – either through a video service or texting –
with a therapist. Clearly the cost of this type of treatment is broadly
comparable to face-to-face therapy in well-populated areas where travel
is not a major factor but it can support service access. There are also
systems that offer a limited amount of personal contact with a guiding
therapist while the patient works through online modules. This can take
the form of ‘check-up’ phone calls through to full therapy sessions
interspersed between the computerised modules. However, ‘unguided’
therapy, where the patient uses a programme autonomously without any
direct or personalised therapist support, has the most potential to save
significant costs. Autonomous digital psychotherapy can nevertheless
incorporate automated text messages and even user forums, while
retaining minimal therapist costs. This type of therapy may represent a
viable ‘first-level’ care strategy, with patients progressing to therapy
with personal contact if required thereafter.\ :sup:`3` Many programmes
have been shown to be effective; however sustaining patient engagement
in the therapy, which can be as low as 20% by the end of a treatment
programme,\ :sup:`7` remains a problem. However, because such a large
number of people could be treated very cheaply, the potential gain in
care is still enormous, provided the online therapy does not discourage
or prejudice the efficacy of any future personalised therapy.

.. _sec2:

Current online therapies
========================

The aim of early pioneering work on online therapy was to overcome
access problems caused by population dispersal. Leading developments
have thus originated in Australia (e.g. *MoodGYM* and *BluePages*
[https://bluepages.anu.edu.au/]). Similarly, in New Zealand the
development of *SPARX* was driven by poor mental health across widely
dispersed young people. These therapies are offered on three financial
bases: charged, access paid by health services and free to access.
Australian services approve the use of *MoodGYM* (free) and
*MyCompass*.\ :sup:`8` New Zealand nationals can use *SPARX* for free.
The UK's NHS partly funds the use of two computerised
cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) programmes, *Beating the Blues*
(http://www.beatingtheblues.co.uk/) and *FearFighter*
(https://magellanascend.com/Content/View/2526), as part of their
'stepped model' of treatment for depression and anxiety, respectively.3

The evolution of online psychotherapy is shown in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__.
The earliest autonomous treatments, primarily based on CBT, are
interactive programmes where users complete questionnaires and
white-space areas with their own information so as to develop their
insight and encourage internal reflection about habitual behaviour. This
is combined with examples of characters with extreme forms of behaviour
to help the user recognise their own thinking and behaviour patterns.
*MoodGYM* is an illustrative example of this form of online therapy.
Extensive evaluation suggests *MoodGYM* promotes significant
improvements in users’ mental states.\ :sup:`9–13` *MoodGYM* and related
programmes generally consist of five to ten CBT modules that consider
key aspects such as negative thinking and activation. The path through
the programme is not modified according to earlier information provided
by the user. This genre has now been extended to programmes that engage
the user in mindfulness and meditation. *Headspace*
(https://www.headspace.com/) is a well-known commercial example. Here
the user participates in meditation exercises, including breathing and
focusing, accompanied by calming graphics. Programmes within this
general category, including those based on both CBT and mindfulness, may
send automated texts to the user, often as reminders to engage with the
programme. There is also a subgenre that combines online therapy with
intermittent therapist contact through the use of phone calls, messages
or emails. Fig. 1Evolution of online autonomous psychotherapy (may
include access to a user forum). a.
https://business.talkspace.com/?_ga=2.6168373.769027487.1553093877-2135218530.1553093877
b. https://www.helloself.com/ c.
https://www.italk.org.uk/1-2-1-treatments-groups/computerised-therapy-c-cbt/
d. https://www.online-therapy.com/about_us.php e.
https://moodgym.com.au/ f. https://www.headspace.com/ g.
http://ccbtmain.cbtprogram.com/products/fearfighter/ h.
https://www.sparx.org.nz/ i. http://www.celestegame.com/ j.
https://www.wysa.io/meet-wysa k. https://www.youper.ai/about-us\ CBT,
cognitive–behavioural therapy.

These early forms of online psychotherapy treatment require a high level
of motivation that may be challenging for people with mental health
problems. Concerns about engagement have prompted the introduction of
‘gamified’ CBT resources such as *SPARX* and *Celeste*
(http://www.celestegame.com/), where CBT techniques are embedded within
an intrinsically entertaining experience. *SPARX* offers self-help for
young New Zealanders by being set within such a video-gaming framework.
The user selects an avatar to fulfil a number of tasks, which include
challenges such as bursting floating bubbles called GNATS (gloomy
negative automatic thoughts) with a staff, while receiving CBT-based
wisdom from a guiding character who draws links to behaviour in the
user's own life. *Celeste* is an even more traditional game which has
drawn acclaim from video-game forums. *Celeste* centres on a nervous
character who ‘learns’ to modify anxiety through CBT techniques that
include breathing- and meditation-style tasks. These programmes may
herald a new genre in which online virtual worlds combine gaming with
the mutual support of internet forums.\ :sup:`14` *Autcraft*
(https://www.autcraft.com/) is another notable example of an early
development of this format; it is packaged as a ‘limited edition’ of
Minecraft which offers a kinder and more protected environment for
autistic users to build confidence and practice social interaction.
There is, however, a tension within such gamified applications in
balancing the need to provide therapy while maintaining the unbroken
flow of a game.

Not unrelated to interactive gamified therapy is the increasing presence
of ‘chatbot’ forms of therapy. The programme is set within a
machine-messaging environment and so is able to ‘chat’ to the user.
These programmes, of which *Wysa* (https://www.wysa.io/meet-wysa) is a
very good example, tend to deliver CBT, mindfulness and meditation. User
are free to move between the encouraging and supportive online machine
‘conversations’ and subunits engaging them in direct psychotherapy.
These programmes store information about the user, including their
current state of mind, and use this information within the ongoing
conversation. An example of this would be a comment such as ‘You said
that you felt low yesterday, are you feeling a bit better today?’

The next stage in the evolution of autonomous online therapy is likely
to involve a significant extension of the collection of user information
and increased ‘tailoring’ of programme responses to the user's behaviour
and relationship experiences (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). This would move
online care beyond CBT-style interventions and start to offer a
relational form of therapy, through which the user can develop a deeper
insight into his/her own relationship styles, their aetiology and
potential means of escaping negative patterns of behaviour.

Existing internet forums can offer mutual support for those with
psychological distress or more specific mental health problems. They are
sometimes suggested or offered as adjuncts to the types of digital
therapy programmes described above. The use of such forums may or may
not be free and are generally moderated. Examples include *Mood Garden*
(http://www.moodgarden.org/) and *Big White Wall*
(https://www.bigwhitewall.com/v2/Home.aspx?ReturnUrl=%2f), the latter of
which has trained staff online on a 24-h basis.

.. _sec3:

Evidence base for online therapies
==================================

Research into online therapies reveals two important aspects: (1)
improvement of psychological state, and (2) the degree of engagement
demonstrated by users (Supplementary Table 1 available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2019.66). Perhaps unsurprisingly in view of
the heterogeneity of studies, a wide range of results are shown for both
of these measures across the different online programmes. The selection
of participants is also a factor, which may depend upon unsolicited
clicks on a website through to targeted selection of a specific patient
group. Many studies include brief phone or text contact to encourage
engagement.

Online CBT programmes have been the main source of evidence for efficacy
of digital therapies. However, examination of bias-modification
programmes for anxiety reveals weak effects of borderline significance
(observed effect sizes, 0.07–0.42).\ :sup:`8` In contrast, for a
mindfulness programme aimed at patients with established bipolar
disorder, a significant change is observed with an effect size of 0.52
on an intention-to-treat basis. Nevertheless, the attrition rate was
38%.\ :sup:`15`

There is a paucity of published evidence on those users who begin online
CBT therapy independently through search engines or clinical
recommendations. One informative exception is data on the use of the
modular CBT programme *MoodGYM.* Only around 25% of arrivals proceeded
from the initial introductory module through to a second module.
Moreover, the maximum observed pre-post effect size was 0.4.\ :sup:`7,9`
Notably, around 50% of those enrolling on such programmes fulfil
clinical criteria for depression.

Thus the majority of research into effectiveness examines the effects of
CBT programmes on preselected clinical populations. Here, the typical
pre-post effect size is 0.5–0.8\ :sup:`8,13,16,17` with variation
between individual studies. The effect size drops when a comparison
group – typically a treatment-as-usual or waiting-list group – is
included, negating statistical group differences in a subset of studies.
On average, the effect size is typically reduced to around
0.4,\ :sup:`13,17,18` which represents a low to moderate treatment
effect. This suggests that part of the pre-post effect is a natural
recovery cycle from psychological distress, a view also supported by
mixed findings as to whether recovery is enhanced by an increased
engagement with the digital programme. No association was found between
reliable clinical improvement and either the (extended) duration of
engagement with an online programme\ :sup:`18` or the number of therapy
modules offered,\ :sup:`7` although other studies do report increasing
therapeutic benefit in association with longer therapy
engagement.\ :sup:`19`

Engagement is generally poor, with high rates of attrition among user of
online therapies. A true meta-analysis of these data is impossible given
the range of measures across studies (including full programme
completion, minimum ‘adequate’ number of therapy sessions, average
percentage of completed modules, percentage of participants progressing
to second module or percentage completing half of the modules). However,
data for full completion or adequate engagement show a wide range, e.g.
16–82% for completion. A ‘typical’ value appears to be around 50% for
the completion of half of the modules.\ :sup:`12,13,17,18,20–25`

The degree of engagement with online therapy is likely to reflect the
variety of programmes, the range of indications or whether users were
contacted (e.g. brief emails or text) to encourage adherence. Some of
the factors that affect therapy engagement have been studied; for
example observed higher levels of therapy adherence are reported in
people with lower baseline symptoms.\ :sup:`19` Although other studies
have not found associations between engagement and symptom severity or
improvement.\ :sup:`18` Among social factors, adherence is reported to
be higher among users who are white and older.\ :sup:`23` A
meta-analysis also found engagement is better in females, individuals
with higher educational attainment and in older users. Comorbid anxiety
symptoms appear to introduce an additional challenge to
adherence.\ :sup:`26`

.. _sec4:

Forms of additional support for online therapy
==============================================

A number of ‘add-ons’ have been introduced to stand-alone online therapy
programmes, generally with the aim of reducing attrition. These include
brief contact with therapists or allied health staff by phone or text.
The use of weekly phone calls seems to be a particularly popular
approach during treatment trials with the aim of increasing engagement.
The number of therapy modules, out of ten, that were completed increases
from when a user has no contact, to a weekly email to a weekly phone
call (3.7, 5.5 and 7.3 modules, respectively).\ :sup:`24` A related
approach is the use of automated reminder emails. Interestingly, better
results appear to be achieved when the automated email informs the user
about new site content, rather than simply reminding them to return to
the programme. Moreover, email reminders are more effective when sent
after 2 weeks of absence than when the user had been absent for 4 or 6
weeks.\ :sup:`27`

An alternative add-on is membership of a social forum with other users,
noted above to be a potentially valuable adjunct to a bipolar disorder
mindfulness programme.\ :sup:`15` Although the addition of a forum
generally requires staffing in the form of moderation, peer support can
improve adherence to psychoeducation modules.\ :sup:`28` Forum
membership is reported to provide an impetus to ‘keep going’ in a
qualitative study of a CBT sleep improvement programme. Here, users
offered each other support during difficult parts of the
programme.\ :sup:`29` Reported reasons for involvement with the forum
were a desire to connect with peers, receive personalised advice,
curiosity, being invited and wanting to use all sleep improvement tools.
Reasons given for not joining the forum include design problems,
negative self-comparisons, excessive time commitment, data privacy
concerns and the uncertain quality of user-generated content. A user
forum linked to an online CBT programme for individuals receiving
prostate cancer treatment failed to show any improvement in CBT
programme completion.\ :sup:`30`

.. _sec5:

Online therapy: strengths, weaknesses and potential concerns
============================================================

As previously discussed, there are concerns about the high attrition
rate in the use of online therapy programmes and the small-to-moderate
effect size when compared with other groups such as those on the waiting
list or receiving treatment as usual. Expectation management should thus
form an integral part of such programmes.\ :sup:`31` One potentially
compensating effect at the service level is the low cost of massive open
online interventions. When the cost of minor improvement is minimal and
the number of patients receiving treatment is so large, there is a large
resulting gain in psychological health. Related to this is the
advantage, highlighted above, afforded by an increased accessibility of
treatments that no longer need to be time limited.

Online therapy is likely to be most appropriate as an early phase in a
stepped treatment plan.\ :sup:`3,13` A potentially worrying aspect of
online therapy is whether it might have a negative impact on
acceptance/receptivity to face-to-face therapy. Interestingly,
enthusiasm for personal CBT may be increased among individuals receiving
online treatment when compared with the provision of only
psychoeducational information about depression,\ :sup:`32` or there may
be no observable effect on face-to-face treatment.\ :sup:`33` Some users
of course may become ‘well enough’ that they do not feel in need of the
further improvement that could occur through subsequent face-to-face
therapy.\ :sup:`34` This is an odd reversal of the potential gain of
online therapy improving the condition of those not considered ill
enough to require face-to-face therapy.

It is also important to consider whether other harmful effects might
result from engaging in online psychotherapy. Higher rates of clinical
deterioration occur in patients receiving watchful waiting (7.2%) than
those receiving online CBT (5.8%).\ :sup:`35` Feedback from those who
completed a mindfulness programme saw 15 users denying any issues
whereas 1 had been uncomfortable during a 30-min exercise (body scan) as
it reawakened a traumatic memory.\ :sup:`15` This potentially supports
the concern that re-traumatisation might occur with increased
vulnerability due to the reduction of psychological defences. A less
direct form of harm to a user might occur if online responses could be
subject to subpoena.\ :sup:`34`

There are potential concerns that high-risk individuals may not be
identified during online therapy. Questions have been raised as to
whether it should be possible, or ethical, to trace individuals directly
if worrying information is declared while using the programme. Coupled
telephone help services are provided for users of some programmes such
as *SPARX*. Other programmes rely on the presentation of emergency
contact details in a more generic form, for example advising users to
contact local mental health services or helplines. Similar issues have
long been recognised with respect to self-help manuals, whether they are
presented as literature or online. Online therapies have more
opportunity to provide support through ‘help’ buttons or facilities to
put the user in immediate contact with personal support by phone, email
or messaging. An as-yet-unresolved issue relates to the international
nature of the internet that makes it difficult to establish the
jurisdiction under which the programme is being operated,\ :sup:`34` and
consequently how users might seek redress for grievances.

.. _sec6:

The next generation
===================

All of the psychotherapy programmes discussed above share a critical
limitation. They do not adapt to the behaviour and relationship styles
of the individual user. They set out to treat a ‘typical psychology
patient’ and supply information that is known to be widely helpful in
developing a healthier self-narrative. Thus *MoodGYM* encourages the
user to understand the concept of ‘warpy thoughts’, which are related to
automatic negative assumptions. *MoodGYM* illustrates this principal
with tales of the experiences of programme characters with varying
mental states. The user is then invited to reflect on circumstances in
their own life when they react in this automatic negative manner. There
is no feedback or onward development of these personal experiences by
the programme. Similarly, *SPARX* encourages the user's avatar to
destroy pictorial bubbles or GNATs, then further expands on how these
types of thoughts are expressed in ‘real life’. But again, the
information is not specific to the user's experiences in any manner. The
chatbot programmes provide generic information for problems suggested
during the chat conversation.

The limited dynamic personalisation makes it very difficult to move
beyond meditation- and CBT-type programmes toward more relational forms
of psychotherapy that are critically dependent on personal interactions
both inside and outside the therapy room. Nevertheless, there is no
inherent reason why such relationships cannot be explored online with
personalised responses. The programming of such a functionality within a
digital therapy is inherently more complex, requiring a wider range of
outcomes, depending on the user's inputs. The implementation of such
levels of complexity within online psychotherapy programmes is ongoing
and is anticipated to lead to truly personalised therapies. This key
development will presage the arrival of the next generation of
autonomous online psychotherapy programmes.

.. _sec7:

Future directions
=================

We are at an exciting phase in the development of autonomous online
psychotherapy services. Increasingly, programmes are aiming to move from
being informative to entertaining. The advent of programmes such as
*SPARX* and *Celeste* as well as the protected virtual reality of
*Autcraft* show how developers now attempt to offer integral enjoyment
to facilitate the therapeutic process. This is a promising solution to
the problem of high attrition observed in today's more ‘instructional’
programmes, despite their excellent therapeutic value for those
individuals motivated enough to work through the programme. We now
anticipate another generation of autonomous online psychotherapy where
programmes will become responsive to the circumstances of the individual
user and offer an agile, adaptive environment in which the user should
feel more personally engaged with the process.

It might be intuitively strange to think about psychotherapy, a highly
relational form of medical treatment, being in the forefront of
autonomous digital care. Perhaps this can be explained by the fact that
we are often seeking to treat the unfortunate effects of earlier
interactions with others. Themed interaction with another's mind,
through an internet programme, offers a fresh framework through which
earlier negative experiences might be reconsidered, reappraised and
restructured for future well-being. Ultimately, the future of autonomous
digital psychotherapy is not about communication with a computer, but
with the body of knowledge established through evidence-based practice
and its dynamic tailoring to personal need.

.. _sec8:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2019.66.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

**Annabel McDonald**, MBBS, MRCPsych, is a psychiatry consultant and PhD
student at Brighton and Sussex Medical School, UK. **Jessica A.
Eccles**, MBBS, PhD, MRCPsych, is a National Institute for Health
Research academic clinical lecturer at Brighton and Sussex Medical
School, UK. **Sanaz Fallahkhair**, PhD, is a senior lecturer at the
School of Computing Engineering and Maths, University of Brighton, UK.
**Hugo D. Critchley** is Chair of Psychiatry at Brighton and Sussex
Medical School, UK.

A.M. has received an Education Grant (XXT73JACHOPPING) from Kent, Surrey
and Sussex Health Education England. The authors have received no
further financial receipts pertaining to the article.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
