================================================================================================================
A model for specific goals for in-patient treatment linked to resources and limitations in out-patient treatment
================================================================================================================

Virginia Davies [1]_Correspondence to Virginia Davies
(virginia.davies@ouh.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   The author reflects on the Norwegian inpatient service descriptions
   contained in Wilkinson's article, considering the challenges laid out
   in his piece from the perspective of a child and adolescent
   psychiatrist working in a hospital crisis setting, as well as within
   the context of child and adolescent mental healthcare staffing across
   the UK.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

As a paediatric liaison psychiatrist, I was dubious about how an article
that concerns itself with goals for in-patient care would speak to my
own experiences and practice. I need not have worried; Wilkinson's
paper\ :sup:`(n.d.)` is rich in reflections about the core issues at
play in child and adolescent psychiatric practice and has relevance for
all child and adolescent psychiatrists.

Wilkinson writes from the vantage points of retirement and from being
‘over the water’. Having spent his working life practising in the
well-funded healthcare system of Norway, he brings a huge amount of
digested clinical encounter to his analysis of how in-patient services
are most usefully oriented, around safety and the developing
personality. He argues for two different types of in-patient unit, which
might be considered as future service development objectives within the
UK. Both rely on considerable expertise and stable staffing. His ‘safety
first’ model requires most child and adolescent psychiatric expertise at
the emergency and out-patient levels, with less direct psychiatric input
during in-patient admission. He acknowledges that we are a long way from
a point where we might manage this, but how far off are we?

In the UK, the number of consultant child and adolescent psychiatrists
per head of child population is significantly, perhaps scandalously,
lower than for other specialties. As of September 2019, provision ranged
from 2.8 consultant child and adolescent psychiatrists per 100 000
children in Kent, Surrey and Sussex to a high of 10.7 per 100 000
children in North Central and East London. This compares with 29.3
consultant paediatricians per 100 000 children across England. Most UK
general hospitals do not have not a single consultant child and
adolescent psychiatrist in their employ. Accordingly, the majority of
emergency departments catering for under-18s have no departmental
consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist either.

Wilkinson's powerful charge really resonated with me for this reason:
‘Why is it not expected that A&E departments should be catering for the
second highest cause of mortality?’ It is clear what he means by
‘catering for’; he has earlier described using in-house ‘child and
adolescent psychiatry expertise’.

He notes the value of front door expertise: ‘those with greater
experience refer fewer patients for admission because of potential
suicide’. Experienced staff also take less time to come to a decision
and tend to provide greater psychological containment, be this in the
care of a child with a perturbing mental health presentation or one with
a serious physical ailment. Junior psychiatrists, emergency department
staff of all grades, and patients and their families all know this. So
why are we not stacking more experience to the fore as per Wilkinson's
‘safety first’ model?

In discussing why local in-patient work is so vital for the ‘safety
first’ cohort, Wilkinson describes the task thus: ‘It is not the axis 1
diagnosis which determines the need for admission, but the necessity of
an alternative “containment” of the patient to that available at home.
Two factors operate here: the state of the child and the processes at
home.’ Working in an emergency setting, a very large proportion of those
we refer for admission fall into the second bracket. This is the reason
I have watched the stripping back of family therapy provision within
in-patient settings with a deal of dismay.

Wilkinson highlights the need for high and stable levels of staffing in
the ‘intensive’ (24/7) units needed for the ‘safety first’ cohort. This
brings us back to the central importance in recovery at any state or
stage of relationships and attachment. How many of our child and
adolescent in-patient units have ‘a stable group of nurse therapists’?
How many even have enough staff each shift? He comments on the reduced
need for restraint and sedation in Norwegian units, an enviable outcome
of such stable staffing.

Going on to consider the needs of a second cohort of patients, he
describes how counterproductive it is to admit those with developing
personality issues to the same type of unit as that used for the ‘safety
first’ cohort. He proposes instead a weekday unit, with greater direct
involvement by psychiatry, who are less directly involved in day-to-day
patient care in the 24/7 ‘intensive’ units. The benefit of a 5-day unit
is the testing out and information gathering that can be garnered by
weekends at home.

In the UK, psychiatric admission for those with personality issues is
generally to the same unit as the ‘safety first’ cohort. The idea of the
24/5 unit, with its strong emphasis on attachment, trauma and loss,
sounded like an extension of what our current dialectical behaviour
therapy teams offer, but with the added containment for the rest of the
system of not having responsibility for the child or young person during
their most risky stages. Our ‘ordinary’ in-patient units already focus
on axes 2–5. And I don't think most in-patient settings in their current
form are failing to consider trauma and loss. But staffing issues are
the real ‘elephant in the room’. We have so much nursing ‘churn’ and
such a paucity of senior staff capacity that both the intensive 24/7
unit model, with its reliance on stable nursing staff and high-level
emergency and out-patient expertise, and the 24/5 ‘developing
personality’ unit model, with its reliance on intensive consultation and
liaison with other agencies, especially social care, feel like
impossible dreams for us here in the UK.

It would be easy to close by asking ‘Please can I move to Norway?’, but
I suppose the challenge laid down to us in this paper is this: what can
we do individually as citizens, or as a professional collective, to try
to address this most gross injustice of utterly inadequate mental health
services, emergency, out-patient and in-patient, for some of the most
vulnerable members of our society?

**Virginia Davies**, MRCP, MRCGP, FRCPsych, is a Consultant in
Paediatric Liaison in the South London and Maudsley National &
Specialist CAMHS Paediatric Liaison Service at King's College Hospital
Denmark Hill, London, UK.

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.

.. [1]
   Commentary on… Child psychiatry. See this issue.
