================================================================================================================
Evaluation of the effectiveness and acceptability of intramuscular clozapine injection: illustrative case series
================================================================================================================



Rebecca Henry
Ruth Massey
Kathy Morgan
Johanne Deeks
Hannah Macfarlane
Nikki Holmes
Edward Silva [1]_Correspondence to Rebecca Henry
(rebecca.henry@southernhealth.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   A series of eleven patients prescribed intramuscular clozapine at
   five UK sites is presented. Using routinely collected clinical data,
   we describe the use, efficacy and safety of this treatment modality.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   We administered 188 doses of intramuscular clozapine to eight
   patients. The remaining three patients accepted oral medication. With
   the exception of minor injection site pain and nodules, side-effects
   were as expected with oral clozapine, and there were no serious
   untoward events. Nine patients were successfully established on oral
   clozapine with significant improvement in their clinical
   presentations.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Although a novel formulation in the UK, we have shown that
   intramuscular clozapine can be used safely and effectively when the
   oral route is initially refused.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Clozapine remains the gold-standard intervention for treatment-resistant
schizophrenia (TRS), offering a wide range of benefits.\ :sup:`1–5` Case
reports and series describing the use of intramuscular clozapine for
patients unable or unwilling to take oral treatment have been published
from authors based in Israel, the Netherlands and Australia.\ :sup:`6–9`
Although it is possible to successfully administer clozapine via a
nasogastric tube as an alternative to the oral route, the more
conventional option of an injection is usually preferable if a suitable
preparation is available.\ :sup:`10` Reports of the use of both
intramuscular and nasogastric clozapine show that this ‘assertive’
approach can often result in improvements in mental state and a
reduction in incidents and segregation, as well as facilitating
progression to a less-restrictive environment. Also in practice, a
stated intention to use ‘enforced’ nasogastric or intramuscular
clozapine is often sufficient to persuade patients to accept the less
intrusive oral route.\ :sup:`11,12` Clozapine remains an underused
treatment and ‘enforced’ clozapine in particular has been seen as
controversial in the UK.\ :sup:`13–15` The use of, and attitudes to,
intramuscular clozapine in the UK have, to date, been described in
poster presentations only.\ :sup:`16–18` We now present the use of
intramuscular clozapine in five UK settings with eleven in-patients.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

Data was collected between January 2017 and July 2018 at five UK sites:
two medium-secure units, two high-secure hospitals and a locked
rehabilitation unit. Clinical records were used to identify patients
prescribed intramuscular clozapine, and their demographics, previous,
response to clozapine use, use of oral and intramuscular therapy,
subsequent response as assessed by clinical team impressions, adverse
effects from intramuscular treatment and subsequent stabilisation on
oral therapy were recorded. Pharmacy staff were consulted to report on
the nurses’ practical experience of using the intramuscular formulation.

.. _sec1-1:

How to use intramuscular clozapine
----------------------------------

.. _sec1-1-1:

Clozapine preparation and availability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Clozapine for injection is an unlicensed ‘special’ product made in the
Netherlands by Brocacef and imported to the UK by Durbin PLC via
Mawdsleys. The minimum order quantity is two packs of ten 125 mg/5 mL
ampoules costing approximately £2000 in total. Hospital pharmacy
departments have experienced delays with importation, supply shortages
and stock being sent with a shelf life of only 2 months. When new, the
ampoules have a 2-year shelf life in the dark at 25°C.

.. _sec1-1-2:

Legal authority
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In England and Wales, incapacitous or non-consenting patients detained
under the Mental Health Act (1983) may be administered drug treatments
for mental disorders for longer than 3 months only if a second opinion
appointed doctor approves the treatment, including the route of
administration. A rationale needs to be given for the use of unlicensed
preparations and so, even if the current authority includes oral and/or
intramuscular antipsychotics, a separate request for this preparation
will be required. The legal authority to allow enforced blood taking as
part of clozapine treatment is provided by section 63 of the Mental
Health Act (1983) as long as there is valid authority for the clozapine
treatment itself.\ :sup:`19`

.. _sec1-1-3:

Administration and dosing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Administration is by deep intramuscular injection. Depending on the
volume of injection, the gluteal, lateral thigh or deltoid injections
sites were used in this series. The Brocacef preparation has no UK
licence. The Netherlands licence specifies that volumes of 2–4 mL should
be administered into the gluteal muscle and not the arm or thigh, and
that volumes >4 mL should be given as separate injections. There is no
evidence base to favour one site over another. Teams may choose to split
doses exceeding 4 mL.\ :sup:`20` As the bioavailability is approximately
twice that of oral preparations, oral doses are halved and injections
are usually given once daily. Given the practical limits of
administering large volumes of intramuscular medication initial plans
for titrations up to volumes of 3.5 mL (87.5 mg intramuscular clozapine
is equal to 175 mg oral clozapine) may require flexibility, depending on
the response. This would enable the use of intramuscular clozapine
beyond the initial 14-day titration.

.. _sec1-1-4:

Liaison with clozapine monitoring services
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Although the intramuscular preparation is an unlicensed product, the aim
is to establish the patient on oral clozapine as quickly as possible,
with as little intramuscular use as possible (preferably none). The
treating psychiatrist, pharmacy and patient will need to be registered
with a clozapine monitoring service so as to allow oral clozapine to be
dispensed. In practice, patients have been registered with a monitoring
service. Oral clozapine has been prescribed and, if refused, then
intramuscular injections of clozapine administered. Blood monitoring at
the required intervals continues, so ensuring that the patient remains
registered and that oral clozapine can be dispensed. The clozapine
patient-monitoring service manufacturing the relevant oral brand of
clozapine has no responsibility for the use of intramuscular clozapine.
Our series involved patents registered with all current UK clozapine
providers.

.. _sec1-1-5:

Available protocols and guidelines
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Several trusts have produced guidelines and suggested dosing schedules
for the use of intramuscular clozapine, which are available
online.\ :sup:`21`

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Patient characteristics
-----------------------

All eleven patients identified were male: ten had a primary diagnosis of
schizophrenia (ICD-10 code F20)\ :sup:`22` and one had a primary
diagnosis of bipolar disorder (ICD-10 code F31).\ :sup:`22` The
indication for clozapine was treatment resistance following previous
failed treatments, including high dose and antipsychotic polypharmacy.
Most had demonstrated a response to clozapine treatment previously, but
had discontinued owing to various patient or clinician variables:
complaints about blood monitoring, sedation, and a coincidental fall in
platelet count owing to immune thrombocytopenia. At least two patients
had experienced severe rebound psychosis when oral clozapine was
stopped. All the units included have a smoke-free policy, which had been
instigated before the data collection period, and so all patients were
non-smokers. See `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ for a summary of the patient
demographics. Table 1Patient demographicsPatientAge at first episode of
psychosis (years)Age at this admission (years)Duration of psychosis at
intramuscular clozapine prescription (years)Previous clozapine
responsePrevious clozapine dose
(mg/d)Setting117247Poor1100MSU228346Partial350MSU3223917Partial325HSS4233714N/AN/AHSS5214726N/AN/AMSU6173720Yes250MSU7183012Yes600MSU8223614Partial200HSS9203111YesNot
knownHSS10135037YesNot knownHSS11183820N/AN/ARehabMean203717471 [2]_

.. _sec2-2:

Use of intramuscular clozapine
------------------------------

In three patients the offer to choose between the oral and intramuscular
route was sufficient to establish oral clozapine maintenance treatment
at between 400 and 425 mg/day, with significant benefit. In the
remaining eight patients intramuscular clozapine was required, and
between 1 and 99 doses were administered per patient, predominantly into
the gluteal muscle, with one being given into the lateral thigh after a
patient developed nodules in the gluteal muscle, and one into the
deltoid muscle when the patient refused to have the clozapine by any
other route (it was the first dose at only 0.25 mL, and no additional
effects were noted). Seven patients resisted intramuscular
administration to the extent that restraint was used on between one and
nine occasions during the initial 14-day dose titration. Restraint was
required to take a blood sample in two individuals, one on five
occasions and the other on four occasions, and there were no adverse
effects during restraint. The remaining patients did not resist. By the
end of 5 months, nine patients had been established on oral clozapine,
the majority of these showing improvement at doses between 150 mg and
400 mg/day (mean 228 mg/day). No serious adverse effects occurred owing
to either the injection itself or associated episodes of restraint.
Minor injection site pain occurred in three patients; one experienced
sedation, and the patient who had 99 doses of intramuscular clozapine
experienced some injection site nodules. There were no injection site
abscesses or infections. The maximum reported dose of intramuscular
clozapine administered was 250 mg in 10 mL, which was given across three
injection sites. `Tables 2 <#tab02>`__ and `3 <#tab03>`__ describe the
use of intramuscular clozapine in this series. Table 2Use of
intramuscular clozapine: titration over initial 14-day protocol (see
section *How to use intramuscular clozapine*)PatientRoute of first
clozapine doseOral clozapine doses in titrationIntramuscular clozapine
doses in
titrationRestraint1Oral9552Oral01443Intramuscular10424Oral13175Oral13116Oral14007Oral14008Oral14069Oral140010Intramuscular014211Intramuscular0140Mean9.25.82Total1015322
Table 3Use of intramuscular clozapine after 14-day initial
titrationPatientIntramuscular clozapine
doses1021435410506070821901085110total135

Serum levels were obtained from two patients who had intramuscular
clozapine continuously for five or more days; see `Table 4 <#tab04>`__.
The levels were consistent with the equivalent oral doses.\ :sup:`23`
With regards to target plasma levels, all units aimed for the usual
recommended plasma range, 0.35–0.6 mg/L, but then would be guided by
individual patient symptoms and side-effects; higher than usual levels
were used in certain cases. Table 4Clozapine serum levelsIntramuscular
dose, mgEquivalent oral dose, mgClozapine, mg/LNorclozapine,
mg/L1503000.260.111252500.30.13

.. _sec2-3:

Prescribing and administering experiences
-----------------------------------------

Nurses were familiar with the practice of intramuscular antipsychotics
and in general terms the procedure was perceived as acceptable: the
injection solution was reportedly easy to draw up and, despite the
bright yellow colour of the solution, the syringe markings were clearly
readable and administration was easy, with very little resistance
against the plunger when administering.

Nurses needed reassurance and reminding about maximum volume for single
intramuscular administration, so when, for example, 10 mL was
administered, three injections (4 mL + 3 mL + 3 mL) were used. Overall,
nurses reported that they were confident in their ability to administer
intramuscular clozapine.

Doctors required advice on bioequivalence of oral and intramuscular
clozapine and how to word the prescription so that it was clear the
intramuscular was only to be used if oral was declined. They also
occasionally needed to be reminded to document the rationale for
intramuscular treatment in clinical notes and in the associated care
plan. Assistance was sometimes needed, especially initially, to complete
the required application and gain approval by trust approval bodies.

In the unit where nasogastric clozapine had also previously been used,
the procedure for administering intramuscular was seen as much simpler,
faster and less stressful for patients. However, the limitations on
dosing with the intramuscular formulation owing to volume considerations
were a perceived disadvantage in patients who had experienced benefit
and were poorly compliant on higher doses after the initial titration.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

When presented with a patient with TRS who refuses clozapine and
consequently faces distress, disability, risk and a potentially extended
length of stay, clinicians can feel that they are dealing with an
impossible problem.\ :sup:`5` Alternatives to clozapine are unlikely to
work and may well cause harm, although a cycle of depot changes, high
dose or polypharmacy regimes may still be attempted.\ :sup:`24,25`
‘Enforced’ clozapine (i.e. via nasogastric or intramuscular) is a rarity
and, but for the handful of case series above, barely described in the
literature; there is believed to be no previous published experience of
its use in the UK. Although some NHS trusts have published guidelines
for the use of intramuscular clozapine, these do not provide for all
eventualities and will likely need adapting to local and individual
patient circumstances, often while treatment is taking place; indeed, a
flexible and pragmatic approach is more likely to succeed. Difficult
decisions will include not only deciding whether to use the
intramuscular route at the outset, but also when to stop treatment.
Neither oral clozapine nor intramuscular clozapine will provide a
solution to every patient with TRS; for example, the intramuscular route
may result in patient benefit, but not within the time frame or ceiling
dose allowed within a protocol agreed by the governance structure of the
institution. In these cases the clinical team may need to consider
higher doses and/or multiple intramuscular clozapine injections over the
course of the day. A higher-strength solution for injection would be
very useful and could enable intramuscular clozapine to be given as the
doses increase during the titration, and to continue at higher
maintenance doses if the oral dose is refused later in the treatment.
Presently one unit in the study prescribes intramuscular clozapine doses
lower than the equivalent oral dose if 48 h of non-adherence is
approaching, essentially to prevent the need for retitration. An
alternative would include the nasogastric route; however, nasogastric
administration of clozapine is culturally less acceptable and less
routine than intramuscular in mental health settings. With nasogastric
administration, more time is needed in the restraint position, therefore
reducing patient safety, and there is a risk the patient could vomit up
the medication. The clinical team needs to consider whether the benefits
of improvement, possibly in the long term, justify the short-term risks
of daily restraint or the complications of using an unlicensed,
relatively unused intramuscular drug treatment. Although in our series
there were no adverse outcomes from the episodes of restraint, it does
not necessarily follow that the procedure is devoid of risk. Our series
is unusual compared to the experience elsewhere in that greater number
of patients had a much higher number of injections. In the Israeli and
Dutch series most patients were established on oral clozapine after one
intramuscular dose only, almost all within 2 weeks of starting treatment
with clozapine, and only one had treatment for 3 months. It is possible
that our sites, which were all secure units, selected for a patient
cohort that was more clinically complex and hence more difficult to
treat.

In conclusion, given the lack of new treatments for TRS in recent years,
it is essential that clinicians deliver the treatments that are likely
to work, and clozapine in particular. The intramuscular route can be
used to remove one of the impediments to its use, namely refusal of oral
treatment. Although our experience was in secure settings, the use of
intramuscular antipsychotic medication is used throughout different
mental health settings and there is no reason to suggest that ‘enforced’
clozapine, whether using the intramuscular or any other route, should be
confined to secure services. As was found in the series from the
Netherlands and with nasogastric clozapine in the UK, many patients
accept oral clozapine when faced with the coercive alternative, which is
ultimately the desired outcome. There has been concern that the
procedure itself might be aversive and painful; however, reports of
injection site pain and inflammation were very low. We have demonstrated
that the use of intramuscular clozapine, although not without some
drawbacks, is overall easy, safe and effective.

We thank Peter Phiri R&D Moorgreen Hospital, Southern Health NHS
Foundation Trust, for his advice on the need for ethics approval.

**Rebecca Henry** is the lead pharmacist for education with Southern
Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Ruth Massey** is the lead clinical
trials pharmacist and a highly specialist clinical pharmacist with
Mersey Care NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Kathy Morgan** is a senior
clinical pharmacist with Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
**Johanne Deeks** is deputy chief pharmacist in the Secure Care Pharmacy
Service at Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust,
UK. **Hannah Macfarlane** is a clinical tutor in psychiatric pharmacy in
the School of Life and Health Sciences at Aston University, and the Lead
Clinical Pharmacist in Secure Care at Birmingham and Solihull Mental
Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Nikki Holmes** is Head of Pharmacy
for Forensic Services in the Pharmacy Department at Nottinghamshire
Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Edward Silva** is a consultant
forensic psychiatrist in Secure Services with Mersey Care NHS Foundation
Trust, UK.

All authors made contributions to the conception and design of the work,
revisions for important intellectual content, approved the final version
for publication and are accountable for all aspects of the work.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.

.. [2]
   MSU, medium-secure unit; HSS, high-secure services; N/A, not
   applicable; Rehab, low-secure unit.
