---
abstract: |
  This article examines the relationship between poverty and mental
  health problems. We draw on the experience of Glasgow, our home city,
  which contains some of Western Europe\'s areas of greatest
  concentrated poverty and poorest health outcomes. We highlight how
  mental health problems are related directly to poverty, which in turn
  underlies wider health inequalities. We then outline implications for
  psychiatry.
author:
- Lee Knifton
- Greig InglisCorrespondence to Lee Knifton (<lee.knifton@strath.ac.uk>)
date: 2020-10
institute:
- 1Centre for Health Policy, University of Strathclyde, Scotland, and
  Mental Health Foundation, Scotland and Northern Ireland
- 2University of West of Scotland, Paisley
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
title: "Poverty and mental health: policy, practice and research
  implications"
---

Doctors have often played leading roles in social movements to improve
the public\'s health. These range from the early days of John Snow
isolating the role of contaminated water supplies in spreading cholera,
through to advocating harm reduction, challenging HIV stigma and, more
recently, highlighting the public health catastrophe of mass
incarceration in the USA.^1^ Almost all examples are rooted in poverty.
There is now increasing recognition that mental health problems form the
greatest public health challenge of our time, and that the poor bear the
greatest burden of mental illness.^2^

Our article draws on data from Scotland, and especially Glasgow, which
contains some of the areas of greatest need and widest health
inequalities in Western Europe. However, the relationship between
poverty, social stress and mental health problems is not a new
phenomenon and was reported by social psychiatrists half a century ago
in Langner & Michael\'s 1963 New York study^3^ and consistently since
then. Poverty is both a cause of mental health problems and a
consequence. Poverty in childhood and among adults can cause poor mental
health through social stresses, stigma and trauma. Equally, mental
health problems can lead to impoverishment through loss of employment or
underemployment, or fragmentation of social relationships. This vicious
cycle is in reality even more complex, as many people with mental health
problems move in and out of poverty, living precarious lives.

# Poverty and mental health {#sec1}

The mental health of individuals is shaped by the social, environmental
and economic conditions in which they are born, grow, work and
age.^4--7^ Poverty and deprivation are key determinants of children\'s
social and behavioural development^8,9^ and adult mental health.^10^ In
Scotland, individuals living in the most deprived areas report higher
levels of mental ill health and lower levels of well-being than those
living in the most affluent areas. In 2018 for example, 23% of men and
26% of women living in the most deprived areas of Scotland reported
levels of mental distress indicative of a possible psychiatric disorder,
compared with 12 and 16% of men and women living in the least deprived
areas.^11^ There is also a clear relationship between area deprivation
and suicide in Scotland, with suicides three times more likely in the
least than in the most deprived areas.^12^

Inequalities in mental health emerge early in life and become more
pronounced throughout childhood. In one cohort study, 7.3% of
4-year-olds in the most deprived areas of Glasgow were rated by their
teacher as displaying 'abnormal' social, behavioural and emotional
difficulties, compared with only 4.1% in the least deprived areas. By
age 7, the gap between these groups had widened substantially: 14.7% of
children in the most deprived areas were rated as having 'abnormal'
difficulties, compared with 3.6% of children in the least deprived.^13^
National data from parental ratings of children\'s behaviour show a
similar pattern: at around 4 years of age, 20% of children living in the
most deprived areas of Scotland are rated as having 'borderline' or
'abnormal' levels of difficulties, compared with only 7% living in the
least deprived areas.^14^

These findings reflect a broader pattern of socioeconomic inequalities
in health that is observed internationally.^15^ The primary causes of
these inequalities are structural differences in socioeconomic groups'
access to economic, social and political resources, which in turn affect
health through a range of more immediate environmental, psychological
and behavioural processes.^16,17^ A wide range of risk factors are more
prevalent among low income groups for example, including low levels of
perceived control^18^ and unhealthy behaviours such as smoking and low
levels of physical activity,^11^ although these are best understood as
mechanisms that link the structural causes of inequality to health
outcomes.^17^

# Excess mortality and mental health in Glasgow {#sec2}

Glasgow has some of the highest Scottish rates of income deprivation,
working-age adults claiming out of work benefits, and children living in
low-income families.^19^ Moreover, the city also reports poor mental
health, relative to the Scottish average, on a host of indicators,
including lower mental well-being and life satisfaction, and higher
rates of common mental health problems, prescriptions for anxiety,
depression or psychosis, and greater numbers of patients with hospital
admissions for psychiatric conditions.^19^

These statistics are consistent with Glasgow\'s overall health profile
and high rates of mortality. Life expectancy in Glasgow is the lowest in
Scotland. For example, men and women born in Glasgow in 2016--2018 can
expect to live 3.6 and 2.7 fewer years respectively than the Scottish
average.^20^ Within Glasgow, men and women living in the most deprived
areas of the city can expect to live 13.5 and 10.7 fewer years
respectively than those living in the least deprived areas.^21^

The high level of mortality in Glasgow can largely be attributed to the
effects of deprivation and poverty in the city, although high levels of
*excess* mortality have also been recorded in Glasgow, meaning a
significant level of mortality in excess of that which can be explained
by deprivation. For example, premature mortality (deaths under 65 years
of age) is 30% higher in Glasgow compared with Liverpool and Manchester,
despite the similar levels of deprivation between these cities.^22^
Crucially, this excess premature mortality is in large part driven by
higher rates of 'deaths of despair'^23^ in Glasgow, namely deaths from
suicide and alcohol- and drug-related causes.^22^

It has been proposed that excess mortality in Glasgow can be explained
by a number of historical processes that have rendered the city
especially vulnerable to the hazardous effects of deprivation and
poverty. These include the lagged effects of historically high levels of
deprivation and overcrowding; regional policies that saw industry and
sections of the population moved out of Glasgow; the nature of urban
change in Glasgow during the post-war period and its effects on living
conditions and social connections; and local government responses to UK
policies during the 1980s.^24^ On the last point, Walsh and
colleagues^24^ describe how the UK government introduced a host of
neoliberal policies during this period -- including rapid
deindustrialisation -- that had particularly adverse effects in cities
such as Glasgow, Manchester and Liverpool. While Manchester and
Liverpool were able to mitigate the negative effects of these national
policies to some extent by pursuing urban regeneration and mobilising
the political participation of citizens, there were fewer such efforts
made in Glasgow, which contributed to the diverging health profiles of
the cities.

These researchers have also suggested that this excess mortality may
partly reflect an inadequate measurement of deprivation.^24^ However,
that does not capture the reality of living in poverty. One aspect of
this lived experience that may be important is the experience of
poverty-based stigma and discrimination.^25^ Stigma is a fundamental
cause of health inequalities,^26^ and international evidence has
demonstrated that poverty stigma is associated with poor mental health
among low-income groups.^27^ Individuals living in socioeconomically
deprived areas may also experience 'spatial' stigma, which similarly has
a range of adverse health effects for residents^28^ and, crucially, may
be unintentionally exacerbated by media and public health professionals'
reports of regional health inequalities.^29^ Given the continued focus
on Glasgow\'s relatively poor health it is possible that the city is
more vulnerable to such stigmatising processes. However, we stress that
additional research will be required to test whether stigma is an
important aspect of the lived reality of poverty, particularly as
several psychosocial explanations have already been offered for the
excess mortality, with varying levels of supporting evidence.^24^ The
notion of intersectional stigma is also gaining traction and requires
further research.

Understanding the life-course impact of poverty on mental health is also
important. Childhood adversity is one mechanism through which poverty
and deprivation have an impact on mental health. Adverse childhood
experiences, such as exposure to abuse or household dysfunction, are
relatively common in the population. Marryat & Frank examined the
prevalence of seven adverse childhood experiences among children born in
2004--2005 in Scotland, and found that approximately two-thirds had
experienced at least one adverse experience by age 8.^30^ Moreover, the
prevalence was greatest in low-income households: only 1% of children in
the highest-income households had four or more adverse childhood
experiences, compared with 10.8% in the lowest-income households.
Adverse childhood experiences are also strong predictors of mental
health in adulthood: individuals who have experienced at least four are
at a considerably greater risk of mental ill health, problematic alcohol
use and drug misuse.^31^ It has also been suggested that experiences of
childhood adversity and complex trauma may contribute to Glasgow\'s --
and Scotland\'s -- excess mortality, particularly that which is
attributable to violence, suicide and alcohol and drug-related
deaths.^32^ The implications are significant for psychiatry. Not only
does it offer a broader explanation of causation; it also highlights the
importance of supporting early interventions for young people\'s mental
health and supporting the families -- including children -- of those
experiencing mental health problems.

# Implications {#sec3}

When faced with the scale of the challenge the response can be daunting.
This is especially so at a time when we see increasing poverty and
socioeconomic inequalities within our society and challenging political
conditions. The complexity and enduring nature of the problems
necessitate a multilevel response from psychiatry across practice,
policy, advocacy and research, which we explore in this section. We
argue that this response should address three broad areas.

## Reinvigorate social psychiatry and influence public policy {#sec3-1}

The demise of social psychiatry in the UK and USA in recent decades has
deflected focus away from the social causes and consequences of mental
health problems at the very time that social inequalities have been
increasing. Now is the time to renew social psychiatry at professional
and academic levels. There is considerable scope to form alliances with
other areas -- especially public mental health agencies and charities.
Psychiatry as a profession should support those advocating for
progressive public policies to reduce poverty and its impact. If we do
not, then, as Phelan and colleagues outline, we will focus only on the
intermediate causes of health inequalities, rather than the fundamental
causes, and this will ensure that these inequalities persist and are
reproduced over time.^33^ Activism with those who have consistently
highlighted the links between poverty and mental health problems, such
as The Equality Trust, may effect change among policy makers.

## Tackle intersectional stigma and disadvantage {#sec3-2}

We must understand, research and tackle stigma in a much more
sophisticated way by recognising that mental health stigma does not sit
in isolation. We need to understand and address what Turan and
colleagues define as intersectional stigma.^34^ Intersectional stigma
explains the convergence of multiple stigmatised identities that can
include ethnicity, gender, sexuality, poverty and health status. This
can then magnify the impact on the person\'s life. In this context, the
reality is that you have a much greater chance of getting a mental
health problem if you experience poverty. And if you do, then you will
likely experience more stigma and discrimination. Its impact on your
life will be greater, for example on precarious employment, housing,
education and finances. It is harder to recover and the impact on family
members may be magnified. Intersectional stigma remains poorly
researched and understood,^35^ although the health impact of poverty
stigma is now emerging as an important issue in studies in Glasgow and
elsewhere.^25^

## Embed poverty-aware practice and commissioning {#sec3-3}

We conclude with our third idea, to ensure that poverty-aware practice
is embedded in services through commissioning, training and teaching.
This means that recognising and responding to poverty is part of
assessments and care. Income maximisation schemes should be available as
an important dimension of healthcare: how to access benefits, manage
debt, access local childcare and access support for employment at the
earliest stages. This needs to be matched by a major investment in
mental health services focused on low-income areas, to address the
inverse care law.^36^ These principles are already being put into
action. For example across Scotland, including Glasgow, several general
practices working in the most deprived areas (referred to as Deep End
practices) have recently trialled the integration of money advice
workers within primary care, which has generated considerable financial
gains for patients.^37^

**Lee Knifton** is Reader and Co-Director of the Centre for Health
Policy at the University of Strathclyde, Scotland, and Director of the
Mental Health Foundation, Scotland and Northern Ireland. **Greig
Inglis** is a lecturer in psychology at the University of West of
Scotland, Paisley, Scotland.

Both authors were fully and equally involved in the design of the
article, drafting the article and making revisions to the final version
and are accountable for the integrity of the work.

# Declaration of interest {#nts3}

None.

# Supplementary material {#sec4}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.78.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::
