.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Award-winning investigative journalist Robert Kolker follows the success
of *Lost Girls* with the incredible story of the Galvin family and the
impact of schizophrenia on their lives.

Kolker follows the story of Don and Mimi Galvin who, along with their 12
children, represented the ‘perfect all-American family’ – that is until
6 of their sons developed schizophrenia. After a whistle-stop tour of
the history of psychology and psychiatry, Kolker deftly navigates us
from the first Galvin brother's diagnosis in the 1960s through many
pharmacological, genetic and psychological advances right up to our
present-day understanding of schizophrenia. The book examines the
conflicts within psychiatry over the years, poignantly portraying a
family lost in the gulf of a specialty at war with itself.

Kolker deals sensitively and compassionately with the more challenging
themes of sexual abuse, suicide and even murder, presenting the
differing experiences of many of the family members in a thoughtful and
considered way. A real strength of this book is that it also considers
the experiences of ‘well’ family members, whose lives are so affected by
their brothers’ illness. The hero of this story is undoubtedly Mimi
Galvin: dismissed early on as the typical ‘schizophrenogenic mother’,
she provides a lesson in love, loss and resilience and reminds us of the
lengths to which a mother will go to protect her family.

Despite being marketed to the general public, the skilful mix of
scientific detail coupled with engaging storytelling makes this book
essential reading, particularly for psychiatry trainees. In addition to
its clear educational value, for me this book served as a reminder of
the importance of compassion in our services – not only to the patients
themselves but to all those involved in their care.

You need look no further than the acknowledgements section to see the
time, effort and genuine care that went into putting this story together
with the help of the remaining Galvin family members. I believe this is
something that, as psychiatrists, we can also bring to assembling and
understanding our own patients’ stories.
