---
abstract: |
  Research on the bi-directional relationship between mental health and
  homelessness is reviewed and extended to consider a broader global
  perspective, highlighting structural factors that contribute to
  housing instability and its mental ill health sequelae. Local,
  national and international initiatives to address housing and mental
  health include Housing First in Western countries and promising local
  programmes in India and Africa. Ways that psychiatrists and physicians
  can be agents of changes range from brief screening for housing
  stability to structural competence training. Narrow medico-scientific
  framing of these issues risks losing sight of the foundational
  importance of housing to mental health and well-being.
author:
- Deborah K. PadgettCorrespondence to Deborah K. Padgett
  (<dkp1@nyu.edu>)
date: 2020-10
institute:
- 1New York University
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
- id: ref38
- id: ref39
- id: ref40
- id: ref41
title: "Homelessness, housing instability and mental health: making the
  connections"
---

# Mental illness and homelessness {#sec1}

The bi-directional relationship between mental ill health and
homelessness has been the subject of countless reports and a few
misperceptions. Foremost among the latter is the popular notion that
mental illness accounts for much of the homelessness visible in American
cities. To be sure, the failure of deinstitutionalisation, where
psychiatric hospitals were emptied, beginning in the 1960s, led to far
too many psychiatric patients being consigned to group homes, shelters
and the streets.^1^ However, epidemiological studies have consistently
found that only about 25--30% of homeless persons have a severe mental
illness such as schizophrenia.^2^

At the same time, the deleterious effects of homelessness *on* mental
health have been established by research going back decades. Early
epidemiological studies, comparing homeless persons with their domiciled
counterparts, found that depression and suicidal thoughts were far more
prevalent, along with symptoms of trauma and substance misuse.^2,3^ A
recent meta-analysis found that more than half of homeless and
marginally housed individuals had traumatic brain injuries -- a rate far
exceeding that of the general population.^4^ Qualitative interviews with
street homeless persons bring to life the daily struggles and emotional
toll of exposure not only to the elements but to scorn and harassment
from passers-by and the police.^5^

In the USA, healthcare professionals were among the first responders to
the homelessness 'epidemic' of the 1980s. The Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation Health Care for the Homeless initiative funded 19 health
clinics around the nation, beginning in 1985. Individual physicians,
including Jim Withers in Pittsburgh and Jim O\'Connell in Boston, made
it their mission to go out on the streets rather than participating in
the 'institutional circuit'^6^ that led so many homeless men and women
to cycle in and out of emergency departments, hospitals and jails.
Health problems such as skin ulcerations, respiratory problems, and
injuries were the visible indicia of what foretold a shortened
lifespan.^7^ Less visible but no less dire are the emotional sequelae of
being unhoused -- children are especially susceptible to the
psychological effects of homelessness and housing instability.^8^ The
gap between mental health needs and service availability for the
homeless population is vast.

# The bigger picture: global housing instability and structural factors {#sec2}

Literal homelessness -- sleeping rough in places unfit for human
habitation -- can be seen as the tip of an iceberg of housing insecurity
affecting millions of people around the world.^9^ As with attempts to
count the number of homeless people and the definitional difficulties
attending such counts,^10^ providing an estimate of the number of
housing-unstable persons globally is definitionally and logistically
challenging. In terms of slum dwellers (a prevalent form of housing
instability), Habitat for Humanity cites estimates ranging from 900Â 000
to 1.6 billion.^11^ The Dharavi slum in Mumbai has one million residents
squeezed into two square kilometres, one of the densest human
settlements in the world.^11^ Substandard housing affects the well-being
of inhabitants -- crowding, poor sanitation and infestations bring their
own risks to health and mental health.^12^

Severe housing shortages in low-income countries contrast with the
greater availability of housing in higher-income countries. And yet the
visibility and persistence of homelessness in wealthier nations attests
to the effects of growing income inequities in the midst of plenty. In
the USA, attempts to address homelessness must take several structural
barriers into account. First, housing is fundamentally viewed as a
commodity and is bound up with economic gains in the forms of tax
benefits for homeowners and builders, equity or wealth accumulation from
owning property, and developers' profits from housing market
speculation.^13^ The worst 'slumlords' (landlords who own and rent
decrepit properties to poor families) reap greater levels of profit than
their counterparts who build for affluent buyers or renters.^14^ Second,
exclusionary zoning ordinances ensure protection of single-family
properties, thus reducing housing availability for renters and
preventing multi-family dwellings.^15^ Finally, access to housing is not
a purely economic proposition. The effects of centuries of *de facto*
and *de jure* racial exclusion continue to uniquely harm African
Americans in denying them access to housing and associated wealth
accumulation, thus contributing to their disproportionate representation
among homeless persons in the USA.^15^

The ultimate causes of homelessness are upstream, i.e. a profound lack
of affordable housing due in large part to neo-liberal government
austerity policies that prevent or limit public funding for housing,
gentrification that displaces working and poor families, and growing
income disparities that make paying the rent beyond the means of
millions of households. Currently, more than half of US households must
devote over 50% of their income to paying for housing, an unprecedented
level of rent burden.^14^ Farmer refers to this phenomenon as
'structural violence': the combined and cumulative effects of entrenched
socioeconomic inequities that give rise to varied forms of social
suffering.^16^ Social suffering does not easily align with existing
psychiatric nomenclatures and diagnostic algorithms, but its influence
on health through chronic stress and allostatic overload weakens immune
systems and erodes emotional well-being.^17^

# International and national initiatives {#sec3}

Interestingly, since its 1948 declaration of a right to housing,^18^ the
United Nations (UN) has generally steered clear of re-enunciating such a
right until the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were announced in
2015. Subsumed within SDG \#11, labelled 'sustainable cities and
communities', is Target 11.1 of 'safe and affordable housing for all by
2030'.^19^ The UN Special Rapporteur on the right to adequate housing,
Leilani Farha, recently submitted a set of guidelines for achieving this
goal.^20^

In the global south, access to mental healthcare for the most vulnerable
is extremely limited despite legislative initiatives to expand such
care^21,22^ and reduce human rights abuses against psychiatric
patients.^23^ The Global Mental Health Movement (GMHM), which began with
a series of articles in the *Lancet* in 2007 asserting 'no health
without mental health',^24^ came together to address a crisis that
results in a 'monumental loss in human capabilities and avoidable
suffering'.^21^ The *Lancet* Commission on Global Mental Health and
Sustainable Development, part of the GMHM, has strategically partnered
with the UN\'s SDGs to ensure that mental health and substance misuse
are integral to the SDGs moving forward.^21^ And there are signs of
progress -- most originating in the work of citizen advocates and
patients working through non-profit rather than formal government
channels. In Chennai, India, a visionary non-profit known as The Banyan
has pioneered a culturally and socially innovative approach, 'Home
Again', to help homeless persons with severe mental illness recover
their lives and live independently or return to their family homes.^25^
In West Africa, advocates for AIDS and leprosy patients have turned
their talents and expertise to developing programmes for persons with
mental illness that are inclusive, rehabilitative and rights based.^23^
Zimbabwe\'s 'Friendship Bench' programme, which situates attention to
mental health within ongoing community activities, has been replicated
worldwide.^26^ Although the African approaches are not targeted at
homeless persons, they have been heralded as low-barrier and inclusive
-- and by their location are likely to assist persons with housing
insecurity problems among others.^21^ The recent *Lancet* Commission
report on global mental health^21^ included mention of homelessness as
both a cause and consequence of poor mental health.

The advent of Housing First has been a rare success story at the
programmatic and systems levels in the US, Canada and Western
Europe.^27^ Begun in New York City as a small but determined
counterpoint to 'treatment first' approaches making access to housing
contingent on adherence, Housing First has achieved an impressive
evidence base and extensive adaptations to new populations such as
homeless youth, families and opioid users.^27^ By reversing the usual
care continuum of first requiring medication adherence, abstinence and
proof of 'housing worthiness', Housing First is the prime exemplar of an
evidence-based, cost-saving enactment of the right to housing.
Importantly, it is not 'housing only', i.e. support services including
mental healthcare are essential to its success.^28^ Early reliance on
assertive community treatment in Housing First support services was
eventually expanded to include less-intensive case management supports
for clients whose mental health recovery had proceeded further.^27^

Another evidence-based programme known as critical time intervention
(CTI) has proven effective in preventing homelessness pending discharge
from institutional care.^29^ Using time-sensitive intensive supports
before and after discharge, CTI connects the patient or client with
housing and support services to ease return to the community and avert
falling into homelessness.^29^ Like Housing First, CTI has focused on
persons with mental disorders but has since been adapted for other
at-risk groups, such as clients leaving substance misuse treatment
settings or prisons.

In the USA, there are a few signs that housing as a social determinant
of health is receiving greater recognition. The Obama-era Affordable
Care Act offered states the opportunity to expand Medicaid eligibility
to millions of low-income households, including coverage for mental
healthcare.^30^ Although federal rules prohibit use of Medicaid funds to
pay for housing (with the exception of nursing homes), some states have
creatively used Medicaid funds for all housing-related services short of
rent, including move-in costs and follow-up supports.^30^ Unfortunately,
capital funding for building and developing new housing units remains
woefully inadequate, and it is too often left up to the private sector
to act on a profit motive incentivised by government subsidies and tax
incentives.^15^ Given the current national political situation in the
US, positive change at the federal level is unlikely, but states and
cities continue to independently seek ways to move from shelters to
housing.^30^

The healthcare landscape in the UK offers opportunities for service
integration under coordinated national healthcare, and the link between
housing and health is evident in recent cooperation between the National
Housing Federation and the Mental Health Foundation in providing
supported accommodation for persons with mental disorders.^31^ In
Western Europe, the establishment of FEANTSA (European Federation of
National Organizations Working with the Homeless;
[www.feantsa.org](www.feantsa.org)) in 1989 with support from the
European Commission has brought together representatives from 30 nations
for programmatic and research initiatives (many using Housing First).
Consideration of mental problems as cause and consequence of
homelessness is a key component of FEANTSA\'s work, with psychiatrists
actively involved in research at several sites, e.g. France\'s
multi-city randomised trial of Housing First.^32^

# Psychiatrists and physicians as agents of change {#sec4}

In what ways can healthcare providers help? For housing-related risk
assessment, family or general care physicians may make use of brief
screening items inquiring about recent moves, evictions and rent
arrears^33^ as a means of ascertaining a patient\'s housing instability.
Regrettably, there are limited programmes available to which to refer
patients with 'positive' screens, but raising awareness and knowing a
patient\'s life challenges can only improve care. Calls for medical
training to include 'structural competency'^34^ point to the broader
importance of practitioners becoming versed in patients' life
circumstances linked to poverty to contextualise their health problems.
According to Metzl and Hansen,^34^ structural competency is the
practitioners' trained ability to recognise that patients' problems
defined clinically as symptoms, attitudes or disease also represent the
downstream implications of upstream decisions about housing
affordability, healthcare availability, food delivery systems and other
infrastructure supports.

Some physicians have called for the right to prescribe housing as a
means of solving this underlying problem, with the added advantage of
reducing medical costs.^35^ Prescribing housing as a form of 'preventive
neuroscience' has received support from the O\'Neill Institute as a
cost-saving humane investment in children\'s brain development.^36^ Such
attention to social and environmental determinants of health is hardly
misplaced, as they account for 90% of health status, with only 10%
attributable to medical care.^30^

Homeless men and women have few encounters with physicians, much less
psychiatrists and other formal mental healthcare providers. Those with
diagnoses of severe mental illnesses might have an assigned psychiatrist
to prescribe anti-psychotic medications, but these are brief encounters
at best. Even in wealthier nations, psychiatrists working in the public
sector are relatively fewer in number, overworked, underpaid and rarely
able to address the hidden crisis of mental ill health wrought by
homelessness and housing instability. In low-income nations, the service
gap is even wider.^22^

A recent US report on the alarming lack of access to mental healthcare
even for the well insured points to a broad-based crisis in mental
health services.^37^ Ignoring laws ensuring parity, insurers provide
much lower coverage for mental health treatment than would be tolerated
for cardiac or cancer care, and out-of-pocket costs can run as high as
\$400 per private psychiatrist visit.^37^ The prospects for a homeless
man or woman who is feeling anxious, depressed or suicidal are indeed
dismal. Although many homeless and other low-income individuals in the
US are enrolled in Medicaid, an acute scarcity of psychiatrists who
accept Medicaid patients renders such coverage virtually unattainable in
many parts of the US.^37^

# A caveat about the medico-scientific approach moving forward {#sec5}

Attempts to incorporate social determinants thinking into public policy
discourse on the mental health benefits of stable housing still have
some way to go in jurisdictions where the medico-scientific approach
holds sway. As a case in point, witness the recent report by the
prestigious US National Academy of Science, Engineering and Medicine
(NASEM) on the health benefits of permanent supportive housing (PSH), a
major source of housing and supports for formerly homeless persons with
severe mental illness.^38^ Acknowledging that research on the topic was
severely limited owing to the recency of PSH and its many poorly defined
iterations, the NASEM report nevertheless concluded that the health
benefits of such housing were minimal, with the possible exception of
persons with HIV/AIDS having improved outcomes.^38^ The report argued
for the need to identify 'housing-sensitive' health conditions to point
future researchers in the right direction.^38^

Such delimiting of what is important to 'housing-sensitive' medical
conditions exemplifies the narrowness of the medico-scientific model set
against a social determinants model combined with human rights. In
response to such reductionism, the British Psychological Society
recently proposed the Power Threat Meaning Framework as an alternative
to the medicalisation of mental illness,^39^ proposing that greater
attention be given to the implications of power and inequality.

Homelessness represents an existential crisis that threatens mind and
body alike. The concept of ontological security, having its modern
origins in the writings of sociologist Anthony Giddens, offers
phenomenological insights into the benefits of stable housing that
domiciled persons easily take for granted. As noted by this author,^40^
going from the streets to a home enhances one\'s ontological security,
as such a transition affords a sense of safety, constancy in everyday
life, privacy, and a secure platform for identity development.^40^ As
with Maslow\'s hierarchy,^41^ fundamental human needs must be met in
order to satisfy higher-order needs such as belonging and
self-actualisation.

# Conclusion {#sec6}

Despite a plethora of research linking mental and physical health to
housing stability, the salience of structural barriers is too often
submerged in 'blaming the victim' for her or his plight. Physicians and
healthcare providers receive little training in social determinants and
often view them as off-limits or distracting from attention to signs and
symptoms. Yet psychiatrists and other mental health professionals can
become agents of change by paying greater attention to the social
determinants of mental health and seeking structural competence in their
practice. It is difficult to overestimate the benefits of having a
stable, safe home as fundamental to mental health and well-being.

**Deborah K. Padgett**, PhD, MPH, is a Professor at the Silver School of
Social Work at New York University (NYU). She is also an Affiliated
Professor with NYU\'s Department of Anthropology and College of Global
Public Health.

# Declaration of interest {#nts2}

None.

# Supplementary material {#sec7}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.49.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::
