---
abstract: |
  We review basic science research on neural mechanisms underlying
  emotional processing in individuals of differing socioeconomic status
  (SES). We summarise SES differences in response to positive and
  negative stimuli in limbic and cortical regions associated with
  emotion and emotion regulation. We discuss the possible relevance of
  neuroscience to understanding the link between mental health and SES.
  We hope to provide insights into future neuroscience research on the
  etiology and pathophysiology of mental disorders relating to SES.
author:
- Yu Hao
- Martha J. FarahCorrespondence to Yu Hao (<hhao@sas.upenn.edu>)
date: 2020-10
institute:
- 1Center for Neuroscience & Society, University of Pennsylvania, USA
- 2Center for Neuroscience & Society, University of Pennsylvania, USA
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
- id: ref38
- id: ref39
- id: ref40
- id: ref41
- id: ref42
- id: ref43
- id: ref44
- id: ref45
- id: ref46
- id: ref47
- id: ref48
- id: ref49
- id: ref50
- id: ref51
- id: ref52
title: "The affective neuroscience of socioeconomic status: implications
  for mental health"
---

Low socioeconomic status (SES) is a potent risk factor for mental
disorders, particularly mood and anxiety disorders.^1--3^ Life\'s
challenges weigh more heavily on people with fewer financial resources
and less education, and the impact of SES on emotional well-being is
substantial. For example, Guhn et al^4^ found an adjusted odds ratio for
mental health conditions 25--39% higher for children of low-income
families compared with others. A Canadian government survey^5^ found
that disabling mental health problems are twice as common among those
without a high school diploma compared with college graduates.

In this article we review what is known about the affective neuroscience
of SES and sketch some of the implications this field of science might
have for mental health. We begin with basic definitions and
distinctions. 'Affective neuroscience' is the study of neural mechanisms
underlying the experience, expression and regulation of emotion. Given
that the brain is shaped by a combination of genes and environment,
explanations in terms of the brain and the environment are not mutually
exclusive. SES is a complex construct, or more accurately an
interrelated set of constructs, that captures differences in material
and social wherewithal. It has been measured in terms of financial
attributes (e.g. income, wealth), neighbourhood characteristics (e.g.
rates of unemployment and crime near one\'s home), educational and
occupational background and self-reported social standing, among other
approaches. Although these measures are all distinct from one
another,^6^ they are normally moderately correlated.^7^ Here we will
seek broad generalisations within this relatively small literature,
referring therefore to SES in general rather than making distinctions
among more specific measures. Similarly, we will generalise across life
stages at which participants' SES was measured. All of these
distinctions undoubtedly have scientific and clinical relevance, which
should also be examined. Nevertheless, for a preliminary review, we
choose to begin by aggregating findings as much as possible.

Many useful insights into the aetiology and pathophysiology of mental
disorders have come by studying the brain. Here we explore the possible
relevance of neuroscience to understanding the link between mental
health and SES. Recent attempts to link SES and psychopathology through
the brain have adopted different concepts from psychology and
neuroscience as explanatory frameworks. These include the effects of
stress on the brain,^8^ the role of self-regulation in mental health^9^
and the distinction between adversities consisting primarily of
deprivation (prevalent in low SES) and those consisting primarily of
threat (such as accompanies abuse^10^). These frameworks are not
mutually exclusive, and the goal of our review is neither to adjudicate
between them nor to develop a fourth alternative. Rather, we aim to
gather the most comprehensive collection to date of research findings
related to SES, brain and affect, and attempt a provisional integration
that will enable empirical generalisations and highlight consistencies
and inconsistencies.

The neuroscience studies reviewed here are basic science research,
carried out with normal people of varying SES. Note that in some studies
SES is not the focus of the study but included as a covariate. In some
of these cases the range of SES is restricted and the power to detect
SES effects is therefore attenuated. [Figure 1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}
depicts the systematic review process. Fig. 1Flowchart for the
systematic review. Relevant studies were identified through searches of
the database PubMed throughout 13 March 2020. The search required that
studies used at least one of the following socioeconomic status (SES)
keywords in the full paper: socioeconomic status, poverty, income,
neighbourhood quality, neighbourhood disadvantage, educational
attainment, social class, social standing. Identified studies also used
at least one of the following social and affect-related keywords in the
entire paper: emotion, threat, fear, angry, sad, happy, reward, social
interaction, hostility, rejection. In addition, the keyword of
neuroimaging method was included: fMRI. This search identified 166
results, which were screened for the inclusion criteria.

The resulting functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies
manipulated emotional states experimentally inside the scanner with
emotionally evocative stimuli or tasks. The most common methods involve
photographs of faces expressing different emotions or of affectively
valenced objects and scenes, and signals that money has been won or lost
in a game. Less frequently, studies have used other kinds of stimuli or
experiences to evoke emotion and these will also be described.

# Subcortical and cortical bases of negative affect {#sec1}

Textbook coverage of affective neuroscience invariably begins with
subcortical systems, particularly the amygdala and ventral striatum.
These appear to respond automatically, without the need for conscious
awareness of the emotion (e.g.^11,12^), and play crucial roles in the
experience and expression of emotion. Many other regions, cortical and
subcortical, also participate in emotion and there is no simple mapping
of specific emotions to specific brain areas.^13^ Emotion is best
thought of as a construction of the brain as a whole.^14^ Nevertheless,
many studies take the amygdala as a starting point in the investigation
of emotion and the brain, especially negative emotion.

## Brain responses to negative facial emotions {#sec1-1}

Although the amygdala plays a role in a range of emotions, its most
consistent role is in negative emotions. The amygdala is most readily
activated by viewing facial expressions of fear and anger. Our review
identified a substantial number of studies that have compared low- and
high-SES individuals under these experimental conditions. In the
majority of studies, lower SES by at least one measure was associated
with stronger amygdala reactivity to negative facial emotions. Young
adults whose parents were of lower SES showed greater amygdala
activation when viewing angry faces compared with control conditions in
two studies.^15,16^ In another study, negative facial expressions
elicited greater amygdala reactivity for young adults from lower-SES
families, taking into account parenting quality and maternal mental
health.^17^ Emotional faces more generally evoked greater right amygdala
activation in adults of lower SES.^18^ The same study showed that SES
was associated with strength of coupling between right amygdala and
right insula.^18^ In a study of first-time mothers viewing the faces of
either happy or distressed infants, the right amygdala was more active
to depictions of distress in mothers of lower SES.^19^

Three other studies yielded partial support for a relationship between
amygdala reactivity to negative facial emotions and SES. The support
from these findings was qualified by participant gender in one case
(only for women^20^), ethnicity of depicted face in another (only for
Black emotional faces in a study with Mexican American participants^21^)
and history of violence exposure in a third (only in non-exposed
participants^22^). In only one study testing the relationship between
amygdala reactivity and SES was a significant relationship not found,
and this study had relatively little variance in SES among the
participants (all were recruited through an antipoverty programme^23^).
Finally, in a memory study with emotional faces as retrieval cues,
testing the hippocampus as a region of interest (ROI), there was less
activity in the posterior hippocampus in lower-SES individuals when they
watched angry faces.^24^

## Brain responses to other negative stimuli {#sec1-2}

Apart from facial emotional cues, other stimuli that have been used to
evoke negative emotions include unpleasant sounds, social rejection and
loss of money. In one study unpleasantly loud auditory stimuli were used
to evoke emotional states in participants of varying SES, violence
exposure and ethnicity, generally with a warning tone but occasionally
without.^25^ When trials without a warning cue were considered, family
income was negatively associated with hippocampal activity, consistent
with greater effect of unexpected negative stimuli with lower SES. SES
showed the opposite effect with cued noise, with higher neighbourhood
deprivation (i.e. lower SES) showing lower activity in the hippocampi
and amygdalae, perhaps related to reduced preparatory regulatory
effects.

Two studies have used the sound of babies crying, contrasted with white
noise, with participants of varying SES. The crying was rated as more
annoying,^26^ but effect of SES on neural response to the cry in
non-parent adults was complex and difficult to interpret; there was
generally more activation in the insula and several other regions in
women from low-SES backgrounds, with the opposite pattern in men.
Another study of mothers hearing baby cries found less activation
associated with lower SES in frontal and temporal cortical regions, but
differences in classic emotion-related areas were not found.^27^
Although baby cries communicate urgency and distress, they may function
less as generic signals of threat or harm and more as triggers for
complex, evolved systems of parenting behaviour.^28^

Social rejection is another kind of experience that evokes negative
emotion. The so-called 'social pain' that results from rejection is not
typically associated with amygdala activity, but has a more distinctive
functional anatomy including the dorsal and ventral anterior cingulate,
anterior insula and also the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and
orbital cortex regions (see meta-analyses^29--31^). Gonzalez et al^32^
assessed responses to exclusion in the classic 'cyberball' rejection
task in young adults of varying neighbourhood SES, and tested whether
SES was associated with dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and
insula responses. The insula was not reliably activated by exclusion in
this study overall, nor as a function of SES, but lower SES was
associated with a larger dACC response. Related to social rejection is
negative social evaluation. Muscatell et al^33^ had participants read
negative versus neutral or positive personal assessments of their
performance in an interview, and *a priori* regions of interest were the
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) and amygdala. Although amygdala
activity did not differ with subjective social status (and it was not
stated whether the task evoked amygdala activity in this condition for
participants in general), dmPFC activity was evoked by negative
evaluations and was higher in lower-SES participants.

Finally, the aversive experience of losing money, a secondary
reinforcer, which differs in some ways from primary aversive stimuli
such as pain,^34^ has been assessed during fMRI in two studies with
participants of varying SES, neither of which found effects of
SES.^35,36^

## Summary {#sec1-3}

There is a trend, across various forms of negative emotional state, for
lower-SES individuals to have more brain activity in at least some
emotion-related areas. This includes evidence from tasks using emotional
facial expressions, loud noises and social rejection. This
generalisation, although reasonably broad, does not extend to all of the
literature. In particular, two studies using infant cry sounds show SES
effects, but these effects are complex and cannot be interpreted as
simply more activity in emotion-related areas, and two studies of
monetary loss failed to show effects of SES at all.

# Subcortical and cortical bases of positive affect {#sec2}

The anatomy of positive affect overlaps with some of the areas mentioned
above in connection with negative affect, consistent with the complex,
emergent nature of emotion in the brain. Studies of positive affect use
depictions of happy faces and scenes and the occurrence of desirable
outcomes such as the winning of money or points in games. The region
most often associated with positive affect is the ventral striatum,
which consists primarily of the nucleus accumbens and part of the
caudate nucleus, although other cortical regions are also engaged,
including the medial and orbital frontal cortex, cingulate cortex and
anterior insula.^37^

The literature on the neural correlates of positive emotion and SES is
relatively small. One study, already mentioned in connection with
negative emotion, is also relevant to positive emotion. In this study,
mothers viewed happy as well as unhappy baby faces, and some of the
areas activated by the happy faces, including the left amygdala and the
right insula, differed by SES and specifically were less active in the
lower-SES mothers.^19^

Silverman et al^38^ exposed participants to affectively valenced
pictures of people, objects and scenes and contrasted neural responses
to positive images (e.g. an amusement park) relative to neutral images
(e.g. furniture). They found lower activity in response to the happy
pictures in lower-SES participants in a variety of areas, including the
striatum.

Other studies have induced positive emotional states with monetary gains
during simple games. The focus of most studies on SES and reward has
been on reward anticipation, rather than the receipt of the reward
itself. Reward anticipation is a motivational state sometimes associated
with 'wanting', in contrast to the response of 'liking'.^39^ Response to
receipt of a reward has either not been shown to differ by SES^35,40^ or
the study design has not allowed reward receipt to be examined separate
from reward anticipation because of block rather than event-related
design.^36^ In contrast, reward anticipation generally evokes more
activity for lower-SES participants. Romens et al^40^ found heightened
response to the anticipation of reward in medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) in lower-SES girls, and no locations of reduced response.
Gonzalez et al^41^ found a similar relationship in striatal and other
regions. Quevedo et al^35^ covaried SES in a study of the effect of
attachment style on reward, and although the range of SES was relatively
narrow, they found that maternal unemployment and lower family income
during childhood were associated with higher striatal activity and
amygdala activity respectively, during reward anticipation. When
anticipating a larger but lower-probability reward, lower-SES
adolescents show more mPFC activation.^42^

## Summary {#sec2-1}

Positive stimuli may evoke smaller responses in people of lower SES,
although the evidence is limited, while reward anticipation may be
accompanied by greater activation.

# Networks for emotion and emotion regulation {#sec3}

Emotion regulation refers to self-induced changes in intensity and
duration of emotional experience, typically for the purpose of reducing
negative experience. These changes can be accomplished by either
conscious, explicit strategies or automatic, implicit processes.^43^ One
of the most effective explicit emotion regulation strategies is
cognitive reappraisal, by which we volitionally reinterpret the meaning
of stimuli in order to alleviate negative feelings. A recent review
suggests that explicit emotion regulation engages the dorsolateral,
ventrolateral and dorsomedial frontal and parietal cortex.^44^ Kim et
al^45^ showed disturbing pictures to participants of varying SES and
instructed them to reduce negative emotion through cognitive
reappraisal, for example viewing a picture of a bruised and beaten woman
and reappraising it as a picture of an actress playing the role of a
violence victim. They found that individuals of low SES recruited less
prefrontal activation than their higher-SES counterparts and showed less
reduction in amygdala activity during reappraisal, consistent with this
emotion regulation strategy being used less effectively by these
participants. However, gender seems to moderate the effect of SES on
prefrontal activity related to emotion regulation:^20^ in males but not
females when considered separately, activation in dorsolateral and
ventrolateral prefrontal cortical regions (dlPFC and vlPFC) during
cognitive reappraisal was positively correlated with SES.

Another form of emotion regulation is implicit, involuntary emotion
regulation, which does not require effortful use of a strategy or
conscious monitoring of emotional state, but is simply evoked
automatically.^46^ Implicit emotion regulation is omnipresent in our
encounters with emotional stimuli, with ventral ACC and vmPFC engaging
automatically to modulate subcortical activity.^44^ By its nature,
implicit regulation is not carried out following instructions, so it can
be difficult to determine in any given task whether these ventral
anterior activations represent regulatory activity. In any case, less
functional coupling between the amygdala and vmPFC has been found in
low-SES individuals when processing negative emotion.^47^ In the same
intensively studied group of participants (see also^20,45,47^), Liberzon
and colleagues^48^ found less prefrontal activity in lower-SES
participants in a task designed to evoke implicit emotion regulation,
although in this task the finding was localised to lateral rather than
medial regions.

Studies of participants at rest provide additional evidence concerning
limbic--cortical interactions. Functional connectivity between the
amygdala and the vmPFC was found to be weaker in participants of lower
SES, and this difference in brain activity accounted for SES disparities
in vulnerability to stressful life events.^49^ Connectivity of the
amygdala and hippocampus to prefrontal regions was also reduced in
lower-SES children, and these differences fully mediated the
relationship between SES and later depression.^50^ Finally, connectivity
between the ventral striatum and ventral PFC is reduced in low SES, and
this fully mediated the relationhip between SES and anxiety.^51^

# Conclusions {#sec4}

We offer this preliminary review of the literature as a starting point,
to be refined as the literature grows and our understanding of SES and
affective neuroscience advances. It is limited in part by the small size
of the literature. Our search method uncovered only 27 studies, and many
of these involved small samples (*n* \< 50 for half of the studies) or a
restricted range of SES. In addition, affect and SES are both complex
constructs, and each has been operationalised in numerous different ways
in the studies reviewed here. Is it sensible to group the sight of a
frightened face, the sound of a crying baby and the loss of small sums
of money into a common category of 'negative emotion?' We did so here
provisionally, to help organise our review at a very general level,
recognising that important differences may be glossed over. The studies
reported here were also heterogeneous in terms of participants' ages.
Finally, the studies measured SES in different ways, for example in
childhood or adulthood, and according to income, educational attainment
or neighbourhood deprivation. In attempting this first broad review of
SES and the neural bases of emotion, we do not distinguish between
different measures of SES, and we report findings as positive if any
measure of SES shows a statistically significant effect.

For the reasons just mentioned, any conclusions from this review must be
considered very provisional. Nevertheless, some trends can be discerned,
and these may be relevant to the SES gradient in mood and anxiety
disorders. Socioeconomic disadvantage shapes the brain\'s response to
emotional stimuli, such that negative stimuli appear to evoke a stronger
response and positive stimuli may possibly evoke a weaker response. This
amounts to an overall bias towards the negative and away from the
positive for lower SES, which would be expected to indicate a greater
susceptibility among low-SES individuals to depression and anxiety. In
contrast, anticipation of reward appears to evoke more activity in
people of lower SES, which in one study mediated the relationship
between socioeconomic disadvantage and adolescent depression
symptoms.^40^ Greater reactivity to the promise of reward may contribute
to disorders of impulse control.^52^ Finally, in at least a few studies
functional networks that may serve to regulate emotion are weaker in
people of lower SES, and these differences too have been found to
mediate risk for psychopathology.

Given the disproportionate mental health burden borne by those of low
SES, it makes sense to deploy the full range of approaches to
understanding and addressing this inequity, from the sociological to the
neuroscientific. High priorities for future research will be to expand
the evidentiary base relating SES, brain function and psychological
symptoms, and to establish how social and economic factors external to
the individual may give rise to the neural and psychological
vulnerabilities reviewed here. In aiming to understand the
interrelations among psychology, biology and social context, it should
be possible for mental health and well-being to be more widely enjoyed
throughout society.

**Yu Hao**, PhD, is a postdoctoral researcher at the Center for
Neuroscience & Society, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. **Martha J. Farah**, PhD, is Walter H. Annenberg
Professor in the Natural Sciences and Director of the Center for
Neuroscience & Society, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Literature reviewed and interpreted by both authors; first draft written
by Y.H.; revisions by both authors.

# Declaration of interest {#nts3}

None.

# Supplementary material {#sec5}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.69.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::
