============================================================================================================================================
Mild cognitive impairment: narrative review of taxonomies and systematic review of their prediction of incident Alzheimer's disease dementia
============================================================================================================================================

Nicholas I. Bradfield
David Ames [1]_Correspondence to Dr Nicholas I. Bradfield
(nicholas.bradfield@svha.org.au)
:Date: 2020-04

:Abstract:
   Early detection of Alzheimer's disease is vital for developing novel
   treatments. Attempts to identify the intermediate state between
   normal cognition and dementia have evolved over the past 50 years.
   Current taxonomies of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) may be
   criticised for their imprecise operationalisation. With the advent of
   biomarkers such as amyloid-beta positron emission tomography imaging
   in established Alzheimer's disease, much research has focused on
   establishing which factors predict progression from MCI to
   Alzheimer's disease dementia. In this review, we discuss the
   historical context of MCI before reviewing the literature of MCI
   subtypes and their risk of progression to Alzheimer's disease
   dementia. Finally, we summarise the literature and discuss
   limitations and weaknesses of how the construct is operationalised
   and implemented, before offering suggestions for development of the
   concept of MCI. We conclude that MCI must be empirically defined for
   the sake of its predictive validity to identify Alzheimer's disease
   before dementia develops.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Dementia (in this review, we will use the term dementia because of its
ubiquity, the fact that it is still used by ICD-10 and historically many
studies have used the term dementia), now also known as major
neurocognitive disorder,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` is a common clinical syndrome
that is characterised by progressive cognitive impairment that is severe
enough significantly to impair daily functioning.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Much
research effort has been directed towards Alzheimer's disease, which is
the most common cause of dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.d)` Despite its
tremendous burden, no disease modifying treatments for Alzheimer's
disease are available.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)`

The dominant theory of Alzheimer's disease pathophysiology implies that
amyloid-beta (Aβ) is central to the upstream mechanism of
disease.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Recent trials with monoclonal antibodies
against Aβ, such as solanezumab, have proved unsuccessful in mild to
moderate Alzheimer's disease dementia\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` and in mild
Alzheimer's disease dementia,\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` although the negative
results may relate to the late disease stage at which the treatment was
applied. With Aβ deposited in the brain for over 20 years before the
development of the clinical syndrome of Alzheimer's disease
dementia,\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` early recognition will be key to developing
potential disease-modifying therapies and secondary prevention, as well
as making lifestyle and medico-legal decisions while cognitive faculties
are still sufficiently intact.

Efforts to identify early or even pre-dementia patients with some very
mild degree of impairment have been underway for over 50
years,\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` and this thinking has evolved through several
iterations to arrive at the current term of mild cognitive impairment
(MCI).\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` The concept of MCI has several similar but
importantly different definitions and taxonomies, which will now be
discussed systematically.

The review begins with a background consideration of Alzheimer's disease
and an historical overview of MCI. This will be followed by a systematic
review of the literature comparing the various taxonomies in their
usefulness in predicting progression from MCI to Alzheimer's disease
dementia. Finally, we discuss the state of the current literature and
its limitations with a view to early identification of Alzheimer's
disease to allow the testing of novel putative disease-modifying
treatments.

.. _sec1-1:

Alzheimer's disease
===================

Alzheimer's disease is a progressive neurodegenerative condition that is
the most common cause of dementia, accounting for approximately 50–70%
of cases.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)–(n.d.n)` Its clinical hallmark is impairment of
memory and new learning with rapid forgetting of newly learned
information.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` Diagnostic criteria emphasise impairment of
memory with insidious onset and gradual progression, as well as
impairment of at least one other cognitive domain, which are severe
enough to impair functional abilities
significantly.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.o)–(n.d.p)` The most recent iteration
of the DSM has adopted the term ‘major neurocognitive disorder due to
Alzheimer's disease’, while retaining the essential diagnostic
criteria.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`

.. _sec1-2:

Mild cognitive impairment
=========================

MCI is an intermediate state between cognitively intact persons and
those with dementia. This concept has evolved over time with various
taxonomies, nomenclatures and definitions, which are summarised in
`Table 1 <#tab01>`__ and described in an historical context below. Table
1Various definitions of cognitive impairment that is not
dementiaTermBSF(n.d.k)CDR/QD(n.d.q)AAMI(n.d.r)AACD(n.d.s)CIND(n.d.t)Petersen
MCI(n.d.u)Winblad MCI(n.d.l)NIA-AA(n.d.v)mNCD(n.d.a)\ **Cognitive
complaint**––Self- or carer- complaint about memorySelf- or carer-
complaint about cognition–Self-complaint about memorySelf- or carer-
complaint about cognitionSelf- or carer- complaint about cognitionSelf-
or carer- complaint about cognition\ **Psychometric impairment**––1 s.d.
below healthy young adults1 s.d. below age-matched sampleBattery of
neuro-psychological tests1.5 s.d. below age- and edu- matched sampleNo
cut-off specified.Typically 1–1.5 s.d. below age- and edu-matched
sampleModest impairment; typically 1–2 s.d. below age- and edu- matched
sample\ **ADL**–Slight or mild change–––NormalMinimal impairment in
complex instrumental ADLMild change, but still independently
functioningIndependent, but possibly with greater effort or
strategies\ **Dementia**\ NoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNo\ **Notes**\ Mild dementia
may have CDR = 0.5At least 6 months durationDoes not exclude
non-dementia causesAKA Mayo criteriaAKA Revised Mayo criteria or revised
Petersen criteriaBiomarker criteria not presented here [2]_

.. _sec1-2-1:

Historical development
----------------------

The concept of pre-dementia causing subsyndromal symptoms was described
as early as 1962, when Kral\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` described ‘benign senescent
forgetfulness’. This encompassed mild fluctuating retrieval-based memory
impairment, which he speculated could be a mild early form of senile
atrophy that spared the Papez\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` circuit. A shortcoming of
Kral's description was that it lacked operational criteria, which can
impede diagnostic reliability.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)`

Over 20 years later, Kral's concept was extended and operationalised by
Crook and colleagues; they labelled their concept age-associated memory
impairment (AAMI), which they defined as subjective memory complaint and
objective memory impairment on a memory test at least one standard
deviation below the mean for young adults.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` By using
healthy young adults as a reference sample, this definition lacked
specificity, given that performance on psychometric tasks of memory
declines with healthy ageing\ :sup:`(n.d.y)–(n.d.z)` and up to 90% of
elderly individuals would fulfil this criterion.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` A
further criticism was that AAMI exclusively focused on memory, although
other cognitive domains, such as visuospatial abilities, language or
executive functions, may be affected principally early in Alzheimer's
disease.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab),(n.d.ac)`

Addressing both of these criticisms, the International Psychogeriatric
Association broadened the concept to include other cognitive domains and
also defined objective impairment with reference to an age-matched
sample.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` They labelled this age-associated cognitive
decline (AACD), defined as subjective cognitive decline as observed by
the individual or an informant; gradual decline over at least 6 months;
and impairment in a cognitive domain with performance one standard
deviation below the mean of an age- and education-matched normative
sample.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` AAMI and AACD appear to be distinct clinical
entities with only approximately 50% overlap in concordant diagnosis and
AACD participants showing more extensive cognitive
impairment.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)`

The term ‘MCI’ was first described by Reisberg and colleagues with the
development of the Global Deterioration Scale.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` This was
a seven-point ordinal scale from ‘no cognitive decline’ to ‘severe
dementia’ that defined MCI as one or more of several examples of
cognitive lapse such as becoming lost in an unfamiliar location,
word-finding difficulty, forgetting names or misplacing objects, or as
concentration deficit with clinical testing.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)`

Concurrently, the clinical dementia rating (CDR) scale was
developed,\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` which was also an ordinal scale ranging from
‘no impairment’ to ‘severe dementia’. Although not directly referring to
MCI, the CDR introduced the importance of daily functioning into the
concept. A person scoring 0.5 or ‘questionable impairment’ on the CDR
may have slight impairment of community affairs or home life but would
be fully independent with self-care.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` Flicker and
colleagues used the term ‘MCI’ when they showed that psychometric
impairment at baseline could predict subsequent decline in elderly
patients after 2 years.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)`

Ronald Petersen, a major developer of the concept of MCI through the
Mayo clinic, developed his original definition of MCI based on patients
recruited from a community-based medical clinic.\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` They
identified people who were themselves concerned about their cognition,
or whose carers or physicians were concerned. These patients then had an
extensive battery of physical examination, cognitive assessment,
investigations and neuroimaging to rule out dementia as determined by
expert panel consensus. These patients by definition had ‘normal’ scores
on the Mini-Mental State Examination\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)` and Short Test of
Mental Status.\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)` Petersen and colleagues (1995) observed
that this cohort tended to perform 1.5 standard deviations below the
age-matched mean performance on memory tasks such as auditory verbal
learning tests, and activities of daily living (ADL) were generally
preserved, corresponding to a CDR rating of 0.5. By employing
age-corrected, but not education-corrected, normative data, it
introduced confounding difficulties with patients with low education or
low IQ.

These criteria were more formally proposed and became known as the Mayo
Clinic core criteria or the Petersen criteria.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` The
criteria were restricted to memory impairment rather than impairment of
other cognitive domains, and thus were subject to similar criticism to
that of AAMI; that Alzheimer's disease may principally affect other
cognitive domains.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` In 2003, a key symposium of experts
revised the Mayo Clinic criteria to include domains other than
memory.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Referred to as the Winblad criteria, these
defined MCI as: (a) the person is neither normal nor demented; (b) there
is evidence of cognitive deterioration shown by either objectively
measured decline over time and/or subjective report of decline by self
and/or informant in conjunction with objective cognitive deficits; and
(3) ADL are preserved and complex instrumental functions are either
intact or minimally impaired.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Subcategories of MCI were
established based on the pattern of cognitive domains affected: amnestic
single-domain, amnestic multiple-domain, non-amnestic single-domain and
non-amnestic multiple-domain.\ :sup:`(n.d.aj)`

The concept of ‘cognitive impairment, no dementia’ (CIND) was introduced
in the context of the need for early recognition of
dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` CIND was identified on the basis of a
consensus conference of physician, nurse and neuropsychologist,
integrating all available information from clinical and psychometric
assessment.\ :sup:`(n.d.ak)` It includes individuals with
non-dementia-related aetiologies such as delirium, chronic alcohol and
drug use, depression, psychiatric illness, intellectual disability and
circumscribed memory impairment; this results in high prevalence
estimates\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` and many CIND individuals will not develop
dementia. A criticism of CIND is that it does not provide operational
criteria, which may jeopardise its reliability.

.. _sec1-2-2:

Recent definitions and developments
-----------------------------------

In the context of emerging biomarkers, the National Institute on Aging
and the Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) convened a workgroup to revise
the diagnostic criteria for pre-dementia Alzheimer's
disease.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` Not long thereafter, the DSM-5\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`
abandoned the term ‘dementia’ and replaced it with ‘major neurocognitive
disorder’, while adding the term ‘mild neurocognitive disorder’ (mNCD),
which has similarities to MCI including cognitive complaint,
psychometric impairment and relative preservation of ADL.

The NIA-AA and DSM-5 mNCD both refrained from offering a strict cut-off
score for psychometric impairment, instead suggesting that typical
levels of impairment would be 1–2 or 1–1.5 standard deviations below the
mean, respectively, for age- and education-matched normative data.
Instead of arbitrary cut-offs, these criteria advocated for an
individualised assessment that incorporated all available evidence.

The NIA-AA criteria\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` combined core clinical criteria with
clinical research criteria, which incorporated biomarker evidence of
disease. In doing so, these criteria moved beyond MCI as a pre-clinical
definition incorporating history and examination findings to a prodromal
state with biological evidence of incipient disease. The NIA-AA
workgroup explicitly focused on MCI due to Alzheimer's disease and used
biomarkers to stratify the likelihood that the cognitive change is due
to Alzheimer's disease. Biomarkers indicating a high likelihood that MCI
is due to Alzheimer's disease are an abnormal Aβ marker (e.g. positive
PiB (Pittsburgh compound B) scan or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Aβ\ :sub:`42`) and a positive biomarker of neuronal injury (e.g. CSF
tau, FDG-PET (Fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography) or
structural magnetic resonance imaging). MCI unlikely to be due to
Alzheimer's disease is determined when Aβ markers and markers of
neuronal injury are both negative. MCI due to Alzheimer's disease with
intermediate likelihood has either Aβ markers or neuronal injury markers
as abnormal, while the other is untested. Recent studies suggest this
taxonomy is useful in predicting Alzheimer's
disease.\ :sup:`(n.d.al),(n.d.am)` However, the invasiveness, cost and
availability of these biomarkers may limit their widespread
implementation in clinical settings.

Subjective cognitive decline is incorporated into modern definitions of
MCI.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.l),(n.d.r),(n.d.s),(n.d.ag),(n.d.v)` MCI may be
preceded by a state in which the individual experiences subjective
cognitive decline that is too subtle to be detected on psychometric
testing.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)` The Subjective Cognitive Decline Initiative
working party have conceptualised this as a pre-MCI state on the same
spectrum towards Alzheimer's disease dementia and provided
definitions\ :sup:`(n.d.an)` that have been operationalised for research
purposes.\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)`

.. _sec1-2-3:

Prevalence of MCI
-----------------

Since their publication, the revised Mayo clinic
criteria\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` have been commonly adopted in the literature,
and studies reported in this section used these criteria unless
otherwise stated.

Prospective population-based studies show that the prevalence of MCI
ranges from 15 to 22% in elderly individuals.\ :sup:`(n.d.ap),(n.d.aq)`
Prevalence increases with age, decreases with education, and is more
common in males, unmarried people and carriers of the APOE-ε4
allele.\ :sup:`(n.d.aq),(n.d.ar)` Prospective population-based studies
have estimated incidence rates of around 6% per year, although the rate
in men (over 7%) was slightly higher than that in women (under
6%).\ :sup:`(n.d.as)`

.. _sec1-2-4:

Progression of MCI to dementia
------------------------------

Estimates of progression rates to dementia or Alzheimer's disease
dementia are important for advising patients about prognosis and have
implications for conducting research in this population. Individuals
with MCI have a higher risk of developing dementia compared with the
general older population incidence of 1–2% per year,\ :sup:`(n.d.at)`
although estimates vary depending on the definition or subtype of MCI,
study design and follow-up period.\ :sup:`(n.d.at)–(n.d.au)` Earlier
definitions using the Petersen amnestic-only MCI criteria estimated
rates of progression to Alzheimer's disease dementia to be 10–15% per
year.\ :sup:`(n.d.at)` A randomised controlled trial reported a
progression rate of 16% per year.\ :sup:`(n.d.au)` A meta-analysis of
studies using Mayo clinic criteria for MCI suggested that over 10 years,
33.6% will cumulatively progress to Alzheimer's disease dementia in
specialist settings versus 28.9% in population settings, which
translated to an annual progression rate of 8.1% in specialist settings
and 6.8% in community studies.\ :sup:`(n.d.av)`

There is some criticism of the utility of MCI as a diagnosis given its
heterogenous nosology,\ :sup:`(n.d.aw)` variable prognostic
significance\ :sup:`(n.d.ax)–(n.d.ay)` and the various ethical issues it
raises.\ :sup:`(n.d.aw)` We would counterargue that these issue provide
impetus to refine the definition of MCI, as doing so will allow
identification of a group that could be identified for treatment of
modifiable risk factors that may decrease the risk of developing
dementia, such as diet, diabetes mellitus, hypertension and
hypercholesterolemia.\ :sup:`(n.d.az),(n.d.ba)`

The present study aimed to review the evidence with regards to which
taxonomy of MCI was more useful in predicting incident Alzheimer's
disease dementia. We hypothesised that amnestic MCI (aMCI) and
multiple-domain MCI would be more likely than non-MCI controls to
progress to Alzheimer's disease dementia.

.. _sec2:

Methods
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Search method
-------------

Medline was searched via PubMed on 28 February 2017 using the search
terms ‘MCI or Mild Cognitive Impairment’ and ‘Alzheimer's disease’ and
‘progression or conversion’, identifying 2583 studies. The search was
restricted to articles in the English language and studies conducted on
humans aged 65 years and over, resulting in 1674 studies. See `Fig.
1 <#fig01>`__ for the PRISMA diagram.\ :sup:`(n.d.bb)` Fig. 1PRISMA
diagram of study selection.

.. _sec2-2:

Selection criteria
------------------

Studies were selected if they performed longitudinal follow-up of at
least 3 years, reported on the incident development of Alzheimer's
disease dementia using established criteria, and explicitly compared two
definitions of MCI. The 3-year duration was selected because of the
lower specificity associated with shorter follow-up.\ :sup:`(n.d.bc)`

.. _sec2-3:

Data extraction
---------------

All titles were reviewed and the abstracts of all potentially relevant
studies were assessed. The identified full papers were assessed for
eligibility and data were extracted. Study quality was assessed using
the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale.\ :sup:`(n.d.bd)`

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

There were 15 studies included in the final analysis, all of which were
classified as ‘good’ according to the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality
Assessment Scale.\ :sup:`(n.d.bd)`

.. _sec3-1:

MCI subtype and progression to Alzheimer's disease dementia
-----------------------------------------------------------

Only a single study explicitly examined differences between various
classification systems of MCI and progression to Alzheimer's disease
dementia. In a large population-based study of 4057 individuals with 4.5
years follow-up, DSM-5 criteria gave a higher annual progression rate
than Petersen criteria for progression to Alzheimer's disease dementia
and to all-cause dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.be)` However, the majority of
people who developed Alzheimer's disease dementia were classified as
normal controls at baseline. The DSM-5 criteria were more restrictive,
with only 139 cases meeting criteria, whereas 303 cases met criteria for
Petersen aMCI. The authors do not stipulate why, but a possible
contributing factor to this is that the DSM-5 criteria explicitly
exclude people with severe depression, psychosis or delirium, whereas
the Petersen criteria do not. Marcos and colleagues (2016) noted that
most of the MCI cases did not progress to Alzheimer's disease dementia
or dementia during the 4.5-year follow-up; indeed, only 15% of the DSM-5
defined MCI cases progressed to dementia.

Twelve studies explicitly examined differences between various subtypes
of MCI, usually within the Winblad taxonomy.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` The most
consistent finding was that aMCI is associated with an increased risk of
progression to Alzheimer's disease
dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.bf),(n.d.bg)–(n.d.bh)` Individuals with aMCI are
more likely (18–19% per year) to progress to Alzheimer's disease
dementia than non-amnestic MCI participants (10–11%) in
community-:sup:`(n.d.bf)` and healthcare-based cohorts.\ :sup:`(n.d.bi)`

Ten studies compared progression rates between various subtypes within
the Winblad taxonomy. Seven of these studies show that multiple-domain
aMCI has the best predictive accuracy for progression to Alzheimer's
disease
dementia,\ :sup:`(n.d.bj),(n.d.bg)–(n.d.bk),(n.d.bl),(n.d.bm),(n.d.bn)`
with annual progression rates ranging from 4 to 25%. However, two
studies found that single-domain aMCI was associated with the highest
risk of progression to dementia due to Alzheimer's
disease,\ :sup:`(n.d.bo),(n.d.bh)` and one found no difference between
single- and multiple-domain aMCI.\ :sup:`(n.d.bp)` A challenge to the
discriminative validity of the Winblad taxonomy is that multiple-domain
aMCI was also the best predictor of progression to vascular
dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.bl)`

Although all studies purported to employ the revised Mayo criteria,
these were operationalised in different ways, for example, using
hierarchical cluster analysis of neuropsychological data rather than
clinical judgement\ :sup:`(n.d.bo)` or not including information about
subjective memory complaint.\ :sup:`(n.d.bg)` Moreover, psychometric
impairment was defined in one study as at least 1.5 standard deviations
below the mean for an age- and education-matched sample on a
neuropsychological battery\ :sup:`(n.d.bh)` or as at least 1.0 standard
deviations below the mean for an age- and education-matched sample on
indices derived from the Montreal Cognitive Assessment.\ :sup:`(n.d.bq)`

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

The concept of MCI has evolved from a vague clinical observation to a
diagnosis that can incorporate disease biomarkers to predict the
likelihood of developing Alzheimer's disease dementia. There have been
at least nine different attempts to define the intermediate state
between cognitive health and dementia. However, only a single study has
explicitly compared different taxonomies in terms of their usefulness in
predicting incident Alzheimer's disease dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.be)` This
study showed that DSM-5-defined mNCD had better positive predictive
value than did Petersen criteria, although the majority of people who
developed Alzheimer's disease dementia were classified as normal
controls at baseline. Of the studies comparing various subtypes of MCI
within the Winblad taxonomy, aMCI better predicts progression to
Alzheimer's disease dementia than does non-amnestic
MCI.\ :sup:`(n.d.bf),(n.d.bi)` This is consistent with the observation
that memory impairment is the hallmark clinical feature of Alzheimer's
disease.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`

Although there was not consensus, 7 of 10 studies found that
multiple-domain aMCI was better than single domain aMCI in predicting
progression,\ :sup:`(n.d.bj),(n.d.bg)–(n.d.bk),(n.d.bl),(n.d.bm),(n.d.bn)`
two showed the opposite\ :sup:`(n.d.bo),(n.d.bh)` and one showed no
difference.\ :sup:`(n.d.bp)` A possible reason for the discrepant
findings regarding single-domain aMCI and multiple-domain aMCI in the
prediction of Alzheimer's disease dementia is differing definitions of
the subtypes. The inconsistent findings within this area highlight the
variable implementation of the criteria. Although all studies purported
to employ the revised Mayo criteria, these were operationalised in
different ways, such as not including subjective memory
complaint,\ :sup:`(n.d.bg)` different psychometric cut-off *z-*\ scores
ranging from −1.0\ :sup:`(n.d.bq)` to −1.5,\ :sup:`(n.d.bh)` different
psychometric tests\ :sup:`(n.d.bq),(n.d.bh)` or even hierarchical
cluster analysis of neuropsychological data.\ :sup:`(n.d.bo)`

This review suggests that aMCI is superior to non-amnestic MCI and that
multiple domain aMCI is probably superior to single domain aMCI in
predicting progression to Alzheimer's disease dementia. It may be that
involvement of cognitive domains in addition to memory in MCI implies
more severe or advanced disease that is closer to the emergence of
dementia. Despite these findings, the predictive validity of MCI is
limited, as up to 60% of MCI individuals will not develop dementia in
the following 10 years.\ :sup:`(n.d.av)`

We suggest that the concept of MCI may be improved in three ways. First,
criteria should be operationally defined. Second, criteria should be
empirically defined. Finally, the MCI group should be stratified for
likelihood of progression to Alzheimer's disease dementia. These will
now be discussed in turn.

Several taxonomies of MCI have suggested explicit cut-off scores on
cognitive measures. Despite this, more recent taxonomies from the DSM-V
and NIA-AA have dispensed with cut-offs for cognitive impairment.
Although this approach has the merit of tailoring assessment to the
individual, it may introduce issues with interrater reliability, which
may further undermine the reliability of MCI in the research literature.
We suggest that criteria for subjective and objective memory impairment
should be operationalised to ensure reliability of the concept.

This raises the question of which cut-off should be adopted. We suggest
that the utility of MCI may be improved by providing operational
criteria that are empirically defined by their prediction of Alzheimer's
disease dementia. There have been only a few attempts to use such
data-driven definitions of MCI. For example, MCI subtypes identified
with latent profile analysis outperformed Winblad
criteria\ :sup:`(n.d.br)`. Other studies have shown that the severity of
memory impairment\ :sup:`(n.d.bs),(n.d.bt)` and the base rate of memory
impairment\ :sup:`(n.d.bu)` offer an advantage over the common
taxonomies. We propose that cognitive impairment used to identify MCI
should be empirically defined, whether it be in terms of the lowest
performance,\ :sup:`(n.d.bs),(n.d.bt)` base rate of
impairment,\ :sup:`(n.d.bu)` or possibly average memory score or some
other method.

These same factors may then be used to stratify the severity or grade of
MCI. All current taxonomies treat MCI as a categorical entity, which is
not consistent with a longitudinal model of Alzheimer's disease
pathophysiology. Although the clinical manifestation of Alzheimer's
disease exists on a spectrum from asymptomatic to severe dementia, MCI
is not staged as such. We propose that MCI should be stratified by
factors such as severity\ :sup:`(n.d.bs),(n.d.bt)` or base rate of
impairment\ :sup:`(n.d.bu)` to indicate increased risk of progression to
Alzheimer's disease dementia. This may allow individuals to be selected
for more intensive monitoring, for secondary prevention techniques such
as control of diet and cardiovascular risk
factors,\ :sup:`(n.d.az),(n.d.ba)` and for recruitment into clinical
trials of putative treatments for Alzheimer's disease.

.. _sec5:

Conclusion
==========

The current literature suggests that MCI individuals with memory
impairment and impairment of multiple domains are at increased risk of
progression to Alzheimer's disease dementia. We suggest that the concept
of MCI should be improved by offering operational criteria of memory or
cognitive impairment that are empirically defined. Furthermore, we
propose that MCI should be developed from a singular categorical
diagnosis to a graded diagnosis that indicates increased risk for
progression to Alzheimer's disease dementia. In this way, MCI may become
a more reliable construct with better predictive validity that will be
more useful in understanding the natural history of Alzheimer's disease.
This in turn will allow better targeted selection of individuals with
pre-symptomatic Alzheimer's disease to allow early implementation of
therapeutic strategies to modify the course of this common and
burdensome disease.

N.I.B. drafted the manuscript. D.A. assisted in revising the manuscript.

**Nicholas I. Bradfield** is a basic physician trainee at St Vincent's
Hospital, Melbourne, Australia and is a clinical neuropsychologist in
private practice in Melbourne, Australia. **David Ames** is Emeritus
Professor in the University of Melbourne Academic Unit for Psychiatry of
Old Age, St George's Hospital, Kew, Australia, a consultant psychiatrist
with Melbourne Heath, Parkville, Australia, and director of the National
Ageing Research Institute, Parkville, Australia.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref37

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref39

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref40

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref41

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref42

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref43

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref44

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref45

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref46

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref47

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref48

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref49

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref50

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref51

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref52

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref53

      n.d.bf.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref54

      n.d.bj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref55

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref56

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref57

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref58

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref60

      n.d.ay.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref61

      n.d.az.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref62

      n.d.ba.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref63

      n.d.bb.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref64

      n.d.bc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref65

      n.d.bd.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref66

      n.d.be.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref67

      n.d.bg.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref68

      n.d.bq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref69

      n.d.bk.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref70

      n.d.bo.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref71

      n.d.bp.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref73

      n.d.bl.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref74

      n.d.bm.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref76

      n.d.bn.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref77

      n.d.bh.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref78

      n.d.bi.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref79

      n.d.br.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref80

      n.d.bs.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref81

      n.d.bt.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref82

      n.d.bu.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** D.A. reports personal fees from the
   Howard Florey institute sponsored by Eli Lilly, outside the submitted
   work.

.. [2]
   AACD, aging-associated cognitive decline; AAMI, aging-associated
   memory impairment; ADL, activities of daily living; AKA, also known
   as; BSF, benign senescent forgetfulness; CDR, Clinical Dementia
   Rating scale; CIND, cognitive impairment not dementia; edu,
   education; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; mNCD, mild neurocognitive
   disorder; NIA-AA, National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's
   Association; QD, questionable dementia.
