---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  To characterise police involvement with those detained under place of
  safety legislation and determine factors associated with admission to
  hospital. Place of safety referrals over a 1-year period were
  identified retrospectively and evaluated.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  Place of safety legislation is generally used with regard to concerns
  about suicide. Individuals are often removed from high-risk areas and
  referrals to police are frequently initiated by individuals
  themselves. A diagnosis of mental illness or personality disorder
  predicted hospital admission. Presence of senior nursing staff at
  assessment, but not the seniority of the doctor, was associated with
  discharge.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  Closer multiagency working is required as police are currently being
  recruited to fill a void between mental health services and the
  population they serve. Junior doctors require more senior support in
  making complex, and often risky, emergency management decisions with
  this population.
author:
- Struan Simpson
- Jude Eze[^1]Correspondence to Struan Simpson
  (<struan.simpson@nhs.net>)
date: 2020-12
institute:
- 1The Phoenix Centre, Raigmore Hospital, Inverness, UK
- 2Epidemiology Research Unit (Inverness Campus), Scotland\'s Rural
  College, Inverness, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
title: Police involvement, characteristics and outcomes of place of
  safety referrals in the Scottish Highlands
---

Place of safety legislation permits police officers to remove
individuals thought to be mentally disordered and in need of immediate
mental health assessment to a facility where this assessment can be
carried out. Such legislation exists in many countries, including the
UK,^1,2^ Germany,^3^ South Africa,^4^ Australia^5^ and the USA.^6^
Powers and legislation vary between and within countries but in general
police must suspect a mental disorder *and* perceive significant, acute
or serious risk of danger or harm to the individual concerned or to
others in order to permit removal to a place of safety. In Scotland this
power is detailed under section 297 of the Mental Health (Care and
Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003^1^ (this detention lasts for up to 24 h
or until the individual has been assessed); similar powers in England
and Wales are under section 136 of the Mental Health Act 1983.^2^

There have been efforts to reduce use of police stations as a place of
safety, reduce overall use of the legislation and improve knowledge of
the legislation.^7--9^ Practice, however, remains variable across
Scotland^10^ and the rest of the UK.^11,12^ In Scotland the use of this
legislation is rising, with 795 detentions in 2015--2016, up from 130 in
2006--2007.^10^

There is reasonable reporting of place of safety use and the
characteristics of those subject to the legislation^1,5,13--15^ but
little is known about the nature of police involvement and which
factors, if any, are associated with hospital admission. This study in
the Scottish Highlands aimed to characterise the nature of police
involvement with those detained under place of safety legislation, the
demographics of this population and aspects of the assessment process to
determine factors that might be associated with admission.

# Method {#sec1}

We conducted a retrospective study by review of medical case records,
including Place of Safety forms (POS1, v7.0) completed by police
constables, of all individuals brought under place of safety legislation
to New Craigs Hospital, Inverness in the NHS Highland region (the
designated place of safety for the NHS Highland health board) between
April 2016 and March 2017. All place of safety referrals were included
in the project, including repeat detentions for any one individual.
Individuals who were already in-patients when the place of safety
legislation was applied were excluded from the analyses regarding
admission to hospital.

Referrals were identified by collecting POS1 forms from the medical
records department and cross-referencing with a place of safety referral
record sheet in the intensive psychiatric care unit (IPCU), which is
where most place of safety referrals are assessed. The junior doctor\'s
assessment book and mental health assessment team\'s diary were also
consulted to ensure that as many place of safety referrals as possible
were identified. In an attempt to determine completeness of these
records the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland was contacted.
Information about the assessment team\'s wider activity was gained from
their team diary, which is updated reliably after each assessment. The
POS1 form completed by police is not statutory and therefore any
referral identified in case notes as being under place of safety
legislation was included.

The POS1 form has an open text box to give details of the 'circumstances
giving rise to the removal of the aforementioned person to a place of
safety.' In all cases where a POS1 form was available this information
was qualitatively analysed to characterise the nature of police
involvement, the reasons for concerns and the reasons for the decisions
made. Diagnosis was determined from clinical records and kept to broad
ICD-10 diagnostic categories; more than one diagnosis was permitted, for
example comorbid substance misuse and personality disorder. Diagnoses
were often already established from clinical records rather than being
based on the single urgent assessment.

Population data for calculating rates of referral are from census data
from National Records of Scotland, a non-ministerial government
department charged with collecting information about Scotland\'s people
and history.^16^

The project was part of service development and audit and therefore did
not require ethical approval.

## Statistical analysis {#sec1-1}

Statistical analyses were performed using Minitab 17.1.0 and SPSS 22.0
statistical software, both for Windows. The association between
categorical and outcome variables was assessed using Pearson χ^2^-tests;
where the cell count was low the likelihood-ratio chi-squared test was
used. For continuous variables, Student\'s *t*-tests were performed.
Given repeated referrals of some individuals, multivariable binary
logistic mixed-effects regression was performed to predict admission
using individuals as the random effect in order to account for
individual-specific effect and control for the fixed effects of age,
gender, diagnosis and distance from place of safety on detention. Robust
estimation procedure was used to obtain the estimate of covariance
matrix in order to ensure that model assumptions were met. Estimates of
effects are presented as odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals
(CI). The level of significance was set at *P* \< 0.05.

# Results {#sec2}

We identified 237 place of safety referrals over the 1-year study
period. Of these, 97% (*n* = 231) were recorded on the place of safety
record form in the hospital IPCU and 99% (*n* = 234) had a completed
POS1 form. The yearly referral rate under place of safety legislation
for the health board was 74 per 100 000 population (NHS Highland serves
about 320 000 people and is sparsely populated, covering an area of
32 500 km^2^: around a quarter of this population live in Inverness and
surrounding areas). The referrals were for 185 different individuals,
with 30 (16%) being brought on more than one occasion over the study
period (the highest number was five referrals, which occurred for three
individuals).

## Time variation in place of safety referrals {#sec2-1}

The rate of referral was similar throughout the year and did not vary by
month (χ^2^ = 12.06, *P* = 0.359) or day of the week (χ^2^ = 4.63,
*P* = 0.592). Detention under place of safety legislation was most
likely to occur between 12.00 h and 17.00 h and least likely between
06.00 h and 12.00 h (χ^2^ = 48.81, *P* \< 0.001), however no particular
time of detention was associated with admission to hospital
(χ^2^ = 6.99, *P* = 0.221).

## Characteristics and outcome of individuals referred {#sec2-2}

The characteristics and outcomes of place of safety referrals are
detailed in [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"} (analysis of 230
referrals). The admission rate overall was 33% (*n* = 75), with only 15%
(*n* = 11) of those admitted being involuntarily under the Mental Health
(Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. The admission rate for those
brought on place of safety legislation is not significantly different
from the admission rate for those seen by the assessment team referred
from other sources, i.e. referred by health professionals not police
(χ^2^ = 0.41, *P* = 0.521); 79% (*n* = 182) of those referred had at
least one previous contact with local mental health services. Table
1Characteristics and outcomes of place of safety
referralMeasureAll[^a^](#tfn1_1){ref-type="table-fn"}Admitted[^a^](#tfn1_1){ref-type="table-fn"}Not
admitted*P*Referrals, *n* (%)230 (100)75 (32)155 (68)--Age, years: mean
(s.d.)35.5 (12.1)36.5 (12.9)34.9 (11.7)0.408Males, *n* (%)151 (66)43
(57)108 (69)0.065Previously known to local services, *n* (%)177 (77)55
(73)122 (79)0.364Assessed with senior nurse present, *n* (%)198 (86)58
(77)140 (90)0.026Grade of assessing doctor, *n* (%)Foundation year 249
(21)19 (25)30 (19)0.809General practice trainee75 (33)23 (31)52 (34)Core
psychiatry trainee (year 1 or 2)62 (27)21 (28)41 (26)Core psychiatry
trainee (year 3) or above44 (19)12 (16)32 (21)Diagnosis, broad ICD-10
category:[^b^](#tfn1_2){ref-type="table-fn"} *n* (%)10 -- Substance use
disorders115 (50)27 (36)88 (57)0.00320 -- Non-affective psychotic
disorders17 (7)13 (17)4 (3)\<0.00130 -- Affective disorders9 (4)6 (8)3
(2)0.03340 -- Anxiety and stress disorders16 (7)7 (9)9 (6)0.32450 --
Eating disorders1 (0)0 (0)1 (1)--60 -- Personality disorders79 (34)30
(40)49 (32)0.20970 -- Intellectual
disability[^c^](#tfn1_3){ref-type="table-fn"}13 (6)7 (9)6 (4)0.09380 --
Developmental disorders0 (0)0 (0)0 (0)--'No mental illness'/'social
stress'45 (20)3 (4)42 (27)\<0.001Approximate distance of detention from
hospital,[^a^](#tfn1_1){ref-type="table-fn"}^,^[^d^](#tfn1_4){ref-type="table-fn"}
*n* (%)0--5 miles154 (67)42 (56)112 (72)0.0185--10 miles9 (4)4 (5)5
(3)10--15 miles13 (6)5 (6)8 (5)15--20 miles14 (6)7 (9)7 (5)\>20 miles13
(6)9 (12)4 (3)[^2][^3][^4][^5]

Where individuals were not admitted most were discharged to their own
home or in care of friends/family (*n* = 136/155, 88%); in a small
number of cases individuals were taken into police custody (*n* = 6, 4%)
or transferred for medical care in the local general hospital (*n* = 7,
5%).

It is local policy for place of safety referral assessments, where
possible, to be performed by two assessors. All place of safety
referrals were seen by a doctor (of various grades but generally junior
doctors in training up to CT3 grade; in only one case was assessment by
a consultant) and most with a senior assessment nurse present
(*n* = 198, 86%) -- where senior assessment nurses were not available,
doctors completed assessments with ward nursing or auxiliary staff or
alone. There was a high degree of variability in admission rates, with a
median of 29% (IQR = 39, range 0--100), but this was not influenced by
the training grade of the doctor (χ^2^ = 1.60, *P* = 0.809). The
presence of a senior assessment nurse was associated with patients not
being admitted following assessment (χ^2^ = 4.98, *P* = 0.026).

Admission was less likely for individuals where it was thought
difficulties were related to substance misuse (χ^2^ = 9.88,
*P* = 0.003), social stress (χ^2^ = 14.18, *P* \< 0.001) or if there was
felt to be no evidence of mental illness (χ^2^ = 6.43, *P* = 0.011). A
personality disorder diagnosis was proportionately more common in those
admitted following assessment but not significantly so (χ^2^ = 1.57,
*P* = 0.209). Diagnoses of non-affective psychotic disorders
(χ^2^ = 16.07, *P* \< 0.001) and affective disorders (χ^2^ = 4.55,
*P* = 0.033) were more prevalent in individuals admitted following
assessment.

Most of the place of safety referrals were from the local area, with 67%
(*n* = 154) from within 5 miles of the hospital -- this gives a yearly
referral rate of 248 per 100 000 population for Inverness. The number of
referrals reduces with increasing distance from the hospital but as
distance from hospital increases admission is more likely (χ^2^ = 11.87,
*P* = 0.018). The prevalence of substance misuse diagnoses reduces with
increasing distance from the hospital (χ^2^ = 12.18, *P* = 0.016).

If individuals were admitted to hospital the median length of stay was 6
nights (IQR = 22, range 0--136). Significantly shorter admissions were
seen for individuals who had a substance misuse diagnosis (χ^2^ = 11.32,
*P* = 0.023). No other diagnoses were associated with the length of
admission.

## Nature of police involvement from POS1 forms {#sec2-3}

Police were alerted to individuals subsequently detained on place of
safety legislation in a variety of ways ([Fig.
1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}). Usually the alert came from concerned
friends or family members (26%, *n* = 62/234), but it was also common
for individuals to make themselves known to police (23%, *n* = 53),
usually by telephone (15%, *n* = 34) but in some instances by walking
into police stations (7%, *n* = 16). Fig. 1How police were alerted to
individuals subsequently detained under the Mental Health (Care and
Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 (total *n* = 234).Self-contact included
presentation to a police station, telephoning police or approaching
police in the street. Professional report was concern raised by health
professionals or mental health support agencies such as Breathing Space.
In some cases it was not clear from the Place of Safety (POS1) form
details how the police had been alerted.

The most common reason cited for police being involved was expression of
suicidal ideation (73%, *n* = 167/230) ([Table
2](#tab02){ref-type="table"}); 28% (*n* = 65) of individuals had made a
gesture towards suicide (e.g. holding knife at their throat or being at
a risky area on a bridge), and only 7% (*n* = 17) had made an attempt on
their life (e.g. cut at their throat or removed from river after jumping
in). Voicing suicidal ideation (χ^2^ = 23.58, *P* \< 0.001), making a
suicidal gesture (χ^2^ = 5.45, *P* = 0.020) and making an attempt on
their life (χ^2^ = 4.43, *P* = 0.035) were all associated with not being
admitted to hospital. Table 2Qualitative analysis of Place of Safety
(POS1) forms for place of safety
referrals[^a^](#tfn2_1){ref-type="table-fn"}Details recorded on POS1
formsAll[^b^](#tfn2_2){ref-type="table-fn"} (*n* = 230)Admitted
(*n* = 75)Not admitted (*n* = 155)*P*Descriptors of harm to self, *n*
(%)Voiced suicidal ideation167 (73)40 (53)127 (82)\<0.001Had made
suicidal gesture65 (28)14 (19)51 (33)0.020Had made suicide attempt17
(7)2 (3)15 (10)0.035Voiced intent to self-harm24 (10)4 (5)20
(13)0.057Had performed self-harm17 (7)2 (3)15 (10)0.035Police noted
previous suicide attempt20 (9)5 (7)15 (10)0.413Other descriptors, *n*
(%)Precipitating events, e.g. break-up/debts28 (12)4 (5)24
(15)0.027Anxiety4 (2)2 (3)2 (1)0.454Depression/low mood16 (7)3 (4)13
(8)0.220Odd beliefs, perceptual disturbance, paranoia34 (15)18 (24)16
(10)0.006Agitation/emotional/strange behaviours38 (17)17 (23)21
(13)0.081Expressed intent to harm others3 (1)1 (1)2 (1)--Location of
detention under place of safety legislation, *n* (%)Public minor road56
(24)18 (24)38 (25)0.932High-risk area, e.g. bridge/major road39 (17)12
(16)27 (17)0.788Inside public building31 (13)12 (16)19 (12)0.436Directly
outside own home21 (9)9 (12)12 (8)0.293Inside own home15 (7)2 (3)13
(8)0.100Within hospital grounds5 (2)2 (3)3 (2)0.721Rural area, e.g.
woodland6 (3)1 (1)5 (3)0.371Unclear57 (25)19 (25)38 (25)0.893[^6][^7]

In only a small proportion of referrals did police give information
beyond that focusing on suicidality. Of note, there was infrequent
recording of the events that led to the individual now experiencing
difficulties. Where this was detailed it was usually brief and a social
stressor (e.g. split from partner or financial concerns) -- in cases
where a stressor was identified (by police) individuals were usually not
admitted (χ^2^ = 4.87, *P* = 0.027). Police did report details about odd
beliefs, paranoia or perceptual disturbances (e.g. hearing voices or
responding to unseen stimuli) in 34 referrals (15%) -- this was
associated with admission to hospital (χ^2^ = 7.51, *P* = 0.006) *and*
with non-affective psychotic disorder diagnoses (χ^2^ = 4.85,
*P* = 0.028). In the small number of referrals in which police described
behaviours (outwith the suicidal acts/gestures), these descriptions were
often very general and would not necessarily be related to mental ill
health, for example 'highly emotional', 'acting in a strange manner',
'agitated', 'shouting nonsense', 'unpredictable' or 'hysterical.'

Police were called to a range of areas in response to concerns for
individuals subsequently detained under place of safety legislation
([Table 2](#tab02){ref-type="table"}). The location from which
individuals were removed was not associated with subsequent admission to
hospital even when removal was from high-risk areas such as bridges or
major roads (χ^2^ = 0.07, *P* = 0.788). In 7% of cases (*n* = 15/230) it
appeared that individuals had been removed from their own home, which is
not permitted under place of safety legislation in Scotland.^1^

## Multivariable binary logistic mixed-effects model {#sec2-4}

When controlled for age, gender and distance from the place of safety
(i.e. the hospital) in a multivariable binary logistic mixed-effects
regression with individuals as the random effect, the odds of admission
were significantly higher for diagnosis of non-affective psychotic
disorder (OR = 32.93, 95% CI 4.33--250.17, *P* = 0.001), affective
disorder (OR = 15.13, 95% CI 2.15--106.61, *P* = 0.007), anxiety and
stress disorder (OR = 7.01, 95% CI 1.21--40.93, *P* = 0.037),
intellectual disability (OR = 17.58, 95% CI 2.32--130.02, *P* = 0.007)
and personality disorder (OR = 5.49, 95% CI 1.21--24.86, *P* = 0.027)
relative to those without a diagnosis of mental illness. Substance
misuse was not significantly associated with admission (OR = 2.78, 95%
CI 0.64--12.08, *P* = 0.170). Although not statistically significant,
the individual\'s age was positively associated with admission and the
odds of admission were higher for women than men. Also, odds of
admission increased with distance from the place of safety -- the
farther the distance the higher the odds of admission. The use of
individuals as the random effect ensures that extra-individual
variations resulting from repeat referrals are adjusted for and this is
evidenced in the size of the confidence intervals of the estimates.

# Discussion {#sec3}

Place of safety referrals constitute a significant proportion of urgent
mental health assessments within the NHS Highland region -- up to
one-third of assessments within the study hospital. The recording of
these referrals in the hospital appears to be reliable and numbers are
in keeping with data from the Mental Welfare Commission for
Scotland.^10^ NHS Highland accounts for perhaps up to 20% of all place
of safety referrals in Scotland;^8^ this is proportionately lower than a
local study 10 years ago, when up to 50% were in the NHS Highland health
board.^7,8^ However, it is of note that in the current study almost 70%
of place of safety referrals occurred within a few miles of the
designated place of safety. This is unlikely to be simply due to
population factors despite the place of safety being located in
Inverness. The place of safety referral rate per year for Inverness is
248 per 100 000 -- over 10 times the rate for Scotland as a whole and 3
times that for the health board with the highest referral rate in
Scotland.^10^ Under-reporting in some Scottish health boards is likely
to contribute to this variation but does not fully explain the vast
differences. Looking more broadly, this referral rate is also
significantly higher than in studies in England, where rates are
reported between 59.8 per 100 000 in the North-East^12^ and 169 per
100 000 in Ipswich, Suffolk.^11^ There appears to be excessive use of
this restrictive legislation in Inverness -- factors driving this are
likely to be poorer joint working, workload pressures and a lack of
availability of alternative options of disposal/help for those in
crisis. There are a striking number of referrals where individuals have
sought help from police rather than from local mental health services.
This supports the proposal in a recent Mental Welfare Commission for
Scotland place of safety report that there is a gap between service
provision and the needs of this distressed population.^10^

Police are responding to distressed individuals in a range of locations,
from their own home to high-risk situations on major roads or high
bridges. Where place of safety legislation is used, this is
overwhelmingly in response to concerns about suicide risk. This study
does show that police do well in identifying those in need of mental
health support -- the admission rate of police referrals is identical to
that from other sources and they detail evidence of psychosis on their
referrals. The language used by police in describing behaviours includes
terms such as 'highly emotional' and 'hysterical' -- these are commonly
used terms but could be stigmatising for those with mental health
difficulties. Targeted training and support for officers may well
improve their interaction with distressed individuals and make
involvement with police a less daunting experience for those with mental
health problems.

The characteristics of those referred under place of safety legislation
in the Scottish Highlands are similar to those reported elsewhere in
terms of age, gender and outcome.^11,13,14^ However, in this study
substance misuse problems are possibly more prevalent and were felt to
be contributing to presentation in almost 50% of referrals whereas the
proportion of severe mental illness is probably slightly lower.^6,14^
The compulsory admission rate is significantly lower (15%, compared with
up to 50%) than in other reports, likely reflective of the lower
proportion of individuals with severe mental illness.^11,13^

This study identified that presence of senior nurses influenced outcomes
of assessments and recognised that there is significant variability in
admission rates by doctors at all training grades. It is therefore
important to ensure that experienced staff are conducting assessments
and consideration should be given to a model that ensures
multidisciplinary input such as that used in England and Wales,^2^ where
approved mental health professionals (AMHPs) support the assessment
process, including follow-up care arrangements for those not admitted.
Further, with evidence in Scotland that trainees are doing fewer
emergency assessments,^17,18^ ensuring that trainees are well supported
by senior medical staff in completing these assessments is crucial.

## Predicting outcomes and length of hospital stay {#sec3-1}

Predicting outcome of assessments is challenging given the nature of any
mental health crisis, as difficulties are very individualised. However,
diagnosis appears to be a primary factor in the decision-making process.
In general, where referrals are identified as being related to primarily
social stressors or substance misuse problems admission to hospital is
avoided or, where felt necessary, kept as short as possible. A diagnosis
of severe mental illness was associated with admission but not any
particular length of admission, and perhaps in some cases a short
admission plays a containing role rather than being for treatment itself
when individuals are presenting via police. Personality disorder
diagnosis was associated with admission to hospital despite extensive
local training, resource and a new integrated care pathway which states
that admission for those with personality disorder is 'at best neutral
and at worst harmful'.^19^ It is likely that a combination of factors
influence the decision to admit -- those with personality disorder
diagnoses may be in a high degree of crisis that cannot always be
de-escalated over a single assessment and may be thought of as being at
high acute risk of suicide, given their language, circumstances, social
supports or expression of plans for suicide following assessment if they
leave the place of safety. In addition, they may be displaying
'pseudopsychotic' phenomena that are felt to require admission for
further assessment. In this context the seniority and experience of the
assessing team is also likely to be important.

If individuals were detained further from the place of safety, admission
was more likely -- this is probably related to service provision in more
rural areas, i.e. lack of crisis response teams as well as
practicalities in supporting discharge to more rural areas in the
evenings and overnight.

Expression of suicidality or self-harm in itself is not helpful in
determining outcome, although it is an important factor in
decision-making and risk assessment/management. Given that suicidal
expression is actually associated with not being admitted, it may be
that in such circumstances services could offer alternative
interventions or supports (to police and individuals) to avoid use of
legislation and the 'frightening' experience of being detained under
place of safety legislation.^20^ Future studies exploring outcomes and
service use in those with suicidality not admitted would be helpful in
guiding service development and delivery.

## Strengths and limitations {#sec3-2}

This study has a lengthy period of data collection and a relatively
large sample. This makes it similar to other studies in this field,
which helps to allow any variation/patterns to be identified.
Characteristics of the population are also similar to those reported
elsewhere. This is the first study to analyse the nature of police
involvement and link this with outcome of the mental health assessment.
Efforts were made to ensure that all recognised place of safety
referrals, especially those with completed POS1 forms, were identified
over the study period -- unfortunately, despite being contacted the
Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland did not provide information to
cross-reference those included in the project, which would strengthen
the data-set. However, given the multiple sources and communications
systems within the hospital and across the health board we are confident
that the majority of place of safety referrals were identified. The
study was carried out retrospectively, which limits the information
available. Given the retrospective nature and use of a clinical cohort,
diagnostic categories were kept broad and thus open to a degree of
interpretation. However, the decisions and diagnoses made reflect
day-to-day practice and thus findings are clinically informative.

## Improving practice {#sec3-3}

When individuals are brought by police to a place of safety it is
important to complete an individualised assessment. Diagnosis is an
important factor in the decision-making process and practitioners should
remember that individuals not expressing suicidal ideation also have a
significant mental health burden and may require admission. Experienced
practitioners should be involved in multidisciplinary assessment where
possible and it is crucial that junior medical staff are well supported
by senior colleagues in making decisions.

Police are frequently responding to mental health crises and seem to do
well in identifying those in need of urgent service contact. Training
would likely improve knowledge and interaction between service users and
police^21^ but is unlikely to have a major impact on the use of
legislation or characteristics of those referred.^6,14,20^ Street triage
services where police work more closely with mental health services (via
telephone or in mobile units) are becoming established across the UK and
are positively received by police officers.^22^ Recent systematic
reviews highlight that there is a suggestion of positive outcomes such
as reduced referrals and use of police jurisdiction^23^ but there
remains limited robust evidence of efficacy and a lack of clarity on the
best model for services.^22--24^

Ultimately this study identifies a breakdown between mental health
services and those who require support, with police being recruited to
fill the void. Joint working to improve awareness of and access to
mental health services before crisis will be important in reducing use
of restrictive legislation and improving outcomes.

We thank the nursing and medical staff of Affric Ward, New Craigs
Hospital, Inverness, for their assessment of patients and record-keeping
of police place of safety referrals, and the medical administration
staff for their assistance in sourcing medical records and POS1 forms.
We also thank Dr Amy MacAskill (consultant psychiatrist) and Barbara
Brodie (clinical effectiveness coordinator) for their advice and
guidance in putting together this study.

S.S. is the lead author; he designed the projected, carried out data
collection, completed initial statistical analysis and wrote the
majority of the paper. J.E. provided support to the basic statistical
analysis and data presentation within the paper, carried out analysis
for the multivariable binary logistic mixed-effects model, and wrote the
sections describing statistical testing and the output of the
multivariable binary logistic mixed-effects model. Both authors were
involved in production of the final version after peer review and meet
ICMJE criteria for authorship.

**Struan Simpson** is a specialty doctor at the Phoenix Centre, Raigmore
Hospital, Inverness, UK. **Jude Eze** is a quantitative scientist at the
Epidemiology Research Unit (Inverness Campus), Scotland\'s Rural College
(SRUC), Inverness, UK.

[^1]: **Declaration of interest:** None.

[^2]: Excludes individuals who left the hospital during an in-patient
    stay and were returned by police under place of safety legislation.

[^3]: Diagnosis obtained from assessment/discharge letters and kept in
    broad diagnostic categories, more than one diagnosis was permitted
    owing to frequent comorbidity, e.g. personality disorder and
    substance misuse.

[^4]: Also known as learning disability in UK health services.

[^5]: It was not possible to determine the location of detention in 12%
    (*n* = 27) of referrals from the Place of Safety (POS1) forms.

[^6]: POS1 forms were available for 227 of the 230 referrals.

[^7]: Excludes individuals who left the hospital during an in-patient
    stay and were returned by police under place of safety legislation.
