=================================================================
Basic safety first: trauma-informed care in a hostile environment
=================================================================

Cate Bailey [1]_Correspondence to Dr Cate Bailey
(cate.bailey@nhs.net) [2]_
:Date: 2020-04

:Abstract:
   This editorial introduces and reflects on a Praxis article in the
   trainees' section of this issue. The article, 'Assessing asylum
   seekers, refugees and undocumented migrants' by Waterman *et al*,
   begins with a clinical scenario describing an emergency presentation
   at a ‘place of safety’. The authors are to be congratulated for
   navigating a compassionate path through the complexities of law,
   health and new diagnostic categories. The resources found in the
   article, drawing on the principles of trauma-informed care and the
   work of Judith Herman, can help trainees to be more confident in
   promoting the basic rights of survivors of trauma, which might form a
   first step in the re-establishment of trust and empowerment.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

There has never been a more timely moment to highlight the needs and
rights of asylum seekers and refugees, as so comprehensively described
in this month's Praxis article ‘Assessing asylum seekers, refugees and
undocumented migrants’, by Waterman *et al*.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` This
population and those who care for them face many challenges. Not least
of these is the ongoing hostile environment. In the UK, immigration
checks are embedded in everyday interactions and accessing healthcare
may result in sharing of personal data with the Home Office, leading to
deportation or detention.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Frequently changing funding
arrangements related to Brexit threaten numerous charities that support
migrants.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` However, Waterman *et al*'s article can
empower us to be hopeful and compassionate and, importantly, well-versed
in relevant law. In so doing it embraces some of the core values of a
psychiatrist as outlined by the Royal College of Psychiatrists,
including advocacy, empowerment and a person-centred biopsychosocial
approach.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

The article introduces a fictitious but sadly all too familiar case,
which begins with a presentation in crisis at an inner-city ‘place of
safety’. What I have learned in reviewing this article has already
helped me to advocate for two patients under my care to receive National
Health Service (NHS) treatment and eligibility for housing that was
called into question owing to legal uncertainties. Both had been the
victims of torture and were at varying stages in asylum claims. The
securing of such basic rights is the first step for survivors of trauma
beginning to find safety and regain control over their lives, what
Judith Herman describes as a primary stage in her book *Trauma and
Recovery* (p. 326).\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` However, it would seem that I was
not alone in my ignorance of the complexities of law. A recent survey of
a 514 health professionals found that only 26% were aware that all
migrants were entitled to free general practitioner (GP)
services.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` Just 39% were able to identify which groups of
migrants were entitled to non-emergency NHS care.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

.. _sec1:

Individual and societal responses to trauma
===========================================

In words that still hold true today, Herman wrote in the introduction to
her powerful work: ‘The ordinary response to atrocities is to banish
them from consciousness’.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` Psychiatry and trauma have a
long and complicated relationship. Trauma has had an often ‘underground’
history, resurfacing and then disappearing at various points depending
on the sociopolitical climate.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` As far back as 1919 Janet
recognised that the survivors of trauma ‘are unable to make the recital
which we call narrative memory, and yet they remain confronted by [the]
difficult situation’ (Janet 1919: see van der Kolk *et
al*\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`). Years later Kardiner built on Janet's studies of
‘hysteria’ in women to formulate the outlines of traumatic syndromes in
male combat veterans (Kardiner 1941: see van der Kolk *et
al*\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`). Contemporary psychiatrists such as Herman and van
der Kolk have formulated and communicated clearly and conclusively how
traumatic life experiences have far-reaching effects on the mind and
body. This has paved the way for an understanding of the neurobiological
effects of trauma on the brain, endocrine and immune systems, including
dysregulation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and sympathetic
nervous hyperarousal.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` Thanks to Felitti and colleagues’
large and important study on adverse childhood experiences (ACEs), there
are now robust and undeniable links between exposure to trauma and
cardiovascular and respiratory disease, cancer, obesity, chronic pain
and gastrointestinal illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.i),(n.d.j)` The
intergenerational effects of trauma are also being increasingly
understood. It has recently been found that the children of mothers who
were Holocaust survivors and suffered post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) have increased glucocorticoid sensitivity.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)`

Herman, more than 20 years ago, identified the syndrome of complex
post-traumatic stress disorder (CPTSD).\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Yet it has taken
tireless work and campaigning from clinicians, researchers and people
with lived experience for it to now be included in
ICD-11.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` The operationalisation and recognition of the
diagnosis is a significant step towards research and treatments which
acknowledge that prolonged and repeated trauma profoundly affects the
sense of self, affective stability and relationships. Indeed, some
studies have shown that CPTSD may be even more common that
PTSD,\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` and deserves specialist attention, both within
services and also in the educational curricula for future psychiatrists.

.. _sec2:

Facing a culture of disbelief
=============================

The article by Waterman and colleagues avoids the scapegoating of
refugees\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` and the ‘denial, repression and dissociation’
of trauma that Herman identified operating on both societal and
individual levels.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` Refugees and asylum seekers who are
survivors of trauma encounter multiple challenges, which are described
in the article. First, there is the trauma itself, which is known to
cause ‘disintegration of experience’ and loss of
narrative.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Echoing Janet's work, Herman describes how
‘people who have survived atrocities often tell their stories in a
highly emotional, contradictory and fragmented manner’.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`
Yet the processes of accessing healthcare or asylum demand that
survivors tell their story repeatedly, and they are received by a
‘culture of disbelief’ and face both testimonial and hermeneutical
injustice.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.o)` Individuals who are already
hypervigilant to threat must navigate health services that may share
information with the Home Office, mistakenly charge them for treatment
and inadvertently re-victimise them with unjust, uneducated and
sometimes perverse decisions.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Psychiatrist Sandra Bloom
states: ‘because of complex interactions between traumatized clients,
stressed staff, pressured organizations, and a social and economic
environment that is frequently hostile to the aims of recovery, our
systems frequently recapitulate the very experiences that have proven to
be so toxic for the people we are supposed to treat’.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)`

.. _sec3:

Trauma-informed and human rights-based care
===========================================

Trauma-informed care can provide some framework for individuals and
health services and is premised on a fundamental shift from thinking
‘What's wrong with you?’ to ‘What happened to you?’.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`
Such approaches seek to rebuild trust, create safe environments, empower
and to avoid re-traumatisation.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`

After reading this Praxis article I would urge trainees to familiarise
themselves with the principles of trauma-informed care and to think how
these might be applied in their organisations. Sweeney and colleagues’
article in *BJPsych Advances* is an extremely helpful
summary.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` We must also remember that trauma does not
occur only in wars or in other countries; experiences of torture and
childhood adversity are all too common, as highlighted by the original
study of ACEs in the USA.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` Research in the UK has found a
similarly high frequency, with 47% of almost 4000 participants reporting
having experienced at least one ACE.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` The pivotal works
of Herman\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` and van der Kolk\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` provide a
compelling, compassionate and eloquent narrative on a subject that is so
often unspeakable. Practical resources and links to specialist agencies
for asylum seekers and refugees can be found as an online supplement to
the Praxis article.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Trainees may be interested to
explore the various communities of healthcare professionals who advocate
for human rights-based approaches to healthcare such as Medact
(`www.medact.org/project/migration-health <www.medact.org/project/migration-health>`__),
Docs Not Cops (`www.docsnotcops.co.uk <www.docsnotcops.co.uk>`__) and
the Twitter hashtag #patientsnotpassports. Poetry and storytelling can
also communicate and transform, with the potential to both educate and
liberate from shame and secrecy.

British-Somali poet Warsan Shire writes in her poem ‘Home’:‘no one
leaves home unlesshome is the mouth of a shark.You only run for the
borderwhen you see the whole cityrunning as well.’\ :sup:`(n.d.t)`\ I
hope that Waterman and colleagues’ article offers trainees a framework
for thinking about providing safe and compassionate care to asylum
seekers, refugees and undocumented migrants. I thank the authors for
their perseverance in bringing together complex legislation and issues
of mental and physical healthcare in such a fine example of what we are
seeking in Praxis articles. The article and the work of Herman, van der
Kolk and the principles of trauma-informed care demand us as clinicians,
as fellow humans, to bear witness and to empower survivors. We must
strive to avoid re-traumatisation and rejection, despite the current
hostile environment in which we live and practice.

**Cate Bailey**, MBBS, MRCPsych, MRes, is a Fellow in Medical Education
at East London NHS Foundation Trust; an honorary clinical lecturer at
Barts and the London School of Medicine; Trainees’ Section Editor of the
*BJPsych Bulletin*; and Co-chair of the Older Adults Section of the
Association for Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy in the NHS, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest** None.

.. [2]
   See this issue.
