==============================
Anouchka Grose: Apocalypse now
==============================



Claire Mckenna [1]_

:date: 2020-4-30


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The apocalypse is trending. Climate catastrophe looms, end-times movie
scenes spool out in real life all around us, and like a portent of our
worst fears the COVID-19 pandemic is now upon us. As the scions of Big
Bog Roll count their lucre, I've one pressing question for psychoanalyst
Anouchka Grose – why toilet paper?! ‘It's like the last thing between us
and barbarism’ she laughs, ‘once that's gone and you have to touch your
own shit, it's like the whole of culture's collapsed then’!

Grose is refreshingly unguarded and swears liberally (a sign of her
honesty and intelligence I think, as well as her Antipodean roots). She
came to London from Sydney in the 1970s, aged 2, to live in ‘an
Australian ghetto’ as she puts it. Her new book, *A Guide to
Eco-Anxiety: How to Protect the Planet and Your Mental Health*, is to be
published in May 2020, and she does worry a bit about how her irreverent
tone will be received.\ :sup:`1` It has tongue-in-cheek chapter titles
like ‘Anxiety: freaking the fuck out’ and ‘Pleasure yourself: you know
you want to’. She wrote it like that partly so the act of writing wasn't
unbearable, ‘There's the question of how do you talk about something
that's intolerable? And the climate thing *is* intolerable’. I think
she's struck the balance in tone, which mitigates the nagging sense of
fear.

Grose describes herself as a Lacanian psychoanalyst, who also lectures
on Freud. She writes novels, non-fiction books, and journalism. Her new
book originated from a piece she wrote in *The Guardian* in 2019, on the
ecological crisis making Greenlanders depressed. However, she has long
been an eco-warrior. She's been *mostly* vegetarian since 1985 and is a
supporter of XR (Extinction Rebellion), the environmental movement that
encourages ‘non-violent civil disobedience’.

The movie *Apocalypse Now* is based on the novel *Heart of Darkness*,
Joseph Conrad's racist fever dream. His tale of rapacious Belgian
colonialism in the Congo seems a fitting allegory for Grose's
left-leaning world view. Like many, she links our rapacious consumerist
culture both to the climate and COVID-19 crises, ‘Everyone seems as if
they've seen behind the scenes of capitalism suddenly, like this
window's open and you can see that it's just a stage’.

.. _sec1:

Thoughts on humans and other animals
====================================

The parallels between climate-change anxiety and that related to
COVID-19 have triggered a glut of hot-takes. I discuss with Grose that
these crises induce an existential kind of dread. In the language we use
about them, we hear the echo of primitive fears. Take the phrase ‘herd
immunity’, for example. Grose says, ‘The word [herd] was shocking
because it was dehumanizing. I mean, the idea that we're just a herd and
some of us will be lost and that's fine. Like watching a nature
documentary’.

In the language of scientists, however, she thinks there is a disconnect
between their cautious approach and epoch-ending events like the climate
crisis. She'd like them to be a little *more* alarmist, ‘I suppose
they're trained not to, because of the idea of the impartiality of
science, but it turns out that science is political’.

She lauds the approach of people like Professor Jem Bendell, a
sustainability academic. His viral essay\ :sup:`2` on climate-induced
societal collapse didn't pull any punches. He writes, ‘With the power
down, soon you wouldn't have water coming out of your tap…You will
become malnourished… You will fear being violently killed before
starving to death’.

.. _sec2:

The struggle is real
====================

I'm Skyping Grose at her home in London on a beautiful, clear, sunny
Spring morning. I can hear birds chattering and see daffodils in bloom
from my window beside the river in Belfast. It's hard to believe there's
a deadly virus out there.

Grose recounts the story of a fellow analyst, who continues to see
patients face to face (despite social distancing advice) because ‘he
didn't want to get sucked into the hysteria’. Philosophical abstraction,
Grose admits, can be unhelpful in dealing with concrete problems. This
sometimes makes it difficult not to treat *all* prophets of doom as
Cassandras, she thinks.

Do we have a duty as clinicians and therapists to protest the climate
emergency? She thinks we do, ‘You know, if you're going to have subtle
arguments, you need to have a world in which to have them. And so
protecting that world, you know, it is absolutely primary’.

No man is an island, and this is where the COVID-19 crisis diverges
sharply from the environmental one. XR, for example, is conspicuously a
mass enterprise. ‘That's been one of the big things with the climate
movement, that we have to collectivize’ she says, ‘we love each other,
we have to be there for each other, touch each other. That's one of the
pillars of the advice - to be communal. And suddenly that's been really,
really problematized’.

The social isolation and poverty induced by the COVID-19 ‘lockdown’ may
not bode well for our mental well-being. However, for some of Grose's
patients, their anxiety has gone right down: “‘They don't have to make
choices. They don't have to think they need to have a better job, look
for a boyfriend, you know, all these sort of horrible choice making
things have gone. …They're just thinking, well, whatever it is, you know
at least it's interesting.’”

.. _sec3:

No pills for the pain
=====================

In her book on eco-anxiety, Grose says fear is a rational response to
environmental Armageddon. ‘It's the people who aren't worried who are
crazy’ she writes. The trick, she says, is to manage our anxiety so that
we're on the helpful side of the Yerkes–Dodson stress curve. Her
take-home message is to ‘…be anxious, be very anxious, because your
anxiety can be a brilliant resource’.

She recognizes the paralysis that often comes with eco-anxiety, as we
feel stuck between a compulsion to act and the futility of our
individual efforts. She suggests a piecemeal approach to tackling
climate change and also gives us permission to breathe. ‘It's vital to
accept that there isn't a correct level of activity with regard to the
climate’ she writes, ‘each person has to gauge what they can bear’.

In her book, she blends practical tips on environmentalism and personal
anecdote, with strategies to soothe mind and body. As you would expect,
she has some difficulty with cognitive–behavioural therapy framing
real-life problems as something you can think yourself out of. About
psychoanalysis, she says: “‘It's not that I think psychoanalysis has
brilliant answers to everything. But I suppose the anti-normative thing
and the idea that a cure doesn't have to be a quick fix, that you have
these very open-ended speculative treatments, seems to me quite a good
way to approach this stuff [eco-anxiety]. And it's counterintuitive
because you think just calming people down would be a good thing to do.
But actually sometimes opening up questions or sort of encouraging
people to tolerate the possibility of pain and the possibility of not
knowing, yes, that might be a good way to come at it.’”

.. _sec4:

Man's search for meaning
========================

The tectonic plates of our civilization are shifting uneasily against
each other, fault lines exposed. Although there is nothing unique about
this pandemic in the course of human history, Grose thinks humans need
to tell stories to impose meaning on the chaos. Narratives abound of an
anthropomorphized wilderness striking back, to punish us for our
destruction of the world.

Grose hates some climate activist's actions that feed into this
narrative, ‘[They] were putting up posters saying “human beings are the
virus”, and I just thought that was such a nasty way to treat people’.
She says, ‘It seems to have been some people in the Midlands trolling
XR’ and is upset about how so-called ‘eco-fascists’ use the
well-intentioned movement with nefarious intent.

She suggests some alternative narratives: “‘We could say we don't know
why it's [the pandemic] happening, but there are ways we could soften
the blow. By treating each other well and seeing what we can do and
being much more tolerant of each other and prepared to share, less
self-interested.’”Extreme messaging may be crude, but it certainly gets
people's attention. I ask what is better to inspire behavioural change:
appeal to people's desire to protect themselves or to protect others?
Grose thinks there are two different types of people, who need different
messages. On vegetarianism, she says ‘It's like, you know, meat will
give you bowel cancer for one lot. Meat will bring about the apocalypse
for the other lot’.

Like many, Grose sees opportunities for our civilization in the
‘Coronapocalypse’, ‘I mean, I just don't see how the world could just
slip back to before…Like what is big enough to make people see?’

.. _sec5:

‘An emissary of pity and science and progress, and devil knows what else’
=========================================================================

Kurtz, as portrayed by Joseph Conrad, exposes the myth of the Western
man's ‘progress’. Grose says that in today's world, we have fooled
ourselves into thinking that our technology makes us gods, so that we
are estranged from our own mortality. We defend ourselves with material
and mind-numbing things. She says: “‘None of these defences are, in
themselves, necessarily all bad, but they become a problem when the
fantasy solution is opted for so enthusiastically that fashion and cars
start clogging up the planet, causing people to feel anxious, and then
to vote for yet more of the sorts of leaders who promise an endless
supply of fashion and cars.’”

She asks that we wean ourselves off ‘these pacifying myths, in order to
pave the way to ask proper, difficult questions about life, death and
the ethics of coexistence’. She does stress, however, that, ‘It's
absolutely vital that environmentalism doesn't equate with
miserabilism’.

Grose agrees with the view that eco-anxiety can be a luxury, for those
who don't have to worry about their basic survival needs being met. She
is clear-eyed about the XR movement being predicated on privilege, in
that ‘… being arrested if you're a black person is not the same thing’.

Racism in the discourse around climate change and COVID-19 has been
inescapable, Grose agrees. Does our tendency to ‘other’ people, to deny
reality until it happens to people like us, betray something about our
society? Our tolerance of institutionalized racism shows we have a huge
capacity for denial of the ‘other’, Grose thinks: “‘But you're haunted
by the fact that your defence isn't working and you know that those
people are human. You know that they suffer… And actually, what I hear
from people is that the better defended you are in material terms, the
more haunted you are.’”Grose looks to Freud to understand why COVID-19
has triggered a retreat into isolationism and jingoism in some
countries. The insularity he saw in Germany after World War One
represented ‘a state of mourning for what has been lost’, he wrote. She
proposes that instead of saying xenophobes and climate change deniers
are ‘simply idiots…we could say their minds are somehow in revolt…they
don't know what to do about the things they risk losing, or have already
lost’.

.. _sec6:

Suffer the little children
==========================

Babies, says Grose, are ‘the main reason I wanted to write this
[eco-anxiety] book’. As a psychotherapist, she has been ‘…dealing for
years with people who think it's too risky to have children because the
world's going to end’. She has a 19-year-old daughter, so admits that
she is biased.

David Attenborough gets some polite digs in her book for his arguments
about slowing population growth. It's not poor people in Africa we need
to worry about, she says, ‘It's careful, rich people with 1.87 children
(or fewer) who constantly upgrade their iPhones…and go on yoga retreats
in the Himalayas…An Australian Aboriginal baby has quite a different
carbon footprint from, say, a middle-class British one…It's consumerism,
not babies, that we need to place the limits on’.

Which brings us to children in general, who are particularly vulnerable
to the apocalyptic messaging around us. In her typically frank manner,
Grose says there's no easy way to tell children about the climate
crisis, just like sex and death: “‘If we're sort of busy pretending it
isn't happening and the information's arriving from elsewhere, which it
is, then that's not helpful to children…but things that are awful you
can only get it wrong. I mean I grew up in a sort of seventies, cool
family where sex was completely out there, where, you know there was
arty porn around the house. There was the idea that you'd be less
traumatized if it was more out in the open. But obviously, it was
horrible!’”

She thinks we can smooth the conversation by showing it's not completely
hopeless but, ‘You can't not get it wrong. Don't be upset if your kids
clock you as a worrier – that's just part of being a real parent, rather
than one in an advert’.

.. _sec7:

Not with a bang but a whimper
=============================

It's helpful when overwhelmed, to contemplate your own insignificance,
Grose says. ‘When terrestrial life gets too much for you’ she writes,
‘let your mind drift up to the stars. It's so easy to forget they're
there’.

I suggest to her that the danger in this is nihilism. Thinking we are
unimportant and transient might lead to thinking nothing really matters.

Freud's theory of ‘pre-emptive mourning’ can protect us against this,
she says. We are prevented from enjoying the world if we are preoccupied
with being ‘fated to extinction’, he observed. Grose offers comfort that
‘…the inevitability of loss and death needn't make us value things any
less’. She quotes Freud, ‘A flower that blossoms for a single night does
not seem to us on that account less lovely’.

In the rush of COVID-19 think pieces, it's customary to end on a note of
optimism, which alleviates the discomfort of our fear. But let's not.
Grose reminds us that anxiety is a powerful adaptive force when used
productively. ‘The horror, the horror’, Kurtz whispered at the last.
Let's sit with that horror and channel it, in the best way that we can.

.. [1]
   **Claire Mckenna talks to psychoanalyst Anouchka Grose** about the
   twin terrors of eco-anxiety and Coronavirus panic.
