=========================================================================================
Lean management in a liaison psychiatry department: implementation, benefits and pitfalls
=========================================================================================



Lauren Alexander
Susan Moore
Nigel Salter
Leonard Douglas [1]_

:Correspondence: Dr Lauren Alexander
(lalexand@tcd.ie)

:date: 2020-02

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To apply process mapping, a component of lean management, to a
   liaison psychiatry service of an emergency department. Lean
   management is a strategy that has been adapted to healthcare from
   business and production industries and aims to improve efficiency of
   a process. The process consisted of four stages: individual
   interviews with stakeholders, generation of process maps, allocation
   of goals and assessment of outcomes.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   There was a significant reduction in length of stay of psychiatric
   patients in the emergency department (median difference: 1 h; *P* =
   0.015). Five of the six goals were met successfully.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   This article demonstrates a management intervention that successfully
   reduced length of stay in an emergency department. Further to the
   improvements in tangible (quantitative) outcomes, process mapping
   improved interpersonal relations between different disciplines. This
   paper may be used to guide similar quality improvement exercises in
   other areas of healthcare.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Lean management is a process that has been adapted for use in healthcare
from business and production industries. Its usefulness has been
demonstrated in medical settings, where it generates enhanced staff
understanding and improved, coordinated delivery of care.\ :sup:`1–3`
Research indicates similar benefits in behavioural crisis
units\ :sup:`4` but its use in an emergency department liaison
psychiatry setting has not been demonstrated. Although psychiatric
patients comprise a minority of emergency department presentations, they
require a disproportionate amount of time and resources, which can
frustrate emergency department staff and cause negative attitudes
towards such patients.\ :sup:`5,6` Myriad factors underlie this, such as
lengthy waiting times, interpersonal difficulties and procedural
ambiguity. These factors are often longstanding and resistant to change,
but lean management processes, when executed appropriately, are an
accessible and effective way of effecting meaningful change.

Prolonged length of stay was a recurrent source of contention and
discontent in this emergency department before the process was
undertaken. Boarding or lodging of psychiatric patients awaiting
admission to psychiatric units is common and, for various reasons, these
patients spend longer in the department than their medical and surgical
counterparts.\ :sup:`7` The requirement for ‘medical screening’ is
contributory, but avoidable non-clinical factors, such as health
insurance or lack of transport, are known to play a significant
role.\ :sup:`8` In addition to straining resources, patients who spend
longer in an emergency department are more likely to suffer adverse
outcomes or incidents, such as medication errors.\ :sup:`9`

Workplace incivility is a further stressor that is reportedly
commonplace in emergency departments,\ :sup:`10` and is compounded by
the phenomenon of ‘silo working’, whereby different departments operate
in isolation from each other.\ :sup:`11` In addition to contributing to
an unpleasant work environment, interpersonal conflicts interfere with
provision of collaborative and efficient care. Efficient and coordinated
delivery of care is essential to optimising the quality of treatment
provided.\ :sup:`12`

.. _sec1-1:

Aims
====

To execute and describe a quality improvement process consisting of:
mapping the psychiatric patient's journey through the emergency
department, using data from all involved healthcare professionals
(stakeholders)identifying weaknesses in the system, such as duplication
of work, role confusion, communication errors and unnecessary
delays(iii) generating immediate and short-, medium- and long-term goals
to improve service provision.To evaluate and quantify outcomes of the
quality improvement process, including: (i) length of stay of patients
in the emergency department before and after the quality improvement
intervention(ii)  attainment of goals after intervention.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

.. _sec2-1:

Setting
-------

This quality improvement exercise was executed in the emergency
department of an urban university tertiary-referral hospital, processing
in excess of 55 000 patients per year. This is a 24-hour emergency
department that receives on average 29 psychiatric referrals per week.
Mental health assessments are carried out by the consultation liaison
psychiatry service during working hours and on-call psychiatry
out-of-hours.

The process was executed in four stages: stage I – stakeholder
interviewsstage II – generation of process mapsstage III –
interdisciplinary meetingstage IV – assessment of outcomes.

Over a period of 3 months, we conducted interviews with 11 staff working
in the emergency department.

.. _sec2-2:

Selection of participants
-------------------------

The proposal for this project was submitted at an in-house
Emergency-Psychiatry Management Meeting. We applied to interview 11
stakeholders – staff members from different disciplines who are
routinely involved in providing care for mentally ill patients in the
emergency department. They were: one emergency department triage nurse,
one emergency department nurse, two emergency department doctors, one
liaison psychiatry registrar, two liaison psychiatry nurse specialists,
one psychiatry registrar on-call, one social worker, one healthcare
assistant and one security staff. The data were to be collected by a
senior member of the psychiatry team not routinely involved in
first-line care in the emergency department.

.. _sec2-3:

Ethical approval
----------------

Exemption from ethical approval was granted by the Ethics Committee in
St Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, on the basis that there was no
direct patient involvement in this study.

.. _sec2-4:

Stage I: stakeholder interviews
-------------------------------

The purpose of stage I interviews was to elicit details of individual
staff members' management of psychiatric patients in general, in order
to map a generic template of the interaction, from beginning to end,
between psychiatric patients and specific disciplines, such as social
work.

Duration of interviews was 40–60 min, concluding when no new data were
being generated.

In an individual face-to-face meeting, the stakeholder was invited to
describe their involvement with psychiatric patients in the emergency
department, beginning from the point at which they first become aware of
the patient and concluding with their last contact with the case. The
participants were asked to describe interactions with psychiatric
patients in general, rather than specific issues that had arisen with
individual patients.

The purpose of the interview (stage I) was explained to each
participant. They were informed that they would be invited to
participate in stages II and III at a later date. They were advised that
the interviewer would redirect them if they began to engage in stage II
or III discussion.

Participants were first asked open questions, such as ‘Tell me about
your first contact with a psychiatric patient in the emergency
department’, followed by more closed questions, such as ‘How long does
this component take?’ Further questions were raised to identify specific
weaknesses, such as duplication of work, role confusion, communication
errors and unnecessary delays.

To reduce bias from the interviewer, the participant was allowed to
speak without interruption except when redirection or clarification was
required. Participants were redirected back to the routine care pathway
if they began to discuss problem-solving.

.. _sec2-5:

Stage II: generation of process maps
------------------------------------

A working flow diagram of each participant's involvement was drawn up
during the interview and the participant was asked to make any comments
or changes before the meeting ended.

The information was transformed into an overview process map showing the
patient journey and maps representing the role of each individual
stakeholder (`Figs 1 <#fig01>`__ and `2 <#fig02>`__). Fig. 1The overview
process map, detailing the pathway of psychiatric patients through the
emergency department. (a) Baseline map; (b) map with problem areas
superimposed (marked by ‘no access’ symbol).ED, emergency department;
SW, social work; GP, general practitioner. Fig. 2An individual process
map representing the role of the liaison psychiatry nurse specialist:
3–4 h pathway of patient assessment and management in the emergency
department (ED).HCA, healthcare assistant; OPD, out-patient department;
ED, emergency department; GP, general practitioner.

.. _sec2-6:

Stage III: post-interview stakeholder focus group and goal-setting
------------------------------------------------------------------

All stakeholders and heads of departments (medical, nursing, liaison
psychiatry, social work, security) were invited to participate in a
focus group. The focus group consisted of ten individuals.

The overview (integrated) map and individual maps (`Figs 1 <#fig01>`__
and `2 <#fig02>`__) were scrutinised for weaknesses or pinch points. No
solutions were suggested or elicited at this stage. Weaknesses were
itemised into four groups: role confusion, duplication of work,
unnecessary delays and communication deficits. A problem list was
collated and distributed. Stakeholders were asked to categorise items
according to priority (1, low priority; 2, medium priority; 3, high
priority) and to mark a timeline for implementation (immediate, less
than 1 month, more than 1 month). After consensus was reached on target
areas (items that scored >20), stakeholders were invited to generate
potential solutions. Responsibility for each target area was allocated
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Table 1Results of six targeted areas for change,
including action prescribed, individual assigned and projected
timelineProposed improvementWeakness targetedActionPerson
responsibleTimelineAt 6-month follow-up\ :sup:`a` Efficient handover
after psychiatric assessmentsi, ii, xiii, xivDesignated emergency
department staff members (team leaders A and B) to be the contact for
psychiatry staff about all psychiatric patients in the emergency
departmentPsychiatry consultant to inform psychiatry staff; emergency
department clinical nurse manager to inform emergency department
nursesImmediateTarget met on projected timeline Emergency department
staff access to liaison psychiatry team at morning shift-changei, ii,
iii, xiii, xiv, xviiPriority discussion for emergency department nurse
manager or social worker or emergency department doctor at liaison
psychiatry handover meeting at 09.00 hPsychiatry consultant to
restructure handover meetingImmediateTarget met on projected timeline
Refine referral pathway (emergency department to psychiatry)v, vii,
viii, ix, x, xiDefault referral to psychiatry is by emergency department
medical staff, not triage or emergency department nurse. MITT to reflect
thisEmergency department consultant to change MITT protocol. Emergency
department nurse manager to inform triage nursing staff.ImmediateTarget
met on projected timelineIn limited circumstances, as defined, direct
referrals are possibleEmergency department and psychiatry consultants to
agree criteria for direct referral pathway between emergency department
and psychiatryImmediate to 1 monthTarget met on projected timeline
Define medical screeningvii, x, xiEmergency department and psychiatry
consultants to collaborate on medical screening requirementsEmergency
department and psychiatry consultants1 monthTarget revised and excluded
at clinical meetings (see section IV: attainment of outcomes) Prevent or
manage acute agitation in psychiatric patientsv, viImplementation of
psychiatric medication chart for patients awaiting transfer to approved
psychiatric unit. Psychiatry will prescribe ‘as required’ medication and
give advice proactively and pre-emptivelyPsychiatry consultants to
inform psychiatric registrarsImmediateTarget met on projected timeline
Formalise the role of security staffvi, xvClarity about legal
obligations and safeguards in relation to restraint and
detentionPsychiatry consultants to provide formal written guidance and
training for security staff1 monthTarget met on delayed timeline (3
months) [2]_ [3]_

.. _sec2-7:

Stage IV: assessment of outcomes
--------------------------------

Outcomes were evaluated 6 months after completion of stage III. Outcomes
were patient length of stay in the emergency department and attainment
of goals (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__).

.. _sec2-8:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

Lengths of stay of samples of patients referred for psychiatric
assessment were measured over a 3-month period before commencing the
process (January–March 2017) and over a 3-month period 6 months after
the intervention (January–March 2018). In total, 190 pre-mapping
patients and 190 post-mapping patients were compared. Distribution of
data was calculated using the Shapiro–Wilk test. Statistical
significance was calculated using the Mann–Whitney test and effect size
was calculated by the difference between median lengths of stay in the
pre-mapping and post-mapping groups. This was a convenience sample that
represents over half the total number of psychiatry consults in
emergency department over the 3-month post-mapping period. This was a
convenience sample that represents over half the total number of
psychiatry consults over a 3-month period, chosen from cases that were
labelled as psychiatry consults on the emergency department's
patient-processing software.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Stage I: stakeholder interviews
-------------------------------

Each of the 11 interviewees described their involvement with psychiatric
cases, which were mapped onto individual maps (`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__). The
difficulties encountered were also elicited and categorised into four
problem areas and 17 targets (i–xvii). Delays: on-call psychiatry
doctors reported delayed handover of updates from emergency department
staff(ii)emergency department nursing reported delayed handover from
psychiatry team following assessments(iii)social work reported that the
patient stay was prolonged by delays in referral from emergency
department and psychiatry staff(iv)social work reported that medical and
psychiatric assessments were delayed by failure to assess patients in
tandem with social work assessment.Role confusion: the discipline
responsible for the management of acute agitation (emergency department
doctors or psychiatry doctors) was unclearthe role of security staff in
the care of psychiatric patients, in particular the statutory limits of
their interventions, was unclearthe medical discipline responsible for
‘medical screening’ (emergency department, psychiatry or general
medical), and the definition of ‘medical screening’, were unclearit was
unclear which medical discipline (emergency department or psychiatry)
was considered to be the treating team of patients following completion
of psychiatric assessmentconsequent to role confusion (viii), it was
unclear which discipline was responsible for further referralsconsequent
to role confusions (vii) and (viii), it was unclear which discipline was
responsible for further investigations, such as blood tests/ECG/urine
toxicology.Duplication of work: the emergency department nurse and
triage nurse both reported routinely making phone contact with
psychiatry doctors to inform them of the arrival of psychiatric
patients, in addition to the referral that was made by the emergency
department doctor after their assessment; the expectation from these
phone contacts was unclearsome disciplines reported carrying out
overlapping assessments, e.g. social work and psychiatry.Communication
difficulties: emergency department nurses reported a failure by
psychiatry to keep emergency department staff updated on psychiatric
management planspsychiatry staff reported a difficulty identifying
emergency department staff to receive updatessecurity staff reported
failure of medical staff (psychiatry and emergency department) to update
the security team, leading to a longer security intervention than needed
in some casesthe healthcare assistant reported delayed updates after
change of treatment plans, leading to a longer healthcare-assistant
intervention (1:1 special) than needed in some casesthe social worker
reported delayed referrals of child welfare issues to social work.

.. _sec3-2:

Stage II: generation of process maps
------------------------------------

Individual process maps (`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__) and an overview process
map (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__) were developed for discussion at stage III.

.. _sec3-3:

Stage III: post-interview stakeholder focus group and goal-setting
------------------------------------------------------------------

Following presentation of maps and completion of worksheets, the
highest-ranked problems were targeted for intervention and a projected
timeline was assigned. The consensual goals were: to ensure efficient
and comprehensive handover between liaison psychiatry and emergency
department staff following psychiatry assessments (targets i, ii, xiii,
xiv)to facilitate emergency department staff accessing the liaison
psychiatry team for updates at morning shift-change (09.00 h) (targets
i, ii, iii, xiii, xiv, xvii)to refine the referral pathway (emergency
department to psychiatry) in order to clarify the role of each
individual and the appropriate timing of referrals and to prevent staff
making repeated and redundant contacts about the same patient (targets
v, vii, viii, ix, x, xi)to establish a definition of ‘medical
screening’, the process of medical assessment before psychiatry referral
(targets vii, x, xi)to prevent or effectively manage acute agitation in
psychiatric patients (targets v, vi)to formalise the role of security
staff in the management of psychiatric patients, including education
about statutory obligations and limitations (targets vi, xv).

.. _sec3-4:

Stage IV: assessment of outcomes
--------------------------------

.. _sec3-4-1:

Length of stay
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A statistically significant Shapiro–Wilk test indicated a non-normal
distribution of data (2017 *P* < 0.001; 2018 *P* < 0.001), indicating
suitability for non-parametric analysis. There was a statistically
significant improvement in the median length of stay between the
pre-mapping group and the post-mapping group (median difference: 1 h;
*P* = 0.015). The median length of stay pre-mapping was 8 h
(interquartile range, IQR = 8) and post-mapping was 7 h (IQR = 7). There
was a particular improvement in the number of psychiatric patients
spending over 24 h in the department: length of stay exceeded 24 h for
5% of psychiatric patients in the pre-mapping group and 2% in the
post-mapping group.

.. _sec3-4-2:

Attainment of goals
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Five of the six targets were attained to the satisfaction of
stakeholders, four on the projected timeline and one on a delayed
timeline (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__).

One of the targets – ‘define medical screening’ – was revised and
excluded at a subsequent clinical meeting, after concerns were raised
that the implementation of such a definition could lead to a rigid
clinical approach to screening psychiatric patients.

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

Process mapping, a component of lean management (‘lean’), is one of a
number of management tools that aim to improve efficiency and eliminate
‘waste’.\ :sup:`13` Lean was originally applied to the motor industry in
Japan but the underlying philosophy lends itself to many types of
organisation, including healthcare. Lean scrutinises and evaluates each
component of a process so that ineffective, inefficient or potentially
harmful elements (‘waste’) can be fixed or discarded.

Lean processes have been applied to other healthcare services, including
ambulatory care settings\ :sup:`1` and interventional
radiology.\ :sup:`2` Process mapping has been successful in these
settings in identifying problems, reducing errors and generally
improving efficiency; however, the outcomes in most of the previous
studies have taken a qualitative approach rather than quantitative. Some
studies have measured patient satisfaction before and after
implementation of this method, but found no statistically significant
difference.\ :sup:`14` To our knowledge, the benefits of this method
have not been studied in liaison psychiatry. The differences that exist
between liaison psychiatry and other services, in particular the
inherent unpredictability of an emergency department liaison psychiatry
service, make it a unique setting that warrants particular attention.
Lean methods have been applied to acute emergency settings\ :sup:`3` and
behavioural health crisis settings,\ :sup:`4` both more similar to our
service, but those studies did not assess the function of an emergency
psychiatry service within a general emergency department, as is commonly
the setting for the provision of emergency psychiatric care in Ireland
and the UK. One such study of a stand-alone crisis centre found a
significant improvement in door-to-door dwell time, but, as a disparate
service to ours, without comparable interdisciplinary challenges, the
findings are difficult to relate to a hospital setting.\ :sup:`4`

The use of process mapping in the present study afforded us the
opportunity to visualise the journey of the psychiatric patient as they
interacted with each individual stakeholder (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__) and as
they were processed through the interdisciplinary department (`Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__). Doing so, we were able to set realistic, practical,
timely and finite goals, thereby measurably improving efficiency.
Further to this, we hoped that this process might help to improve the
quality of working relationships between individuals and departments.

Lengthy waiting times of mentally ill patients in an emergency
department exert stress on resources and increase the risk of adverse
incidents.\ :sup:`9` Before undertaking this quality improvement
project, their median length of stay in this department (8 h)
significantly exceeded the national target of 6 h. The National
Emergency Medicine Programme in the jurisdiction of Ireland aims to
ensure that 95% of patients are processed within 6 h.\ :sup:`15` Process
mapping and the series of interventions that followed led to a
significant reduction in length of stay (median 7 h), with a particular
reduction in the number of lengthy waiting times (5% exceeding 24 h
pre-mapping, 2% exceeding 24 h post-mapping). This outcome, we
postulate, was achieved by improving staff relations and agreeing on a
series of low-burden and low-cost practical changes.

One such practical change was the management and prevention of acute
agitation in mentally ill patients in the emergency department. The
application of process maps enabled the stakeholder group to deconstruct
the chain of events leading up to acute agitation: delayed handover
following psychiatric assessment caused ambiguity about management
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__, proposal (a))psychiatric registrars reported
being unable to identify the appropriate person in the emergency
department to receive handovers (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__, proposals (a) and
(b))the head of emergency department nursing observed that delays in
administration of oral medication in the early stages of behavioural
disturbance precipitated escalation of the behavioural disturbance,
requiring emergency administration of intramuscular medication (`Table
1 <#tab01>`__; proposal (e))healthcare assistants observed that long
periods spent in the contained environment of the emergency department
led to patients becoming more irritable, but the assistants did not feel
equipped to supervise time out of the departmentsecurity staff were
willing to supervise breaks with the healthcare assistant, but were
unclear about their legal obligations and safeguards in relation to
restraining and detaining patients (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__; proposal (f)).

Consensus on such solutions could not have been reached in the absence
of this process, as non-clinical security staff and healthcare
assistants – who provided important information and insights that were
key to implementing solutions – are not routinely consulted by senior
clinical and management staff. These types of solution, especially in
cases such as this, reduce risks to patients and staff and reduce the
burden on resources, thereby allowing the department to run more
efficiently.

Further to these measurable benefits, process mapping facilitated
progression from silo working to a cohesive team approach. The
phenomenon of silo working leaves individual staff members feeling
isolated and unsure about what to do or where to find help,\ :sup:`11`
especially in highly stressful situations such as a patient's acute
agitation. Clarification of departmental policies and pathways, paired
with improved individual flexibility and collegiality, empowered
individuals to navigate difficult situations as a team so that
interdisciplinary solutions were generated with minimal conflict.
Process mapping provided a structure for this conversation to take
place, thereby enhancing collegiality and collaborative care.

.. _sec4-1:

Limitations
-----------

For process mapping to be successful in creating a consensus of opinion,
the interviewer must remain objective. This process-mapping exercise was
led by a senior registrar on the psychiatry team. Ideally, the lead role
would be undertaken by an external participant, to avoid introducing
interviewer bias (or the perception of interviewer bias by the
stakeholders). This was not possible within the limits of our resources.
This did not emerge as an obstacle in this study, probably because of
the considerable trust between the specialties, but an independent
interviewer would be essential if relationships were more fractious.

Compounding this, participants in this project were vulnerable to recall
and reporting bias due to the retrospective nature of the interviews and
the fact that they were asked to consider the pathway common to the
majority of psychiatric cases, rather than specific cases.

Having evaluated the success of this process, it appears that neither of
these limitations was prohibitive.

.. _sec4-2:

Recommendations for utilising process maps in healthcare
--------------------------------------------------------

.. _sec4-2-1:

Adhering to structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We found that both the interviewer and stakeholders were tempted to
offer personal conclusions and suggestions in stage I, which could have
led to individual maps being contaminated by an individual's personal
agenda. It was important throughout this process to remind the
stakeholders that any useful solutions must be raised through the
focus-group meeting in stages II and III.

.. _sec4-2-2:

Completing the full process
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Change management requires energy and motivation and we found that
sustaining momentum was a struggle at times. Process mapping does not
serve its function if it ends after stage I, so persistence through
stages II and III is needed to enable meaningful change to be made. It
can be a challenge to convince busy professionals to sacrifice valuable
time, but the value of participation en masse cannot be matched by only
one or two people. Active involvement of consultants and heads of
department from the outset is vital.

.. _sec4-2-3:

A word of caution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Not all situations are amenable to process mapping, so this method
should be carefully considered before applying it to a problem
situation.

Process mapping is a tool developed to examine a process, not a
population. It is not designed to mediate interpersonal conflicts.
Although we observed an improved sense of trust and collegiality,
process mapping cannot enhance trust in a relationship where none
exists.

The problems described herein are particular to our liaison psychiatry
service, and may not mirror the challenges faced by other specialties or
services; however, the general challenges encountered in the day-to-day
provision of healthcare (e.g. inefficient use of resources and a
tendency to resort to silo working) are ubiquitous across all settings.
We have identified a method of overcoming these pitfalls. This
experience can provide a blueprint for undertaking this kind of work in
other fields of healthcare. We have found it a useful tool for enhancing
working relationships and implementing immediate, lasting and meaningful
change.

**Lauren Alexander**, MB BCh, BAO, MRCPsych, is a senior registrar in St
Vincent's Psychiatric Hospital, Dublin; a postgraduate clinical research
registrar in the Department of Psychiatry, St Vincent's University
Hospital, Dublin; and an MD candidate at University College, Dublin.
**Susan Moore**, MB BCh, BAO, MRCPsych, is a consultant in liaison
psychiatry in the Department of Liaison Psychiatry, St Vincent's
University Hospital, Dublin. **Nigel Salter**, MB BCh, BAO, FRCP, FRCEM,
is a consultant in emergency medicine in the Emergency Department, St
Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin. **Leonard Douglas**, MB BCh, BAO,
MRCPsych, is a consultant in old age psychiatry in the Department of Old
Age Psychiatry, St Vincent's University Hospital and is based at Carew
House, Dublin, Ireland.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest** None.

.. [2]
   MITT, Mental Illness Triage Tool.

.. [3]
   a. Five of the six targets were met, one on a delayed timeline. One
   target was discarded at subsequent clinical meetings.
