=================================================================================================
Improving patient flow in acute psychiatric wards: enhanced bed management and trusted assessment
=================================================================================================

Douglas Turkington
Steve Moorhead
Gordon D. Turkington
Carla King
Leigh Bell
Denise Pickersgill [1]_Correspondence to Douglas Turkington
(douglas.turkington@ntw.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2020-08

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   In three localities in a mental health trust in England, an enhanced
   bed management team was established to improve patient flow and
   reduce out-of-area placements. Trusted assessments were provided to
   support risk management and conflict resolution. Two measures of flow
   were compared before and after the team was established.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   The trusted assessment recommendation was for discharge in 70% of
   cases. The number of out-of-area placements was significantly reduced
   (*P* < 0.05), saving £616 876 over a 12-month period. Patient flow
   was significantly improved in one of the three localities as measured
   by patients/bed/6-month period (*P* < 0.05). In one of the other
   localities increased use of trusted assessment input and reduced
   numbers of patients being transferred in are recommended to improve
   flow.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Mental health trusts should consider the establishment of an enhanced
   bed management team, including trusted assessment, as a safe and
   cost-effective approach to improving patient flow and reducing the
   need for out-of-area placement.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

NHS England's Five Year Forward View for Mental Health\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`
mandated that access should be increased to high-quality community care,
avoidable admissions should be prevented and treatment delivered as
close to home as possible (recommendation 22). Out-of-area placements
were to be completely eliminated by the financial year 2020–2021.
‘Financial incentives and levers’ were to be deployed to deliver on the
key outcomes anticipated in recommendation 22. Consequently, mental
health trusts working under contracts where these levers were being
deployed had been losing substantial amounts of non-returnable funding
through the use of out-of-area placements at a cost of £608/day. It is
known that patient outcomes when admitted out of area are significantly
worse than for those admitted locally.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` The Five Year
Forward plan, however, set targets without acknowledging that many
mental health trusts were already ‘under-bedded’ in relation to their
population size and level of social adversity and under-resourced in
terms of community provision. Also, critical indicators for
admission/discharge and estimated discharge dates were being
underutilised by crisis teams and ward staff, leading to unnecessarily
prolonged in-patient stays.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Meanwhile, since the plan
was written and distributed, a number of factors have come together to
increase the pressure on scarce in-patient bed
resources.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` In particular, the percentage of patients
admitted under the Mental Health Act 1983 has increased, as has length
of stay. Intellectual disability (‘learning disability’) beds were being
reduced for both the forensic and working-age adult populations. One
possible explanation was put forward that clients are declining informal
admissions as the acute wards are perceived as stressful and end up
eventually being admitted for a longer period under the Mental Health
Act.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` This is paralleled by nursing staff opinion that
acute in-patient wards are now best viewed as ‘mini-PICUs’. Reduction in
the use of the Mental Health Act 1983 is an objective of the Independent
Review of the Act (which was completed in December 2018 and for which a
white paper is proposed in the next session of parliament), and this
could potentially improve flow through acute admission beds. Over the
past 5 years there has been a 50% increase in accident and emergency
(A&E) department attendances for mental health problems.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`
This has led to increased pressure on crisis and liaison specialist
services and, at times, perhaps unnecessary admission under the Mental
Health Act. Presentations with intoxication from alcohol and other
substances have been rising. We have also seen a surge in the use of
‘gate sections’ from Her Majesty's Prisons. This occurs when a prisoner
has been mentally ill, was not transferred to prison under section 38
but is detained under the Act ‘at the gate’ at the time of their
release. People whose primary diagnosis is a personality disorder are
frequently kept too long under assessment in in-patient units, where
risk may increase rather than decrease. Their difficulties have often
arisen from prolonged or repeated traumatising experiences in childhood
or adolescence, and they may be better supported with effective
community psychological management programmes,\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` avoiding
off-licence use of psychopharmacology and potentially further
traumatising coercive in-patient treatment under the Mental Health
Act.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Any such admissions should be brief and require a
team or pathway-based attitude supporting positive risk management. Risk
averse practice has been rising owing to the negative consequences
ensuing if the discharge and community plan are not effective in
preventing a serious adverse outcome. All of these factors have combined
to make the current in-patient experience of care potentially a
stressful one for patients and staff alike.

There is no doubt that the spiralling development of specialist teams
(while a good thing for their target populations) has significantly
weakened the generic community mental health teams. Waiting lists for
key worker allocation are lengthening and, at times, individuals are
discharged too soon, removing ongoing support with well-being activities
(including medication concordance support). Another factor that has
driven admissions up is that nobody ‘owns the flow’. Sector and
integrated psychiatric services would facilitate a discharge if an
admission was needed. However, ‘split’ in-patient and out-patient
consultant psychiatrist posts have contributed to impairing pathway
ownership of the flow of patients into and out of acute units as well as
causing patient dissatisfaction with perceived lack of continuity of
care.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` As a result of this accumulation of factors, many
trusts across the UK have found themselves in great need of a solution
to the problem of lack of available admission beds that arises as they
do not have ‘the right patient at the right place at the right time’ on
their care pathway. Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS
Foundation Trust (NTW), which covers a population of approximately 1.5
million, decided that effective and prompt discharge to the correct
treatment pathway needed to be facilitated and the trust board mandated
a director to take responsibility for this crucial area. The enhanced
bed management (EBM) service was created as one of a number of
interlinking strands to deal with rising demand for in-patient
admission. The other strands included the establishment of a personality
disorder hub, improving crisis assessment and home treatment teams and
improving rehabilitation flow. This paper reports early findings from
evaluation of our EBM service.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

In response to the above pressures, NTW decided to implement the EBM
approach across all acute psychiatric wards in three localities. The EBM
team included three discharge facilitators and five bed managers. There
were also one nurse manager, one part-time administrator, one part-time
social worker, one research assistant and two part-time consultant
psychiatrists (both 0.4 full-time equivalent). A system of linked
detailed electronic bed boards was introduced in all acute wards
trust-wide to regularly update critical indicators, estimated discharge
date, mental health cluster and Mental Health Act status. Discharge
facilitators attended all multidisciplinary team (MDT) meetings and
clinical bed managers were available for consultation on a locality
basis. ‘Trusted assessments’ were made available on request by the MDT
with the agreement of the responsible clinician. The purpose of the
trusted assessment was to complete a full review of the history,
interview the patient and all pertinent staff and give an independent
and comprehensive opinion to all parties on diagnosis, treatment and
management. Trusted assessments began in January 2018, continued
throughout that year and are ongoing. The impact of EBM on out-of-area
placements (adult acute) was calculated by comparing a proxy of flow
(number of out-of-area placements/month) between the calendar years of
2017 and 2018. The impact on flow as measured by patients/bed was
compared between the first 6 months and second 6 months of 2018 (the
second reflecting the period when the full team was operational).
Unpaired *t*-tests were used to compare the periods in
question.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` All other statistical analyses were performed
using IBM SPSS Statistics (for Windows), release 24.0.0.2. Further
exploration to understand the impact of internal transfers examined
length of stay data for all patients discharged from adult acute wards
in the trust during the financial year 2018–2019. Outcomes and
recommendations from the first 50 trusted assessments were determined by
case note review in March 2019.

Ethical approval was not sought as this project was a service evaluation
and there was no randomisation and no treatment being tested.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Out-of-area placements
----------------------

The number of out-of-area placements was reduced by over 60%: in 2017
the monthly mean was 5.25 (65 placed in the year); in 2018 the mean was
2.4 (29 placed in the year) (*P* < 0.05). This equated to a saving of
£616 876 in otherwise lost revenue (the figure given for savings does
not include the cost of the EBM team).

.. _sec2-2:

Patient flow
------------

Flow (patients/bed/6-month period) showed a significant improvement in
one locality (*P* < 0.05) in the period of full operation of EBM,
compared with the preceding 6 months: 4.83–5.5 (167 admissions rising to
246, with 56 transfers reducing to 52 over that period). In the other
two localities one already had acceptable levels of flow and these did
not change significantly (5.2–5.36; 253 admissions rising to 260 and 56
transfers reducing to 35). In the other locality flow remained lower, at
4.6–4.65 (284 admissions reducing to 253 and 46 transfers increasing to
71). The three localities had 57, 70 and 54 acute beds respectively.
Patient flow is locality specific and deemed acceptable in two NTW
localities, because if all three localities were hitting the same flow
targets of 5.2–5.5 patients/bed/6-month period then there would have
been no out-of-area placements and only infrequent admissions into leave
beds.

.. _sec2-3:

Trusted assessment uptake
-------------------------

To examine the potential impact of trusted assessment uptake on locality
patient flow, a *post hoc* correlation between number of trusted
assessments provided and proportionate increase in flow was calculated.
In locality 1, where 9 trusted assessments were requested, the
proportionate change in flow was −0.13. The flow figures for locality 2
were 0.02 (with 14 trusted assessments) and for locality 3 they were
0.13 (with 19 trusted assessments). A correlation between proportionate
change in patient flow and number of trusted assessment requests was
significant, with a two-tailed Spearman's rho of 1.0; *P* < 0.001.

.. _sec2-4:

Length of stay
--------------

A more detailed exploration of the factors affecting flow data was
undertaken. Initial flow data indicated that flow was noticeably low on
one ward in particular. The consultant body suggested that looking after
relatively more intra-trust, cross-locality ‘transfers in’, who would,
by implication, be more ill, might explain the lower flow. Examination
of data for 1 year of patients who had been discharged showed that
intra-trust, inter-locality transfers indeed stayed significantly longer
than those who were admitted and discharged from the same ward (mean
stay 70 days compared with 32 days; *P* < 0.001). If short-stay patients
(in for less than 20 days) are removed from this analysis, a
statistically significant difference remained (83 *v*. 59 days;
*P* < 0.001). Overall then, intra-trust transfers stay significantly
longer than those remaining on the ward on which they land and this ward
had a much greater proportion of transfers in. However, both male wards
in this locality had, proportionately, a considerably greater number of
transfers in, contributing to lower flow data for the whole locality.
Clarity, then, about the greater numbers of transfers in and their
associated length of stay initially suggested an explanation for this
low flow (many more transfers in, who stay longer). However, further
analysis of the pathway indicated that these patients had remained on
initial wards before the transfer for a mean of 18 days. If the same
group of short-stay patients are again removed, the mean rises to 21
days, corresponding almost exactly to the difference in mean of total
length of stay between the groups of those transferred and those
remaining (24 days) once the short-stay group was removed from the data.
Thus, the length of stay on the wards on which the patients land after
the initial stay was examined. This showed that male transferred-in
patients in this locality as a whole stayed significantly longer after
their arrival on the destination ward than male transfers in in the
other localities (means: 38, 46 and 71 days; one-way ANOVA, d.f. = 2;
*F* = 4.6; *P* = 0.01) indicating a difficulty with the male pathway as
a whole in this locality rather than just one ward.

.. _sec2-5:

Trusted assessment recommendations
----------------------------------

Examination of ‘the first 50’ outcomes showed that the trusted
assessments recommended discharge for 35 (70%) of patients they were
asked to assess and, of these, 19 were discharged within 2 weeks; 25 of
the 35 were discharged within 4 weeks. There were no untoward incidents
in the follow-up period after discharge (which was obviously different
for each patient, depending on the timing of trusted assessment
provision): the mean was 149 days (range: 89–355). This amounted to 3730
people-days among 25 people. Thirteen of this 25 experienced a
readmission (eight had one readmission, four had two and one had three
readmissions) for a median of 9 days in total. Considering the impact of
the trusted assessment on overall care, this 25 had experienced a mean
of 7321 days as in-patients since their very first admission and 21 863
days living in the community (ratio 0.33). In the intervening 3730
people-days, these 25 patients experienced a mean of 35.4 days as
in-patients and 251.5 in the community, a ratio of 0.14.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

These results show that, by investing in an enhanced bed management
(EBM) service, improvement in quality of care and substantial financial
savings can be achieved by preventing unnecessarily long hospital
stays.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)`

.. _sec3-1:

Trusted assessments
-------------------

Although the clinical bed managers, discharge facilitators, EBM social
worker and research assistant were broadly welcomed by in-patient teams,
the role of the trusted assessment was viewed initially with some
suspicion, as the exact nature of the role was not understood for some
time. The initiation of the concept of trusted assessment required the
agreement of the responsible clinician. There was not a uniform uptake
across the three localities. This might indicate ambivalence on the part
of the MDT or the responsible clinician. We are not aware of any vetoing
of a trusted assessment by the responsible clinician when it was
requested by the MDT. In a parallel project to build consensus there was
89% agreement with the following statement among a multiprofessional
consultant staff group: ‘Given consensus that the needs of current
in-patients should be balanced with the needs of those waiting
admission, a trusted assessment is helpful in contributing a view that
explicitly takes account of the wider needs of the system and when such
needs are incorporated into the trusted assessment thinking these should
be explicitly articulated in the report’. A trusted assessment is only
undertaken at the request of the MDT and with the full consent of the
responsible clinician. Trusted assessments were able to support the MDT
in relation to difficult discharge situations.

The trusted assessments recommended prompt discharge in 70% of cases and
were able to support MDTs in terms of mediation between different views
and positive risk management to achieve prompt discharge.

Specific locality-based analysis of patient flow highlighted
difficulties that required detailed analysis of data on length of stay
to fully understand local problems, ensuring that possible solutions
could be developed. Rather than showing that transfers in alone
explained the problem on one ward, this analysis revealed that there
were whole-locality pathway problems. A number of patients were waiting
for a rehabilitation bed and there were fewer discharge options in terms
of supported accommodation in that locality. Further, the locality in
question did not make use of trusted assessments, whereas the locality
that optimised flow was a heavy user of trusted assessments.

Trusted assessment has been operating in acute hospitals for some time
but with a slightly different role, where a number of different
providers agree that the trusted assessment will decide on the most
appropriate discharge package once that discharge has been decided
on.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Our model of trusted assessment, within mental
healthcare, is that the various teams within the trust agree to clinical
mediation, positive risk management or other care strategy with the
contribution of an experienced clinician working within EBM. This team
can be consulted in relation to EBM establishment and working practice,
and the multimodal linked bed boards viewed. If the important targets of
the Five Year Forward plan are to be achieved within a system of
suboptimal bed provision, our findings show initial support for the
contention that EBM, incorporating trusted assessments, is a safe and
viable option.

.. _sec3-2:

Study limitations
-----------------

This is the first publication of the impact of such a service. Different
comparison periods were used for out-of-area placements and flow because
trusted assessments began in January 2018 but the full EBM team was not
functioning until mid-2018. It is likely that the impact on out-of-area
placements when next measured will be further enhanced. A further
limitation of this report is that the case note review of the impact of
the first 50 trusted assessments was done by a non-masked team member.

.. _sec3-3:

Implications for other mental health trusts
-------------------------------------------

This service development took place in a mental health trust that
already had an ‘outstanding rating’ from the Care Quality Commission.
In-patient beds, rehabilitation beds, community and other resources were
all close to the median in the NHS benchmarking
document.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` The Five Year Forward plan, however, set
targets without acknowledging that many mental health trusts were
already ‘under-bedded’ in relation to their population size and level of
social adversity and under-resourced in terms of community provision. It
is certainly the case that there are mental health trusts where much
higher numbers of out-of-area acute beds are chronically in use. If the
important targets of the Five Year Forward plan are to be achieved
within a system of suboptimal bed provision, our findings show initial
support for the contention that EBM, incorporating trusted assessments,
is a safe and viable option. The generalisation of these findings to
other trusts and settings will depend on an adequate number of acute
psychiatric beds being funded and a number of other locality-specific
factors. These include the level of social deprivation and adequate
funding of crisis/home treatment teams and other community mental health
provision. Mental health trusts might consider appointing a senior
clinician or director with responsibility for pathway synchronisation
and ownership of patient flow. This model may also prove beneficial for
older adult and rehabilitation services.

All authors contributed in a substantial manner to the design of this
project or the acquisition/analysis or interpretation of the data and
drafted or critically revised the manuscript and approved the final
version. All authors also agreed to be accountable for all aspects of
the work in insuring that all questions relating to accuracy or
integrity are appropriately investigated and resolved.

**Douglas Turkington**, MD, FRCPsych, is a Consultant Psychiatrist at
Monkwearmouth Hospital, Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear (NTW) NHS
Foundation Trust, Sunderland, UK. **Steve Moorhead**, MRCPsych, is a
Consultant Psychiatrist at Monkwearmouth Hospital, NTW NHS Foundation
Trust, Sunderland, UK. **Gordon D. Turkington**, BSc, is a Higher
Research Assistant at Monkwearmouth Hospital, NTW NHS Foundation Trust,
Sunderland, UK. **Carla King**, BSc, is a Team Manager at Monkwearmouth
Hospital, NTW NHS Foundation Trust, Sunderland, UK. **Leigh Bell**, BN,
is a Bed Manager at Monkwearmouth Hospital, NTW NHS Foundation Trust,
Sunderland, UK. **Denise Pickersgill**, BA, is Associate Director of
Monkwearmouth Hospital, NTW NHS Foundation Trust, Sunderland, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
