=================================================================================================
Highlighting some of the challenges COVID-19 has posed to the European Convention on Human Rights
=================================================================================================

Oluwatoyin A. Sorinmade
:Date: 2020-08


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) came into force in 1953
to guarantee specific rights and freedoms for people in countries that
belong to the Council of Europe and to protect their human rights and
prohibit unfair and harmful practices.(n.d.a)

COVID-19 took the world by storm and invaded all aspects of humanity.
The ‘normal approach’ we had to life and issues relating to everyday
living changed. New norms/ways of thinking as well as laws(n.d.b)
emerged to tackle the sweeping public health crisis with consequent
implications for accepted rights and freedoms under the ECHR.

Governments’ world over (including Europe) variously imposed lockdown
measures to limit the spread of the disease and subsequently introduced
schemes to alleviate the financial difficulties imposed on their
populace and pioneered schemes such as volunteer services to help the
less able with shopping, collecting medication from pharmacies etc, to
lessen the hardship(s) imposed by lockdown measures.

The powers available to public authorities under Article 5(1)(e) of the
ECHR to lawfully detain people for the prevention of the spreading of
infectious diseases were imposed by governments across Europe with the
consequence that health and law enforcement agencies acquired powers to
confine otherwise healthy individuals to their homes and to isolate and
screen individuals suspected to have contracted COVID-19 using powers
under Article 5(1)(b) of the ECHR.(n.d.c)

The promotion of powers under Article 5(1)(e) of the ECHR did not seem
to have been extended to the promotion of provisions of Article 5(4) of
the same convention, which allows for everyone deprived of their liberty
by arrest or detention to be entitled to take proceedings by which the
lawfulness of their detention shall be decided speedily by a court and
their release ordered if the detention is not lawful.

The exigencies of COVID-19 especially in the early stages meant that
health resources were diverted to combat/contain the pandemic with the
consequent effect that the care of some individuals were delayed and, in
some instances, cancelled, for example clinics and operations, possibly
leading to death as an indirect consequence of COVID-19 and interference
with Article 2 rights of these individuals.

There were concerns about issues relating to the blanket approach taken
to writing ‘DNAR’ (do not resuscitate) on the notes of older adults and
people with intellectual disabilities without proper consultation(n.d.d)
in disregard of their Article 8 rights.(n.d.e)

There were also problems with the supply and availability of personal
protective equipment(n.d.f) to health and care professionals, with
consequence on the human rights of workers(n.d.g) to be protected from
toxic exposures at work.(n.d.h)

There were concerns that the exigencies of the pandemic had the
potential to cause doctors to consider factors such as the availability
and capacity of current resources(n.d.i) when making decisions about
whether to continue life-saving treatment on an individual with a
potential scenario where an individual could be deprived of continued
treatment, consequently interfering with their Article 2 rights.(n.d.j)

A Court of Protection judgment(n.d.k) considered the interface between
the right to private and family life (Article 8), right to liberty and
security (Article 5) and right to life (Article 2) among others, and
drew out the primacy of absolute rights under ECHR such as Article 2
rights over qualified and limited rights (Article 8 and Article 5
rights, respectively).

Patient consultation via telephone and video calls has grown in
popularity and acceptance(n.d.l) with possible implications for Article
8 rights of patients. The effect of the lockdown on the physical and
mental health of the populace as well as mortality rates, including
suicides will become apparent as time goes on.

Time will tell with regard to whether the exigencies of COVID-19 had an
impact on the speed of hospital discharge as well as the care of people
in care homes and the care and survival of the less able and whether
this interfered with their Article 2, Article 3 and Article 8
rights.(n.d.m)

Although there is the possibility under Article 15 of the ECHR for
governments, in time of war or other public emergency threatening the
life of the nation, to temporarily derogate from their obligation to
secure certain rights and freedoms under the Convention,(n.d.n) some of
the measures put in place to tackle the exigencies of COVID-19 will
endure long after the pandemic has abated in the UK – otherwise we would
have learnt nothing from the pandemic and forgotten nothing. There is
therefore the need, going forward, to carefully calibrate the fine
balance between public health needs and safety with human rights.

The understanding is that the European Charter of Fundamental Rights
that brings together the fundamental rights of everyone living in the
European Union, including the rights protected by the ECHR (as brought
into UK law by the Human Rights Act) will stop having effect in the UK
after the UK leaves the European Union. The government has however
guaranteed UK's continued commitment to ‘respect the framework’ of the
ECHR.(n.d.o)

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.
