========================================
The value of assessing suicidal ideation
========================================



Gethin Morgan
:Date: 2020-02


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The paper by Gibbons *et al*\ :sup:`1` concerning the distress
experienced by psychiatrists who lose a patient through suicide is very
welcome. We all know that such an event is difficult to bear, and this
paper will encourage us to get support from others if things get really
difficult, rather than soldiering on alone.

In describing how hard it is in clinical practice to detect suicide
risk, let alone prevent it, the authors assert that recent research
based on meta-analyses provides no evidence that suicide risk assessment
in clinical practice can usefully guide clinical decision-making.

I believe that such a bald overall dismissal is regrettable because it
discourages acquisition and critical evaluation of relevant clinical
skills. Furthermore, I submit that it is not justified in the case of
psychiatric in-patient care when addressing the problem of suicide
prevention in the immediate or short-term future.

Surely all would agree that in managing severe short-term risk we ignore
evaluation of suicidal ideation at our peril. When less immediate
short-term risk is considered, there is also much to affirm the
important role of assessing suicidal ideation in guiding clinical
decision-making.

We described two series of psychiatric in-patients (1982–1984, N = 27;
1991–1993, N = 18) who died by suicide either during hospital admission
or within 2 months of discharge from hospital.\ :sup:`2` In each of
these, a high proportion of patients, 20/27 (74%) and 15/18 (83%), had
discussed their suicidal ideas with members of staff in the ward during
their in-patient stay. Suicidal ideation, as recorded contemporaneously
in the case notes and not retrospectively, was a key clinical feature in
delineating these patients, because they could not be distinguished from
others in the ward across a range of behaviours. 12/27 (44%) and 9/18
(50%) showed significant clinical improvement during their in-patient
stay, even though stress in the community had remained unresolved. In
the 10 years that had elapsed between our two series, the proportion of
patients that killed themselves after discharge from hospital increased
from 7/27 (26%) to 11/18 (61%).

These findings, based as they are on two small series of suicides, must
be regarded as provisional. Yet they do suggest that knowledge of
suicidal ideation can be useful in guiding clinical management
decisions. Clinicians should be vigilant that clinical improvement in
these particular patients may be temporary and misleading, possibly
related to removal from stress in the community. They should be
particularly careful to ensure that such stress has been resolved, or at
least contained, by planned provision of adequate ongoing support in the
community if discharge from hospital is envisaged. With the increased
emphasis on community care, the proportion of these patients who kill
themselves after discharge from hospital is likely to have increased
further since our studies took place. Our findings suggest that
clinicians should be mindful of the increased hazard which is likely to
be associated with premature discharge of these patients from hospital.

Our in-patient psychiatric wards should be fertile ground for the
necessary further research that is needed to clarify the many other
possible aetiological factors in these suicidal deaths, and so help in
the development of good clinical practice. The identification and
evaluation of suicidal ideation must surely have a central role in this.
