==============
Authors’ reply
==============

David Rigby
Lynsey McAlpine
:Date: 2020-06


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We are delighted that the publication of our article has generated a
debate around the Section 12 approval process and welcome the
opportunity to respond to the three letters. Before responding to some
of the criticisms of our article, we think that readers would benefit on
some narrative on why we chose to publish this article. At a similar
time to attending a Section 12 approval course, the first author had
also attended an advanced life support (ALS) course. These courses have
some similarities in that they are 2-day events with teaching on
performing specialised tasks which are required in order to work in
certain specialties or positions of seniority after accreditation from a
respected body.

However, the author's experience of the two courses also had notable
differences. To name a few: the ALS course came with an extensive
manual, knowledge of which was tested in a multiple choice question; the
large majority of the course was spent undertaking simulations of the
tasks in which the course was accrediting competence; and IDs were
checked and significantly late arrivals would have resulted in course
failure, and therefore the course was promptly attended.

By contrast, the Section 12 course had several late arrivals and some
early leavers. There were no ID checks. Teaching, although of a high
standard, was mostly lecture based and didactic and, most worryingly, a
significant minority of attendees spent large amounts of time using
their phones during the course. There was no simulation training on
performing Mental Health Act assessments (MHAAs) in the course.

Although anecdotal, these differences should cause concern to those with
responsibility for Section 12 approval. As we demonstrated in our
article, our belief that the difference in engagement in these two
courses is due to lack of assessment in the Section 12 approval process
is based on pedagogical research that shows that students will not
engage in effective learning when they are not assessed.

We accept Dr Khwaja's criticism that we do not have contemporaneous
evidence of a lack of knowledge or skills in Section 12-approved doctors
but argue that – in contrast to the current situation – the onus should
be on Section 12 approval courses to establish through assessment that
participants have in fact acquired appropriate knowledge and skills.

We note Dr Khwaja's suggestion to change the title of our article, but
we stand by our original title as we believe that there are concerns in
multiple domains of the Section 12 approval process. For instance, many
National Health Service trusts only allow Section 12-approved doctors to
perform MHAAs. The MRCPsych exams do not assess knowledge of mental
health law. Therefore, it is entirely possible for a doctor to receive
Section 12 approval who has never performed an MHA, simulated or real,
or who did not attend the approval course, instead asking a colleague to
sign in, or attended the course but chose to engage with their phone
rather than the course content. Essentially, UK doctors receiving
Section 12 approval will not have had any formal assessment in their
knowledge and skills in relation to performing an MHAA.

Dr Khwaja notes that international candidates are required to have
evidence of having undertaken supervised MHA assessments. Surely this
disparity should be corrected and extended to all Section 12 approvals
in the UK? He also notes that only a basic working knowledge of the MHA
is required to conduct an assessment, but this should not negate
responsibility for assessing Section 12 doctors for any knowledge of the
MHA.

The authors are aware that Section 12 approval is not required to take
part in an MHA but argue that this is even more reason to ensure that
Section 12 doctors have the appropriate knowledge and skills to
undertake assessments if they are to be relied upon as one of two
doctors with specialist skills. At the time of writing this letter,
proposals to amend the MHA to allow only one doctor to detain a patient
were under consideration owing to the Covid-19 pandemic, focusing our
concerns into even sharper relief. Dr Gupta's letter states that we
attribute the recent 47% rise in detentions primarily to the issues we
have raised. Our article does not make this claim and we detail some
other likely contributory factors. However, this very significant rise
in detentions gives an additional reason to raise the standards of the
accreditation process.

We agree with Dr Khwaja's statement that the approval courses can allow
for debate around the intricacies of mental health law but assert that
this should occur as well as, rather than instead of, ensuring basic
competencies.

We of course accept Dr Ballantyne-Watts comment regarding the very low
response rate to the questionnaire but want to highlight that the survey
was conducted to try to ascertain what degree of standardisation there
was between approval courses; we do not base our conclusions upon the
questionnaire. We found the lack of engagement from course organisers
frustrating and concerning, and this was a driver for writing the
article. We plan to survey attendees of the approval courses to shed
further light on this issue and perhaps the issue of smartphone usage
and expect a much higher response rate.

We know of no other accreditation process in medicine that takes place
with the lack of rigour described in this letter and in our article. We
accept that the question of requisite knowledge and skills in Section
12-approved doctors is an open one and would again welcome the
opportunity to collaborate on performing a study to address the need for
more up-to-date research in this field.
