---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  We aimed to explore access by Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME)
  elders to the memory services in Leicester and Leicestershire,
  examining any trends over time. We then compared the odds of referral
  by ethnicity, using observed versus expected referrals for the city of
  Leicester. We gathered data on a comprehensive county-wide memory
  clinic used by people with suspected dementia and memory problems from
  the Trust electronic record system during the period 2011--2017. For
  Leicester city, we compared referral rates for 2011--2017 and compared
  observed and expected referral rates with demographics from the UK
  Census 2011.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  In Leicester, there was a significant underrepresentation of referrals
  from the BAME population as compared with the White population in
  2011, 2012 and 2013, when compared with population estimates of those
  aged ≥60 years from the 2011 UK Census Leicester city data. Data for
  the Black population were too small for comparisons. The odds of being
  referred to a memory clinic for the White group was double that of the
  Asian group in 2011 (odds ratio 2.15, 95% CI 1.52--3.02) and nearly
  1.5 times in 2012 (odds ratio 1.40, 95% CI 1.01--1.93). This
  difference did not persist after 2014. However, this differential odds
  of referral changes when the age difference between the groups is
  accounted for. After adjusting for age, there were no differences
  between the two groups in their odds of referral to the memory clinic
  from 2011 to 2013, but from 2014 to 2017, members of the Asian group
  had higher odds of being referred.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  The relationship between BAME and access to memory services is
  complex. The relative lower prevalence of Asian people among referrals
  to memory services in Leicester from 2011 to 2013 may partly be
  explained by the lower ages of the Asian population at referral. The
  higher prevalence of Asian people in 2014--2017 may be owing to use of
  denominators from the 2011 UK Census, which are likely to be
  disproportionately low for this group. Further studies are needed to
  explore any potential barriers to the access of services by BAME
  communities.
author:
- Hari Subramaniam
- Elizabeta B. Mukaetova-Ladinska
- Andrew Wilson
- John Bankart[^1]\*Correspondence to Dr Hari Subramaniam
  (<hari.subramaniam@leicspart.nhs.uk>)
date: 2020-08
institute:
- 1The Evington Centre, Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust, UK
- 2Department of Neuroscience, Psychology and Behaviour, University of
  Leicester, UK
- 3Department of Health Sciences, College of Life Sciences, University
  of Leicester, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
title: "Representation of Black, Asian and minority ethnic patients in
  secondary care mental health services: analysis of 7-year access to
  memory services in Leicester and Leicestershire"
---

There are an estimated 25 000 people currently living with dementia from
Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) backgrounds in the UK.^1^ It is
estimated that this figure will rise to 50 000 by 2026 and 172 000 by
2051, given the growing and ageing UK BAME population.^2^ This increase
parallels the projected increase in the numbers of older BAME people. In
2001, approximately 532 000 people from BAME groups were aged ≥65 years,
and this is expected to rise eightfold to approximately 3.8 million by
2051.^3^

BAME people are generally underrepresented in dementia services and
often present later in the course of the illness^4^; development of
appropriate health and social care services to meet their needs has been
a longstanding priority. A national study^5^ found that the incidence
rates of dementia diagnosis are higher among Black ethnic groups
compared with White and Asian groups in the UK. This study reported that
the incidence of dementia diagnosis was 25% higher among Black women
than White women, and 28% higher among Black men than White men. Asian
women and men were 18% and 12% less likely than White women and men,
respectively, to have a dementia diagnosis. Vascular dementia is thought
to be more common among Asian and Black Caribbean people because they
are more prone to important risk factors for vascular dementia, such as
cardiovascular disease, hypertension and diabetes,^6^ and some evidence
suggests that people from BAME groups present later in their illness.^7^

In the UK there are primary care-based studies estimating the prevalence
of dementia diagnosis rates^8^ in BAME groups, but there are not many
county-wide studies on mental health services use within secondary care
services by people with dementia. UK-based secondary care studies tend
to have small population sizes; a recent study^9^ examined data on
referrals to an inner London memory service to explore any differences
in referral rates, cognitive assessments and stages of dementia at
presentation. Although Black and Black British patients comprised a
quarter of all referrals, Asian patients comprised only about 2.6% of
the referrals. Another secondary care study^10^ paradoxically found BAME
overrepresentation, but this is the only UK study to find this. Such
studies that are small and with seemingly opposite findings suggests
that referral patterns may not necessarily reflect the BAME
distributions in the local population and could well be representative
of other factors. Further, it emphasises the need for studies with
larger BAME population samples.

Several qualitative studies have explored why BAME groups may be
reluctant to seek professional help for symptoms owing to
dementia.^4,11--13^ There are several barriers to seeking help
identified for South Asian people. They include patient, carer and
community factors, health professional factors and the type of services
concerned.^14^ Health professional factors include culture and
communication, lack of knowledge of dementia, lack of knowledge of
available services (including any for BAME groups) and high
workload/lack of time. There are several other reported barriers, such
as lack of support, time and financial constraints, stigma, diagnostic
uncertainty and disclosure of the diagnosis.^15^ Furthermore,
interventions raising awareness^16^ have not shown much improvement in
diagnosis or management,^17^ which might suggest an associated
reluctance to seek help.

# Demographic characteristics of Leicester and Leicestershire {#sec1-1}

Leicester is unique in the UK in probably now being the only city to
have a sufficiently large BAME population (with only 51% reporting
themselves as White British) in the UK Census 2011 data; population
changes have been affected over time by immigration patterns. Further,
Leicester is also unique in having a South Asian population as the
majority within the BAME population. Additionally, Leicester has the
highest proportion of BAME adults of any city in the UK, with the BAME
population being the majority population in some areas. The Leicester
data from the 2011 UK Census gave the three main ethnicity estimates in
the city to be 51% White, 37% Asian and 6% Black.^18^ The Leicester
Action Plan 2016/7 estimates that 3000 people aged \>65 years in
Leicester live with dementia, and this is forecast to increase to about
4500 people by 2030.^19^ Estimates suggest that each year about 850
people diagnosed with dementia are from Black and minority ethnic
backgrounds.^20^ Leicester has a high-performing diagnosis rate for
dementia of 88.4% of the predicted population value.^20^

The demographics of Leicester show that the increase in the proportion
of those aged \>65 years is much greater in the South Asian population
than other groups, and that overall, the proportion of this age group
from BAME communities will have risen from 31% in 2016 to 40% in
2026.^19^ This raises the question of whether local referral patterns
reflect the real prevalence of the Asian population among BAME
referrals. It provides us with a good opportunity to explore secondary
care service use by BAME groups in a setting where the BAME population
is high, in a city with only about 51% reporting themselves as White
British in the UK Census 2011 data.^18^

# Aims {#sec1-2}

First, we wished to examine the access by BAME elders to memory services
in Leicester and Leicestershire and examine any trends over time.
Second, we aimed to compare the odds of referral by ethnicity, using
observed versus expected referrals for the city of Leicester.

# Method {#sec2}

## Data collection {#sec2-1}

We gathered data on comprehensive county-wide memory clinic use within
mental health services by people with suspected dementia and memory
problems. For this we used the Leicestershire Partnership National
Health Service Trust (LPT) electronic record system, RiO.

The LPT moved to an electronic system of patient records in 2010 and
this included electronic records of all referrals to the memory clinics,
out-patient referrals and referrals to the community mental health
teams. As a part of a National Institute of Health Research (NIHR)
study, the findings of which will be reported elsewhere, we identified
all referrals to the LPT memory clinics where patients suspected of
cognitive disorders and dementias would be referred and diagnosed.
Memory clinics provide assessment for cognitive problems across the city
and county to adults referred with suspected memory problems. Patients
are offered comprehensive assessments, including standardised tests,
brain imaging and neuropsychological tests as needed. Diagnoses are
considered by a multidisciplinary team and appropriate treatments and
follow-up are arranged as required.

For this study, we report only the findings of ethnicity data and
findings related to patients referred to mental health services for the
elderly who were referred by general practitioners for memory
assessment. Ethnicity was coded as per the National Health Service (NHS)
criteria for recording ethnicity data at the time of referrals. We were
able to stratify the data according to the ethnicities as recorded on
NHS patient-recording systems. The data collected included data for
older people referred for a memory assessment, but not those suspected
of having a young-onset dementia or cognitive syndromes in younger
adults, this information being reported separately. We collected date of
referral, ethnicity recorded at the point of receiving the referral,
gender, general practitioner details and whether the case was active or
discharged. Age was not routinely recorded at the time of receiving the
referrals.

We collected data for 8 years, from 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2017.
Analysis used anonymised data from a yearly referral database with LPT
maintained for the purpose of service monitoring and includes all the
referrals received by the Trust. NHS ethnic data categories include
White British, White Irish, Asian or Asian British, Black or Black
British, any other White, mixed, Chinese, other ethnic, not known and
not stated. We studied patterns yearly to look for any emerging trends.

Ethics approval for this study was granted by University of Leicester as
a part of the NIHR study application (reference PB-PG-0416-20019). The
study also had approval from the LPT Research and Development Department
(ELMH0818; Integrated Research Application System reference 232861).

## Age imputation {#sec2-2}

The age distribution of the entire Leicester city population at risk was
already known for 2011 in 5-year age bands. As age was not routinely
recorded at the time of receiving referrals, we collected these data
only for a sample of randomised individuals. Because we lacked age
information for the non-randomised referrals, we decided that it was
reasonable to assume that the age distribution for the randomised
referrals (in 5-year bands) would be the same as for the non-randomised
referrals, and imputed the age data on that basis. So, if a third of
randomised White referrals in 2011 had ages in the 80--84 years age
band, the same proportion was imputed for non-randomised White referrals
in 2011. This resulted in the creation of seven data-sets, one for each
year (2011--2017). Age distributions were calculated and created
separately for the non-randomised referrals in the two ethnic groups in
each year. In each year, the total number at risk was the same, so no
account was taken of population growth in those aged ≥60 years, for
which we had no information. The total number at risk in each year
consisted of 49 115, with the number at risk being constrained to be
constant from 2011 to 2017. The number of referrals in each year was
subtracted from the number at risk to give the number of non-referrals.
The numbers of non-referrals in the years subsequent to 2011 were not
removed from the at-risk group to take into account the fact that the
referrals in previous years may no longer have been at risk of being a
referral. Having estimated the numbers of referrals and non-referrals in
each age band in each year for each ethnic group, we generated these
data in Stata version 14 for Windows, using the 'gen' command.

## Statistical analysis {#sec2-3}

A separate analysis was performed for each year, and *P*-values were
correspondingly adjusted for multiple comparisons with the Bonferroni
method (significance level 0.05/*n*, two-tailed). Logistic regression
was used to compare proportions of referrals between ethnic groups,
using 5-year age bands to calculate age-adjusted odds ratios and 95%
confidence intervals. Population-at-risk estimates were derived from the
published UK Census (2011) data for Leicester. Age was only available in
the form of six (mainly 5-year) age bands, ranging from 60--64 to ≥85
years and was treated in the logistic models as a continuous predictor,
ranging from 1 (60--64 years) to 6 (≥85 years). We used 60 years as the
cut-off for population-at-risk estimates, as it is reflective of the age
generally used as a cut-off age for population-at-risk estimates in
defining older adult services and has face validity in clinical
practice. However, beyond 2013 it is highly likely that the denominators
for the two ethnic groups will have both increased and also diverged
non-trivially, leading to potential biases in the estimated proportions
and differences in proportions, so estimates of individual proportions
and differences in proportions beyond this time should be treated with
caution.

## Randomisation {#sec2-4}

Simple randomisation by a computerised program (SAS version 9.4 for
Windows) had previously been carried out from the memory clinic
referrals in the White and Asian groups separately, to obtain a
representative sample of 260 cases from each group; the ages of referral
were then individually collected from those case notes for comparison.
The number of Black referrals was too small for meaningful comparisons,
and hence this study did not include data for the Black population. All
analyses were exploratory.

# Results {#sec3}

Over the analysed period, LPT memory services received a total of 15 634
referrals, of which 191 (1.2%) had been entered in error. These included
referrals that were deemed inappropriate or had other medical problems
present and hence were not suitable for memory clinic assessments. A
total of 1493 (9.6%) people had blank values in the ethnicity data rows,
whereas 'not known' ethnicity was recorded in 994 (6.4%) people. These
missing data were missing at random with no consistent pattern, and were
all excluded from the analyses. Formal statistical analyses were
conducted on just the two main groups of interest here, namely White
British and Asian groups; other ethnic groups and mixed groups were
excluded because of the low numbers in each group. Comparisons of the
main groups are shown in [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}. Table
1Referral data for Leicestershire memory clinics, 2011--2017Referrals by
ethnicity*N*Gender% FemalePercentage of the sample,
*N* = 15 443MaleFemaleWhite British11 1664631653558.572.3White
Irish152658757.21.0Asian or Asian British112847665257.87.3Black or Black
British141677452.40.9Any other
White2889319567.71.9Mixed35171851.40.2Chinese93666.60.06Other
ethnic37162156.70.2Not known99445354054.36.4Not stated149365184256.39.7

Despite the overall higher proportion of BAME in Leicestershire compared
with many other counties, during the period 2011--2017, of all the
referrals across the county, only 1128 were Asian (7.3%) and 142 were
Black (0.9%).

The proportion of Asian ethnicity referrals was higher in the city of
Leicester ([Table 2](#tab02){ref-type="table"}), but it was still only
22.6% compared with the expected Asian proportion of 37% based on the
2011 UK Census data population size estimates. Table 2All memory
services referrals for Leicester city and county, 2011--2017Total
referralsReferralsWhiteWhite, %AsianAsian, %BlackBlack,
%City4182252960.5%94622.6%1202.9%County11 452863775.4%1821.6%220.1%Total15 63411 16671.4%11287.2%1420.9%

## Yearly comparison of referrals in Leicester city and Leicestershire county {#sec3-1}

We have presented the referral rates among the three largest ethnic
groups over the period 2011--2017 (see [Table
3](#tab03){ref-type="table"}). Referral numbers increased consistently
in all the groups for part of this period. There were 529 referrals
combined in all the three groups in 2011, peaking at 3313 in 2016, but
then decreasing to 2033 in 2017. This drop may be explained by the
increase recorded in the 'not known' and 'not stated' ethnic categories.
White British referrals increased from 461 in 2011, peaking at 2350 in
2015 and dropping to 1337 in 2017. Asian ethnicity referrals also rose
from 43 in 2011, peaking at 295 in 2015. Black ethnicity referrals were
relatively low throughout, ranging from 5 in 2011 to 25 in 2017. Table
3Annual referrals for Leicester and Leicestershire (*n*, %
referrals)White BritishAsianBlackOther WhiteNot knownNot statedTotal*n*,
%*n,* %*n*, %*n,* %*n*, %*n,* %2011461,  
87.143,  
8.15,  
0.09,  
1.72,  
0.32,  
0.35292012870,  
87.543,  
4.34,  
0.020,  
2.017,  
1.77,  
0.799420131422,  
76.0113,  
6.018,  
0.944,  
2.3195,  
10.445,  
2.4187020142142,  
76.5228,  
8.128,  
1.053,  
1.8254,  
9.051,  
1.8280020152350,  
78.5294,  
9.825,  
0.864,  
2.1134,  
4.4201,  
6.7299120162068,  
62.4242,  
7.325,  
0.755,  
1.6166,  
5.0725,  
21.8331320171338,  
65.8148,  
7.226,  
1.228,  
1.3226,  
11.1458,  
22.52033

The proportion of White British referrals fell over this period from
86.9% in 2011, to 65.6% in 2016 and 65.7% in 2017 ([Table
3](#tab03){ref-type="table"}). In contrast, referrals from the Asian
population remained relatively similar over this period, from 8.1% in
2011, peaking at 9.8% in 2015 and then slightly falling again to 7.2% in
2017. The Black population proportion remained low, rising from 0.09% in
2011 to 1.2% in 2017.

## Comparison with Leicester city population estimates {#sec3-2}

As the raw referral rate data suggested a lower referral rate among BAME
groups compared with the White British population, for Leicester city we
compared annual referral rates between 2011 and 2017, based on an
estimate of the population at risk, derived from the 2011 UK Census. We
obtained this population-at-risk estimate by an age-defined cut-off of
60 years, obtained by stratification of the known population estimates
taken from the 2011 UK Census data. A cut-off age of 60 years holds
greater relevance and reflects the age cut-offs normally associated with
the way services reflect clinical practice. We restricted this analysis
to Leicester city as the city has a sufficiently large BAME population
to make statistical comparisons meaningful. It is interesting to note
that the referral patterns from the city rose from 2011, peaking in
2016, but fell again in 2017 ([Table 4](#tab04){ref-type="table"}).
Table 4Comparison between Asian and White groups in Leicester city
(unadjusted)2011 UK CensusWhiteAsianComparison166 636122 470Population
at risk (*n* \> 60)34 75014 365*n*Rate per 1000*n*Rate per 1000White
(reference) versus Asian, odds ratio (95% CI)20112075.96402.782.15
(1.52--3.02)20121624.66483.341.40 (1.01--1.93)201335710.271006.961.48
(1.18--1.85)201448513.9619113.301.05
(0.88--1.25)201552615.1425317.610.86
(0.73--0.99)201645213.0118813.090.99 (0.83--1.18)20172657.631238.560.89
(0.71--1.11)Total24547.069436.561.08 (1.00--1.17)

To control for the effects of age at presentation, we compared the White
ethnicity and Asian ethnicity groups, using age-adjusted logistic
regression over the period 2011--2017 ([Table
5](#tab05){ref-type="table"}), with data from each year being analysed
separately. There is a clear trend between 2011 and 2015 showing the
odds ratio changing increasingly in favour of Asian patients being
referred. Table 5Comparison of Asian and White groups in Leicester city
in 2011--2015, adjusted for age (results 2011--2017)YearOdds ratio (95%
CI) for ethnicity  
1/odds ratio*P*-value for ethnicityOdds ratio (95% CI) for age*P-*value
for  
agePseudo  
*r*^2^20111.13 (0.80--1.60)  
0.930.482.92 (2.57--3.32)\<0.0010.17020120.87 (0.62--1.22)  
1.150.432.03 (1.83--2.24)\<0.0010.09620130.80 (0.63--1.03)  
1.250.062.68 (2.46--2.92)\<0.0010.17120140.72 (0.60--0.86)  
1.37\<0.0011.74 (1.65--1.83)\<0.0010.07720150.51 (0.43--0.60)  
1.92\<0.0012.19 (2.07--2.31)\<0.0010.13820160.67 (0.56--0.80)  
1.49\<0.0011.80 (1.71--1.90)\<0.0010.08520170.61 (0.48--0.76)  
1.640.0011.77 (1.65--1.89)\<0.0010.074[^2]

At any given time only a proportion of patients referred for a memory
clinic were actively being managed within the service. Some would be
waiting for an assessment and some would have been assessed, treated and
discharged. To get a fair representation, we compared the numbers of
referrals that were considered actively open to see if they matched
estimates of patients with suspected dementia in Leicester. As of 2017,
there were 932 open cases in the city, with White British cases being
54% of the total. We compared the active cases from the three groups
with their at-risk estimates in Leicester city (based on the Leicester
2011 UK Census). Statistical comparison of active memory clinic use data
shows significantly lower use by BAME groups. The odds of being actively
open to the memory clinic were 1.67 (95% CI 1.42--1.96; *P* \< 0.0001)
times lower in the Asian population (24% of active cases compared with
the 40% of total at-risk Asian population estimates), whereas the odds
of being actively open to the memory clinic were 2.72 (95% CI
1.79--4.15; *P* \< 0.0001) times lower for the Black population (among
the 2.4% of active cases compared with the 7% of total at-risk Black
population estimates).

# Discussion {#sec4}

Referrals of patients to memory services in Leicester and Leicestershire
have increased fourfold over the period 2011--2017, although the drop of
39% between 2016 and 2017 is not easy to explain. We found that Asian
people represented 22.6% of all the memory service referrals in
Leicester city and 1.5% within the county of Leicestershire. The Black
population appears to be severely underrepresented among referrals to
the service.

Referrals from White British groups rose sharply from 2011 to 2014, but
then stabilised. Interestingly, the referrals from the BAME groups have
correspondingly not increased, suggesting the role of other factors
(i.e. access difficulties, immigration changes) that need to be
accounted for. However, this could be partly explained by the higher
proportion of 'not known' or 'not stated' ethnicity groups. The role and
the nature of the assessments in memory clinics have also perhaps
changed over these times, with increasing awareness of the newer concept
of minimal cognitive impairment and changes to the assessments of
cognitive issues associated with functional illness and/or physical
illnesses. There could also be influences arising out of the National
Dementia Strategies^21^ and the changes within primary care (such as
Quality Outcomes Framework targets)^22^ or the changes in costs
associated with anti-dementia drug prescribing. This may mean that the
population presenting to memory clinics for assessment may have altered
in its composition over the years, with a greater emphasis on early
assessment for cognitive problems. Administrative reasons may affect
data collection, explaining the higher 'not stated' scores, and perhaps
political influences affect the ethnicity documentation or the 'not
known' scores. We suspect these uncoded data may also affect the ongoing
activity and open case contacts, and may need to be taken into account
when interpreting the results.

In this study we demonstrate underrepresentation of Asian ethnicity
groups in Leicester city memory clinic referrals in 2011, 2012 and 2013
when we compare them with unadjusted population-at-risk estimates
derived from the Leicester BAME demographic data from the 2011 UK
Census. However, this difference can be explained by the finding that
the Asian population is younger than the White population at the time of
the referral. After adjusting for age, there were no ethnic differences
between the two groups in their odds of being referred to memory clinic
before 2014, from which time the denominators become increasingly
unreliable. Age is thus the more important predictor of being referred
to memory services. For every rise in age category (5-year bands), the
odds of being referred increased by a factor of around 1.5 to 3. There
is a clear trend between 2011 and 2015 showing the odds ratio changing
in favour of Asian people being referred. There may be two main reasons
for this. First, this is likely to be because of the denominator for the
Asian population increasing more than the denominator for the White
population, leading to increasingly high numbers at risk for Asian
people relative to White people. However, we could not take this into
account in the analyses as the data which could confirm this are not
available. Second, it is also possible that the clinical presentations
in this group may be such that general practitioners feel more inclined
to refer to memory clinic for a specialist assessment. We cannot
identify any other factors that might change the likelihood of Asian
people being referred compared with White people, regardless of the
number at risk, and there are no changes that we can identify in
referral methods or local clinical practices.

As far as we know, this is the first comprehensive study of BAME
referral rates at a county-wide level within secondary care services.
Although there have been other studies looking at secondary care memory
clinic use, they have been confined to district or borough levels, often
covering a few memory clinics and community mental health teams. This
study\'s strength is that it covers the whole of
Leicester/Leicestershire, which has multiple memory clinics and covers
all the community mental health teams in the county. By that nature, our
study is comprehensive and cover practices across an entire healthcare
system.

Reinforcing the findings from other UK studies, our findings also
suggest underuse of services by BAME groups within secondary care memory
services; however, the lower odds in the BAME group of being referred to
services may be explained by their lower ages at the time of referral.
The odds of getting referred to memory services are changing, with the
odds ratio favouring Asian people being referred in the latter years of
the sequence. However, this finding is likely to be owing to
underestimation of the population at risk for this group. This is an
important finding as Leicester has a very high BAME (chiefly Asian)
population in inner city areas and so arguably has sufficient BAME
populations to study trends in service use by BAME (chiefly Asian)
groups. A study such as ours helps in adding substantively to findings
in this area, where there have previously been contradictory reports.

Our findings reinforce the need for more in-depth research to identify
reasons for varying presentation of BAME patients in memory clinics and
mental health services across different regions and also across
different generations.

## Limitations {#sec4-1}

Despite the comprehensiveness of the study, the numbers in the BAME
population in Leicester are relatively small. It is possible that with
greater numbers and larger studies across regions, the outcome may be
different. Moreover, Leicester\'s geographical and historical
immigration patterns are unique and a similar study elsewhere may have
different findings. Consideration should also be given to the role of
the primary care physicians and the diversity of the ethnic backgrounds
they may come from, which could affect referral practices. A major
limitation is using the age data from the 2011 UK Census to adjust rates
beyond the year of the census. The population profile would have changed
since the 2011 UK Census data estimates, and comparing the referral
rates in the latter years with this data would limit its applicability,
but the 2011 UK Census data remains the last officially published
national estimates of UK population data. Also, an at-risk population
with an alternate cut-off age other than 60 years may result in
different findings.

There may be other reasons apart from age and ethnicity that could also
explain the underrepresentation of BAME patients in our sample.
Additional missing variables relate to physical morbidity and health
service use elsewhere (e.g. acute physical health services), traditional
cultural practices and reluctance in seeking help from Western services,
the role of the extended family system, and the perception of the
inevitability of dementia and it being seen as a part of normal aging
decay. The barriers these pose should be explored in further studies.

This study is limited by the way ethnicity is coded by NHS staff at the
point a referral is received. Further, the categories have been broadly
classified; not analysing further subtypes of ethnicity and its clinical
implications may be a limitation, but it was beyond the scope of this
study. Similarly, there are changing migration patterns and
intergenerational differences, which again are beyond the scope of this
study.

In light of these limitations, caution is needed in interpreting the
findings. BAME groups by their nature are heterogeneous and subject to
constant change, owing to cultural, immigration or political influences.
BAME groups may vary in different geographical regions and may be
affected by other factors, such as economic indicators and deprivation.
It is possible that the BAME groups in Leicester may be economically not
as deprived as in other areas such as the north of England, and the
pattern of referrals to memory services in such areas may be different.
Furthermore, there are intergenerational effects and as such a
repetition of this study in the coming decades may reveal different
findings.

## Future work {#sec4-2}

Future work is needed to carry out additional investigations into any
perceived barriers to help-seeking in BAME populations. We are currently
in the process of undertaking an NIHR-funded study to look at diagnostic
challenges and the severity of presentation of dementia in BAME
populations, and this will be reported in due course.

Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust provided support with access to
data and information. The University of Leicester supported with
intellectual and research support.

**Hari Subramaniam** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at The Evington
Centre, Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust, and Honorary Senior
Lecturer at the University of Leicester, UK. **Elizabeta B.
Mukaetova-Ladinska** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at The Evington
Centre, Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust, and Professor of Old Age
Psychiatry in the Department of Neuroscience, Psychology and Behaviour,
University of Leicester, UK. **Andrew Wilson** is a Professor of Primary
Care Research in the Department of Health Sciences, College of Life
Sciences, University of Leicester, UK. **John Bankart** is a Honorary
Associate Professor in Medical Statistics in the Department of Health
Sciences, College of Life Sciences, University of Leicester, UK.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors. This paper is part of an
independent research funded by the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR) under its Research for Patient Benefit programme (grant
PB-PG-0416-20019). The views expressed are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social
Care.

All authors contributed to the design of the study and production of the
manuscript. H.S. led the project and is guarantor of the paper. The
statistical analysis and calculations was led by J.B. E.B.M.-L. and A.W.
contributed to study design, interpreting the LPT data and the
statistical analyses and their interpretations.

[^1]: **Declaration of interest:** None.

[^2]: Reference category for ethnicity is Asian (coded as 0). Age is
    modelled as a linear and continuous variable, so for 2011, for every
    rise in age category (5-year bands), the odds of being referred
    increase by a factor of nearly 3. After Bonferroni correction for
    multiple comparisons (0.05/14), the adjusted significance level
    becomes 0.003, so all results for 2014--2017 are significant.
