---
abstract: |
  Each of the components of the biopsychosocial model of mental illness
  is important for understanding mental illness. Biological and genetic
  abnormalities have been demonstrated in major mental illnesses. These
  are leading to changes in our understanding of these conditions, as
  well as our understanding of the link between life events and mental
  illness.
author:
- Lindsey Isla Sinclair[^1]Correspondence to Lindsey Sinclair
  (<Lindsey.sinclair@bristol.ac.uk>)[^2]
date: 2020-06
institute:
- Department of Population Health Sciences, University of Bristol, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
subtitle: ": Commentary on... Why hasn\\'t neuroscience delivered for
  psychiatry?"
title: What neuroscience has already done for us
---

As readers will be well aware, the biopsychosocial model has underpinned
psychiatry for several decades.^1^ Each component of this model is
important for our understanding of mental illness. Professor Kingdon is
therefore correct to say in his interesting editorial that neuroscience
is unlikely to hold all of the answers to why people develop mental
disorders and when they occur in their lifetime.^2^ I challenge,
however, his assertion that 'biological changes have yet to be shown to
be relevant to the major mental disorders'.

# Brain imaging and schizophrenia {#sec1}

Taking schizophrenia as an example, there are clearly demonstrable
differences in the brains of individuals with schizophrenia compared
with those of controls. It was first shown in the 1970s that people with
schizophrenia had enlarged cerebral ventricles.^3^ Since then
abnormalities in both grey and white matter have been convincingly
demonstrated in the disorder.^4^ More sophisticated brain-imaging
techniques have allowed the discovery in recent years that differences
in brain volume are present even in medication-naive individuals with
first-episode psychosis.^5^ It seems increasingly likely that there are
differences in volume even before the at-risk mental state, although
this remains difficult to prove definitively.^6--8^

Recently developed scientific techniques such as the use of induced
pluripotent stem cells to create a 'cortex in a dish' (*aka* brain
organoids) have allowed tantalising insights into why these imaging
abnormalities may emerge. Using cells from individuals with
schizophrenia (some with a range of predisposing genetic abnormalities)
multiple studies have shown abnormalities such as impaired cellular
differentiation and synapse formation.^9--11^

These studies add to the emerging hypothesis that the brain of someone
at risk of schizophrenia differs from controls at an early stage and
that these differences increase as psychosis emerges. These
neuroscientific findings are a good fit with the long-standing findings
from more psychosocially focused research that differences can be seen
in childhood behaviour in those who later develop schizophrenia.^12--15^
They also suggest that, to develop better treatments for schizophrenia,
we need to look beyond compounds targeting dopamine receptors.

# Genetics in intellectual disability and depression {#sec2}

I would also challenge Professor Kingdon\'s assertion that no genetic
findings of use to the practising psychiatrist have been found for the
major mental illnesses. Genetic testing for copy number variants is
starting to form part of practice in intellectual disability
services.^16,17^ Using his example of depression he is correct to say
that the much vaunted candidate genes studied in the 1990s and 2000s
have not been replicated in later, large studies.^18^ However, more
recent, vastly better powered studies have produced findings of greater
potential use. The most recent genome-wide association study on
depression found 87 independent loci that were associated with
depression, with a startling lack of genes involved in the 5-HT
system.^19^ This may suggest that, although drugs acting on the 5-HT
system are effective in treating depression for many people,
disturbances in 5-HT are not the cause of depression. Findings such as
these are likely to be of great benefit in developing new treatments.

# Epigenetics and treatment targetting {#sec3}

Neuroscience can also help us to explain the link between life events,
which are frequently assessed in psychosocial research, and mental
health outcomes. For example, epigenetic studies have shown that
maternal behaviour influences the expression of genes, including those
involved in the glucocorticoid stress response.^20,21^ Because this work
was done in rats it was possible to demonstrate that this effect was not
genetic as it was abolished by cross-fostering with more affectionate
mothers.^21^ Childhood maltreatment such as physical abuse has long been
recognised as a risk factor for mental illness. Recent genetic and
epigenetic studies are helping us to understand why some people are more
resilient to the effects of this abuse than others.^22,23^ It has been
suggested by some authors that this information could be used to better
target childhood interventions, such as providing more intensive
interventions to those likely to be least resilient to the effects of
childhood maltreatment.

# Conclusions {#sec4}

Our understanding of mental health problems has started to change
radically in the past few decades. It is only 50 years since it was
widely believed that parents could be responsible for their offspring
developing schizophrenia.^24^ Within the past 50 years patients with
intractable epilepsy were cared for in psychiatric hospitals, something
that would now be unthinkable, and the parent--child relationship was
seriously considered as a cause of epilepsy.^25,26^

This improvement in understanding has the potential to reduce stigma, to
ultimately lead to new treatments and to provide patients with a better
understanding of what is happening to them and why. It is critical that
mental health researchers work together, rather than in methods-based
silos, to further improve our understanding of why and how patients
develop mental health problems.

L.I.S. has received research funding from BRACE, Dementias Platform UK,
the British Neuropathological Society and the David Telling Charitable
Trust.

**Lindsey Isla Sinclair**, MBBS, MSc, PhD, MRCPsych, is a Clinical
Research Fellow in psychiatry in the Department of Population Health
Sciences at the University of Bristol, UK. Her research is neuroscience
based and she is a Gatsby/RCPsych travelling fellowship awardee 2019.

[^1]: **Declaration of interest:** None.

[^2]: See this issue.
