==========================================================================================================================
Evaluation of the physical health of adolescent in-patients in generic and secure services: retrospective case-note review
==========================================================================================================================

Rebekah Carney
Shermin Imran
Heather Law
Siri Folstad
Sophie Parker [1]_Correspondence to Rebekah Carney
(rebekah.carney@gmmh.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2020-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To assess physical health needs of adolescent in-patients by routine
   monitoring. A retrospective analysis of case notes was conducted on a
   6-month intake to generic and secure adolescent mental health units
   in Greater Manchester, UK.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Fifty individuals were admitted (52% female, average age 15.84
   years). Diagnoses varied and 66% were prescribed medications before
   admission. All had a physical health assessment, which identified
   various physical health risk factors. Average body mass index was
   25.99 (range 15.8–44), and increased during in-patient treatment for
   84% of individuals who had their body mass recorded more than once. A
   total of 28% of individuals smoked. Lipids and prolactin levels were
   elevated across the sample.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   This evaluation strengthens the argument to optimise physical
   healthcare for adolescent in-patients and develop physical health
   interventions, particularly given that we observed elevated lipids
   and prolactin. Physical health and well-being may not be prioritised
   when assessing and managing young peoples' mental health, despite
   their increased vulnerability for comorbid conditions.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

People with serious mental illness (SMI) experience poor physical
health, resulting in an estimated loss of life of 30
years.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)–(n.d.b)` This is because of unhealthy lifestyles,
medication side-effects and inadequate physical
healthcare.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.c),(n.d.d)` It occurs early, often
preceding the onset of illness, thus offering the opportunity to
intervene to prevent comorbid conditions.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)` Young
people with mental health disorders are a vulnerable group requiring
additional physical healthcare.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.g)` Adolescent
in-patients are particularly at risk, given the ‘obesogenic’
environment.\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.i)` This refers to additional
restrictions and barriers to living a healthy lifestyle, such as reduced
opportunities to exercise, lack of control over dietary intake and
increased access to highly calorific snack foods. It may also be their
first contact with mental health services, and affords the opportunity
to intervene on an individual level through treatment access, and on a
wider scale. For example, ensuring the environment encourages a healthy
lifestyle and reduces the chance of iatrogenic harm. However, the
precise physical health needs of adolescent in-patients is still
unclear. A previous Australian study found that physical health problems
are common in adolescent mental health settings, yet often go undetected
and untreated.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` Previous evaluations suggest physical
healthcare is inconsistent across services, including in-patient units,
neurodevelopmental clinics and community
services.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)–(n.d.l)` Therefore, indicators of poor physical
health are missed. However, this issue has not been evaluated in UK
generic/secure adolescent in-patient services, where individuals present
with a range of disorders on a variety of medications. Therefore, we
aimed to evaluate the physical health needs of adolescent in-patients by
routine monitoring in services in Greater Manchester, UK.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

A retrospective analysis was conducted on electronic files of
individuals admitted to generic and secure adolescent in-patient units
over 6 months in Greater Manchester, UK (August 2018 to February 2019).

.. _sec1-1:

Setting
-------

The service is made up of units Junction 17 (generic) and Gardener (male
secure). Junction 17 is a 20-bed, mixed-gender, generic adolescent
in-patient service that provides various evidence-based treatments for
young people with complex mental health needs. The young people admitted
to the unit present with mental health symptoms that are of a severity
such that they are unable to keep themselves safe, or require intensive
treatment above and beyond the scope of community mental health teams.
Individuals have a range of diagnoses and mental health needs, yet all
are experiencing a high level of psychological distress. It also has a
day service to provide alternatives to in-patient care (patients
attending this were excluded from this evaluation). Referrals are
received via regional child and adolescent mental health services and
adult mental health services for adolescents aged 13–18 years with needs
that cannot be met safely within the community. They receive intensive
therapies and treatment in line with National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines and have access to a range of
psychological therapies (individual and group), occupational therapy
based activities and family interventions. The Gardener unit is a
specialized, ten-bed, national medium secure in-patient service for
adolescent males with complex health needs that cannot be met safely
within the community or by standard mental health services. It is one of
seven nationally commissioned services by National Health Service (NHS)
England for adolescents. Referrals are received from mental health teams
via a national referral process. There is also an onsite educational
facility for young people provided by the Bury Educational authority.
Multidisciplinary teams consist of consultant psychiatrists, psychiatric
trainees and colleagues from nursing, psychology, occupational therapy,
family therapy, dietetics, social work and advanced practitioners with
non-medical prescribing and physical health monitoring skills.

Although ethical approval and informed consent were not sought, the
evaluation was considered necessary by the clinical leads within the
trust who are responsible for approving audit and service evaluations.
The audit and evaluation team at Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS
Foundation Trust was informed of the rationale for this evaluation and
reviewed the data that was to be extracted, along with the clinicians'
approval. They approved this process and provided the research team with
a list of patient identification numbers to be used to extract the data.
No identifiable information was extracted from the patient files and the
process was conducted in line with the local guidance for service
evaluations.

.. _sec1-2:

Outcome measures
----------------

A structured audit tool was developed with Microsoft Excel. The
following demographics were collected: gender, ethnicity, employment and
living status, legal status and age on admission. Clinical variables
included primary diagnoses, length of stay, discharge status and
medication. Medication was recorded at two time points; the first was
upon admission (this included any pre-existing prescriptions before
their admission) and the second included medications prescribed at the
time of discharge, or any current medications if the individual remained
an in-patient at the time of the search. To maintain patient
confidentiality no identifiable information was recorded.

The Physical Health Improvement Tool (PHIT) is a standardised measure
developed within the service to collect physical health data for
individuals upon admission. It is an electronic document that enables
clinicians to record physical health assessments (blood tests,
electrocardiogram (ECG), body mass index (BMI)), body composition,
physical health observations, and lifestyle factors such as smoking
habits, alcohol use (Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test;
AUDIT\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`), substance use, physical activity and diet,
sexual health and referral to other services, e.g. sexual health
services. BMI was recorded on the PHIT tool shortly after admission;
some individuals also had their BMI recorded at subsequent time points,
which enabled change in BMIs to be calculated.

The standard procedure for physical health monitoring is set according
to the local physical health and well-being policy (Greater Manchester
West Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust Physical Health and Wellbeing
Policy, 2011).\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` The policy recommends a
PHIT\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` assessment within 24 h of admission, and all
individuals are to be offered appropriate lifestyle interventions in
line with NICE guidelines.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` The PHIT tool enables
clinicians to select whether individuals were offered lifestyle
interventions such as smoking cessation, diet and exercise advice, and
referral to drug, alcohol and sexual health services.

.. _sec1-3:

Data extraction and analysis
----------------------------

A manual search of patient files was conducted from 12 to 19 February
2019 for the previous 6-month intake across generic and secure services
(August 2018 to January 2019). Descriptive analysis was conducted with
SPSS version 22 for Windows (IBM Corp., 2013) and Microsoft Excel 2016
for Windows.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)`

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Sample
------

Fifty individuals were admitted between August 2018 and January 2019 to
the generic and secure services (52%, *n* = 26 females, 76% White
British; `Table 1 <#tab01>`__). The average age at admission was 15.84
(range 13–21, s.d. 1.46) years. Average length of stay was 49 (range
2–169, s.d. 44.1) days. Nine (18%) were detained under the Mental Health
Act 2007.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` Table 1Demographic informationIn-patient
admissions\ *n*\ %Junction
174590%Gardener510%GenderMale2448%Female2652%EthnicityWhite
British3876%Any other White background36%Other ethnic group,
Chinese12%Mixed, any other mixed background12%Other ethnic group, any
other12%Black/Black British, any other12%Black/black British,
African24%Employment statusEducation/training3570%Unemployed48%Not
recorded/stated/unknown1122%Living statusLives with parents510%Not
recorded4590%Legal status1983 MHA section 47/4912%1983 MHA section
3612%1983 MHA section 224%Informal714%None3468%Discharge outcomeRemains
current in-patient1734%Discharged3366%DiagnosesDepressive/mood
disorders918%Adjustment disorders816%Mixed anxiety and depressive
disorders714%Null/not recorded612%Autism/Asperger syndrome48%Attention
disturbances36%Psychotic disorders36%Conduct disorders36%Eating
disorders24%Anxiety disorders24%Obsessive–compulsive disorder12%Learning
difficulties12%Intentional feigning of symptoms12% [2]_

.. _sec2-2:

Diagnoses and medication
------------------------

Individuals had a range of diagnoses, primarily mood disorders (e.g.
moderate depressive episode) (*n* = 9, 18%), adjustment disorders
(*n* = 8, 16%) and mixed anxiety/depressive disorders (*n* = 7, 14%)
(see `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ for full list of diagnoses). Thirty-three
(66%) were prescribed medication on admission and 32 (64%) received
medication upon discharge or at the time of the search. A total of 38%
(*n* = 19) were prescribed antidepressants, 18% (*n* = 9) were
prescribed antipsychotics and 2% (*n* = 1) were prescribed anxiolytics
at discharge or time of the search. A range of non-psychotropic
medications were also prescribed to individuals for physical
comorbidities such as digestive complaints and dermatological issues
(see Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2019.68).

.. _sec2-3:

Physical health assessments
---------------------------

All new admissions received a physical health assessment, recorded on
the electronic records with the PHIT tool. However, the extent to which
the assessments were completed in full varied for each variable, and
some information was missing at the time of the search either because of
a delay in paperwork processing or patient or staff non-adherence.

.. _sec2-3-1:

Body composition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A large variation in BMI was observed at the initial physical health
assessment (range 15.8–44, *n* = 44, 88%). The average BMI fell in the
overweight category (mean = 25.99), and some individuals were morbidly
obese (for example, two individuals had BMI values as high as BMI = 44,
BMI = 35). Twenty-five (57%) individuals were within the healthy weight
range, whereas seven (16%) were overweight and eight (18%) were obese or
extremely obese. Twenty-six individuals had BMI recorded more than once;
84% of these individuals gained weight during this time (*n* = 21), with
an average increase in BMI of 1.33 (range 0.07–5.48).

Blood pressure ratings were recorded as an average of 126.9 mm Hg (range
92–159 mm Hg, *n* = 50) systolic and 74 mm Hg (range 46–100 mm Hg,
*n* = 50) diastolic.

.. _sec2-3-2:

Blood results and ECG recordings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A total of 70% (*n* = 35) of individuals had blood test results
available at the time of data collection (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). Average
levels of haemoglobin a1c, random plasma glucose and cholesterol were
within the healthy range for the general population; however, all
individuals had elevated levels of prolactin. During times of stress,
prolactin levels can reach 200 mmol/L in the general
population.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` In this sample, 50% had prolactin levels
even higher than this, displaying evidence of hyperprolactinaemia
(*m* = 253.1 mmol/L, *n* = 32). A total of 87% had elevated lipid levels
above the healthy average of 1 mmol/L (*m* = 1.45, range 0.8–3.5 mmol/L)
and 16% had elevated triglycerides (>1.7 mmol/L), ranging up to a
maximum value of 3.9 mmol/L and an average value of 1.13 mmol/L. This
can be a common side effect in relation to psychotropic medication, as
well as unhealthy diet.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` Additionally, none of the
individuals who had undergone an ECG required further intervention
(*n* = 30, 66%). Table 2Physical health assessmentsAverage, mean
(s.d.)RangeCompleted *n* (%)Not reported, *n* (%)PHITTime between
admission and PHIT assessment (days)\ `a <#tfn2_2>`__\ 0.35 (0.6)0–250
(100%)–Time between admission and physical exam (days)1 (1.74)0–723
(66%)17 (34%)Physical health assessmentsCardiovascular exam––30 (60%)15
(30%)Respiratory exam––31 (62%)14 (28%)Abdominal exam––30 (60%)14
(28%)Nervous system exam––22 (44%)14 (28%)ECG––30 (60%)3 (6%)Blood
resultsBlood test results––35 (70%)–Haemoglobin a1c (mmol/L)34.19
(3.80)24–4232 (64%)–Random plasma (mmol/L)4.65 (0.75)3–6.532
(64%)–Fasting plasma (mmol/L)––0 (0%)–Total random lipids (mmol/L)3.8
(0.76)2.3–5.633 (66%)–Random triglycerides (mmol/L)1.13 (0.66)0.4–3.932
(64%)–Random HDL lipids (mmol/L)1.45 (0.54)0.8–3.232 (64%)–Prolactin
(mu/L)253.1 (171.27)80–95532 (64%)–Body compositionBMI24.74
(6.69)15.8–44.0144 (88%)–Height (m)1.67 (0.09)1.43–1.8145 (90%)–Weight
(kg)68.58 (17.36)42.6–13546 (92%)–Blood pressure, systolic126.9
(13.2)92–15950 (100%)–Blood pressure, diastolic74 (9.3)46–10050
(100%)– [3]_ [4]_

.. _sec2-4:

Lifestyle
---------

.. _sec2-4-1:

Physical activity and diet
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As part of the PHIT assessment individuals were asked about physical
activity and diet (*n* = 49, 98%). Most individuals responded to
questions about consuming a diet high in fat and salt and whether they
ate a balanced diet by reporting that they practiced a ‘healthy balanced
diet, with no restrictions’. However, this assessment may have
contradicted other available information from some healthcare
professionals. For example, individuals were frequently described as
being overweight, consuming a poor diet and being inactive. Precise
physical activity measurements could not be obtained as individuals were
asked to self-report whether they lived a sedentary lifestyle, and to
describe their levels of activity. A total of 68% of individuals were
offered lifestyle interventions, including weight management, advice on
physical activity and diet.

.. _sec2-4-2:

Smoking and alcohol use
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Smoking rates were higher than the general population as 28% currently
smoked, compared with the average of 12% for young people in the
UK.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` The amount of cigarettes smoked daily varied
(*m* = 11, range 2–40, *n* = 7) and two individuals reported the age
they started smoking (9 and 11 years). Nine smokers used cigarettes
(64%) and three used roll-ups (21%). Six (42% smokers) individuals
received nicotine replacement therapy as part of their routine care
(`Table 3 <#tab03>`__). Table 3Lifestyle assessmentsPhysical lifestyle
assessmentYes, *n* (%)No, *n* (%)Not reported, *n* (%)Reports a diet
high in fat and salt–30 (60%)20 (40%)Lives a sedentary lifestyle8
(16%)42 (84%)–Aware of the risks of a sedentary lifestyle44 (88%)6
(12%)–Referral made to physical activity advice1 (2%)18 (36%)31
(62%)Smoking statusNon-smoker (history unknown)23 (46%)Current smoker14
(28%)Never smoked10 (20%)Ex-smoker3 (6%)Alcohol useCompleted, *n*
(%)Mean (s.d.)RangeUnits of alcohol consumed per week49 (98%)1.02
(4.44)0–30AUDIT total49 (98%)0.81 (2.40)0–14Frequency of alcohol
consumptionYes, *n* (%)Weekly (4 or more)1 (2%)Weekly (2–3 times)1
(2%)Monthly (2–4 times)4 (8%)Monthly or less3 (6%)Never40 (80%)Not
recorded1 (2%)Quantity of drinks on typical dayNone40 (80%)1 or 24 (8%)3
or 43 (6%)10 or more1 (2%)Not recorded2 (4%)Times consumed ≥6 (female)
or ≥8 (male) drinks on a single occasionDaily or almost daily1
(2%)Weekly1 (2%)Monthly0Less than monthly4 (8%)Never42 (84%)Not
recorded2 (4%)Substance useYes6 (12%)Yes previous3 (6%)No39 (78%)Not
recorded2 (4%) [5]_

As part of the initial PHIT assessment individuals were screened for
alcohol use with the AUDIT tool.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` Alcohol consumption was
low, and most individuals abstained (*n* = 40, 80%). Individuals were
also screened for substance use (*n* = 48, 96%). Six (12%) used
substances on admission and three (6%) used substances previously,
including cannabis, cocaine, ketamine, LSD and aerosols.

.. _sec2-4-3:

Sexual health
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sexual health was discussed with ten individuals. This included whether
they practiced safe sex (*n* = 10, 20%) or used contraception (*n* = 9,
18%). For females, relatively few files contained information on human
papillomavirus vaccination status (*n* = 9, 35%), whether they
experienced amenorrhoea (*n* = 6, 23%) or if they were pregnant
(*n* = 5, 19%; no pregnancies). For males, the presence of symptoms such
as erectile dysfunction were discussed with some individuals (*n* = 5,
21%). One referral was made to sexual health services.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The entire sample received routine physical health monitoring, and
multiple various health recordings were conducted as part of these
assessments. Individuals had a range of diagnoses, and displayed
evidence of physical health issues requiring some form of assessment,
monitoring and intervention. This is consistent with adult in-patient
populations. Individual risk factors for poor physical health included
high levels of obesity upon admission, subsequent weight gain, high
levels of self-reported sedentary behaviour, increased smoking rates and
some evidence of increased levels of lipids and prolactin. For some
young people prescription of medication with metabolic side-effects
included increased sense of hunger. Therefore, some of the antipsychotic
medications may also be a risk factor, although only 18% of young people
were prescribed antipsychotic medications in this cohort. Further
information is needed to establish the dietary intake of young people
and there is a need to introduce standardised measures for physical
activity and diet. This evaluation highlights the vulnerability of young
people admitted to in-patient wards and emphasises the opportunity this
presents for physical health to be monitored, assessed and treated
routinely. Although many risk factors for physical health may predate
the admission, contact with health professionals during an in-patient
stay affords the opportunity for healthcare provision.

.. _sec3-1:

Clinical implications of findings
---------------------------------

Our findings have important clinical implications for adolescent
in-patient settings.

.. _sec3-1-1:

The ‘obesogenic’ environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ‘obesogenic’ environment of in-patient wards has frequently been
discussed in the literature.\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.i)` This has been
attributed to higher energy intake through increased access to
high-calorie foods, reduced energy expenditure through inactivity and
fewer opportunities to engage in exercise.\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.i)` Our
evaluation adds further evidence to this as individuals had high BMI
values, which rapidly increased with duration of stay. Weight gain in
mental health services is often attributed to side-effects of
antipsychotic medication; however, only a small proportion of young
people were prescribed antipsychotics and those who were not also gained
weight.

Unhealthy lifestyles were often reported by the clinicians. Although
many received advice on living a healthy lifestyle, research has
consistently shown that advice alone is insufficient to result in
meaningful behaviour change.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)–(n.d.u)` Clinicians should
be aware of using proactive approaches to implementing lifestyle
interventions and encouraging uptake of routinely offered physical
health activities, such as occupational therapy groups (e.g. walking).
People with SMI experience significant barriers to living healthily,
such as low mood and anxiety, poor motivation, lack of social support,
reduced opportunity, lack of knowledge and skills, financial barriers
and employment difficulties.\ :sup:`(n.d.v),(n.d.w)` This group also has
additional restrictions of being on secure and adolescent in-patient
wards, living in a contained environment with relatively reduced access
to facilities and outdoor opportunities. Therefore, interventions taking
these additional barriers into account need to be explored, and these
difficulties should be considered when attempting to promote health and
well-being in this setting.

Because of the limited data available on food intake on the in-patient
wards, we were unable to assess the adolescents' diet. At the time of
this evaluation, routine dietary assessments were not yet conducted upon
intake. This is an important and valuable opportunity to collect
information on young people's eating habits and identify appropriate
interventions to promote healthier diets. Systematic ways of recording
food choices and dietary intake will need to be developed to facilitate
this process. This could include simple charting of meal options on
patient files, and conducting routine diet assessments with individuals,
such as 24-hour recall to include any other foods consumed outside of
regular mealtimes. Monitoring of diet will allow appropriate
interventions to be targeted to those who are most in need to prevent
the likelihood of weight gain.

.. _sec3-1-2:

Other physical health issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Many patients were prescribed medications to alleviate physical health
problems upon admission. There was also evidence of dysregulated blood
metabolites and elevated levels of prolactin in over half of this
sample, which is common in people with SMI.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)`
Hyperprolactinaemia can have serious consequences, such as hormonal
disturbances causing sexual dysfunction, facial hair and acne,
disruption to usual pubertal development in young people and increased
risk of developing cancers such as breast
cancer.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)–(n.d.y)` This is addressed appropriately within
the service and monitoring of bloods is conducted routinely. It is
important for clinicians and healthcare teams to maintain routine
monitoring of blood metabolites and endocrine markers as there are often
no obvious symptoms to indicate individuals are at risk. Ensuring blood
tests are conducted routinely, regardless of medication or diagnosis, is
important. Additionally, information about sexual health screening was
variable, and at the time of the search only 10% had discussions about
their sexual health. This is a common issue across adolescent services.
For example, a previous review found that only 37% of young people had
sexual health screening upon admission to an in-patient
unit.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` This represents a missed opportunity for
management of sexual health in a high-risk group.

.. _sec3-1-3:

Importance of monitoring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We add to the growing evidence that physical health monitoring in mental
healthcare is necessary, particularly for
adolescents.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)–(n.d.l),(n.d.aa)–(n.d.ab)` Previous research
also shows that metabolic abnormalities are common in adolescents
receiving mental healthcare, but often go unnoticed and
untreated.\ :sup:`(n.d.f),(n.d.j),(n.d.l),(n.d.t)` Individuals admitted
to generic and secure mental health wards have a wide range of
difficulties and non-specific mental health needs, and may or may not be
prescribed psychotropic medication. It is therefore important to develop
clear guidelines and policies that focus on adolescents in mental
healthcare, regardless of their diagnosis or physical health status.
Senior clinicians should acknowledge this when developing the standard
operating procedures for their units and ensure that physical health is
a fundamental part of individuals care when staying on adolescent
in-patient units.

.. _sec3-2:

Recommendations and future work
-------------------------------

There is a pervasive need to explore health interventions for this group
and identify the best way to deliver these within in-patient settings.
Future work should focus on developing physical interventions to reduce
the cardiometabolic risk associated with the in-patient environment.
Hayes *et al* reviewed non-pharmacological interventions delivered on
in-patient wards and found psychosocial programmes, such as
therapy-based activities, family interventions and mindfulness-based
activities, were common.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` Yet, few studies have been
conducted offering physical health interventions within this setting, or
even those across the general population, despite the benefits of
exercise for adolescents.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)` Further, a recent review
showed that despite being recommended by NICE, lifestyle interventions
are not consistently offered across mental health trusts in the
UK.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` Standardised guidance also needs to be developed to
guide clinicians and ensure adolescents are receiving high-quality
physical healthcare regardless of diagnosis and in-patient status. This
includes introducing formal assessments of diet and physical activity to
better quantify adolescents' needs. Ensuring access to interventions
alongside continued monitoring of physical heath is imperative to
improving outcomes for adolescents.

.. _sec3-3:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

To date, this is the first evaluation of adolescent in-patient generic
and secure services that assesses routine monitoring of physical health.
The findings carry significant implications for service development.
This work has only been made possible because of the high levels of work
happening within the unit to record all of this data, and the importance
placed on ensuring the physical health assessments are conducted for all
young people on admission to the units. However, this clinical audit
taken from a cross-section of this population is only representative of
one specific area, and the trans-diagnostic nature of the service means
that physical health issues identified may change over time given the
rapid turnover of young people, particularly within generic in-patient
services. However, it is likely that the issues and difficulties
identified here will be prevalent across mental health trusts. There is
potential that some assessments identified as missing had indeed been
conducted, and the data may have been uploaded after the files were
searched. There is also potential for the data to exist in paper format
within the service, or exist elsewhere in the electronic files rather
than the physical health tool, thus resulting in some missing data. As
with all routinely collected measures, they are subject to human error
and reliant on accuracy of the clinicians completing the forms.

In conclusion, this evaluation strengthens the argument for optimising
physical healthcare for adolescent in-patients. Adolescents admitted to
generic and secure in-patient services show increased cardio-metabolic
risk in the form of weight gain, obesity and dysregulated blood
metabolites. We suspect that our findings are not unique to this unit
and there is a need to consider physical health in adolescent in-patient
services across the UK. There is a need to implement standardized
routine monitoring guidelines for physical healthcare for adolescent
in-patients, given their increased vulnerability, and also develop
appropriate interventions in collaboration with young people to tackle
the physical health disparities experienced by this group.

We acknowledge the work of all the clinicians and staff at the
adolescent generic and secure in-patient services at Greater Manchester
Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust to which this service evaluation
would not have been made possible.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2019.68.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

This research has received no specific grants from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit agencies.

The data included in this manuscript was extracted from routinely
collected data from within the service. The data is available on secure
NHS servers and, for the purpose of this study, no identifiable
information was collected.

**Rebekah Carney** is a Research Associate at the Youth Mental Health
Research Unit Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust; and
Research Associate with the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services,
Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Shermin
Imran** is a Lead Consultant Psychiatrist with the Child and Adolescent
Mental Health Services, Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation
Trust, UK. **Heather Law** is a Trial Manager at the Youth Mental Health
Research Unit, Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust,
UK. **Siri Folstad** is a Research Assistant at the Faculty of Biology,
Medicine & Health, University of Manchester, UK. **Sophie Parker** is a
Clinical Psychologist and Director at the Youth Mental Health Research
Unit Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.ad.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.

.. [2]
   MHA, Mental Health Act 2007.

.. [3]
   PHIT, Physical Health Improvement Tool; ECG, electrocardiogram; HDL,
   high-density lipoprotein; BMI, body mass index.

.. [4]
   Excluding two extreme values of 7 and 20 days.

.. [5]
   AUDIT, Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test.
