===========================================================================================
The Parliamentary Scholar Scheme: a way to engage doctors in healthcare policy and politics
===========================================================================================



Jen Perry
Paul Lomax
Fiona Taylor
Susan Howson
Kathleen McCurdy [1]_

:Correspondence: Jen Perry
(jenperry@doctors.org.uk)

:date: 2020-06

:Abstract:
   The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Parliamentary Scholar Scheme
   gives higher trainees in psychiatry the opportunity to spend 1 day a
   week in the House of Lords working alongside a peer with an interest
   in health. This article describes the work of the House of Lords and
   Parliament using examples from the experiences of 2017–2018 scholars
   and outlines ways doctors can get more involved in policy and
   politics.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Royal College of Psychiatrists set up its Parliamentary Scholar
Scheme in 2017 with Professor the Baroness Hollins, who is a cross-bench
peer in the House of Lords. Professor the Baroness Hollins, a former
Consultant Psychiatrist and College President, spends much of her time
in the Lords campaigning to improve services for people with learning
disabilities, which is one of her specialist areas of interest. The
Parliamentary Scholar Scheme, now supported also by the BMA Foundation,
gives higher trainees working in psychiatry the opportunity to spend 1
day a week, as a special interest session, in the House of Lords working
alongside a peer with an interest in mental health. Peers on the scheme
come from across the political spectrum; in the 2017–2018 cohort there
were peers from the Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat parties as
well as from the cross-benches.

The scheme gives trainee psychiatrists hands-on experience of working in
the field of health policy as well as wider politics. The psychiatric
higher trainee curriculum requires the development of ‘effective
leadership skills’ and ‘an understanding of organisational policy and
practice at a national and local level in the wider health and social
care economy’.\ :sup:`1` The scheme clearly allows participants to
develop such skills but it aims to go further – to enable the trainees
to develop skills in influencing the mental health agenda.

There are other schemes available to support trainees to develop
leadership skills, for example the National Medical Directors Fellowship
Scheme\ :sup:`2` and the Darzi fellowship scheme.\ :sup:`3` However, as
far as we are aware, the Parliamentary Scholar Scheme is the first
programme to give trainees experience of working in the House of Lords.
Given the current recruitment and retention problems within the mental
health workforce,\ :sup:`4` this scheme is certainly something that
makes psychiatry training stand out from other specialties and may help
encourage more doctors into the profession.

This article aims to guide readers through the work of Parliament,
mainly focusing on the House of Lords, using examples from our
experiences as 2017–2018 scholars.

.. _sec1:

What the House of Lords and Parliament do
=========================================

The UK Parliament is made up of the House of Commons, House of Lords and
the monarch. Members of the House of Lords, known as peers, are
appointed by the Queen (the monarch) on the advice of the Prime Minister
and are unelected. The House of Lords has three main roles: making laws,
debating public policy and holding government to account. Members of
Parliament (MPs) have the power to overrule the Lords, but the Lords can
still be very influential in terms of making/changing legislation and
policy.

.. _sec2:

Members of the House of Lords
=============================

Peers are often experts with experience from outside of Parliament, for
example, the peers we worked with had experience of working in
psychiatry, nursing, surgery, trade unions and the civil service. Most
are ‘life peers’, although 92 (at the time of writing) sit by virtue of
a hereditary title. Life peers are appointed by the monarch on the
advice of the Prime Minister to serve for life; the title is not
transferable when they die.\ :sup:`5` Peers are nominated either by
their political parties or by the House of Lords Appointments
Commission, which recommends people for appointment as non
party-political life peers.\ :sup:`6`

.. _sec3:

Work of the House of Lords
==========================

.. _sec3-1:

Making and changing laws (legislation)
--------------------------------------

Bills (draft laws) are introduced to Parliament and then repeatedly
reviewed, debated and amended by both the Lords and the Commons. There
is a process known as ‘ping-pong’ where the Bill goes back and forth
between each House as amendments are made and agreed or rejected. When
the Bill is agreed by both Houses it is given Royal Assent and becomes
an Act of Parliament.\ :sup:`8` An example of a Bill that was going
through Parliament while the 2017–2018 scholars were in post was the
Mental Health Units (Use of Force) Bill, otherwise known as ‘Seni's
Law’. The Bill was proposed by Steve Reed, MP for Croydon North,
following the death of one of his constituents, Seni Lewis, in 2010.
Seni died aged 23, after being restrained on a mental health ward by 11
police officers. The Bill started in the Commons, went to the Lords,
amendments were considered in both Houses and then it became an Act in
2018. The new legislation means that mental health units will have to
take steps, including better training for staff, to reduce the use of
force against patients. Robust data on the use of force will be
collected and police will have to wear body cameras when called to
mental health settings; recordings from these cameras can be used in
evidence.\ :sup:`9,10`

Another example is the Mental Capacity (Amendment) Bill, which is now
enacted\ :sup:`11` and lays out a new legal framework to replace
Deprivation of Liberty Safeguards. Some of the 2017–2018 scholars were
able to research the framework, liaise with experts and organisations
with interests in the area, and contribute to topics such as the role of
care home managers in overseeing the safeguards and the central
importance of a person's wishes and feelings when decisions are made
about them. Many peers spoke on this Bill as it passed through the House
of Lords and some of the 2017–2018 scholars were able to support their
peers in drafting speeches using their own experience of working in
mental health services and research briefings.

One peer put down an amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill when it passed
through the House of Lords in 2018. The amendment focused on the mutual
recognition of professional qualifications, which is about ensuring that
professional qualifications (e.g. medical degrees) continue to be
recognised in the EU and UK after Brexit. The 2017–2018 scholar attached
to this peer undertook some research in this area using a briefing from
the Parliamentary library and liaising with relevant organisations, such
as the British Medical Association (BMA) and legal firms to seek their
perspectives. The scholar then used this information to draft a speech
for their peer for the debate on the Bill.\ :sup:`12`

.. _sec3-2:

Debating public policy
----------------------

Alongside debates on specific legislation there are also debates on
topical issues and public policy. It is during these that members are
able to give speeches, giving their opinions and arguments and the
relevant government minister has to respond. Members may speak because
they have a particular interest in the area of debate or particular
expertise. The 2017–2018 scholars had the opportunity to contribute to a
variety of speeches for their peers on topics related to mental health,
for example for debates on access to mental health services for people
from Black and minority ethnic groups\ :sup:`13` and to debates on wider
healthcare system issues such as long-term NHS sustainability and global
nursing.\ :sup:`14,15`

.. _sec3-3:

Checking and challenging the work of the government (scrutiny)
--------------------------------------------------------------

.. _sec3-3-1:

Select committees
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

MPs and peers hold the government to account. One way of doing this is
through the select committees run in the Commons and the Lords. The most
important one for health is the House of Commons Health and Social Care
Select Committee, which conducts inquiries on a range of topics. Anyone
can submit a proposal to a select committee and, as a group of scholars,
we submitted a proposal for an inquiry into the state of drug and
alcohol services in England. An inquiry we followed during our time in
Parliament focused on the impact of Brexit on medicines, medical devices
and substances of human origin. Experts (including doctors), interested
organisations and members of the public can submit written evidence to
inquiries, for example in this one, the BMA and the Academy of Medical
Royal Colleges both submitted evidence. The committee also took oral
evidence from a range of expert witnesses, including the Rt Hon Jeremy
Hunt (the then Secretary of State for Health and Social Care) and Dr Ian
Hudson (Chief Executive, Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency), which some of the 2017–2018 scholars were able to watch. The
committee used this evidence to write a report with a series of
recommendations. For example, one of the recommendations was that the
government should ‘produce a comprehensive list of all the issues
relating to the supply of medicines, medical devices and substances of
human origin which require contingency planning for the UK leaving the
EU […] with evidence that plans are in place to address identified risks
to patients’.\ :sup:`17` The government has to respond to each published
select committee report and to consider its recommendations, which may
or may not influence government policy. The government published its
response to this Brexit report in July 2018 and in answer to the
recommendation above it said, ‘At this stage we do not have plans to
publish a comprehensive list of the issues relating to medicines,
medical devices and substances of human origin. We will continue to be
as transparent as possible, but whilst we are engaged in on-going
negotiations it is vitally important that we manage information
carefully in order to not disadvantage the UK's position’.\ :sup:`18`

.. _sec3-3-2:

Written and oral questions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Members also hold the government to account by asking oral or written
questions that the government is required to formally answer on the
record. Questions on health and social care are answered by the
Ministers for Health and Social Care. At the time of writing, Matt
Hancock MP is Secretary of State for Health and Social Care. However,
there are other government health ministers to be aware of, for example
Jackie Doyle Price MP is currently the Parliamentary Under Secretary of
State for Mental Health, Inequalities and Suicide Prevention and, in the
Lords, the Parliamentary Under Secretary of State (Lords) for Health is
Baroness Blackwood. As part of their role, the 2017–2018 scholars
drafted oral and written questions that could be used by their peers to
put to House of Lords ministers. Ideas for questions came from recently
published reports, government announcements and stories in the media.

Oral questions are posed each day in both Houses. In the House of Lords,
there is a 30 min slot for four oral questions, which peers have to
submit in advance. The peer stands up for their slot and puts their
question to the minister for the appropriate department, who has to
respond; there is then time for other peers to ask the minister
supplementary questions on that topic. The 2017–2018 scholars also
identified upcoming oral questions in the chamber that could be of
interest to their peers and drafted supplementary questions to be used
in the brief debate to further clarify or challenge the government's
position. An example of an oral social care question asked by one of the
peers we were working for during our time on the scheme was ‘To ask her
Majesty's Government what steps they are taking to support (a) the care
sector, and (b) those receiving care, in the light of the retrospective
change in guidance on the application of the national minimum wage to
sleep-in shifts for care workers’.\ :sup:`19` This question was asked
following a widely publicised media story about sleep-in carers being
able to claim minimum wage for overnight shifts and was answered by Lord
O'Shaughnessy, the then Parliamentary Under Secretary of State (Lords)
for Health.

Peers and MPs can submit written questions to government departments
that ministers have to respond to within certain time frames. Peers can
table up to six questions each day and can expect an answer within 14
days. For example, when the report by the Parliamentary and Health
Services Ombudsman on NHS eating disorder services\ :sup:`20` was
published, one of the shadowed peers asked a series of questions about
improvements that could be made to medical training and funding, one of
which was, ‘To ask Her Majesty's Government, following the conclusions
of the Parliamentary and Health Services Ombudsman, *Ignoring the
alarms: how NHS eating disorder services are failing patients* (HC 634),
published on 6 December, what assessment they have made of the
recommendations set out in that report; and what discussions they have
held with the General Medical Council on reviewing the eating disorders
training for junior doctors’. This was answered by Lord
O'Shaughnessy.\ :sup:`21`

.. _sec3-4:

Other work of peers
-------------------

All-party parliamentary groups (APPGs) are informal cross-party groups
that have no official status within Parliament. They are run by and for
members of the Commons and Lords. Many choose to involve individuals and
organisations from outside Parliament in their administration and
activities. Examples are the Acquired Brain Injury APPG, the Mental
Health APPG and the Psychology APPG.\ :sup:`22` The 2017–2018 scholars
were able to attend meetings and contribute to the work of some of the
APPGs. In 2017–2018 the APPG for Mental Health was chaired by Helen
Whateley MP and its secretariat was provided by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists and Rethink. Some of the 2017–2018 scholars had the
opportunity to work on the APPG for Mental Health's inquiry into the
Five Year Forward View for Mental Health.\ :sup:`23` One of the scholars
went on a visit to see some of the new services set by Central and North
West London NHS Foundation Trust as a result of the Five Year Forward
View and to understand the challenges and opportunities involved. We
helped with reviewing evidence and recommendations for the report using
our clinical expertise.

Day to day, most peers have meetings with a wide range of people, such
as politicians, representatives from charities, think-tanks and NHS
organisations, journalists and lobbyists. The 2017–2018 scholars had the
opportunity to shadow peers and also contribute to some of these
meetings. There are always events taking place in Westminster, for
example we were able to accompany our peers to events such as the launch
of the report by the Lancet Commission on Liver Disease, the launch of
the Schizophrenia Commission report and the Parliamentary Conference on
Mindfulness.

Peers also receive correspondence from a wide variety of sources,
including members of the public, interested organisations and other
politicians. The 2017–2018 scholars were able to help their peers with
responding to enquiries and drafting letters.

.. _sec4:

The role of the College
=======================

Our links with the Royal College of Psychiatrists were invaluable, and
the advice from its Public Affairs team enabled us to navigate what can
be a complex parliamentary process. They were also able to support us
with our parliamentary research on specific topics related to mental
health. More broadly, the Public Affairs team works with
parliamentarians, arm's-length bodies and other political stakeholders
to campaign and influence mental healthcare. It sends out written
briefings to parliamentarians on mental health topics which are coming
up in debates, oral questions or Bills to give an overview of the topic
but also to give the College's perspective (for example with the Mental
Capacity Bill). Team members regularly meet with politicians face to
face about different mental health issues. The Public Affairs team,
alongside Rethink, coordinates the APPG on Mental Health and helps to
plan their activities and inquiries for the year. The team also sends
out a weekly email to College members entitled ‘Political Week’, which
gives an overview of any mental health topics that have come up in
Parliament.

.. _sec5:

What we learnt and skills we developed
======================================

Our 1-year scholarship was an exciting and unique opportunity to learn
more about the interface between politics and healthcare and how
Parliament works. As trainees it gave us a better understanding of the
wider mental health system and its interactions with government. We
developed skills in leadership, policy analysis, speech writing and
influencing the mental health agenda, all of which will be helpful for
us as consultant psychiatrists. Within the Healthcare Leadership
Model,\ :sup:`24` these skills correspond to the ‘connecting our
service’ domain, as we were able to develop an understanding of how
different services connect to the broader health landscape, how complex
relationships form and how decisions are made. It also corresponds to
the ‘influencing for results’ domain, as we were able to develop our
communication skills and our ability to influence people.

During our time, we were able to meet with a number of MPs and peers who
are influential in healthcare to learn more about how they got into
politics, their day-to-day work and what their priorities are. In
return, we were able to share with them our experiences of working in
front-line mental health services. Some of us took our peers to visit
our clinical teams so that they could get an in-depth understanding of
what it is like to work in psychiatry.

All of us have been able to share our learning with colleagues through
teaching sessions, blogs and conference presentations. At present there
are no objective data to examine the impact of the scheme, but this
could be gathered after further cohorts of scholars have completed the
placement.

.. _sec6:

How doctors can get involved
============================

There are lots of different ways doctors can get involved in healthcare
policy and politics. One way is to join a political party, which will
allow you to develop an understanding of the political system and to
become politically active. You can write to your local MP, or a peer in
the House of Lords with an interest in your issue. Politicians'
interests are listed on their Parliament webpage. The select committees
regularly run inquiries and, as a doctor, you can submit evidence,
propose a topic or go to watch the evidence sessions. You can follow
what goes on in the Houses of Commons and Lords by reading Hansard
(https://hansard.parliament.uk), watching Parliament TV
(https://www.parliamentlive.tv/Commons) or listening to the BBC Radio 4
programme ‘Today in Parliament’
(https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qtqd), which provides a 30 min
summary of the day's events.

If you have an interest in a particular topic you can campaign for it on
social media, write blogs or articles for newspapers or go on TV or
radio. The difficulties with the revised NHS junior doctor contract a
few years back led to many more doctors becoming politically active.
There are also roles for doctors in organisations that lobby government,
for example the BMA. Many medical Royal Colleges have a policy and/or
parliamentary committee which will influence policy and you may be able
to get involved with this. The Royal College of Psychiatrists produces a
weekly political update that you can sign up for. This will keep you up
to date with forthcoming parliamentary business.

Of course, if you are a psychiatry higher trainee you can apply to the
Parliamentary Scholar Scheme, which (at the time of writing) is in its
third year. It is advertised on the Royal College of Psychiatrists
website usually in the spring.

.. _sec7:

Conclusions
===========

Our participation in the 2017–2018 Parliamentary Scholar Scheme was a
unique opportunity for us as trainee psychiatrists to learn more about
healthcare policy and Parliament. It has enabled us to develop skills in
leadership and influencing that will stand us in good stead for our
future careers as consultant psychiatrists.

The idea of the medical profession turning to soft power to influence
policy has been proposed recently.\ :sup:`25` Our experience of working
in Parliament has demonstrated the many areas where policy is made,
challenged and communicated. The scope for those with first-hand
knowledge of the healthcare system to have input into the areas where
policy is influenced is there, but it requires knowledge of the system
and a willingness to suggest solutions, not just to criticise the end
product.

We thank Olivia Clark, Jonathan Blay, Rebecca Couper (Royal College of
Psychiatrists) and Professor the Baroness Hollins and the other peers
associated with the scheme.

We confirm that we meet all four ICMJE criteria for authorship. J.P.,
P.L., F.T. and K.M. designed, drafted and revised the article. S.H.
designed and revised the article.

**Jen Perry** is a consultant psychiatrist with Camden and Islington
Mental Health Trust, London, UK; **Paul Lomax** is a specialty trainee
with South West London and St George's Mental Health NHS Trust, UK;
**Fiona Taylor** is a consultant psychiatrist with Camden and Islington
Mental Health Trust, UK; **Susan Howson** is a consultant psychiatrist
with Devon Partnership Trust, Exeter, UK; **Kathleen McCurdy** is a
consultant forensic psychiatrist with Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust,
Dartford, UK. All five authors were higher trainees on the 2017–2018
Parliamentary Scholar Scheme.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** J.P. continues to work as a
   parliamentary researcher in the Houses of Parliament 1 day a week.
   S.H. received funding from the Royal College of Psychiatrists to pay
   for travel expenses to enable participation in the scheme.
