======================
Clozapine and COVID-19
======================



Edward Silva
Siobhan Gee
Shubulade Smith
Fiona Gaughran
:Date: 2020-08


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The COVID-19 pandemic presents psychiatrists prescribing clozapine with
complexities over and above the general difficulties already described
among Chinese psychiatric in-patients.\ :sup:`1` Some common initiation
effects of clozapine: isolated fever, tachycardia or a mildly raised
C-reactive protein\ :sup:`2` may be difficult to differentiate from
intercurrent infection, including COVID-19.\ :sup:`3` Other laboratory
anomalies may add to confusion. Given COVID-19 infection deaths that are
not the result of acute respiratory distress syndrome are often from
fulminant myocarditis, for which a raised troponin is a poor prognostic
feature, troponin levels taken routinely during clozapine initiation
will need to be interpreted carefully. However, while leucopenia is a
reported blood dyscrasia with COVID-19, to date neither neutropenia nor
agranulocytosis is.

In the absence of an antibody test for COVID-19\ :sup:`4` we rely on
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction COVID-19 testing, which
does not have 100% sensitivity in the initial phase of infection, so a
single negative test does not exclude infection. Once an antibody test
becomes available it will be a useful addition to pre-clozapine
investigations.

Comorbidities such as diabetes, hypertension, respiratory illness and
cardiovascular disease are very common in patients taking clozapine but
are associated with adverse outcomes in the event of COVID-19 infection,
including increased mortality rates. It is not known whether the
antibody deficiency described in patients taking clozapine will further
compromise this vulnerable group.\ :sup:`5` These are not, however,
indications to stop clozapine, which itself has serious adverse
consequences. Rather patients need clear advice and, if possible,
assistance regarding self-isolation and other precautions advised.
Obesity and sleep apnoea may also contribute to poor outcomes and
continuous positive airway pressure treatment, which can be an
aerosol-generating procedure,\ :sup:`6` may be a risk to staff.

Individuals already established on clozapine and managed in the
community may require changes to their management. In view of
recommendations for social distancing, the use of clozapine clinics for
routine blood testing should be reconsidered. Instead, blood tests may
be better performed in patient's homes, with staff using personal
protective equipment and at, or near, the maximum intervals permitted.
While the standard blood monitoring frequencies are at weekly (weeks
1–18), fortnightly (weeks 19–52) and four-weekly (over 52 weeks)
intervals, clozapine can still be dispensed and administered with
satisfactory monitoring at 14-, 21- and 42-day intervals, respectively.

Inevitably many patients taking clozapine will present with flu-like
symptoms. An urgent full blood count will be required to exclude
neutropenia with appropriate action. Many, however, will have another
cause and so the evolving National Health Service recommendations
regarding isolation and hopefully testing for COVID-19 infection should
be followed. The combination of flu-like symptoms, chest pain and
shortness of breath will, as community prevalence of COVID-19 increases,
be much more likely to be because of COVID-19 than clozapine-induced
myocarditis, except perhaps within the first 60 days of
treatment.\ :sup:`7` However, such a presentation will still need
investigation and cessation of clozapine may on occasion be required as
well as urgent general medical assistance. Careful documentation of
symptom profiles and investigations will aid subsequent decisions
regarding clozapine re-challenge. In the event of COVID-19 infection the
acute-phase reaction may result in reduced activity of cytochrome P450
1A2, raising clozapine levels and so an urgent trough clozapine level
will be needed with a reduction in clozapine dose if required. This
effect may be amplified if hospital admission is indicated necessitating
abrupt change in smoking habits.

In summary; COVID-19 presents us with extreme difficulties regards
clozapine initiation, the risks of COVID-19 are insufficient to justify
stopping clozapine, an action which presents its own serious problems,
precautions must be taken now to help protect our high-risk patients as
COVID-19 infection may jeopardise both their physical and mental health.

F.G. has received honoraria for advisory work and lectures or continuing
medical education activity support from Roche, BMS, Lundbeck, Otsuka,
Janssen and Sunovion, is a collaborator on an NHS Innovations project
co-funded by Janssen and has a family member with professional links to
Lilly and GSK, including shares. E.S. has received speaker fees from
Janssen and Novartis.
