=======================================================================================================================
Reviewing the burden of comorbidity in patients receiving specialist in-patient treatment for drug and alcohol problems
=======================================================================================================================



Alice Bradley
Amy Martin [1]_

:Correspondence: Alice C. Bradley
(alice.bradley@nhs.net)

:date: 2020-08

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To compare and contrast the burden of comorbidity in a population
   receiving in-patient treatment for substance misuse with that of a
   cohort admitted to the same unit 4 years previously. The Charlson
   Comorbidity Index (CCI) was used to quantify patients' comorbidity
   and predict 10-year survival.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   There was a marked reduction in predicted 10-year survival: in 2014,
   22% of patients had a predicted 98% chance of 10-year survival,
   whereas only 2% in the 2018 cohort had a predicted 98% chance.
   Additionally, in 2014 only 9% of patients had a <20% 10-year
   predicted survival chance, whereas 28% in 2018 had a predicted
   10-year survival chance of <20%. In this time, funding for services
   was cut by 23% and the 12-bed unit was reduced to 8 beds. This
   resulted in an increase in the average waiting time from 30 to 65
   days. In 2018, more patients were admitted for alcohol
   detoxification, rising from 79% to 93% of admissions. Chronic
   respiratory disease remains the most prominent comorbidity; however,
   there is also an increase in the percentage of patients with liver
   disease.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   In-patient substance misuse units are known to serve individuals with
   complex illnesses. With service funding cuts, subsequent bed
   reductions and increased waiting times, this complexity is
   increasing, with a considerably higher burden of comorbidity. The
   consequential increased mortality risk highlights the ongoing need
   for adequate community and in-patient services with integrated care
   of mental and physical health alongside social work.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

It is widely accepted that there are social, psychological and physical
harms associated with chronic substance misuse.\ :sup:`1` It has also
been identified that drug and alcohol misuse are independent risk
factors for physical illness in people with pre-existing mental
illness.\ :sup:`2` Furthermore, the World Health Organization (WHO)
found alcohol consumption to be the third highest risk factor, in
high-income countries, for disease burden, superseded only by smoking
and hypertension.\ :sup:`3` Specialist in-patient units offer drug and
alcohol detoxification and stabilisation to individuals with complex
problems, whose substance misuse needs cannot be met in the community.
Despite this, there have been significant funding cuts for alcohol and
drug prevention, treatment and support services in Scotland in recent
years.\ :sup:`4` This study seeks to describe and evaluate the burden of
comorbidity carried by a current population of in-patients in a
substance misuse unit in Edinburgh. It was anecdotally noted among the
staff of this unit that in-patients were requiring more medical
intervention. We therefore sought to compare the disease burden of a
patient cohort in 2018 with that of a 2014 cohort in order to identify
any developments in the prevalence or character of comorbidity carried
by this population. These data provide invaluable insight into a
high-risk population and aim to recognise any areas of developing trends
within this group, to identify possible areas for intervention in the
future.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

We conducted a retrospective study of in-patients over a 6-month period
in 2018. We sought to explore the population's characteristics and
compare these with the data collected by Mogford & Lawrence for their
primary study conducted in the same unit in 2014.\ :sup:`5` To quantify
comorbidity, cumulative disease burden scales are used. These are
calculated by attributing scores to specific diseases, health behaviours
and medications, which are weighted according to their impact on
morbidity and mortality. These scores are combined to assign an overall
index of comorbidity, which can be used to compare, contrast and track
change in individual patients or patient groups. The Charlson
Comorbidity Index (CCI) has previously been used across a wide range of
clinical settings and a variety of patient populations, including the
2014 cohort. To allow a direct comparison of patient cohorts, the same
CCI was implemented to quantify comorbidity in the repeat patient cohort
in 2018. There is a strong base for using the CCI, which has been deemed
valid and reliable for estimating the burden of comorbidity in clinical
research.\ :sup:`6` The index records 16 diagnoses, including chronic
respiratory disease and congestive heart failure. These details are all
obtained as part of the routine documentation completed on admission to
the unit. These 16 diagnoses have validated predictive value when
calculating projected 10-year survival. The impact of age on predicted
survival is accounted for by the addition of an age-based score to the
raw CCI. The version of the CCI used is an extended one that includes
four additional items that predict healthcare cost, but are excluded
from the calculation of predicted 10-year survival.\ :sup:`7` This
version held the additional benefit of including a greater breadth of
conditions/factors, specifically hypertension, skin ulcers or recurrent
cellulitis, treatment with warfarin and the presence of depression. The
individual patient scores could then be used to calculate their
predicted 10-year survival.

We assert that all procedures contributing to this work comply with the
ethical standards of the relevant national and institutional committees
on human experimentation and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as
revised in 2008. Ethics approval was not required.

.. _sec1-1:

Participants
------------

There were a total of 138 participants, who were admitted over a 6-month
period to the Ritson Clinic at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital in Scotland.
All the patients who were admitted to the unit were included in the
data-set. The Ritson Clinic is a specialist unit that provides
in-patient detoxification, stabilisation and replacement therapy for
people with alcohol, opiate and other drug dependencies such as
benzodiazepines, stimulants and novel psychoactive substances. All of
the patients have complex psychiatric and social needs that are best met
in an in-patient setting. Referrals are received from a range of
community teams, including general practice and substance misuse
services as well as some acute services such as the regional infectious
diseases unit. These are all within the local National Health Service
(NHS) health board of Edinburgh and the Lothians, with a population of
over 800 000. The participants included in the study were ‘recruited’
retrospectively from the 6-month period immediately prior to the start
of data collection. The period covered was from 19 April to 22 October
2018. The original study recruited patients from 26 May to 27 November
2014 in a prospective manner.\ :sup:`5`

.. _sec1-2:

Data collection
---------------

All collected data had been gathered during the in-patient admission
clerking that was part of routine practice at the unit. As with the data
collection in 2014, a brief paper recording tool was used for
standardised collection of data. The authors, A.B. and A.M., completed
the brief paper recording tool, retrospectively, that was created for
completion during admission in the 2014 study. This information included
a full psychiatric history, substance misuse history, medical history,
physical examination and appropriate investigations, including a routine
set of blood tests. To provide collateral information, a full range of
data sources were used to complete the summary. These sources included a
verbal report from the patient, electronic patient records, out-patient
letters, previous discharge letters and general practitioner clinical
summaries. The CCI provides detailed and specific descriptions of the
inclusion criteria for each diagnosis, allowing for objectivity and
repeatability in assessment so that each diagnosis was given the
appropriate score. This data collection was conducted in the same manner
as the data collected from 2014 cohort had been, as provided by Mogford
& Lawrence, to allow for direct comparison.\ :sup:`5`

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

In total, 138 patients were admitted during the repeat 6-month period of
data collection. This compares with 175 patients admitted during the
original period of data collection in 2014. The profile, number of
patients admitted for alcohol detoxification, substance misuse
diagnosis, the presence of a diagnosis and prevalence of cigarette
smoking are shown in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. The average age of patients
for treatment has increased from 44 years to 49 years. There has been an
increase, from 80% to 93%, in the number of patients who were admitted
for alcohol detoxification. There has been a slight fall, from 80% to
76%, in the number of patients who were smokers at the time of
admission. At the time of data collection for the 2018 study, 14% of the
2014 cohort was deceased and 2% of the current cohort was already
deceased. Table 1Study group characteristics2018 cohort2014 cohortAge,
years: mean (range)49 (23–70)44 (19–73)Male, *n* (%)60 (43)111
(63)Female, *n* (%)78 (56)64 (37)Patients admitted for alcohol
detoxification, *n* (%)128 (93)139 (80)Comorbid depression diagnosis,
*n* (%)100 (72)82 (47)Cigarette smoker, *n* (%)105 (76)138 (80)Patients
deceased at 2018 data collection point, *n* (%)3 (2)25 (14)

The proportions of patients with each of the CCI items are summarised in
`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__. Within both cohorts, the condition with the highest
prevalence was depression. Of note, however, this has shown a marked
increase, from 47% in 2014 to 72% in 2018. Depression is the only
psychiatric condition included in the CCI. There was a small reduction
in the percentage of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(from 26% in 2014 to 22% in 2018), which we would expect with the
reduction seen in the percentage of smokers over this period. In the
2018 cohort there is an increase in prevalence of both mild liver
disease (from 19% to 21%) and moderate to severe liver disease (from 6%
to 14%). This is in the context of an increased number of admissions for
the purpose of alcohol detoxification. There is also a marked increase
in the percentage of patients who met the criteria for diagnosis of
dementia (from 6% in 2014 to 16% in 2018). Fig. 1Comparison of comorbid
diagnoses/factors recorded for the 2014 and 2018 study cohorts. COPD,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; TIA, transient ischaemic attack.

`Table 2 <#tab02>`__ presents the comparison of the distribution of CCI
scores and associated 10-year mortality. The percentage of patients with
a predicted 10-year survival chance <20% has increased from 9% to 28%.
In 2014, 63% of patients had a predicted 10-year survival chance >90%,
whereas in 2018 this was only 16%. Table 2Comparison of Charlson
Comorbidity Index (CCI) scores and predicted 10-year survival for 2018
and 2014 cohortsCCI scorePredicted 10-year survival chance2018, *n*
(%)2014, *n* (%)>5<20%38 (28)16 (9)520–49%17 (12)13(7)450–74%24 (17)12
(7)375–90%37 (27)24 (14)<3>90%22 (16)110 (63)

As shown in `Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__, in 2014 only 7% of patients were
predicted to have no chance of survival at 10 years, compared with 15%
in 2018. There were just 2% of patients with a 10-year predicted
survival chance >98% in 2018, whereas this was 22% in 2014. The
interaction between age and predicted survival is demonstrated in `Fig.
3 <#fig03>`__. The number of younger patients carrying a high burden of
comorbidity has increased. Fig. 2Comparison of predicted 10-year
survival for the 2014 and 2018 study cohorts. Fig. 3Comparison of age
and predicted 10-year survival for the 2014 and 2018 study cohorts.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec3-1:

The Ritson Clinic and government policy on drug and alcohol services
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The Royal Edinburgh Hospital site is currently being redeveloped, with
the Ritson Clinic being one of the last areas of the hospital to undergo
service redevelopment. This has led to considerable discussion about
whether the unit would be best placed at a medical hospital or on a
psychiatric site and about level of intervention the in-patients
require. In addition, on a wider scale, there is ongoing debate
regarding the allocation of resources to fund specialist in-patient
treatment of drug and alcohol problems within NHS Lothian. The original
study\ :sup:`5` helped make the case for the ongoing availability of a
medically supported in-patient unit for the treatment of alcohol and
drug use disorders within NHS Lothian. In the intervening period,
service pressures have increased and available bed numbers have
decreased. Between 2016 and 2017 direct Scottish Government funding for
alcohol and drug partnerships (ADPs, local partnerships between health
boards, local authorities, police and voluntary agencies to tackle
alcohol- and drug-related problems) fell by 22%.\ :sup:`4` In Lothian,
the ADP funding allocations for alcohol and drug prevention, treatment
and support services was cut from £11 469 680 in 2015–2016 to £8 887 133
in 2016–2017.\ :sup:`8` As a consequence of this reduction in national
funding, by January 2018 the number of beds in the Ritson Clinic was
reduced from 12 to 8. These changes have occurred in the context of
changes in public health policy, which increasingly focuses on the
preventability of drug- and alcohol-related deaths. The average waiting
time for an admission to the Ritson Clinic has increased from 30 days
for the 2014 cohort to 65 days in 2018. The average length of admission
was 8.9 days for the 2018 cohort. The unit receives referrals from
community addiction services, general practices (including practices for
those without fixed accommodation), in-patient and out-patient
hepatology teams, alcohol liaison nurses and the regional infectious
diseases unit. These are screened using admission criteria originally
based on Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN)
guidelines.\ :sup:`9` This ensures that admission for in-patient
treatment is limited to those who could not have their needs met in the
community; by its very nature, this predisposes them to carry a higher
burden of comorbidity.\ :sup:`8` It is worth noting that there are other
factors that may contribute to increased morbidity in this patient group
that were not accounted for in the study, such as poor nutrition and
blood-borne viruses such as hepatitis B or hepatitis C. This study did,
however, look at the prevalence of smoking in the patient group.
Evidence suggests that the prevalence of smoking in the Scottish
population is falling. In 2017, it was estimated that 18% of the
Scottish adult population smoked.\ :sup:`10` Despite showing a small
improvement between 2014 and 2018, the in-patients included in our study
still have a considerably increased prevalence of smoking; 76% of the
2018 cohort were current smokers, which will contribute to their overall
increased morbidity and mortality.

.. _sec3-2:

Reductions in 10-year predicted survival
----------------------------------------

Data from the Office for National Statistics for 2011–2013 estimated the
predicted 10-year survival chance for a 45-year-old Scottish male to be
96.6%.\ :sup:`11` Comparatively, in the original cohort, among patients
aged between 45 and 55, the mean predicted 10-year survival chance was
68.6%. In the 2018 cohort, this had reduced to 55%. There are multiple
likely contributing factors to the increase in predicted mortality over
the 4 years. The increased waiting times and reduced bed numbers have
certainly played a role. When screening referrals to the unit, the
patients with the greatest need are given preference, with those with
highest immediate risk to physical well-being taking precedence. This is
also likely to explain why there is an increase in the number of
patients admitted for treatment of alcohol dependence over the 4 years,
as the risk to physical health from alcohol withdrawal is usually
greater than that of drug stabilisation or detoxification, therefore
these patients are admitted preferentially. As per the SIGN guidelines
any patient who is confused, has a history of seizures or
hallucinations, has an acute physical or psychiatric illness, including
multiple substance misuse, has previously failed home-assisted
detoxification or has a home environment unsupportive of abstinence is
deemed to require in-patient detoxification.\ :sup:`9` These broad
inclusion criteria cover much of the patient population that would
require alcohol detoxification and also go some way to explain why the
large majority of admissions, in both 2014 and 2018, were for treatment
of alcohol dependency, despite the Ritson being a unit that treats both
drug and alcohol problems. With increased waiting times and pressure on
beds, the triage of referrals requires ever more challenging clinical
decision-making.

.. _sec3-3:

Increasing burden of comorbidity
--------------------------------

The Ritson Unit currently forms part of the Royal Edinburgh Hospital
site, which provides only psychiatric care and is not a medical
hospital. Anecdotally, among the multidisciplinary team, it was felt
that the patients being admitted to the unit had increasingly complex
medical problems, requiring more medical intervention beyond the
capabilities of the unit. Patients admitted to the unit who become
acutely medically unwell often require transfer across the city to the
medical hospital, as their physical health needs cannot be safely
managed within the psychiatric hospital setting. Our data have supported
this impression that patients are indeed carrying a higher burden of
comorbidity. In quantifying this burden, the study demonstrates the
ongoing and growing demand for in-patient facilities to treat this
unique population of patients, whose needs intersect mental and physical
healthcare services. To improve outcomes for these patients, a more
collaborative and proactive approach in the development of these
services is required. This is in accordance with the recommendation of
increased funding and an emphasis on better integrated care made by NHS
England in its NHS Long Term Plan.\ :sup:`12`

.. _sec3-4:

Limitations
-----------

The study was conducted using the CCI, which is a useful tool for
comparison of predicted mortality. We have compared two groups, admitted
over the same length of time. However, because the capacity of the unit
was reduced between the two studies, we compared a smaller, of an
already small, sample (138 patients in 2018, compared with 175 in 2014).
This meant that we used percentages for data analysis rather than gross
numbers of patients. The CCI does not give an indication of the impact
of morbidity on quality of life, nor does it demonstrate causation. A
further limitation of the study is that the data were collected
retrospectively. The initial study was carried out prospectively and by
different clinicians, so there may have been a resultant difference when
scoring the patients. However, the CCI is based on objective measures,
so variability should be limited. The score is predicted over 10 years,
and we have repeated the study after 4 years. We are therefore unable to
compare the predicted mortality with the actual mortality. Furthermore,
one cannot extrapolate the current number of deceased patients to draw
any conclusions about the accuracy of the scoring in this patient group.
In addition, although the score demonstrates a declining trend in health
outcomes in this patient population, it does not provide any indication
of quality of life or functionality of patients.

.. _sec3-5:

Implications
------------

The original data collected in 2014 showed a high burden of physical
illness carried by those admitted for in-patient treatment for substance
misuse. The data collected in 2018 confirm what was suspected from
observations made by the healthcare professionals working within the
service: that patients being admitted have an increasing burden of
comorbidity, requiring more intervention from specialties, and
ultimately are likely to have worse long-term health outcomes. At 4
years, 14% of patients originally audited were deceased. It is
recommended that the study is repeated after 10 years, to assess the
accuracy of the score at predicting mortality in this population with
complex, specialist care needs. The intersection between physical
healthcare requirements and psychiatric and substance misuse needs
continues to present a unique challenge in caring for this group of
patients. Although the current trend is to move towards a more
community-based healthcare model, the increased comorbidity and growing
waiting lists identify the ongoing need, within this population, for
in-patient services. There is clearly a requirement for healthcare
providers and facilities that can provide safe and effective treatment
of the combined conditions and substance misuse needs of these patients.
Quantifying the degree of comorbidity within this population remains
valuable for the allocation of resources and development of services
with an emphasis on integrated care.

Daniel V. Mogford and Rebecca J. Lawrence, both consultant psychiatrists
with NHS Lothian, Edinburgh, UK, conducted the 2014 data collection and
provided non-financial advice and support for the current study.

A.M. has met all four ICMJE criteria with regard to her contribution.
She helped follow up the previous cohort of patients and contribute to
the collecting of new retrospective data. She placed the data in the
spreadsheets for analysis. In collaboration with A.B. she contributed to
the drafting, editing and review of the final paper. A.B. has met all
four ICMJE criteria with regard to her contribution. In her role as ward
doctor she gathered retrospective data and contributed to the analysis
and interpretation of the data. This involved using spreadsheets to
input the data and attributing the score. She formulated the formulae to
analyse and compare the results. She contributed to the drafting,
editing and review of the final paper. Both authors agree to be
accountable for the work and to answer any questions regarding the work.

**Alice Bradley**, BMBS (Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry) is
a Junior Clinical Fellow in general surgery at NHS Fife, and she was a
foundation year 2 (FY2) doctor in NHS Lothian at time of writing. **Amy
Martin**, MBChB (University of Aberdeen) is a general adult higher
psychiatry trainee in NHS Lothian (ST4) and was a core psychiatry
trainee (CT3) at time of writing.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
