=====================================
Section 12 approval: fit for purpose?
=====================================



Darryl Ballantyne-Watts

:date: 2020-06


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

I read this article\ :sup:`1` with some interest, and with some alarm.
Yes, striving for ‘evidence-based improvements’ in the Section 12
approval/reapproval process is an understandably good thing. However,
basing recommendations on a 21.7% (5/23) return rate for a questionnaire
is never going to change much behaviour. Not even when this information
is ‘triangulated … with other sources’ are many heads going to be
turned.

I believe that those of us who carry out Section 12 assessments in the
real world are all too aware of the lack of hospital resources and are
thus inclined to seek out every community solution for disposal, given
the availability of ‘alternative to hospital’ teams these days.
Particularly when we are considering complex mental illness and mental
disorder matters in a social context coupled with a healthy assessment
of risk, the decision to detain to hospital for assessment cannot be
taken easily or lightly.

Knowing the precise wording of mental health law is important, and we
all want to ‘do things right’. But in a complex, sometimes heated,
community situation we are required to complete the harder additional
task of ‘doing the right thing’, which takes time, thought, experience
and some element of wisdom. I am not at all sure that the solutions
proposed in this paper will take many in that direction.

None.
