---
author:
- Edward Silva
- Siobhan Gee
- Shubulade Smith
- Fiona Gaughran
date: 2020-08
institute:
- "Consultant Psychiatrist, Ashworth Hospital, Mersey Care NHS
  Foundation Trust, UK; email: <ed.silva@merseycare.nhs.uk>"
- Principal Pharmacist, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust,
  Maudsley Hospital, UK
- Consultant Psychiatrist, South London and the Maudsley NHS Foundation
  Trust and Visiting Senior Lecturer, Institute of Psychiatry,
  Psychology and Neuroscience, King\'s College London, UK
- Consultant Psychiatrist, National Psychosis Unit, South London and the
  Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and Reader, Institute of Psychiatry,
  Psychology and Neuroscience, King\'s College London, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
title: Clozapine and COVID-19
---

The COVID-19 pandemic presents psychiatrists prescribing clozapine with
complexities over and above the general difficulties already described
among Chinese psychiatric in-patients.^1^ Some common initiation effects
of clozapine: isolated fever, tachycardia or a mildly raised C-reactive
protein^2^ may be difficult to differentiate from intercurrent
infection, including COVID-19.^3^ Other laboratory anomalies may add to
confusion. Given COVID-19 infection deaths that are not the result of
acute respiratory distress syndrome are often from fulminant
myocarditis, for which a raised troponin is a poor prognostic feature,
troponin levels taken routinely during clozapine initiation will need to
be interpreted carefully. However, while leucopenia is a reported blood
dyscrasia with COVID-19, to date neither neutropenia nor agranulocytosis
is.

In the absence of an antibody test for COVID-19^4^ we rely on
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction COVID-19 testing, which
does not have 100% sensitivity in the initial phase of infection, so a
single negative test does not exclude infection. Once an antibody test
becomes available it will be a useful addition to pre-clozapine
investigations.

Comorbidities such as diabetes, hypertension, respiratory illness and
cardiovascular disease are very common in patients taking clozapine but
are associated with adverse outcomes in the event of COVID-19 infection,
including increased mortality rates. It is not known whether the
antibody deficiency described in patients taking clozapine will further
compromise this vulnerable group.^5^ These are not, however, indications
to stop clozapine, which itself has serious adverse consequences. Rather
patients need clear advice and, if possible, assistance regarding
self-isolation and other precautions advised. Obesity and sleep apnoea
may also contribute to poor outcomes and continuous positive airway
pressure treatment, which can be an aerosol-generating procedure,^6^ may
be a risk to staff.

Individuals already established on clozapine and managed in the
community may require changes to their management. In view of
recommendations for social distancing, the use of clozapine clinics for
routine blood testing should be reconsidered. Instead, blood tests may
be better performed in patient\'s homes, with staff using personal
protective equipment and at, or near, the maximum intervals permitted.
While the standard blood monitoring frequencies are at weekly (weeks
1--18), fortnightly (weeks 19--52) and four-weekly (over 52 weeks)
intervals, clozapine can still be dispensed and administered with
satisfactory monitoring at 14-, 21- and 42-day intervals, respectively.

Inevitably many patients taking clozapine will present with flu-like
symptoms. An urgent full blood count will be required to exclude
neutropenia with appropriate action. Many, however, will have another
cause and so the evolving National Health Service recommendations
regarding isolation and hopefully testing for COVID-19 infection should
be followed. The combination of flu-like symptoms, chest pain and
shortness of breath will, as community prevalence of COVID-19 increases,
be much more likely to be because of COVID-19 than clozapine-induced
myocarditis, except perhaps within the first 60 days of treatment.^7^
However, such a presentation will still need investigation and cessation
of clozapine may on occasion be required as well as urgent general
medical assistance. Careful documentation of symptom profiles and
investigations will aid subsequent decisions regarding clozapine
re-challenge. In the event of COVID-19 infection the acute-phase
reaction may result in reduced activity of cytochrome P450 1A2, raising
clozapine levels and so an urgent trough clozapine level will be needed
with a reduction in clozapine dose if required. This effect may be
amplified if hospital admission is indicated necessitating abrupt change
in smoking habits.

In summary; COVID-19 presents us with extreme difficulties regards
clozapine initiation, the risks of COVID-19 are insufficient to justify
stopping clozapine, an action which presents its own serious problems,
precautions must be taken now to help protect our high-risk patients as
COVID-19 infection may jeopardise both their physical and mental health.

F.G. has received honoraria for advisory work and lectures or continuing
medical education activity support from Roche, BMS, Lundbeck, Otsuka,
Janssen and Sunovion, is a collaborator on an NHS Innovations project
co-funded by Janssen and has a family member with professional links to
Lilly and GSK, including shares. E.S. has received speaker fees from
Janssen and Novartis.
