---
abstract: |
  Use of social media by people with mental health problems, and
  especially those who are prone to self-harm, has potential advantages
  and disadvantages. This poses a dilemma about how and by how much the
  form and content of social media sites should be regulated.
  Unfortunately, participation in the public debate about this dilemma
  has been restricted and high-profile discussion of necessary action
  has been focused almost entirely on how much suppression of content is
  justified. Professional bodies, including the Royal College of
  Psychiatrists, should be doing much more than they are to shape how
  the debate is conducted.
author:
- Allan House[^1]Correspondence to Allan House (<a.o.house@leeds.ac.uk>)
date: 2020-08
institute:
- Leeds Institute of Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of
  Leeds, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
title: Social media, self-harm and suicide
---

# The dilemma {#sec1}

There are, broadly speaking, positive and negative accounts of how
people with mental health problems, and especially those with a history
of self-harm, experience social media.^1,2^ Negative accounts have been
emphasised in mainstream media,^3^ with social media presented as places
where you are drawn into an immersive atmosphere of depressive messages
and images that act as enticement to self-harm and suicide. More
positive accounts from young people suggest that social media can also
offer a space where you can come out of hiding, share otherwise secret
fears with peers, and gain an element of support and advice.^4^

In the former view, risk of suicide is increased by the mood-lowering
effect of the content and by a sort of creeping familiarity with the
idea of self-harm or suicide -- called sometimes desensitisation or
normalisation -- and greater awareness of the methods involved. In the
latter view, the social or networking function creates opportunity for
reducing the sense of disconnection or lack of belonging, and the
sharing of detail allows some alleviation of the burdensomeness of
feeling uniquely troubled (these and other ideas about risk of suicide
are discussed by Joiner^5^). This Janus-faced nature of social media is
well outlined in a report by Barnardo\'s about young people, social
media and mental health -- *Left to Their Own Devices.*^6^

The natural conclusion is that different people are likely to be
affected differently by their online experiences, and the same person
may be affected differently on different occasions. Which raises the
question -- how to minimise risk without at the same time suppressing
useful content? This is a dilemma that requires a careful public debate
involving as many interested parties as possible in coming to a solution
that considers all the competing demands of the situation.

There are three issues that contribute to the complexity of the problem.

First, examination of online material about self-harm reveals
substantial diversity in form and content.^7^ Those who post and those
who respond to posts are engaged in conversations not just about the
manifest topic of self-harm and suicide, even when the relevant posts
are explicitly tagged as self-harm: content is also about emotional
problems more generally, about relationships, fitting in or belonging,
and about attractiveness, sexuality and body image. The mixture of
textual and visual messaging leads to communication the ambiguity and
irony of which can be missed by reading one without the other.

Second, much of this may be regarded as helpful by those who access
it,^4^ even when the content includes direct communication about
self-harm with images of self-injury. Such images can help an isolated
person (anything up to a half of people who self-harm do not seek help
for their problems^8^) feel less alone. The images may come with
messages about self-care or harm minimisation. It is reasonable to
conclude that content which some people find unhelpful is found helpful
by others, and that whether particular content is found to be helpful or
unhelpful by a particular individual depends on the immediate
circumstances in which it is accessed.

Third, it is not clear what the putative pathway to harm is, following
exposure to self-harm material online. Words such as graphic, explicit
or glamorising are in themselves not tightly defined, but they imply
that the underlying mechanism is an invitation to copy the behaviour.
Linking this argument to suicidal behaviour is problematic -- for
example most online images of self-harm are of self-injury (cutting or
burning) and yet these are extremely rare methods of suicide, especially
in young people. If the putative pathway to suicide is not by copying
then presumably it is by exposure leading to low mood and hopelessness
-- in which case it is not clear that images of self-injury are more
problematic than other mood-influencing content.

These sources of ambiguity raise the serious possibility that clumsy,
excessive or inconsistent intervention -- in the name of reducing
harmful exposure and (by implication) habituation or normalisation --
may have the unintended damaging consequence of increasing the sense of
disconnectedness and burdensomeness experienced by people with mental
health problems who self-harm.

# The public debate {#sec2}

In the UK, this public debate has centred recently on the suicide of
teenager Molly Russell, not least because her father has pressed
forcibly the case for the damaging effect of social media and the need
to suppress content that might (in his view, definitely does) encourage
suicide. The BBC opened their coverage with an aggressive interview^9^
of Steve Hatch, the managing director of Facebook in Northern Europe, by
Amol Rajan, who is the BBC\'s Media Editor rather than somebody with
expertise in self-harm or suicide. Not long afterwards the government
produced a White Paper -- *Online Harms*^10^ -- that bundled encouraging
self-harm or suicide with incitement to terrorist activities,
dissemination of child pornography, and drug dealing on the dark web.
The main direction has not therefore been about self-harm and suicide
prevention, but about steps to regulate the tech giants.

The response from the principal player in this case --
Facebook/Instagram -- has been dispiriting. After an attempt to use Nick
Clegg as a front man, they announced earlier this year a ban on images
of self-harm described as graphic or explicit^11^ -- with no definition
of either offered by way of clarification. Now Instagram has announced a
ban on drawings or cartoons depicting self-harm.^12^ There is again lack
of clarity about exactly what this means: in the cited article the
specific example is of text linked to an innocuous drawing. What is
happening, in the absence of serious discussion of the pros and cons, is
a piecemeal suppression of visual content of social media postings.

# The missing element: clinical and academic leadership {#sec3}

Where is the commission-like meeting of organisations, clinicians,
academics and people with personal experience, that should be leading
the debate and informing the decisions? Neither the social media
companies nor the government has shown an interest in organising such an
activity. The mainstream media, as one might expect, just want a story
to tell, sentimental or sensational if possible. Samaritans has an
interest^13^ but progress is painfully slow.

What is striking in all this is the absence from the debate of the
professional bodies -- the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the British
Psychological Society, the Royal College of Nursing, the Health and Care
Professions Council. Although members of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists may have an online presence, and although the College has
issued (rather one-sided) advice to its members^14^ and further guidance
about professional standards of online behaviour is forthcoming, the
College has conspicuously not been organising the high profile, mature
debate that is needed to replace what is going on now. The absence of
professional bodies from that role represents a failure of leadership in
an area of public health where they should be at the forefront of
educating the general public about self-harm and suicide, and modelling
how intelligent decisions should be made on complex and important
topics. It is time our College took the lead, initiating the
establishment of a joint working group with the key professional bodies,
third-sector organisations and people with personal experience. The role
of such a body is not to establish the practicalities of regulation or
control of content, but to offer the best available advice about what
such content should be. The group should have a strong policy related to
communication and dissemination of its discussions and not just await
the production of a report -- the aim is as much to model how discussion
should happen as it is to achieve any other outcome.

**Allan House** is Professor of Liaison Psychiatry at the Leeds
Institute of Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Leeds,
UK. He is author of *Understanding and Responding to Self-Harm: The One
Stop Guide* (Profile Books, 2019), which offers practical advice for
anyone affected by self-harm.

[^1]: **Declaration of interest:** None.
