===============================================================================================================================
Who wants to be a psychiatrist? Northern Ireland foundation doctors (2006–2018) are positive toward psychiatry as career choice
===============================================================================================================================



Michael Doris
Amy Grimason
Damien Hughes
Edel O'Neill
Lorraine Parks
Angela Carragher [1]_Correspondence to Dr Michael Doris
(michael.doris@belfasttrust.hscni.net)
:Date: 2020-08

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Northern Ireland presents itself as an anomaly – a region in which
   only 31.8% of doctors enter into any training programme after
   completion of the Foundation Programme, but where Core Psychiatry has
   been consistently oversubscribed. Here, we aim to find what other
   regions can learn from this success. All doctors of any grade,
   working in psychiatry, who had been though the Foundation Programme
   were questioned on their motivations for becoming a psychiatry
   trainee.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Sixty-two doctors currently working in psychiatry responded,
   including over 60% of current trainees, and 45% stated they had not
   considered a career in psychiatry before their foundation attachment.
   Over 80% preferred foundation placements in FY2 only, rather than in
   either foundation year 1 or FY2.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   This survey identifies that for the majority of people who ultimately
   chose to train in psychiatry, in a region that has consistently
   attracted candidates to core and higher level training, completion of
   a foundation psychiatry post was an influencing factor in this
   decision. A strong majority of doctors prefer the foundation
   psychiatry placement to be offered in FY2.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Recruitment into core psychiatry training in the UK has been a
longstanding area of concern.\ :sup:`1` Despite the success of the Royal
College of Psychiatrist's ‘Choose Psychiatry’ scheme and the subsequent
increase in the fill rate in 2018,\ :sup:`2` there still remains 18% of
posts that are not filled nationally. There are, however, variations
based on geographical area, with Northern Ireland consistently achieving
a 90–100% fill rate at core recruitment.

Following the Collins Review\ :sup:`3` in 2010 highlighting the need for
more community foundation placements and the Royal College of
Psychiatrists recruitment strategy\ :sup:`4` of 2011, one option put
forward was to increase exposure to psychiatry during the Foundation
Programme. A target was set to have 22.5% of all foundation year 1 (FY1)
and 22.5% of all foundation year 2 (FY2) doctors offered placements in
psychiatry. Northern Ireland is the only region of the UK that does not
offer any placements in FY1, but it does offer a 4-month psychiatry
placement to approximately 33% of FY2 doctors.

In this survey we aimed to explore why psychiatry doctors working in
Northern Ireland chose their specialty and whether having a psychiatry
foundation post in FY2 influenced their career choice. We also examined
the opinions of the doctors who chose psychiatry following an FY2
placement on when psychiatry should be offered in the Foundation
Programme.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Participants
------------

The participants for this survey were doctors working in psychiatry in
Northern Ireland who had completed Foundation Programme training since
its establishment in 2006. This consisted of a group of psychiatry core
trainees, speciality trainees (in all areas of psychiatry) and
consultants.

.. _sec1-2:

Survey design
-------------

The survey was designed using the SurveyMonkey online questionnaire
system, following collaboration between the Northern Ireland Foundation
School and the Northern Ireland School of Psychiatry.

The survey questionnaire (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__) consisted of 12 questions
establishing baseline demographic data with regards to gender, medical
school, year of graduation, current grade, year entering into core
psychiatry training and, if applicable, year entering specialist
training in psychiatry. There were questions that established the
trajectory of foundation training and if this was planned, coordinated
by the UK Foundation Programme and the duration of their foundation
programme. Respondents were asked if they had considered a career in
psychiatry before selecting their foundation programme and what may have
influenced their decision in this (i.e. undergraduate experience,
training reputation). The respondents were then asked if they had a
psychiatry placement in foundation training and if they agreed with the
statement, ‘After completion of a psychiatry post within foundation
training I was influenced to pursue a career in psychiatry’. The final
question was examining the preferences of respondents in the option of
having psychiatry available as a preference in FY1 (which is not
currently offered in Northern Ireland but is offered in other parts of
the UK). The nature of the survey resulted in retrospective data being
collected. Fig. 1Survey questionnaire.FY1, foundation year 1; FY2,
foundation year 2.

.. _sec1-3:

Distribution
------------

It was an open and voluntary survey. The survey was populated via an
email from the current Head of School of Psychiatry to all doctors who
had been enlisted in psychiatry training from 2006 (i.e. after the first
full 2-year cycle of the Foundation Programme). The survey was open for
3 weeks. This email list was obtained from records within the School of
Psychiatry at the local deanery (Northern Ireland Medical and Dental
Training Agency; NIMDTA). Reminders were sent via email and social media
to encourage completion. The survey was sent to 92 psychiatry trainees
and 25 specialty doctors/consultants; as updated lists of consultant
emails are not held by the deanery, emails may not have reached all the
doctors who were no longer in training, so the figure of 25 is
approximate.

.. _sec1-4:

Analysis
--------

Following the closure of the online survey, the results were collated in
their entirety for evaluation by the authors. Quantitative data was
exported to Microsoft Excel 2016 (v.16.0) for analysis. As a portion of
the data was from ‘white space’ or free-text questions and thus
qualitative in nature, these were assessed for common themes.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

A total of 67 participants responded to the survey, and demographic data
is represented in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Of the 12 questions, 7 were
answered by all respondents (questions 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 10). Of the
remaining questions, there were 66 responses, with the exception of one
in which there were 65 responses (question 11). The majority of the
respondents were female (*n* = 42, 63.6%). Table 1Demographic dataTotal
(*n* = 67)GenderFemale42 (63.6%)Male24 (34.3%)Current gradeSpecialty
trainee32 (47.8%)Core trainee26 (38.8%)Non-trainee doctors (i.e.
consultant, specialty doctor)9 (13.4%)Foundation scheme2-year planned
programme60 (89.5%)Recruited to a 1-year standalone FY2 programme5
(7.5%)Other2 (3%)Psychiatry placement in Foundation ProgrammeIn FY13
(4.5%)In FY2 (first placement)33 (49.3%)In FY2 (second placement)13
(19.4%)In FY2 (third placement)11 (16.4%)No psychiatry placement10
(10.4%)Considering psychiatry before Foundation ProgrammeYes37
(55.2%)No30 (44.8%) [2]_

A high proportion of respondents had completed their undergraduate
training at Queen's University Belfast (*n* = 62, 92.5%) and year of
graduation ranged from 2006 to 2016. The vast majority of respondents
had completed their foundation training within the deanery in Northern
Ireland, NIMDTA (*n* = 63, 94.0%).

The majority of respondents were in training; almost half of respondents
were currently in specialty training (*n* = 32, 47.8%), with a slightly
smaller percentage in core training (*n* = 26, 38.8%). Consultants made
up a small proportion (*n* = 7, 10.4%), with a smaller number of
specialty doctors and associate specialists (*n* = 2, 3%). `Figure
2 <#fig02>`__ shows the distribution across training levels. Fig. 2Grade
breakdown of participants, *n* = 62. LAS, Locum Approved Service; LAT,
Locum Approved Training; SAS, Specialty and Associate Specialist; ST,
Senior Trainee; CT, Core Trainee.

The year of entering core psychiatry training ranged from 2007 to 2017,
and year of entering into specialty training ranged from 2011 to 2018
for those that this was applicable to.

The vast majority of respondents were recruited through the Foundation
Programme UK system on a planned 2-year Foundation Training
Scheme (*n* = 60, 89.6%). A small number (*n* = 5, 7.5%) were recruited
through the Foundation Programme UK system on a single 1-year FY2
programme.

The majority of participants had a foundation placement in psychiatry
(*n* = 60, 89.5%). The breakdown of when participants had their
placements is shown in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Those who had a psychiatry
placement in FY1 had completed their foundation training outside of
Northern Ireland.

When asked if they had considered a career in psychiatry before
selecting their foundation programme, 55.2% of respondents (*n* = 37)
reported they had and 44.8% (*n* = 30) reported they had not. When asked
what influenced their decision to choose (or not choose) to pursue a
career in psychiatry before commencing foundation training, the most
commonly cited theme was undergraduate experience of psychiatry
(*n* = 47, 70.1%). Generally, the majority of respondents who cited this
as a factor reported a positive contributor (*n* = 34, 72.3%) toward
their choice to pursue psychiatry as a career. The second most commonly
cited factor was the positive reputation of psychiatry training in
Northern Ireland (*n* = 20, 29.9%). This factor encompassed the positive
reputation of training and also of having positive interactions with
trainees and consultants in their undergraduate training. The third most
commonly cited factor positive influencing people's decision to enter
psychiatry was of having an interest in the subject (*n* = 11, 16.4%).

Other less commonly cited positive factors were of having a
qualification in a related field (such as psychology), enjoyment of a
psychiatry locum post, the expectation of a positive work–life balance
over the course of their career, media and mental health group
influences and future job prospects.

The most commonly cited reasons that led people originally to not
consider psychiatry as a career was a negative or ambivalent
undergraduate experience (*n* = 13, 19.4%) Those that were negative or
ambivalent reported not enjoying their experience, feeling daunted by
how different psychiatry was from other medical specialties and also by
their experiences in in-patient settings in undergraduate training.

Exposure to negative opinions of psychiatry in placements in other
specialties was also cited as a reason people did not consider
psychiatry. In response to the statement ‘After the completion of a
psychiatry post within foundation training I was influenced to pursue a
career in psychiatry’, the majority of respondents agreed with it
(*n* = 60, 92.%).

The final questions gathered the views of respondents as to whether
psychiatry should be offered to FY1 doctors. The majority of respondents
(*n* = 54, 81.8%) felt that psychiatry should only be offered as an FY2
rotation in the Foundation Programme. By far the most commonly cited
reason for this was to allow for the development of general skills and
improve general medical and surgical knowledge in FY1 (*n* = 42, 77.8%).
Many felt this to be important as often psychiatry units were isolated
from acute hospitals and out-of-hours work in psychiatry is often
non-resident with senior assistance also being non-resident. One
respondent felt that a job in psychiatry for an FY1 may not be
representative of a psychiatry experience as the doctor would likely
complete more administrative and medical tasks. Another respondent felt
that FY2 was when doctors are more likely to be considering their career
options.

For those who reported wishing to have a psychiatry placement in FY1
(*n* = 12, 18.2%) the most common reason for this was that it would give
doctors earlier exposure, which may encourage them to apply for
psychiatry (*n* = 8, 80.0%). Some reported they had missed an
application process owing to having psychiatry as their last rotation in
their FY2 year. Two respondents reported that psychiatry would be useful
in FY1 to give doctors early exposure to a more holistic care approach.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

This survey adds to previous findings\ :sup:`5–7` that exposure to
psychiatry in foundation training is a powerful tool in recruiting
doctors to work in the field. Remarkably, of doctors working in
psychiatry in Northern Ireland, 45% had not considered a career in
psychiatry before their foundation placement, and 92.31% went on to
agree with the statement ‘After the completion of a psychiatry post
within foundation training I was influenced to pursue a career in
psychiatry’.

Doctors working in psychiatry spoke positively of the undergraduate
experience and the close local ties between the medical school and the
deanery in establishing a programme that encouraged them to apply.
Northern Ireland has one medical school, Queen's University Belfast, of
which around 70–80% of foundation doctors working in Northern Ireland
graduate from.

In considering recruitment strategies, the proportion of those who are
attracted after undergraduate level should not be underestimated: in a
survey including 51 core trainees, Denman *et al*\ :sup:`8` found that
most chose psychiatry during their foundation placement as opposed to as
an undergraduate, a finding that resonates with our conclusion of the
importance and influence of foundation training experience to the
specialty's recruitment. There has been extensive research into the
factors that affect recruitment into psychiatry and our findings are
similar to those identified in previous studies.\ :sup:`9`

The importance of a positive experience of psychiatry in medical school
has been highlighted in numerous studies. Mukherjee *et al*\ :sup:`10`
identified the significance of a genuine interest in the subject as
being important to recruitment and proposed that the way some
undergraduate placements are structured (mainly in acute in-patient
settings) expose students to complex patients who are potentially the
most unwell, perhaps resulting in a skewed perception of those with
mental illness. They highlight the need for more doctors to complete
foundation placements in psychiatry and that the process of choosing a
specialty within a year of qualifying disadvantaged psychiatry in terms
of recruitment, it being a career choice for ‘late bloomers'. This was
specifically highlighted in our study with one participant missing the
application window owing to not having a psychiatry placement until the
end of their foundation programme, forcing them to wait a further year
before applying. They also identified a perception that psychiatry was
less scientific and of lower status than other areas of medicine as an
important factor with regards to negatively affecting recruitment.

Given the unique cohort of doctors in Northern Ireland, we looked to
establish what attitudes were toward the current approach of having 100%
of psychiatry placements in FY2. An overwhelming 81.82% felt that this
was what they would personally choose. They speculated that a FY1 doctor
may be seen as the ‘medical doctor’ and may not get the same breadth of
experience of acute psychiatric care as an FY2 doctor.

This survey identifies that a strong majority of doctors prefer the
foundation psychiatry placement to be offered in FY2, from a region that
has consistently attracted candidates to core and higher level training.
As a region without an FY1 placement, the generalisability of the
results must be considered as a weakness of the survey. It could be
argued that those who stated that they would prefer psychiatry in FY2
have limited frame of reference for such an argument.

We believe there are a number of reasons that could help explain why
recruitment in Northern Ireland is higher than in other regions in the
UK. As we have already alluded to, there is a sense of collegiality in
Northern Ireland with regards to the speciality. Northern Ireland has
one medical school, one medical training body and one Royal College of
Psychiatrists headquarters, allowing for the promotion of psychiatry to
be streamlined and coordinated between these entities.

There has been a concerted effort to promote psychiatry in undergraduate
training and to ensure that this is of good quality. Medical students
have a 6-week placement in psychiatry in their 4th year and also
opportunities earlier in their studies to partake in psychiatry-themed,
student-selected modules. Enthusiastic psychiatry trainees are also
visible within the undergraduate teaching, delivering teaching sessions
to a variety of undergraduate years, promoting the speciality from the
start of the curriculum. Queen's University produces proportionally more
psychiatry doctors than any other university in the UK, which is
indicative of the successes of these efforts.

Following a positive undergraduate experience, more doctors then
experience a FY2 placement in psychiatry than in other regions in the
UK, which this survey has shown to be an important influencing factor
for those not previously considering the specialty. The structuring and
delivery of psychiatry training is potentially another important reason
why Northern Ireland has higher recruitment figures: psychiatry training
has a good reputation in Northern Ireland because of its weekly
protected teaching time, with subsequent examination pass rates that are
above the national average.

Nationally there is evidence of green shoots in psychiatry
recruitment\ :sup:`9` and there is a momentum being built by the Choose
Psychiatry movement. However, there is still cause for concern with
recruitment of doctors into psychiatry and continued efforts are needed
to build upon the progress already made. Here we show that a strong
foundation programme in Northern Ireland, focused on FY2, showcases the
specialty as a beacon for recruitment in the UK. This is reinforced by
strong links at local university and college level, supported by
trainers who buy into personal and professional development and trainees
who provide role modelling at an early stage for trainee doctors.

**Michael Doris** is a higher trainee in learning disability psychiatry
with Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, and an ADEPT Leadership
Fellow at Northern Ireland Medical and Dental Training Agency, Northern
Ireland. **Amy Grimason** is a higher trainee in forensic psychiatry
with Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Northern Ireland. **Damien
Hughes** is a consultant psychiatrist working in learning disability
psychiatry with Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, and Head of the
School for Psychiatry at Northern Ireland Medical and Dental Training
Agency, Northern Ireland. **Edel O'Neill** is a consultant psychiatrist
working in learning disability psychiatry with Southern Health and
Social Care Trust, Northern Ireland. **Lorraine Parks** is a consultant
anaesthetist with Southern Health and Social Care Trust, and Associate
Postgraduate Dean for the Northern Ireland Foundation School at Northern
Ireland Medical and Dental Training Agency, Northern Ireland. **Angela
Carragher** is a consultant surgeon and former Associate Postgraduate
Dean for the Northern Ireland Foundation School at Northern Ireland
Medical and Dental Training Agency, Northern Ireland.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

We confirm that all authors listed above satisfy the four ICMJE
criteria. M.D. was involved in designing questionnaire, collecting and
collating data as well as analysis and write-up. A.G. was involved in
analysis of data and write-up. D.H. was involved in design of
questionnaire and review of write-up. E.O. was involved in design of
questionnaire and review of write-up. L.P. was involved in design of
questionnaire and review of write-up. A.C. was involved in design of
questionnaire and review of write-up.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.

.. [2]
   FY2, foundation year 2; FY1, foundation year 1.
