---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  To review the literature on the emotional and mental health needs of
  young carers of parents with mental illness and the extent to which
  such needs are recognised and supported by professionals. Three
  databases were systematically searched from 2008 to 2018, and five
  studies met the inclusion criteria.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  The key findings were that young caregivers had a significantly higher
  dose-response mortality risk than their peers; were at increased risk
  of mental health difficulties, especially where the ill family member
  was a parent and had mental illness or misused substances; were
  overlooked by professionals owing to a lack of awareness; but could
  derive benefits from their caring role when appropriately supported.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  Young carers are at increased risk regarding emotional and mental
  health needs; this risk could be mitigated by professionals
  recognising the young carer\'s role and including them in their
  parent\'s treatment plan.
author:
- Roswitha Dharampal
- Cornelius Ani[^1]Correspondence to R. Dharampal
  (<r.dharampal@doctors.net.uk>)
date: 2020-06
institute:
- 1Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 2Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS Foundation Trust and Imperial
  College London, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
- id: ref38
- id: ref39
- id: ref40
- id: ref41
- id: ref42
- id: ref43
- id: ref44
- id: ref45
- id: ref46
- id: ref47
- id: ref48
- id: ref49
- id: ref50
- id: ref51
- id: ref52
- id: ref53
- id: ref54
- id: ref55
- id: ref56
- id: ref57
- id: ref58
- id: ref59
- id: ref60
- id: ref61
- id: ref62
- id: ref63
- id: ref64
- id: ref65
- id: ref66
- id: ref67
title: "The emotional and mental health needs of young carers: what
  psychiatry can do"
---

# Background {#sec1}

Societal awareness of young carers and the potential effects of caring
on their health and development has increased in the past 20 years.^1^ A
'young carer' is 'a child or young person under 18 who provides regular
or ongoing care and emotional support to a family member who is
physically or mentally ill, disabled or misuses substances'.^2,3^ The
2011 Census in England and Wales showed that 166 363 children in England
cared for their parents, siblings or family members, an increase of 20%
on the number recorded in the 2001 Census.^4,5^ However, this was
thought to be an underestimate.^2^ The prevalence of informal caring in
the underage population was estimated as a minimum of 2--4% in Western
countries.^6^

Dearden and Becker reported that most young carers cared for parents,
particularly mothers, although some provided support for grandparents,
siblings or other relatives. Tasks undertaken by young carers included
housework, general healthcare -- for example, assisting with mobility or
giving medication -- intimate personal care such as bathing or
toileting, and emotional support.^7^ Emotional support by young carers
was more likely to be offered to parents with a mental health
problem.^7--10^ Caring responsibilities ranged from a few hours a week
to over 100 in extreme cases.^11^

Half of all conditions supported by young carers involved physical
health, but almost a third (29%) were for mental health problems, while
17% related to learning difficulties and 3% were for sensory
impairments.^7,12^ Extrapolating from these figures suggested that
55 000--60 000 children in the UK cared for a parent with mental
illness.^13^ According to 2018 estimates for England, 3.7 million
children aged 0--17 (31.7%) were in a household where a randomly
selected adult had at least moderate mental health symptoms, including
1.6 million (13.5%) where the adult had severe mental health
symptoms.^14^

For psychiatrists, the young carers most likely encountered in work are
those of their adult patients with mental illness. Estimates in
Australia and the USA of the proportion of people accessing mental
health services who were parents ranged from 20 to 60%.^15--18^ In the
UK, the majority had common mental disorders such as depression or
anxiety, but some (0.5%) had a psychotic condition.^19^ According to
recent UK estimates, parents comprise at least 25% of adult mental
health patients with significant interpersonal/personality difficulties,
including 63% of women with psychosis and 25% of adults in acute
psychiatric hospital settings.^20^

The 2011 Census in England and Wales showed that one in eight young
carers was under the age of ten, and some were as young as five.^5^
According to Canadian research among youth aged 15--24 years, females
accounted for the majority of carers, and there was an increasing
feminisation of care as youth aged, the differences being most acute at
the highest care levels.^21^ It was suggested that this pattern was
similar to that in the UK and Australia.^7,10,21^ A further UK survey
suggested that young carers were 1.5 times more likely than their peers
to be from Black, Asian or minority ethnic communities, and twice as
likely to not speak English as their first language. They were 1.5 times
more likely than their peers to have a special educational need or a
disability.^11^

How the young carer and parent were viewed often depended on the
disability or diagnosis, such that having parents with mental health
problems was presumed to pose more adverse challenges.^1^ Young carers
were often considered as a homogenous group; however, it has been argued
that those caring for a mentally ill parent could experience particular
risks and needs. Studies from several countries have found that children
of parents with a mental illness were at a greater risk of poorer
outcomes than their peers,^22,23^ with higher rates of mental
illness^24^ and poorer development in behavioural,^25,26^ social,^27^
and academic^28^ domains.^22^ According to Pakenham and Cox, the
presence of any family member with an illness was associated with a
greater risk of mental health difficulties for young people, relative to
their peers from 'healthy' families. This risk was further elevated if
the ill family member was a parent and had mental illness or abused
substances.^29^ In the UK, parental mental ill health was a significant
factor for children entering the care system.^30^

Aggregated data suggested that a child had a 30--50% chance of
developing a serious mental illness if they had two parents with mental
illness.^31^ A child of a parent with an affective illness had a 40%
chance of developing an affective disorder by age 20, compared with a
20--25% risk in the general population.^32--35^ However, the increased
risk noted in these studies may have a multifactorial aetiology.

It has also been argued that younger carers can sometimes overcome the
effects of extreme adversity^36^ with information, recognition of their
role, and inclusion in their parent\'s treatment plan. Studies suggest
that some young carers may even derive some benefit from their caring
role.

# Aim {#sec2}

The main aim of this literature review was to explore the emotional and
mental health needs of young carers and their circumstances, particular
those related to their parents\' mental health. The review also explored
the extent to which the needs of young carers were recognised and
supported by the psychiatrists and other professionals working with
their parents.

# Method {#sec3}

The PRISMA guideline^37^ was followed to search three databases (EMBASE,
Medline and PsychInfo), which are accessible from the Royal College of
Psychiatrists library. The search covered 2008--2018 using the terms
'emotional health or emotional stability or psychological health or
social psychology or mental health' and 'young carers' or 'young and
carers' or young caregivers or 'young and caregivers'. Boolean
operations and truncations were employed to allow for alternative
endings in the keyword searches. The search was limited to the past 10
years in order to focus on more recent developments in the field, which
are more likely to be relevant to current practice. Additional
literature was accessed through contact with the authors of some of the
papers, a charity that supports young carers, and references from
retrieved papers.

Studies were included if they were published in English and involved a
primary study published in the past 10 years that identified the
emotional and mental health needs of young carers and had a minimum of
14 participants. The latter criterion was based on the fact that very
small sample sizes would limit the generalisability of results to the
wider young carer population.^38^ Four hundred and eighty-eight
abstracts were identified; initial screening identified 43 relevant
studies, whose full texts were assessed. Finally, five studies were
selected ([Fig. 1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}). Fig. 1Study selection

# Results {#sec4}

The literature review focused on five recent papers published between
2013 and 2018 which investigated the emotional and mental health needs
of young carers, the circumstances which gave rise to them, current
psychiatric practice and possible improvements. One study^39^ was
census-based, retrospective and longitudinal. The others, reflective of
the majority of studies in the search, were qualitative and recorded the
experiences of young carers. The papers showed the increased and
particular needs and risks of young carers of a parent with mental
illness, with one study identifying what it referred to as a 'young
carer penalty'.^38^ The census-based study further found a higher
mortality risk among young carers.^39^ The shortcomings of mental health
services in their consideration of young carers were also raised. The
studies are summarised in [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}. Table
1Summary of studies reviewedCitationStudy design, country and
sampleResultsConclusionLeu *et al*^54^  
(*n* = 30)Semi-structured interviews  
Switzerland  
16 young carers aged 10--17 years  
14 young carers aged 18--25 yearsTasks depended on nature of
illness/impairment and availability of other family carers. Intensity
varied from part- to full-time responsibilityHighlighted importance of
communication with family, professionals and peersMillenaar *et
al*^53^  
(*n* = 14)Semi-structured interviews  
The Netherlands  
14 children aged 15--27 years living with a parent with young-onset
dementia (YOD)Divided into three themes that demonstrated effects of
dementia on daily life, different ways of coping, and children\'s need
for care and supportIn addition to practical information, more
accessible and specific information about diagnosis and course of YOD
needed to provide better understanding for children. Underlined need for
personal, family-centred approach.Packenham and Cox^29^  
(*n* = 2474)Questionnaire Survey  
Australia  
2474 youth aged 9--20 years ('healthy family' *n* = 1768, parental
illness *n* = 336, other family member illness *n* = 254, both parental
and other family member illness *n* = 116)Presence of any family member
with illness associated with greater risk of mental health difficulties
for youth. Risk elevated if ill family member is parent and has mental
illness or substance misuseSerious health problems within household
adversely affect youth adjustmentStamatopoulos^38^ (*n* = 15)Two focus
groups and one in-depth interview Canada  
15 young carers aged 15--19 yearsEvidence for unique 'young carer
penalty'Ongoing youth caregiving constitutes a form of hidden labour
that carries with it a range of benefits and penaltiesTseliou *et
al*^39^  
(*n* = 19 621)  
  
Census-based mortality linkage study  
Northern Ireland Caregivers aged 5--24 yearsYoung caregivers more likely
than non-caregiving peers to report chronic poor mental health. They
also differed from older caregivers and were at significantly higher
mortality risk than peers. Dose-response relationship between hours
devoted to caregiving and mortality risk evidentYoung caregivers at
significantly increased risk of poor health outcomes

A study by Pakenham and Cox examined differences in adjustment between
children of a parent with an illness and peers from 'healthy' families,
controlling for whether a parent or non-parent family member was ill,
the illness type, demographics and caregiving.^29^ The study was
questionnaire-based and had a total sample of 2474 youths, comprising
those from 'healthy' families = 1768 and those from families with
parental illness = 336, other family member illness = 254, and both
parental and other family illness = 116. The youths, aged 9--20 years,
were recruited in Queensland, Australia, mostly from schools. However,
recruitment also took place through church groups (*n* = 35), scouts
(*n* = 23), university vacation care (*n* = 13), and a young carer
association (*n* = 42) in order to achieve more diversity in the sample.

The youths completed questionnaires to obtain information on their age,
gender, home postcode, employment, dual- versus single-parent family,
number of siblings and ethnic background. An eight-item family
responsibilities subscale of the Young Carer of Parents Inventory^40^
was used to assess youth caregiving. A range of positive and negative
youth adjustment outcomes were assessed by behavioural-emotional-social
difficulties, somatisation and health. Positive adjustment outcomes were
assessed by family satisfaction, life satisfaction, positive affect and
pro-social behaviour.

The results showed that the presence of any family member with an
illness was associated with greater risk of mental health difficulties
for youths compared with their peers from 'healthy' families. Using
Cohen\'s effect size conventions, the effect sizes for the significant
outcomes for parental illness group ranged from small (0.22) to very
large (1.0), but they were uniformly small for the 'other family
members' illness group (range 0.08--0.18). This risk of poorer
adjustment was elevated if the ill family member was a parent and had
mental illness or misused substances. The latter risk held even when
caregiving and demographic factors were considered. Incidentally,
caregiving itself was associated with poorer adjustment in six of the
seven outcomes considered, even after controlling for illness type and a
range of sociodemographic factors.

Parental illness and illness in other family members were both
significantly associated with more negative outcomes compared with
'healthy' families for all but two outcomes. The effect of 'parental
illness' was significantly larger than for 'other family member' illness
for all but one outcome, although the effect sizes were small. However,
as these data were cross-sectional, the associations may not be causal,
as it is also possible that the additional risk attributed to caregiving
may be confounded by other unmeasured factors such as genetic
influences.

A recent study^39^ investigated the association between caregiving and
health/mortality risk in young caregivers when compared with
non-caregiving peers and older caregivers. They used a census-based
record to link all residents enumerated in the 2011 Northern Ireland
Census with subsequently registered deaths data, until the end of 2015.
Among those aged 5 to 24 years in the 2011 Census, approximately 4.5%
were reported to be caregivers. The presence of a chronic physical
and/or mental health condition was measured through the Census, and
all-cause mortality was assessed by official mortality records.

This study found that young caregivers had a significantly higher
mortality risk than their peers (adjusted hazard ratio = 1.54, 95% CI:
1.10, 2.14). A dose-response relationship between the hours devoted to
caregiving duties and mortality risk was evident. Young caregivers were
also more likely to report chronic mental health problems than their
non-caregiving peers (adjusted odds ratio (OR) = 1.44, 95% CI: 1.31,
1.58).

Further, young carers differed from older caregivers, with the odds of
reporting poor mental health inversely related to age. Tseliou *et al*
maintained that although the majority of studies found that caregiving
may be associated with poor mental and emotional health,^41--44^ this
had been moderated by growing recognition that older caregivers had a
reduced mortality risk compared with non-caregiving peers.^45--52^ At
older ages, less intense caregiving was associated with a reduced risk
of chronic poor mental health. However, by 25--44 years old, this was
reversed such that a positive dose-response association was observed
between caregiving status and mental ill-health. This adverse effect was
most evident among 5--17-year-olds. In this younger cohort, those
providing more intensive caregiving were more than twice as likely as
non-caregiving peers to have poor mental health (adjusted OR = 2.46, 95%
CI: 1.70, 3.56).

Light caregiving may be associated with a positive effect on physical
health, such as fewer chronic mobility problems compared with
non-caregivers.^39^ However, this apparent benefit of caregiving was not
observed among younger carers providing higher levels of care. The
authors hypothesised that the protective effect of light caregiving,
especially for older carers, could be due either to the physical
requirements of the caregiving role or an instance of 'selection into
the role' by healthier individuals.^39^ To further illustrate the
differential effect of care givers\' age, the authors stratified the
data by age group (young adults versus children and adolescents) and
found that although less-intensive caregiving in the older cohort was
associated with 35--40% reduced odds of reporting chronic mobility
problems, those aged 5--17 were more likely to report mobility problems
(OR = 1.61, 95% CI: 1.16, 2.23).^39^

Although the census-based study by Tseliou *et al* had unsurpassed
population coverage and encompassed many hard-to-reach groups, it was
nonetheless limited by the fact that it may have missed a
disproportionate number of young adults and caregivers in deprived
inner-city areas. Also, the proxy nature of census returns makes it
likely that the parent or guardian completed the 'self-assessed' health
question, which might have led to confounding, although not for
mortality risk.

The literature search identified a study which explored the experiences
and needs of children living with a parent with young-onset
dementia.^53^ The study recruited 215 patients and their families
through memory clinics, regional hospitals, mental health services and
specialised day care in The Netherlands. For ethical reasons, inclusion
was restricted to children older than 14 years. There were a total of 35
eligible participants living in 29 families, of which 15 agreed to
participate. The method involved semi-structured interviews with 14 of
the young people, six males and eight females, aged between 15 and 27,
with an average age of 21 years. In three families, the mother had
dementia. The mean age of the parent was 53.6 years. Five of the parents
had Alzheimer\'s disease, four had frontotemporal dementia, one had
vascular dementia and one had dementia not otherwise specified. Most of
the parents had mild to moderate dementia. The type of care the young
people provided included housekeeping tasks (cooking, cleaning, and
grocery shopping), supervision and social contact.

Semi-structured interviews were analysed using a qualitative inductive
content analysis, which revealed three major themes. The first theme
indicated the effects of dementia on daily life, including changing
relationships within the family, children\'s difficulties managing
responsibilities while maintaining a life of their own, and children\'s
concerns about their future. The second theme reflected the different
ways the children coped, including acceptance, avoidance, searching for
relief and actively dealing with changes. The third theme revealed the
need for care and support. Many children wanted to know more about
dementia but received little information after the diagnosis from either
their parents or healthcare professionals. In addition, they wanted
practical guidance in dealing with their parent.

However, the study by Millenaar *et al* was limited by the
less-than-optimal representativeness of the sample due to the restricted
availability of children in the target population and high refusal
rates. The authors acknowledged that these sampling difficulties may
have led to an underestimation of needs, because those who were not
included may have found it too demanding to participate in the study or
too difficult to talk about their needs.

A qualitative study with young carers and young adult carers in
Switzerland further explored the role of communication with
professionals about the caring situation.^54^ Interviews were conducted
with 16 carers aged 10--17 years and 14 aged 18--25 years. The
interviews were recorded, transcribed and analysed following a grounded
theory approach.

The study reported that the participants found talking to professionals
was often seen as difficult. The young people described situations in
which they were simply overlooked by experts from healthcare or social
services. It was recognised this generally did not happen because of
malicious intent by professionals, but rather owing to a lack of
awareness about young carers and their roles and responsibilities.^55^
In particular, getting into contact with healthcare professionals in
hospitals seemed to be challenging when young people were the main
carer. Information was often withheld by healthcare personnel owing to a
perceived need for confidentiality. Some young adult carers had to
resort to alternative ways, for example, the internet, to access
necessary information when neither professionals nor the care-receiving
family member provided it.

In the final study selected for this literature review, a qualitative
focus group design was chosen to explore the 'lived realities' of young
people providing unpaid familial caregiving in Canada.^38^ Two focus
groups and one in-depth interview were held with 15 young people aged
15--19 years, who were current or past members of a formal young carers
programme. Participants also completed a short survey after the
discussion, representing a form of 'concurrent triangulation'. Purposive
sampling was used to recruit young carers.

Over half the youth provided care primarily to a sibling, with the next
largest group caring for a parent, and several caring for multiple
family members. The main conditions ranged from substance (alcohol)
abuse to terminal cancer to autism, and a high likelihood of comorbidity
existed. A diverse range of ethno-racial profiles were captured, with
just under half the participants self-identifying as Caucasian and the
remaining as Arab, Black, South Asian and Chinese. However, gender
imbalance was evident, with only three male young carers in the sample.
The author maintained that this partly reflected the conflict boys
experienced when discussing or recognising their care contributions.
'This gendered reticence by young men due to the presumed violation of
expected gender roles makes it more difficult for them to get
recognition and receive dedicated support as carers'.^38^

The young carers derived a range of positive benefits, including added
maturity, empathy and the strengthening of familial bonds. However, they
also incurred a range of difficulties that caused short- and long-term
harm to their personal and professional development Together, these
difficulties presented what the author referred to as a 'powerful young
carer penalty', a term used to highlight the personal (emotional,
familial and social) and professional (education and employment-based)
disadvantages incurred by the young person\'s substantial and ongoing
caregiving.^38^

# Discussion {#sec5}

The main aim of this literature review was to investigate the emotional
and mental health needs of young carers and their circumstances,
particular those relating to their parents\' mental health. It also
explored the extent to which the needs of young carers are recognised
and supported by psychiatrists and other professionals working with
their parents, with shortcomings raised. The review concentrated on five
papers that showed the increased and particular needs and risks of young
carers of a parent with mental illness. One even found a higher
mortality risk among young carers. The findings are further explored
here.

According to Pakenham and Cox the type of illness present in the home
was associated with differential adjustment outcomes, with mental
illness and substance problems associated with more negative adjustments
across a range of outcomes.^29^ They suggested a potential explanation
for these findings: that in general, compared with physical illness,
mental illness and substance misuse were less understood in the
community and more likely to be associated with greater social
disadvantage, unpredictability of symptoms, family and social
disruption, stigma, discrimination and parent-child attachment
difficulties.

These results are similar to findings from previous studies. Cooklin and
Hindley suggested that parental mental illness could be responsible for
serious interruptions in a child\'s cognitive and emotional
development.^56^ They cited a list of adversities faced by children
affected by parental mental illness, which could affect their emotional
life, attachment and development. These included the ill parent\'s
disordered thinking and behaviour, the loss of emotional closeness and
the witnessing of distressing side-effects of treatments.^56^ According
to Mechling, many children witnessed or had to assist their parent in a
mental health crisis, such as a suicide attempt, psychotic episode or
aggressive state,^57^ leading other authors to highlight that this was a
responsibility beyond young people\'s years.^8,58,59^

Millennaar and colleagues discussed the influence on the daily lives of
children of parents with young-onset dementia. Children felt that the
child-parent bond was inverted as their parent became increasingly
dependent.^53^ There was more tension at home due to the stress of the
caring process and changes in the parent with dementia. They witnessed
strain on a healthy parent, had difficulties adjusting to the
behavioural, cognitive and personality changes in the parent with
dementia, and had to contribute more to the household. Millennaar *et
al* also suggested that parents of young carers were not always aware of
their child\'s needs.

Similarly, according to Stamatopoulos, substantial caregiving by young
people affected their joint familial, social and emotional well-being.
Numerous young carers revealed strained familial bonds, often linked to
a real or perceived inequality in the provision of care, in addition to
limited opportunities for socialisation outside the household. A
heightened sense of missing out created strain on existing friendships
and was tied to an inability to partake in social outings outside
school.^38^ Unbalanced friendships, resulting from parental-role
spillover, further strained young carers\' existing peer network.

Pakenham and Cox hypothesised that the elevated mental health problems
in children of a parent with illness relative to those from healthy
families were due to their extra caregiving demands.^29^ However, they
found that the effects on youth adjustment of a family member with
serious illness were not attributable in the main to factors such as
differential access to community services, being in a sole parent
family, the age or gender of the youth, or increased caregiving
responsibilities, although all these factors were implicated in
adjustment outcomes. They acknowledged that the absence of significant
interactions in their results was not consistent with a previous
study,^60^ where a complex set of potential moderators including age of
children, socioeconomic status and single parenthood were identified.
Stamatopoulos also found that the severity of the 'young carer penalty'
was associated with two key factors: family size and type of condition
requiring care. Specifically, participants from single-parent and
single-child families generally incurred a greater 'penalty', as did
those providing care in the context of more stigmatised illnesses such
as mental illness and substance abuse, and/or more debilitating physical
illness or disability.^38^

In their study on the variation of caregiver health and mortality risk
by age, Tseliou *et al* proposed a number of reasons that caregiving may
be deleterious to the health and well-being of young carers.^39^
Providing care could have interfered with schooling and the formation of
healthy social networks, thereby creating issues with other aspects of
social and emotional development and leading to a problematic transition
to adulthood. The authors suggested that many of the positives
associated with caregiving at older ages may not hold true for younger
ages. At older ages, where activities such as paid employment no longer
applied, caregiving may provide a purposeful role that tightens
interpersonal bonds appropriate to expectations of both age and existing
relationships, and may be seen as a natural progression, with positive
caregiving attributes being associated with lower mortality risk. At
younger ages, the expectations of role relationships and function are
different, and significant caregiving responsibilities are likely to be
at variance with perceived social norms. In contrast to older ages,
young caregivers may feel constrained in undertaking a role they had
little choice in accepting and that they considered inappropriate for
their age. The authors highlighted that the feeling of duty to provide
care has been linked to high caregiver burden and worse outcomes among
child caregivers.

Leu *et al* raised the failure among professionals to identify young
carers and some potential causes of their health and emotional
difficulties.^54^ Although many parents may have had an earlier
diagnosis of, for example, depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia
or personality disorder, they may later have gone unnoticed by
services.^57^ A secure attachment between child and parent could have
been undermined if the parent was inadequately treated or supported.^61^
When treatment did occur, clinicians may not have asked whether the
adult client had children, and, if parental status was discussed, the
focus of treatment was on the adult and the child\'s needs may have been
overlooked.^57^ Millenaar *et al* found that professionals in contact
with families often failed to identify children as providers of informal
care because they did not ask about their caring role.^53^ A Royal
College of Psychiatry report recognised that professionals may have
agreed that offering support to the children of their patients was
important but often felt this was not their role, and their natural
sympathy and alliance with their patient may have led to 'blindness'
about the needs of the child.^33^ Staff in mental health teams or
in-patient services may have seen themselves as solely the 'patient\'s
person'.^62^ Some may have seen it as above or outside their expertise
or responsibility, and therefore the province of someone else\'s
responsibility.^62^ Wolpert *et al* maintained that the needs of young
carers had been traditionally overlooked, falling between adult and
child mental health services. However, Child and Adolescent Mental
Health Services only see a small proportion of children affected by
parental mental illness.^62^

Cooklin suggested that for some young carers, the involvement of
services can sometimes worsen aspects of their experiences. Even though
a young carer had often been managing the situation for months, no one
asked their advice, what they knew about their parent\'s illness, or
what made it better or worse.^13^ Ali *et al* found that young carers
received several kinds of information about mental illness and advice
about what to do as long as the person with the mental illness was
within the healthcare system, but as soon as they were discharged,
support for the young carer ended too.^63^ Despite the statutory
requirement in the UK that mental health services elicited the views of
children and young people about the care plans for their parents\'
treatment, relatively few were talked with directly about the nature of
the illness.^62^ McAndrew *et al* cited young carers\' experience of
their relative being discharged from hospital but no one explaining
about changes in their medication, the administration of which had
previously been the young carer\'s responsibility.^30^ Similar to other
young carers, some children of parents with young-onset dementia were
not included in conversations with healthcare professionals after
diagnosis.^53^

Not all children of parents with a mental illness reported poor
outcomes.^22,38^ Dearden and Aldridge maintained that there were
positive aspects of caring for children and parents, as long as support
services were in place which adequately addressed the needs of all
family members. These positive aspects included enhanced maturity,
responsibility and independence, life skills, increased understanding
about disability issues and stronger family ties.^64^ According to
Fraser and Pakenham, this led to the development of a resilience model
whereby the potential harmful effects of risk factors were mitigated by
the influence of protective factors. Interventions should therefore
focus on targeted modification of risk factors such as isolation, while
promoting protective factors including independence and psychosocial
skills.^22^

Bilsborough reported ten demands of mental health professionals by young
carers, of which the top three were (a) introduce yourself, (b) tell us
who you are and what your job is, and (c) give us as much information as
you can.^65^ Cooklin identified what children said they needed: a
two-way explanation of the parent\'s illness' access to a neutral adult
with whom the child could discuss the illness and contact in times of
crisis, and who could act as the child\'s advocate; an opportunity for
the child to address their fears that they would 'catch' or that they
'caused' the illness or that the parent may die from it and/or they
might not see them again; interventions to diminish the child\'s social
isolation, to learn they are not the only one with the problem, and to
allow them to meet other young people with similar experiences; and
rebalancing the child\'s inverted role as carer, including opportunities
to do childish or youthful activities with other young people and
sharing the load of responsibility with one or more adults.^62^ However,
Cooklin warned of the dangers of offering counselling unless the child
explicitly accepted the idea of therapeutic help, as this might increase
their unwelcome sense of identification with the ill parent and define
them as on a similar pathway.^62^

It was noted that family work or therapy has become more available
within adult mental health services.^62^ Thus, a 'whole family approach'
model, developed in the UK has begun to be the dominant paradigm
internationally. In an NHS England presentation, Cooklin recommended
that all psychiatric adult care plan assessments should establish:
knowledge of all children face to face; who if anyone has assessed the
needs of the child or the effects of the parent\'s illness on them, and
what if any referral needs to be made; and who has explained the
patient\'s illness to the child.^56^

In the UK, the Care Act 2014 and Children and Families Act 2014 provided
statutory recognition for young carers\' entitlement to regular
assessments of their ability and suitability to provide care, and,
importantly, of the effects of the role on them.^66^ Of note, the UK
alone was classified as 'advanced' in an international comparison of
awareness and policy responses to young carers.^67^ The UK was advanced
in terms of awareness, research, law, social policy, government guidance
and service delivery. No country was identified as having developed
extensive awareness or sustained or sustainable policies. The analysis
noted that the reality in most countries is that young carers still fall
through gaps in policy and legal safety nets.

# Limitations {#sec6}

The main limitation of studies in this review was the absence of
intervention studies relating to young carers. Most of the studies were
qualitative and recorded the experiences of young carers and
professionals in contact with them. Although the qualitative studies
were limited by small sample sizes, resulting in poorer generalisability
of their findings, they had the strength of seeking out more detailed
and in-depth accounts.^21^ The review was limited by searching only
three main databases. Also, the search was limited to recent papers
published in the past 10 years. Finally, only the first author applied
the selection criteria.

# Conclusion {#sec7}

This literature review found that children and adolescents who cared for
a parent with illness may be at higher risk of a range of emotional and
mental health needs. Those who specifically care for a parent with
mental illness could be at an increased risk, possibly owing to the
potential for a more disordered relationship with the parent as a result
of their mental illness. However, it is argued that such adversities
could be mitigated with the help of information, recognition of the
young carer\'s role, and their inclusion in the parent\'s treatment
plan. Internationally, the UK appears to afford the most recognition to
young carers. However, many young carers in the country are still
falling through the net because mental health professionals who treat
their parents fail to recognise the significance of young carers.
Changes in practice to address this are crucial.

We thank Dr Ananta Dave, Medical Director, Consultant Child & Adolescent
Psychiatrist, Lincolnshire Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, for
continual support as Fellowship Supervisor; Dr Peter Byrne, MD MRCPsych,
Consultant Liaison Psychiatrist, Royal London Hospital and Associate
Registrar RCPsych for Public Mental Health; and Dr Alan Cooklin,
FRCPsych, Consultant in Family Psychiatry and founder of Our Time, a
charity for the children of parents with mental illness, for advice; Our
Time for use of its resources; and Shaun Kennedy, Librarian, Royal
College of Psychiatrists, for undertaking the literature search.

None.

**Roswitha Dharampal** was the Dinwoodie Research Fellow for Children
First, Royal College of Psychiatrists, and is ST6 in Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK; **Cornelius Ani** is Honorary Clinical Senior Lecturer,
Division of Psychiatry, Imperial College London, and Consultant in Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS Foundation
Trust.

R.D. collected, analysed and interpreted the data, and drafted the
manuscript. C.A. supervised the work and contributed to the
interpretation of the data, drafting and critical revision of the
manuscript.

[^1]: **Declaration of interest:** None.
