=====================================================
Section 12(2) MHA approval process is fit for purpose
=====================================================



Masum Khwaja

:date: 2020-06


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Rigby and McAlpine\ :sup:`1` have confusingly conflated criticism of
Section 12 Mental Health Act (s12 MHA) approval courses, attendance at
which is only one of several statutory criteria for s12 approval, with
criticism of the overall process of s12 approval. This letter addresses
some of the limitations of the article, which in hindsight I'm sure
Rigby and McAlpine would prefer to have entitled: ‘Are s12 approval
courses fit for purpose?’

Before reading further, readers should understand the following. •A
s12-approved doctor is legally defined as ‘a medically qualified doctor
who has been recognised under section 12(2) of the MHA as having
specific expertise in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorder’
and has had training in the application of the MHA.\ :sup:`2`\ •The
criteria for s12 approval are contained within the statutory
instructions\ :sup:`3` and represent the Government's requirements
regarding the work experience, training and qualifications doctors need
to possess before they can legally be considered to have the ‘specific
expertise in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorder’ required to
be an s12-approved doctor.•Regional s12 approval panels have robust
governance structures and procedures in place, including audit, that
ensure that only those doctors that meet the statutory criteria are
approved.•Doctors require only a basic working knowledge of the MHA to
be involved in MHA assessments (MHAAs).•Doctors do not need to be s12
approved to be involved in MHAAs. If they are not s12 approved then it
is preferable that they have personally treated the patient in the past
or have some previous knowledge of the patient's case.•S12 approval
courses are not courses on which doctors learn about the MHA, or how to
conduct MHAAs, for the first time. The courses serve to reinforce and
enhance attendees’ knowledge of the MHA and of the MHA Code of Practice.
They offer valuable time for discussion among clinicians, with a
solicitor present, with debate often focused on the intricacies of the
MHA as opposed to the basics.•Not all s12-approved doctors are actively
involved in detaining patients under the MHA. Examples include medical
members of the first-tier tribunals (mental health), Second Opinion
Appointed Doctors (SOADs) and doctors who produce independent expert
reports for court.

Aspects of Rigby and McAlpine's article that need highlighting include
the following. •Rigby and McAlpine imply that s12 doctors may not be
‘equipped with the knowledge and skills’, particularly knowledge of the
MHA, to consider detention of patients under the MHA and that this may
have contributed to a rise in detentions over the past decade. There is
no evidence to support their view, which in any case has not considered
that the decision to apply to detain a person under the MHA does not lie
with s12 doctors but with, usually, an approved mental health
professional (who makes the application).•Rigby and McAlpine declare
that a ‘lack of formative assessment [in relation to s12 course
objectives] is particularly concerning considering that there is
evidence to indicate that there are inadequacies in many psychiatrists’
understanding of the relevant [MHA] legislation’. Once again, this is an
eye-catching assertion for which they offer no convincing evidence. The
two papers they cite are more than 20 years old, from 1999 and 1997
respectively, and pre-date the introduction of routine s12 approval
courses, which commenced around 2002.•Rigby and McAlpine state that
international applicants with MRCPsych may not be aware of the UK MHA as
‘the MRCPsych does not assess UK mental health law’. However, they
neglect to mention that s12 legal instructions require that ‘if the
applicant has completed all or a substantial part of their training
outside England or Wales, that the applicant must provide evidence of
‘steps the applicant has taken to familiarise themselves with
psychiatric practice and the organisation of psychiatric services in
England or Wales, including the practical application of the 1983
Act’.\ :sup:`3` Furthermore, the MRCPsych curriculum is different to the
requirements for core training (e.g. Workplace Based Assessments
(WBPA)), and the knowledge and skills pertinent to s12 approval are
mostly gained outside preparation for the MRCPsych examination.•In
criticising references for s12 approval, Rigby and McAlpine fail to
appreciate that references for s12 approval are not restricted to
commenting on an applicant's ability to undertake an MHAA but also
require referees to be able to comment on, for example, the applicant's
report writing and attendance at legal hearings, or that referees are,
as always, bound by General Medical Council guidance in that references
must be honest, objective and include all information relevant to a
colleagues’ competence, performance and conduct.\ :sup:`4`\ •The
response rate of their survey was only 21.7% (5/23), which is far too
low for the results to be usefully interpreted regardless of
triangulation.

In summary, Rigby and McAlpine offer no convincing evidence that
attendees of s12 courses do not have a working knowledge of the MHA
sufficient to undertake MHAAs, or that the introduction of an additional
requirement for s12 approval, to pass a multiple choice question (MCQ)
and clinical examination, essentially on the MHA and on conducting
MHAAs, is required.

We would also argue that, other than theoretically, Rigby and McAlpine
provide no evidence that s12 courses, as they are currently delivered,
fail to fulfil their core objectives or require major revision, or that
the s12 approval process is anything but fit for purpose.

It is always important to consider how training may be improved; in
relation to s12 courses, as Rigby is aware, the London Approval Panel
have suggested that benchmarking MCQ course material and content across
s12 courses nationally might support the development of improved course
material and potentially of a ‘s12 course MCQ self-assessment revision
aid’ focused on the essential aspects of mental health law and the Code
of Practice akin to mandatory training on the MHA recommended by the MHA
Code of Practice and monitored by the Care Quality Commission.\ :sup:`5`

The development of continuing professional development material relevant
to building or maintaining the skills and knowledge required to act as
an s12-approved doctor, and support from employers to evidence
experience pertinent to s12 approval and reapproval in annual
appraisals, are areas that those interested in supporting doctors to
improve practice in relation to their s12 work might also wish to focus
on.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

M.K. is Chair of the London Section 12 and Approved Clinician (s12/AC)
approval panel. This letter was submitted on behalf of the Chairs of all
four regional s12/AC approval panels in England.
