===============================================================
Adjustment to short-term imprisonment under low prison staffing
===============================================================

Sarah O'Connor
Zoe Bezeczky
Yvonne Moriarty
Natasha Kalebic
Pamela J. Taylor [1]_Correspondence to Pamela J. Taylor
(taylorpj2@cardiff.ac.uk)
:Date: 2020-08

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To understand experience of early imprisonment in one prison under
   low staffing levels. A researcher, independent of the prison,
   interviewed each prisoner soon after reception and 3–4 weeks later.
   The first question of the second interview was: ‘I’d like to start by
   asking you about your experience of the last 3–4 weeks in prison'.
   Data are verbatim answers to this. Narratives were brief, so
   responses from all 130 participants were analysed, using grounded
   theory methods.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   The core experience was of ‘routine’ – characterised by repetitive
   acts of daily living and basic work, and little reference to life
   outside prison – generally resolved passively, towards boredom and
   ‘entrapment’.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   This ‘routine’ seems akin to the ‘institutionalism’ described in the
   end days of the 1960s’ mental hospitals. In an earlier study of
   similar men at a similar stage of imprisonment, under higher
   staff:prisoner ratios, experience was initially more distressing, but
   resolved actively and positively, suggesting that staff loss may have
   affected rehabilitative climate.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

More men are imprisoned in England and Wales than in any other Western
European country.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Many prisoners have at least one
mental disorder,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` but few are transferred to a healthcare
setting for treatment, so most treatment and most programmes for
offending behaviour are delivered in prison. Any impact of these is
likely to be affected by the prison milieu. Studies have shown that
people seem to be particularly vulnerable during early imprisonment,
especially to self-harm,\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.d)` although there is
widespread evidence of adjustment, including improvement of mental state
over 4–6 weeks.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)` Since these studies, however,
there have been substantial cuts to prison staffing in England and Wales
– about 40% in publicly run prisons since 2013.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Over the
same period, prisoner suicide, self-harm and violence rates have
risen.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Austerity in public service delivery is far from
unique to the UK, so it is important to understand day-to-day prisoner
experience and adjustment under reduced staffing. In one prison in
public management, for example, prison officer numbers had been cut from
200 in 2013 to 148 in 2016, while the number and type of prisoners had
remained more or less constant; there were 763 prisoners, of whom 52%
were unsentenced or serving sentences of less than 6 months, in 2013,
compared with 770, of whom 57% were similarly short-term, in
2016.\ :sup:`(n.d.i),(n.d.j)` Our research question was: How did new
receptions in this prison affected by staff cuts experience day-to-day
living during the first 4–5 weeks of a new imprisonment?

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Overview
--------

Applying a grounded theory approach, a researcher employed independently
of the prison recorded prisoners’ responses to an open question about
experience of the current imprisonment. This study was designed to stand
alone, although it was embedded in a larger study, a randomised
controlled trial of a 9-group intervention for alcohol misusing
prisoners.

.. _sec1-2:

Ethics
------

The overarching study, including the qualitative components, had ethical
approval from the National Health Service Health Research Authority
National Research Ethics Service (NRES) Committee East of England –
Essex (IRAS ref. 140458; REC ref. 14/EE/0046). Information leaflets
about the research were made available to all prisoners on reception.
Each potentially eligible prisoner was approached by the researcher, who
explained the research to each man in private, assured him that neither
his treatment in the prison nor in the criminal justice system more
widely would be affected by a decision to participate or not and
answered any questions about the research. Confidentiality was assured,
except with reference to any specific information about intent or plan
to harm self or others or to escape from the prison. Consenting men were
asked to sign a consent form. Each man had at least 24 h to reflect
before full participation and could withdraw at any time if he changed
his mind about the research. The rate of refusal to participate was
below rates reported in similar studies (P. J. Taylor, personal
communcation, 2019), but still about one in five men approached for
screening refused and 27 (11%) of the eligible men initially agreeing to
participate subsequently withdrew.

.. _sec1-3:

Sample
------

Participants were recruited between June 2014 and August 2016, from men
newly received into one UK prison. In a two-stage screening process, the
first stage was to identify, from records, all men likely to be in
prison on this occasion for under 12 months (short-term prisoners) but
to remain in this prison for at least 1 month, thus likely to acquire
sufficient experience of the environment to be able to describe living
in the prison and adjusting to it rather than talk about receiving a
prison sentence *per se*. About 1 week after reception, a researcher
invited these men to meet her to explore willingness to participate, to
take formal consent from those willing and to complete a second,
face-to-face screen for alcohol\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` or drug\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`
misuse. All 238 consenting men screening positive for substance misuse
were included; 197 remained for interview on a subsequent day up to a
week later about pre-prison life experiences and their mental state.
Between 3 and 4 weeks later, those still in prison and consenting were
interviewed about their experience of this imprisonment and their mental
state was re-evaluated. Data from the opening of this second interview
are analysed in the study we report here.

For the trial, the men were randomised to receive either standard prison
regime alone or prison regime and a 3-week group programme between these
two interviews. The group programme included motivational work and
self-management skills development, delivered by clinical psychologists
from a local health board. Both intervention and treatment-as-usual men
were included in this qualitative work.

.. _sec1-4:

Procedures
----------

All interviews were conducted in private, by the same researcher on both
occasions for each man. The data for this study were responses to the
opening question of the second interview: ‘I'd like to start by asking
you about your experience of the last 3–4 weeks in prison’. After this,
only simple, neutral prompts were used to encourage the men to talk
freely about this, for example ‘go on’, ‘tell me more’. Each prisoner's
responses were documented contemporaneously and any abbreviated words or
phrases written up in full immediately after the interview was complete.
The interviews were not audio-recorded; audio-recording is commonly
discouraged in grounded theory work and external researchers are not
generally permitted to take recording equipment into prisons. Once each
man had said everything that came to his mind, unprompted by us, about
this imprisonment, he was asked some specific, supplementary questions
about aspects of the imprisonment, including how much time he spent out
of his cell, whether he had work, education and/or outside visitors, and
whether he got on with prison staff and other prisoners. In turn, we
were able to access independent reports on this prison from Her
Majesty's Inspectorate of Prisons.\ :sup:`(n.d.i),(n.d.j)` These two
separate sources of data allowed some *post hoc* consideration of the
extent to which reported experiences fitted with actual activities on
the one hand and general prison conditions on the other.

.. _sec1-5:

Data analysis
-------------

Anonymised, free narrative data were analysed in two batches – control-
and intervention-arm men – by researchers blind to trial-arm membership
and without reference to answers to specific questions about this
imprisonment. This was to allow for the possibility that participating
in groups as part of the trial affected the standard prison experience.
The narratives tended to be short, a third of them not more than three
sentences, so we decided to analyse all of them rather than defining the
sample size by data saturation as would be more usual in a study of this
kind. We used a grounded theory approach to
analysis.\ :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.n)` The first narrative was examined, and
categories of information contained in it extracted into a table, as far
as possible labelling each category with a word or phrase used by the
participant, with the supporting evidence of the full quotation. The
second narrative was analysed in a similar way, using already identified
categories where possible and adding new ones as appropriate. Two of us
analysed the first 10 narratives masked to each other, then compared the
ratings. Differences between us lay only in the extent to which we had
listed each item as a separate category of routine – for example ‘having
food’ as a common term for taking meals rather than listing each meal as
a separate category. It was agreed that even the smallest of categories
would be listed initially, after which both extractions were in full
agreement.

We then completed first-level category identification from each batch
separately (see Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.2). It was apparent that very similar
categories of experience were emerging, regardless of trial arm, so data
from all the men were combined for further analysis. Using constant
comparative analysis, higher-order categories were allowed to emerge,
and then a core category, which best encompassed all the other
categories.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Sample characteristics
----------------------

In total, 130 men provided valid interviews. Given the sample size, we
have not tabled each man's personal characteristics for context but
provide the following summary. Their mean age was 30 years (s.d. = 7.9).
Most (101/130) had been in prison before, with a mean total time spent
in prison, after adding their various remands and sentences together, of
just over 5 years (5.17, s.d. = 5.65). Two-thirds had mental health
concerns (87/130), over a quarter physical health concerns (36/130) and
screening confirmed that all were struggling with problem substance use.

.. _sec2-2:

The core experience of this imprisonment
----------------------------------------

The core category or concern was of ‘routine’ within the prison. The
most repeated elements were activities of daily living (‘got up’, ‘made
a cuppa’, ‘food’, ‘fag’, ‘nap’, ‘TV’, ‘association’ (when prisoners are
allowed to mingle freely out of their cells), ‘cleaning’), with most men
making some reference to at least one of these. Most of these activities
were just listed to us – without further comment – but in a few cases
comments were explicitly negative – ‘do a bit of work, well I say work,
fuck around on the computer. I'm wasting time […] really’ (141); ‘I'm
fed up of TV’ (230) (the number shown in parentheses indicates the
particular man making the statement). A few men mentioned going to the
gym or taking other forms of exercise, and a few were explicit about not
doing so. Other activities sought by the men as part of a healthy
routine but which required more initiative met mostly with limits and
frustration. These activities were work, education and courses. Few men
reported attending education or courses, but most were preoccupied with
seeking work – ‘my brain needs to focus on something’ (217). More than
half reported actually working, although often repetitive cleaning or
prison maintenance, with some explicitly objecting to this: ‘I don't
want to just work for the prison’ (154). Others were explicit about the
frustrations of trying to get ‘real work’: ‘I'm frustrated because I
didn't get a job’ (217). Many seemed accepting, coming back to the
concept of routine: ‘You get into a routine and tell yourself it's not
forever’ (215).

This dreary routine also seemed to encompass the men's experience of the
outside world. Few men volunteered reference to family or friends, and
most of these only in terms of ‘routine visits or phone calls’. The few
men who referred to outside events with emotion were all negative: ‘they
wouldn't let me go to my Dad's funeral; I was a bit upset’ (120); ‘Nan
passed away […] someone came from the chapel […] he asked if I was
alright and if I was going to do anything stupid while I was in here’
(211).

.. _sec2-3:

The model of adjustment to this imprisonment
--------------------------------------------

The men all felt some sense of movement over the 3 weeks in relation to
this ‘routine’. Two directions of resolution were apparent. The stronger
was passive movement towards feeling ever more trapped or ‘banged up’.
The weaker, experienced at all by very few, was of ‘being busy’ and even
of ‘time flying’.

Passive resolution was characterised by comments such as: ‘The same
stuff, day in day out, it just does your head in’ (100); ‘spend all my
time sweltering in my cell’ (219); ‘banged up most of the time’ (109).
For a few, though, even this restrictive routine provided a kind of
stability: ‘I'm settled now. Been in 10 times and got my routine now’
(128); ‘I like the routine of prison’ (253).

The very few men who described more active movement towards ‘being busy’
and ‘time flying’ were not only looking for ‘new opportunities’, but
considered that they had found them: ‘it's busy, and I like to keep
busy’ (106); ‘time goes quicker now I'm doing stuff’ (117). Just two men
stood out as different because they specified that they themselves were
trying to help others, which gave them a sense of purpose: ‘I'm also the
smokers’ champion – I give people advice on coping strategies, just like
being a listener really’ (134); ‘I've been cleared to be a prisoner
listener. History of self-harm, so surprised, didn't ever think I would.
Look forward to starting that’ (153). Further, when these more positive
things happened, prison staff were invariably also seen in a positive
light and as helping them to move in a positive direction.

.. _sec2-4:

Barriers to and facilitators of adjustment
------------------------------------------

In this model of adjusting to imprisonment, the men volunteered
particular barriers and facilitators as affecting direction of movement
towards being trapped and bored or towards being busy. These broadly
fell into two types – personal or prison issues.

.. _sec2-4-1:

Personal issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The few personal issues raised relating to life outside prison were
almost invariably described as problems, leaving the men feeling more
restricted and trapped: ‘I'm stressing a lot, thinking I'm a parent,
shouldn't be here, I should be out there looking after my missus and
kids’ (102).

Reports of the impact of relationships in prison were more mixed. Some
liked their relationships with other prisoners and thought they helped
pass the time positively: ‘chill out with the boys and have a chat, the
boys are all good in here’ (103). Most were more negative, with ‘routine
irritations’ beyond their control promoting a negative path towards an
increasing sense of entrapment: ‘me and my cell mate just end up bugging
the shit out of each other’ (100); ‘It's hell in here – kicking doors,
bunch of kids’ (207). There was an occasional report of loss of an
in-prison attachment as a stressful ‘outside-prison’ issue: ‘I was in
with my other mate, but he went to [another] prison. I'm gutted. I won't
be seeing him for three years – that's how long he's got left. I'll have
to do another sentence to see him’ (141).

Another major personal issue frequently referred to was ill health. Most
comments indicated that this was a real barrier to progress and left
individuals feeling restricted. Occasionally, these were in the form of
a simple statement of fact: ‘my liver is fucked’ (112); ‘I got a
diagnosis. PTSD’ (230). Sometimes state of health was a more explicit
barrier: ‘Won't let me go to the gym because of my blood pressure’
(101); ‘Sleeping mostly. My head is shot’ (223). Six men, though,
thought prison was helping or could help their health specifically: ‘No,
it's brilliant. I feel better and put a bit of weight on’ (138); ‘I've
seen mental health today – let them know my frustrations. She is going
to help me’ (134).

.. _sec2-4-2:

Prison system issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The prison system issues that most felt frustrated by were the ‘routine
blocks’, or barriers, to their efforts which left them trapped in their
poor health, boredom and numbing routine. Very occasionally, this was
attributed to staff personally – ‘Staff don't care’ (238) – but mostly
to the system. This was of particular concern in relation to health:
‘I'm waiting to see the dentist. Remember I had toothache last time you
came [3 weeks before]? Well I've got an abscess now. I asked to see the
dentist, but I've not heard back’ (147); ‘I still haven't seen mental
health’ (222); ‘I was pissing blood and passed kidney stones on Monday.
There is no help in here’ (148). Prison issues posing barriers to
occupation were commonly described, with most wanting to be productive
but being frustrated in their efforts: ‘I've applied for everything,
I'll do anything’ (262); ‘You read the prison policies and they say you
must work and I'm here begging for it. I've spoken to the officers […]
I've put three apps [applications] in so far. I said I would kick off in
a week if I didn't get something but my partner said it's not worth it’
(217); ‘You don't seem to get anywhere when you put the applications in
– we made a complaint but I haven't heard anything about that either’
(247); ‘I think the system is designed to break you’ (156).
Prison-system problems were thus generally seen as frustrating recovery
and a direct barrier to progress.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

‘Routine’ is, by definition, made up of a series of repeated, expected
actions. In some form, it is ubiquitous among human beings. It may be
imposed in order to influence behaviours. Institutions, almost by
definition, impose routines, whether deliberately or otherwise, so it
may seem unsurprising that men put routine at the core of their
experience of being in prison. The routine that most men reported,
however, was impoverished and seemed comparable to reports from the end
days of the big ‘asylums’ for people with mental disorder, in which the
patients tended to become as impoverished as their
environment.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)–(n.d.p)` Wing\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` subsequently
emphasised that this could happen in the community too if resources were
limited. A difference between the patients described by Wing and
colleagues and these prisoners is that none of these prisoners had
enduring psychotic illness, so it is possible that they were less
vulnerable. A few prisoners welcomed the basic, limited repetitiveness
of the experience and a very few found positive ways through the system.
Most were explicit about finding the limitations frustrating and being
unable to affect their situation. To what extent, however, could we rely
on these accounts from, perhaps, disgruntled men and to what extent is
this a consistent experience?

.. _sec3-1:

Other evidence on the experience of being in this prison
--------------------------------------------------------

There is an independent inspectorate of prisons for England and Wales
(HM Inspectorate of Prisons), which conducts reviews of individual
prisons as well as occasional thematic reviews of needs and services in
them (https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprisons/).
Fortuitously, an unannounced inspection of this prison took place in
2016, more or less at the same time as this research. The resultant
report, despite referring to ‘a decent, hard-working staff group who had
maintained good relationships with the men in their care, and had done
well to keep the prison stable through some challenging times’ (p. 5),
highlighted how low staffing levels had affected the responsiveness of
staff to the needs of the men in the prison.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` In 2016,
for example, only 16% of prisoners’ call bells were responded to within
5 min, compared with 39% in 2013; timetabled activities were run less
often, application response rates fell from a 59% within 7 days in 2013
to 31% in 2016, and only 5% of men reported spending more than 10 h out
of their cells in 2016 but 10% in 2013, all significant differences.
This all fits with the limitations that the men in our sample were
citing. It indicates that the prison milieu may be subject to
substantial changes over time. This has implications for all prisoners
and their chances of ‘reform’. From a trialist's perspective, it is
clear that ‘treatment as usual’, the traditional standard against which
psychosocial interventions are evaluated, must be measured in some
detail in order to understand its meaning and potential impact. For
clinical and criminal justice system practice, staff should be aware of
the potential impact of the milieu on what they can deliver.

.. _sec3-2:

How prisoner experience after staff cuts compares with experience at a better staffed time
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We were able to consider the model of prisoner experience and adjustment
for the years 2014–2016 in the context of data we collected in a similar
way from similar men in this prison (and another in South Wales) in
2007–2008, before the prison staff cuts.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` In that study,
narratives were much longer and richer, to the extent that we had clear
data saturation (no new categories of information emerging) after just
20 cases. This in itself fits with the possibility that the later sample
of men were, indeed, already so restricted by their ‘routine’ that they
were less engaged in thinking and talking about themselves and their
experiences. The core concern of these similar men in prison during the
better staffed period was of the losses inflicted by the imprisonment
and how awful the experience was. Although, even then, there was some
passive resolution of this concern by ‘getting used to it’, most invoked
a sense of active movement towards becoming ‘alright’, which meant
feeling and getting better, making positive changes and developing good
relationships. The men in the earlier sample spoke much more about how
much they were missing people, freedom, information and other resources,
whereas those in the current sample were much more focused on prison
*per se*. The study samples were of different men, but as their age,
sentences, prior experience of imprisonment and rates of reported mental
health difficulties were so similar (the earlier sample is described in
Taylor *et al*, 2010\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`), it is reasonable to consider that
the difference in prison milieu and experience has had an impact.

Souza & Dhami,\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` in a quantitative study of men in two
English prisons at about the same time as our earlier study, also cited
losses of family, friends and freedom as the hardest experiences
reported by first-time and recurrent male prisoners, but also some
resolution of problems through improving health and having opportunities
for rehabilitation. They then argued that positive engagement or not was
better explained by aspects of life before imprisonment and overall
exposure to imprisonment than by prison security or regime. They could
not envisage the extent of imminent cuts, and we must now question
whether, for most prisoners, impoverished regimes force their focus onto
prison conditions *per se* and limit capacity for concern about others
and/or reflection and development.

.. _sec3-3:

The advantages of richer routines
---------------------------------

Behan\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` examined the specific prisoner experience of
educational programmes. Although some prisoners wanted to ‘better
themselves’, gain new skills and prepare themselves for work on release,
some used these programmes as a way of coping with their imprisonment,
saying that it took their mind off their experience in prison and
‘killed time’. This use of education to better oneself or as a coping
strategy resonates with the narratives given by our sample of men, some
of whom were clearly wanting to develop their skills and abilities,
whereas others just wanted to get out of the cell or the wing or simply
fill the time. Behan suggests that attendance for experiences such as
education may also give a greater sense of agency in being able to
control their prison routine. Our men commonly found themselves
frustrated and without agency because they wanted to be at education or,
more likely, work and could not get there.

Nurse *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` found, in a qualitative study of prison
environment and mental health of prisoners and prison staff, that
understaffing and a lack of activities led to increased stress and
frustration among prisoners. The men in their sample, like those in
ours, viewed any activity as important to ‘stimulate your mind’. Nurse
and colleagues, however, found more tension between prisoners and staff
than in either of our studies. Their data were, however, collected
through focus groups rather than individually. It may be that prisoners
feel more need to complain about staff when other prisoners are
listening than when they can talk in private.

Reiter *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` were wide ranging in their inquiries
about prison experience, covering a broader range of prisoners and
prison conditions than we did. All our prisoners were living in
‘ordinary locations’ within the prison during the study. Nevertheless,
it is striking that in the relatively well-staffed Danish prisons of the
Reiter study, men's experiences had more in common with those in the
earlier of our studies. The Danish prisoners too seemed very aware of
what they were missing by being in prison and, although making
references to in-prison conditions, did not appear so mentally bound by
their routine as the men in our ‘austerity prisoner sample’.

.. _sec3-4:

Limitations
-----------

This was a qualitative component of a wider study and not set up as a
primary open inquiry in its own right. Nevertheless, the question about
experience of imprisonment was planned, open ended, consistent and posed
before any other questions at the second interview after the men had had
about a month of experience of imprisonment. The interviews were not
audio-recorded, so the notes and final written record of the responses
could not be checked except against each other, but as responses were
generally not long or complex, we think it extremely unlikely that any
key word or phrase was missed. The researchers collecting the data
experienced some of the same frustrations in accessing the prisoners as
the prisoners did in their daily living, which could have coloured data
recording, but consistency on some key issues with the report published
by HM Inspectorate of Prisons\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` mitigates against this.

We have suggested that the dull, restricted, almost institutionalised
experience of the men, so different from that of an earlier cohort,
related to staff cuts. It is impossible to rule out other explanations
completely, but the reduction in prisoner officer numbers from about 200
to fewer than 150 was the main observable change. Numbers and types of
prisoner overall remained the same and there were only modest
differences between research cohorts in likely key measures. Although
all of the men in our later cohort screened positive for substance
misuse so did 84% in the earlier cohort; 74% of the men in the earlier
cohort had had prior experience of imprisonment, but so did 80% in the
later cohort.

.. _sec3-5:

Summary and implications
------------------------

Focus on prison ‘routine’, which tended to leave prisoners feeling
trapped, dominated short-term prisoners’ accounts of their time in this
one UK prison at any time between July 2014 and August 2016. They did
not raise concerns about the awfulness of the losses of family, friends
and freedom incurred by imprisonment, as men in an earlier cohort had
done, and hardly referred to the outside world. They rarely reported any
positive resolution, which had been prominent among the men in the
earlier study. The large change in staffing levels made a difference to
the environment, and it seems that the core experience and adjustment of
prisoners cannot be assumed to be a constant in such a context.
Indicators that the later men were experiencing ‘institutionalism’, not
apparent in an earlier, better staffed time, should concern those who
fund and commission prisons.

Our warmest thanks to the staff of Cardiff prison, who facilitated the
work under the most difficult circumstances, and to the prisoners
themselves. Many others contributed substantially to the study,
including: Michael Robling and Rebecca Playle, grant co-applicants;
Rachel McNamara, all of the Centre for Trials Research, and Hannah
John-Evans, who completed some of the data collection; Anna Kissell and
Gemma Plant, who provided additional research support in the Division of
Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University; and clinical psychologists
from Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University Health Board, who provided the
group work: Ruth Bagshaw, Bronwen Davies, Leigh Gale, Thomas Hoare,
Lynwen Mallows, Sara Morgan, Chris Stamatakis and Samantha Vine.

The trial of which this study is a part was funded by Health and Care
Research Wales and the Welsh Assembly Government under the Research for
Patient and Public Benefit (RfPPB) scheme (grant number RfPPB-1028).

S.O'C. completed qualitative analysis of all cases and co-led the
drafting of the paper. Z.B. completed most of the interviews with the
prisoners and contributed to drafting the paper. Y.M. provided
independent qualitative advice and contributed to drafting the paper.
N.K. completed independent analysis of a proportion of the cases from
each group and contributed to drafting the paper. P.J.T. designed the
study, analysed data for half the cases, co-led paper drafting and
completed revisions.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.2.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

**Sarah O'Connor** is a medical student in the Division of Psychological
Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff
University, UK. **Zoe Bezeczky** is a research assistant in the Division
of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of
Medicine, Cardiff University, UK. **Yvonne Moriarty** is a research
associate and the ABACus Trial Manager in the Centre for Trials
Research, College of Biomedical & Life Sciences, Cardiff University, UK.
**Natasha Kalebic** is a post-doctorate research assistant in the
Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of
Medicine, Cardiff University, UK. **Pamela J. Taylor** is Professor of
Forensic Psychiatry in the Division of Psychological Medicine and
Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.v.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
