=========================================
What neuroscience has already done for us
=========================================
------------------------------------------------------------------
: Commentary on… Why hasn't neuroscience delivered for psychiatry?
------------------------------------------------------------------

Lindsey Isla Sinclair [1]_Correspondence to Lindsey Sinclair
(Lindsey.sinclair@bristol.ac.uk) [2]_
:Date: 2020-06

:Abstract:
   Each of the components of the biopsychosocial model of mental illness
   is important for understanding mental illness. Biological and genetic
   abnormalities have been demonstrated in major mental illnesses. These
   are leading to changes in our understanding of these conditions, as
   well as our understanding of the link between life events and mental
   illness.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

As readers will be well aware, the biopsychosocial model has underpinned
psychiatry for several decades.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Each component of this
model is important for our understanding of mental illness. Professor
Kingdon is therefore correct to say in his interesting editorial that
neuroscience is unlikely to hold all of the answers to why people
develop mental disorders and when they occur in their
lifetime.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` I challenge, however, his assertion that
‘biological changes have yet to be shown to be relevant to the major
mental disorders’.

.. _sec1:

Brain imaging and schizophrenia
===============================

Taking schizophrenia as an example, there are clearly demonstrable
differences in the brains of individuals with schizophrenia compared
with those of controls. It was first shown in the 1970s that people with
schizophrenia had enlarged cerebral ventricles.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Since
then abnormalities in both grey and white matter have been convincingly
demonstrated in the disorder.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` More sophisticated
brain-imaging techniques have allowed the discovery in recent years that
differences in brain volume are present even in medication-naive
individuals with first-episode psychosis.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` It seems
increasingly likely that there are differences in volume even before the
at-risk mental state, although this remains difficult to prove
definitively.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)–(n.d.g)`

Recently developed scientific techniques such as the use of induced
pluripotent stem cells to create a ‘cortex in a dish’ (*aka* brain
organoids) have allowed tantalising insights into why these imaging
abnormalities may emerge. Using cells from individuals with
schizophrenia (some with a range of predisposing genetic abnormalities)
multiple studies have shown abnormalities such as impaired cellular
differentiation and synapse formation.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)–(n.d.i)`

These studies add to the emerging hypothesis that the brain of someone
at risk of schizophrenia differs from controls at an early stage and
that these differences increase as psychosis emerges. These
neuroscientific findings are a good fit with the long-standing findings
from more psychosocially focused research that differences can be seen
in childhood behaviour in those who later develop
schizophrenia.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)–(n.d.k)` They also suggest that, to
develop better treatments for schizophrenia, we need to look beyond
compounds targeting dopamine receptors.

.. _sec2:

Genetics in intellectual disability and depression
==================================================

I would also challenge Professor Kingdon's assertion that no genetic
findings of use to the practising psychiatrist have been found for the
major mental illnesses. Genetic testing for copy number variants is
starting to form part of practice in intellectual disability
services.\ :sup:`(n.d.l),(n.d.m)` Using his example of depression he is
correct to say that the much vaunted candidate genes studied in the
1990s and 2000s have not been replicated in later, large
studies.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` However, more recent, vastly better powered
studies have produced findings of greater potential use. The most recent
genome-wide association study on depression found 87 independent loci
that were associated with depression, with a startling lack of genes
involved in the 5-HT system.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` This may suggest that,
although drugs acting on the 5-HT system are effective in treating
depression for many people, disturbances in 5-HT are not the cause of
depression. Findings such as these are likely to be of great benefit in
developing new treatments.

.. _sec3:

Epigenetics and treatment targetting
====================================

Neuroscience can also help us to explain the link between life events,
which are frequently assessed in psychosocial research, and mental
health outcomes. For example, epigenetic studies have shown that
maternal behaviour influences the expression of genes, including those
involved in the glucocorticoid stress response.\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.q)`
Because this work was done in rats it was possible to demonstrate that
this effect was not genetic as it was abolished by cross-fostering with
more affectionate mothers.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` Childhood maltreatment such
as physical abuse has long been recognised as a risk factor for mental
illness. Recent genetic and epigenetic studies are helping us to
understand why some people are more resilient to the effects of this
abuse than others.\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.s)` It has been suggested by some
authors that this information could be used to better target childhood
interventions, such as providing more intensive interventions to those
likely to be least resilient to the effects of childhood maltreatment.

.. _sec4:

Conclusions
===========

Our understanding of mental health problems has started to change
radically in the past few decades. It is only 50 years since it was
widely believed that parents could be responsible for their offspring
developing schizophrenia.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` Within the past 50 years
patients with intractable epilepsy were cared for in psychiatric
hospitals, something that would now be unthinkable, and the parent–child
relationship was seriously considered as a cause of
epilepsy.\ :sup:`(n.d.u),(n.d.v)`

This improvement in understanding has the potential to reduce stigma, to
ultimately lead to new treatments and to provide patients with a better
understanding of what is happening to them and why. It is critical that
mental health researchers work together, rather than in methods-based
silos, to further improve our understanding of why and how patients
develop mental health problems.

L.I.S. has received research funding from BRACE, Dementias Platform UK,
the British Neuropathological Society and the David Telling Charitable
Trust.

**Lindsey Isla Sinclair**, MBBS, MSc, PhD, MRCPsych, is a Clinical
Research Fellow in psychiatry in the Department of Population Health
Sciences at the University of Bristol, UK. Her research is neuroscience
based and she is a Gatsby/RCPsych travelling fellowship awardee 2019.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.v.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.

.. [2]
   See this issue.
