==================================
The recruitment legacy of COVID-19
==================================



Rajaei K. Sharma
Bhupinder Sharma
Harriet L. Ogle

:date: 2020-08


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

With increasing thought being put into COVID-19 and the implications for
psychiatric care in the months and years to come, it would be remiss to
not consider the potential impact this could have on recruitment to the
specialty.

Recruitment in psychiatry is a national, if not global problem, and has
been for some time. Although frequently highlighted, there has been
limited work clarifying the reasons behind the problem, which in turn
has led to muted and potentially ineffective responses. This could all
now be amplified by the COVID-19 crisis.

We know that foundation doctors already have very low exposure to
psychiatry placements and teaching; the proportion of psychiatry
teaching time has been found to be as low as 2.3% relative to surgical
and medical specialties seeing 44.1%. We also know that there is a
significant correlation between trainees having a foundation placement
in psychiatry and going on to apply for specialty training.\ :sup:`1`
This has been replicated in targeted studies with a surprisingly high
45% of psychiatric specialists found to not have even considered the
specialty before their foundation years.\ :sup:`2`

So, it is not an understatement that the current foundation year
trainees are to be drastically affected. Not only have rotations been
paused, but huge numbers have been redeployed. Already, the invaluable
experiences of an entire cohort have been curtailed, with more likely to
follow. Additionally, national exams have been cancelled; the impact of
this and the choices made thereafter may even lead to very
immediate-term shortages and unknown ramifications.

This is before we even consider those that will shortly follow them
through, the medical students. The proportionally enormous amount of
time lost directly affects many of the clearly identified factors
attracting students to the field such as placement and elective
exposure.\ :sup:`3` There have recently been some targeted strategies
implemented by the Royal College of Psychiatry to try and improve
recruitment – especially the ‘Choose Psychiatry’ campaign – these
outreach programmes might serve to be a much-needed lifeline more than
ever before. Psychiatric societies within universities might be the
great untapped resource that prevail the shutdown and educational
restrictions.\ :sup:`4` Could they, in turn, be a vital commodity?

There is a growing recognition that although it may appear to be
minutiae relative to the scale of a global pandemic, COVID-19 could have
a profound effect on the career progressions of a generation of
doctors.\ :sup:`5` Only by addressing this early and actively can we
mitigate potential disaster for years to come.

None.
