=================================================================================================================
Challenges during the transition from child and adolescent mental health services to adult mental health services
=================================================================================================================

Gaelle Hendrickx
Veronique De Roeck
Athanasios Maras
Gwen Dieleman
Suzanne Gerritsen
Diane Purper-Ouakil
Frédérick Russet
Renate Schepker
Giulia Signorini
Swaran Preet Singh
Cathy Street
Helena Tuomainen
Sabine Tremmery [1]_Correspondence to Gaelle Hendrickx
(gaelle.hendrickx@kuleuven.be)
:Date: 2020-08

:Abstract:
   The transition from child and adolescent to adult mental health
   services for young people with mental health problems is of
   international concern. Despite the high prevalence of mental
   disorders during adolescence and their tendency to continue during
   adulthood, the majority of young people do not experience continuity
   of care. The aim of this review paper is to unravel the complexity of
   transitional mental healthcare to clinicians, policy makers and
   mental health service managers, and to address challenges to a smooth
   transition process at all levels.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Young people's transition from child and adolescent mental health
services (CAMHS) to adult mental health services (AMHS) has gained
increasing international interest in recent years. At around the age of
16–18 years, young people with chronic mental health problems are
confronted with two simultaneous transitions: a situational transition
(from CAMHS to AMHS) and a developmental transition (to
adulthood).\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`

Transition is defined as an efficient, planned, patient-oriented process
that meets the medical, psychosocial and educational/occupational needs
of young people with chronic conditions.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Additionally,
the developmental perspective is important in conceptualising transition
as young people, those aged 16–24 years, are confronted with changes in
various life domains.\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.d)`

The transition age refers to the age at which the care of the young
person in CAMHS is continued in AMHS, and in most cases, concerns young
people in the 16–18 year age range. The following findings linked with
psychopathology are relevant for transitional care at this time point:
first, psychopathology has a high persistence from an early age into
adulthood\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`; second, the onset of many psychopathologies
has been shown to coincide with the transition
age.\ :sup:`(n.d.f),(n.d.g)` Critical changes in the brain occur during
late adolescence, which make this age group more vulnerable for
developing psychopathology.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

Moreover, 75% of all psychiatric disorders in adults start before 24
years of age, and 50% before 14 years of age.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` However,
there is a discord in the pattern of increased risk of psychopathology
in young people and mental health service use.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.i)`
Older adolescents access care far less (28.9%) than 13- to 16-year-olds
(50.9%) or adults over 26 years (41.1%).\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.k)`
Furthermore, the gap between CAMHS and AMHS, the so-called ‘transition
gap’, results in a clear discontinuity of care. A sizeable number of
youth and young adults who ‘fall’ in this transition gap access adult
services at a later point in time, when more serious and chronic
problems have developed.\ :sup:`(n.d.l),(n.d.m)`

The care gap affects not only the young people, but also their families,
communities and society as a whole. Mental health problems are
associated with poorer physical health and poorer functioning in the
social, educational and economic life domains.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` At the
societal level, the presence of a mental disorder during childhood leads
to a 10-fold higher health cost during adulthood compared with children
without mental health problems.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` To date, it is unclear
what the real societal impact of the care gap in late adolescence is and
to what extent adequate transitional care reduces this impact.

The aim of this paper is to summarise the new insights and developments
investigated since the review of Singh in 2009.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`
Furthermore, this paper includes research on youth mental health
services and shared management components, which is one of the
limitations of the review of Paul *et al*.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)`

Continuation of care is a complex process, with important players at the
policy and organisational level, service level and at the level of
individuals: patients, their families and healthcare providers. However,
care discontinuity cannot be explained by only one
level.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.q)` This paper attempts to unravel the
complexity of transitional mental healthcare to clinicians, policy
makers and mental health service managers, and to address challenges to
a smooth transition process at all levels. The advantage of splitting
the findings according to the three levels makes the extensive research
regarding transition more manageable. Furthermore, it emphasises the
complexity of the topic, but also makes clear that solutions are
possible at every level.

.. _sec1:

Challenges regarding transitional mental healthcare
===================================================

.. _sec1-1:

Policy and organisational level
-------------------------------

Improving transitional care has been on the policy agenda in different
European countries for some time now; however, it has been one of a
number of competing priorities. Furthermore, there has been a gap
between policy and implementation in practice, insufficient research
regarding transition, and a lack of transition protocols guiding
transitional care of service providers.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)`

Historically, the way in which mental health services have been
structured, with separate facilities for children/adolescents and adults
is a significant bottleneck to transitional care.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`
Eligibility thresholds for referral to CAMHS and AMHS often differ;
thereby causing young people to fall through the care
gap.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.r)` Furthermore, the CAMHS-AMHS interface is
characterised by different cultural approaches, a lack of communication
and doubts about AMHS staff being proficient in managing young peoples'
care.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)`

Waiting lists form another major barrier in the provision of mental
healthcare to youth and young adults.\ :sup:`(n.d.t),(n.d.u)` As a
result, young people presenting with a mental health problem at 17 years
of age are often referred directly to AMHS because the waiting time for
CAMHS coincides or exceeds their 18th birthday, i.e. the transition
boundary. Adult services, in turn, hesitate to treat these young people
before 18 years of age, because the expertise or the adjusted setting
for this patient group is lacking, or because internal or external
regulations prevent care providers from forming a treatment plan. Young
people who have attended CAMHS but find themselves on a long waiting
list for AMHS – usually with no interim support in place – describe this
as highly anxiety-provoking.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)`

Another challenge is the lack of training requirements for care
providers and variations in the content of training
programmes.\ :sup:`(n.d.w),(n.d.x)` The knowledge clinicians in either
child/adolescent or adult speciality acquire about young people largely
depends on whether they are provided with adequate training on
psychopathology of adolescents. A lack of confidence amongst mental
health practitioners to work with young people in transition is an area
of concern frequently identified by young people.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)`

Healthcare financing is another policy challenge affecting the care
trajectories of young people. Gaining financial responsibility at the
age of majority can have a real effect on the provision of care in some
countries. Differences in financial benefits for minors versus adults
may relate to the cost of a consultation, the possibility to organise
family therapy or the reimbursement of medication. Some health insurance
policies provide partial reimbursement for therapy sessions for young
people up to 18 years of age, but not for (young) adults. Hence,
although they have reached the age of majority and the ability to
organise their mental healthcare independently, young people often still
remain financially dependent on their parents to pay for their care. If
there is a serious disruption in the parent–child relationship, the
continuation of care at a new mental health service may be in jeopardy.

.. _sec1-2:

Service level
-------------

Different treatment approaches at CAMHS and AMHS pose a significant
challenge. In CAMHS, treatment is reported to be more family-oriented
and holistic, inherent to the legal position of the parents, whereas in
adult psychiatry, individual patients and their symptoms are the main
focus. These differences are described by young people and their
families as an important reason for discontinuing care in
AMHS.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` This perception may also lead to hesitance among
CAMHS clinicians to refer young people.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` In addition, the
lack of common registration and information systems hampers the exchange
of information between services.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`

.. _sec1-3:

Level of the individual
-----------------------

.. _sec1-3-1:

Youth and young adults
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Characteristics specific to young people can influence the transition
process. Having a severe and enduring mental illness, e.g.
schizophrenia, enhances the chance of being referred to AMHS, whereas
having a neurodevelopmental disorder decreases the chance of being
referred. Moreover, receiving medication, having a history of hospital
admissions and living with both parents or independently are all
variables that can determine whether a young person is more likely to be
referred.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.z)–(n.d.aa)`

Even if a transition to adult services has been carefully planned, a
young person's urge for autonomy and self-determination may influence
their care trajectory. For example, the young person can decide to
abandon psychological care or to not make the transition to AMHS, even
when a referral has been made.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.z),(n.d.aa),(n.d.ab)`
The reasons for this are diverse: young people want to solve their
problems themselves, or they may not want to repeat their story to a new
clinician. The lack of information about mental healthcare, the stigma
associated with mental health problems,\ :sup:`(n.d.ac),(n.d.ad)`
anxiety about how confidentiality is handled and the physical
accessibility of mental health services can all act as barriers to
seeking help or accessing care.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` Young people have also
suggested that further investments should be made to improve the
accessibility of mental healthcare and have pointed out to the
importance of e-health.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`

Furthermore, service (dis)engagement is influenced by an identity change
that accompanies the transition from CAMHS to AMHS. Besides adopting an
adult identity, transitioning to AMHS implies adopting a new illness
identity.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` Although CAMHS is associated with temporary
psychopathology, AMHS is associated with having a severe and enduring
mental illness, as this is often the prerequisite for being referred to
or accepted by AMHS.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` Disengagement can be attributed to
failure in adopting a new illness identity, an illness identity that is
incompatible with AMHS service remit or fractious professional
relationships between CAMHS and AMHS during the transition, which causes
anxiety and uncertainty to the young person.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)`

Although young people want to make autonomous decisions and are
concerned about the confidentiality of information, the loss of parental
or other psychosocial support is an important negative factor for care
continuation or adequate help-seeking behaviour.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)`

The relationship of trust with the CAMHS clinician must not be
forgotten, as at the transition to adult services this relationship
comes to an end. Entering into a new social and trust relationship at an
AMHS can be daunting for young people. On the other hand, a positive
relationship with the new clinician can enable the development of other
positive relationships.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)`

.. _sec1-3-2:

The parents and important others
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The parents' position changes the moment a young person becomes an
adult, as their legal right to be involved in the care for their child
is no longer there. Furthermore, because of the distinct service
cultures, CAMHS and AMHS clinicians' training regarding family
involvement differs considerably; in adult psychiatry, the focus is more
on the individual, not the family.\ :sup:`(n.d.y),(n.d.ag)`

The need to give a young person autonomy to make their own decisions
regarding treatment can be a difficult process for the parents, who may
also require additional support.\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)` Many parents and
carers would like to remain involved in the treatment, although they
respect their child's wishes and their right to
privacy.\ :sup:`(n.d.ai),(n.d.aj)` They also want psychoeducation about
how to deal with their child and to attend parent support groups where
they can benefit from increased knowledge, shared recognition and
exchange of experiences.\ :sup:`(n.d.ak)`

.. _sec1-3-3:

The clinician
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mental healthcare transition should be a planned and efficient process.
This implies starting on time to prepare individuals and their families
for the transition. Some authors state that this process should start at
14 years of age,\ :sup:`(n.d.al)` whereas others stress that it should
start at least 1 year before the transition boundary.\ :sup:`(n.d.am)`
For the process to be efficient, by the time the young person reaches
the transition boundary it should be clear whether they need further
care or not, and whether this care will be continued in CAMHS or whether
a referral to AMHS, or another type of service (e.g. private practice),
is appropriate. In any case, the clinician should consider all these
options to make the best possible decision.

To date, there is no consensus about this decision-making process, and
the follow-up trajectory of the young person thus depends on the
practitioner's clinical judgement. Because of the lack of transition
protocols, this clinical judgement is not usually based on a structured
assessment of transition-relevant factors, such as severity of symptoms,
the patient's motivation regarding further mental healthcare and the
risk and protective factors in several psychosocial
domains.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` CAMHS and AMHS should, therefore, be supported
in the initiation, advancement and supervision of the transition
process. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence and
Cleverley *et al* have produced guidelines on
transition.\ :sup:`(n.d.an),(n.d.ao)` The Managing the Link and
Strengthening Transition from Child to Adult Mental Healthcare
(MILESTONE) project developed an instrument for assessing transition,
the Transition Readiness and Appropriateness Measure, a process called
managed transition, which uses the Transition Readiness and
Appropriateness Measure to guide clinicians' actions, and training
regarding transition.\ :sup:`(n.d.ap),(n.d.aq)`

The transition process is also influenced by professional relationships
between CAMHS and AMHS. Clinicians' decisions regarding referrals may
depend on the (not always comprehensive) knowledge they have of the
other care provider and their prior experience with the service and
clinician.\ :sup:`(n.d.ar)` Furthermore, incompatible beliefs about who
is responsible for the different steps during the transition process,
lack of confidence in AMHS staff in managing young people and different
cultural approaches in service delivery may also impede the transition
process.\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.as)`

.. _sec2:

Improving transition through specific interventions
===================================================

Some of the above-mentioned challenges provide directions as to what
should be done in clinical practice and at policy level to improve the
transition process. On the other hand, effect studies are lacking and
there is a need for longitudinal research about different transition
trajectories and health outcomes.\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.at)` Although care
trajectories, transition experiences and quality of transition have been
investigated within the UK,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`
Ireland,\ :sup:`(n.d.aa),(n.d.as)` the USA and
Australia,\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` no research has been performed about the care
and transition trajectories (both the experiences and the quality) in
relation to their effects on mental health in the long term. The
MILESTONE project contains a prospective study on the longitudinal
outcomes and experiences of young people reaching the transition
boundary within eight different European countries, taking into account
differences in the organisation of mental health systems, the age at
which transition takes place and the available
services.\ :sup:`(n.d.ap),(n.d.aq)` The MILESTONE study will result in
evidence- and practice-based guidelines that clinicians can follow to
support their decision-making and direct their actions.

To prevent young people from falling through the care gap and to tailor
services to their specific needs, new service models have been
developed. Examples include mental health services in Australia, Canada
and some European countries that target the age group of 0–25 years.
Besides solely focusing on mental health, these services take into
account all aspects of psychosocial
functioning.\ :sup:`(n.d.au)–(n.d.av)` Despite the aim of trying to
solve the problem of a shortage of tailored services for this target
group, some of these services are faced with an additional transition
boundary: the first around 12 years of age and the second around 25
years of age, both of which need to be optimally managed. At the current
time, it is too early to conclude if these models provide an answer to
the longstanding problems of transition barriers.

An alternative approach to bridge the transition gap is by improving the
liaison between CAMHS and AMHS, but keeping services as they currently
exist. To achieve this, diverse models to enhance joint-working between
services, including transition clinics and transition coordinators have
been suggested.\ :sup:`(n.d.aw)–(n.d.ax)`

.. _sec3:

Improving clinical practice
===========================

Policy makers should consider implementing the topic of transition in
the training program of clinicians as 94% of European psychiatric
trainees indicated further training regarding transition is
necessary.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` Furthermore the distinct split between CAMHS
and AMHS should be revised as well as the separate funding, which may
hamper collaborative efforts.\ :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.ao)`

To ensure that the transition process is better managed, the transition
should be mentioned to the young person well in
advance,\ :sup:`(n.d.q),(n.d.an),(n.d.ao)` whereby the young person
should be involved in the decision-making during all phases of the
process.\ :sup:`(n.d.v),(n.d.ao),(n.d.ay)` Guidelines and criteria
regarding optimal transition can guide clinicians during their clinical
practice.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.an),(n.d.ao)` Furthermore, standardised
assessment of the young persons' needs when approaching the transition
boundary should become routine, although it is rarely done
nowadays.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`

.. _sec4:

Conclusion
==========

The transition from CAMHS to AMHS is an important process for young
people with mental health problems. Literature shows that continuation
of care is a complex process, with important players at policy and
organisational levels, service level and at the level of individuals:
patients, their families and healthcare providers. At the moment,
specific programmes for young people are being developed. However,
research such as the MILESTONE project is needed to support these
interventions in an evidence-based manner.

We would like to thank Marc Hermans, past president of the European
Union of Medical Specialists (UEMS) board of psychiatry, for inviting us
to join the UEMS working group regarding transition. We are also very
grateful for the whole UEMS working group on transition for their
interest and plans to make transition part of the training of
psychiatrists throughout Europe. Furthermore, we would like to thank all
members of the MILESTONE consortium.

The MILESTONE project has received funding from the European Union's
Seventh Framework Programme for research, technological development and
demonstration under grant agreement no. 602442. This paper reflects only
the authors' views and the European Union is not liable for any use that
may be made of the information contained therein. The funding body has
had no role in the study design, in the writing of the protocol or in
the decision to submit the paper for publication.

S.P.S. is part-funded by the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care
WM (CLAHRC-WM). The views expressed are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the CLAHRC-WM collaborative organisations, the NIHR
or the Department of Health.

**Gaelle Hendrickx** is a PhD student at Department of Neurosciences,
Centre for Clinical Psychiatry, KU Leuven, Belgium, and a research
associate with the MILESTONE consortium. **Veronique De Roeck** is a is
a researcher at the Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, Belgium, and
a research associate with the MILESTONE consortium. **Athanasios Maras**
is Director of Yulius Academy, Yulius Mental Health Organization, The
Netherlands, and a principal investigator with the MILESTONE consortium.
**Gwen Dieleman** is a child and adolescent psychiatrist and clinical
research coordinator at Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
and Psychology, Erasmus Medical Center, The Netherlands, and a principal
investigator with the MILESTONE consortium. **Suzanne Gerritsen** is a
PhD student at the Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and
Psychology, Erasmus Medical Center, The Netherlands, and a research
associate with the MILESTONE consortium. **Diane Purper-Ouakil** is a
psychiatrist at the Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Unit of the
University Hospital of Montpellier, France, and a principal investigator
with the MILESTONE consortium. **Frederick Russet** is a psychologist at
the Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Unit of the University Hospital of
Montpellier, France, and research associate with the MILESTONE
consortium. **Renate Schepker** is a psychiatrist at the Centre for
Psychiatry South-Wuerttemberg, Germany, and a principal investigator
with the MILESTONE consortium. **Giulia Signorini** is a researcher at
the Psychiatric Epidemiology and Evaluation Unit of Saint John of God
Clinical Research Center, Italy, and research associate with the
MILESTONE consortium. **Swaran Preet Singh** is Head of Mental Health
and Wellbeing at Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, UK, and
Chief Investigator with the MILESTONE consortium. **Cathy Street** is
the Patient and Public Involvement Lead at Warwick Medical School,
University of Warwick, UK, and at the MILESTONE consortium. **Helena
Tuomainen** is a senior research fellow at Warwick Medical School,
University of Warwick, UK, and Scientific Research Manager with the
MILESTONE consortium. **Sabine Tremmery** is a professor at the
Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, Belgium, and a principal
investigator with the MILESTONE consortium.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref37

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref39

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref40

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref41

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref42

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref43

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref44

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref45

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref46

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref47

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref48

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref50

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref51

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref54

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref55

      n.d.ay.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
