=============================================
Quality improvement in mental health services
=============================================



Billy Boland [1]_
:Correspondence: Billy Boland (billy.boland@nhs.net)

:date: 2020-02

:Abstract:
   Quality improvement (QI) approaches are becoming increasingly
   important in the delivery of mental healthcare internationally. They
   were originally developed in the manufacturing industry, but the
   principle of having a systematic approach to improvement has spread
   to many other industries, not least to healthcare. Quality
   improvement approaches in healthcare were pioneered in the USA at
   organisations such as Virginia Mason and the Institute for Healthcare
   Improvement. In recent years, they have become firmly established in
   mental health services in the UK's National Health Service (NHS).
   There are a number of different approaches to quality improvement,
   but two leading models have taken root: ‘lean thinking’ (also known
   as ‘lean methodology’ or simply ‘lean’), which arose out of Virginia
   Mason, and the ‘Model for Improvement’, which came out of the
   Institute of Healthcare Improvement. This article describes these two
   quality improvement approaches, critiques their philosophy and
   explores how they can apply in the provision of mental healthcare,
   particularly with reference to the use of data, evidence and metrics.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Lean thinking
=============

Getting to the essence of ‘lean’ is made challenging by the ambiguous
language and definitions in the field. Hallam captures this well in
observing that the term ‘lean’ has been used interchangeably to describe
four different dimensions, specifically ‘the operating philosophy, the
tools, the activities, and the state of the manufacturer’ (cited by
Stone\ :sup:`1`). In his review on the science of lean, Kyle Stone
defines the lean thinking paradigm as the ‘operational philosophy’ of
the organisation’ which ‘differentiates between waste and
value’.\ :sup:`1`

*Muda* (Japanese for waste) is defined by Womack & Jones as ‘any human
activity which absorbs resources but creates no value’\ :sup:`2` (p.
15). The ‘powerful antidote’ to tackling waste, they argue, is lean
thinking. Five ‘lean principles’ are proposed. Data, evidence and
metrics, and their application are not specifically addressed within the
principles, but their use in realising the principles is clearly
important. Definitions of the principles exist, but there are challenges
in engaging with them and applying them to healthcare. The next section
considers these challenges in relation to the key concept of each
principle.

.. _sec2:

Challenges engaging with the lean principles
============================================

.. _sec2-1:

Specifying value
----------------

Womack & Jones argue that value can only be specified by the ‘ultimate
customer’\ :sup:`2` (p. 16), but fall short of clarifying who that is.
They make a compelling argument that those who design and deliver the
business can never truly know the value that customers seek and must
work hard to understand the customer's wants and needs in building their
product. How one defines or identifies the ‘ultimate customer’ is not
made clear. Instead, readers are encouraged to maintain a dialogue with
a broad customer base and continually evolve their product. They offer a
number of lenses through which one can see value, such as ‘challenging
traditional definitions of value’ (p. 31), defining value in terms of
the ‘whole product’ (p. 32) and tackling the ‘target cost’ (p. 35), yet
crucially they do not define what value actually is.

Specifying value is key to making best use of data, evidence and
metrics, as all efforts should be directed towards improvement aimed at
achieving the target ideal value. Having a robust definition of value is
necessary in order to demonstrate, using data and evidence, whether or
not value has been achieved. Progress towards achieving ideal value can
be measured using metrics.

.. _sec2-2:

The value stream
----------------

Liker & Ross define the value stream as ‘core customer-focussed business
processes’\ :sup:`3` (p. 241). Womack & Jones offer a more granular
explanation: “‘The Value Stream is the set of all the specific actions
required to bring a specific product (whether a good, a service, or,
increasingly, a combination of the two) through the three critical
management tasks of any business: the problem-solving task running from
concept through detailed design and engineering to production launch,
the information management task running from order-taking through
detailed scheduling to delivery, and the physical transformation task
proceeding from raw materials to a finished product in the hands of the
customer.’\ :sup:`2` (p. 19)”

Both definitions are inadequate as they fail to get to the heart of the
matter and they leave important questions unanswered. The Liker & Ross
definition is narrow and wholly business oriented. Why should the value
stream only regard ‘core’ business processes, and how are these defined?
The mass production examples given in both texts do not fully translate
to a complex multiservice industry such as healthcare. Which business
processes in healthcare are ‘core’? Does that mean ‘non-core’ services
do not deliver value?

In contrast, the Womack & Jones definition is too verbose and meaning is
obscured as a result. It is also internally incoherent, as although it
begins by explaining that a product can be goods or services, later
parts of the definition are articulated only in terms of goods, for
example ‘the physical transformation task proceeding from raw materials
to a finished product’\ :sup:`2` (p. 19).

In establishing the value stream, obtaining information (data and
evidence) from those involved in delivering the work is crucial to truly
understanding what is happening. Evidence from customers (such as
patients and carers) is important in understanding what value is
actually delivered at relevant points through the stream. Metrics can be
used to indicate whether value has been delivered, provided that the
value has been clearly specified. For example, in mental health services
patient-reported outcome measures (PROMS) and patient-reported
experience measures (PREMS) can give some insight into patients'
experience of services and service impact.\ :sup:`4`

.. _sec2-3:

Flow
----

Frustratingly, a ‘lean’ definition of flow is hard to come by, and most
authors appear to have resorted to explaining what it is not. Womack &
Jones explain that it is not batch processing or doing tasks in batches
that inherently cause waiting and queuing\ :sup:`2` (p. 50). In their
analysis of lean in an emergency department in an NHS hospital in
Nottingham, Timmons and colleagues talk of the lean principle in the
healthcare setting in terms of ‘ensuring that there is a continuous flow
throughout the process. Standardising processes around best practice
allows smooth running, which frees up time for creativity and
innovation’.\ :sup:`5`

Flow can be quantified with respect to value and so can be amenable to
the generation of metrics. Indirect measures of waste (*muda*) are
useful data and evidence proxy indicators for flow. For example,
measures of defects, overproduction or waiting can all give useful
insights into the performance of flow\ :sup:`6` (pp. 82–84).

.. _sec2-4:

Pull
----

Pull also seems to be defined by what it is not. For example, Womack &
Jones offer: ‘you can let the customer pull the product from you as
needed rather than pushing products, often unwanted, onto the
customer’\ :sup:`2` (p. 24) and ‘pull in simplest terms means that no
one upstream should produce a good or service until the customer
downstream asks for it’\ :sup:`2` (p. 67). Although, on the face of it,
pull seems a wholly transactional concept, Liker & Ross emphasise ‘even
a well-designed pull system does not automatically solve all our
problems and is dependent on human judgement and discipline’\ :sup:`3`
(p. 177). Once more in these definitions we see a focus on goods rather
than services, and so aspects of the human nature of pull are obscured.
For example, in their new study of lean in a Finnish healthcare service,
Hihnala and colleagues state that, although work and workflow can be
ordered to create pull, ‘It emerged […] that a common set of values that
respects human dignity came [sic] more important’.\ :sup:`7`

Pull too can be amenable to metrics to help maximise value. Measures of
demand can be a useful source of data, which can be used to evidence how
to manage the flow. Qualitative sources of evidence can include
customers' (patients' and carers') accounts of their experience and
motivations to make use of the service\ :sup:`6` (p. 96).

.. _sec2-5:

Perfection
----------

This is yet another concept with a shadow side. Womack & Jones once
again avoid defining it, but talk of it as being the continuous
application of the previous four principle concepts to strive to
continue achieving better products\ :sup:`2` (p. 25). Perfection is
never achieved, but there is always room for improvement. Actually, what
they are truly referring to is the continual pursuit of identifying and
eliminating waste (*muda*).

Metrics are important here as perfection needs to be defined.
Perceptions of perfection can change over time, so descriptions need to
be clear and revised regularly. Perfection may be best approached
incrementally (monitored through metrics) and is never reached. Evidence
demonstrating approaching perfection can be quantitative (e.g. in
consistency of data) or qualitative (e.g. in having a culture free of
fear that promotes quality improvement).

.. _sec3:

Lean in practice: a case example
================================

Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust (TEWV) were supported by
Virginia Mason in the USA in adopting lean.\ :sup:`8` Virginia Mason's
own lean processes were adapted from the Toyota Production System, with
a strong focus on eliminating waste (*muda*) and the use of metrics to
measure improvement.\ :sup:`9` TEWV have made a number of high-impact
changes to the way their processes operate that have had benefits
(brought value) to patients. One of these, the purposeful in-patient
admission (PIPA) model, which was trialled on two adult wards, saw their
original bed occupancy of 106% reduce by 22%, a 57% reduction in length
of stay, a 72% reduction in reports of violence and aggression, and a
100% reduction in complaints (p. 62).\ :sup:`10`

Lean techniques they used to achieve these changes included: a move from
a weekly ward round to daily multidisciplinary team meetings – to remove
‘batching’ of decision-making (to improve *flow* of the *value stream*
of clinical decisions and interventions)visual control boards on the
wards – to map the patient journey (*flow*)removal of waste (*muda*)
from the office and patient literature – ensuring that only necessary
literature were on the wardcreating standard processes for each step of
the patient journey and changing the layout of the ward environment (to
improve *flow*).

The Health Foundation is now exploring how other organisations might
benefit from lean and is conducting research into the effect a
partnership with Virginia Mason would have on five other NHS
organisations.\ :sup:`11`

.. _sec4:

Lean thinking – evidence of impact
==================================

Although there are countless books and journal articles on the subject,
Stone\ :sup:`1` identifies three ‘voids’ that lean research is yet to
adequately tackle: the relationship between planned organisational
change and human resource development interventionsthe relationship
between planned organisational change theories and lean theoriesthe
‘human’ factor – by this he means how best to engage staff in lean.

In contrast, in *The Toyota Way*, Liker defines the tenth of the 14
management principles of Toyota as ‘develop exceptional people and teams
who follow your company's philosophy’\ :sup:`12` (p. 184) and explains
that at the company the Toyota Production System was originally called
the ‘Respect for Humanity System’\ :sup:`12` (p. 186). Nevertheless,
other than his own observations, and a critique of theories of
behaviour, Liker offers no empirical evidence for human resources and
the human factor.

.. _sec5:

The Model for Improvement
=========================

Don Berwick, the improvement champion who has led the Institute of
Healthcare Improvement (IHI) in the USA and who was called on by the
then Prime Minister David Cameron to help make the NHS safe for the
future\ :sup:`13`, writes an impassioned introduction for *The
Improvement Guide*, a key text that describes the Model for
Improvement.\ :sup:`14` Notably though, the authors of the guide, who
Berwick says he is still learning from, are largely statisticians by
training. This is important, as the focus in lean is on waste and flow,
whereas data, and the use of data, are at the heart of the Model for
Improvement.

Berwick calls the model the ‘most useful single framework’ he has
encountered\ :sup:`14` (p. xiii). Founded on the work of Deming, also a
statistician, the ‘System of Profound Knowledge’ is fundamental to the
Model of Improvement. The system asserts that, through developing
appreciation for a system, understanding variation (data, evidence and
metrics are clearly important here), building knowledge and getting to
grips with the human side of change, one is better equipped to make
improvements\ :sup:`14` (p. 76). Applying the Model for Improvement to
an improvement challenge helps the leader organise an approach by
guiding them through the following key questions. ‘\ *What are we trying
to accomplish*?’ is about being specific and defining the problem. This
makes it measurable and potentially subject to metrics. The question is
also used as a call to arms, by clearly describing what is expected, and
to create ownership, through encouraging others to contribute to
creating this definition or ‘charter’\ :sup:`14` (p. 89). There are some
darker sides to how this statement is used to motivate change, of the
stick rather than carrot variety. For example, Langley and
colleagues\ :sup:`14` suggest choosing goals that are clearly
unachievable using current practices, being explicit that previous tools
will be removed whether change happens or not, or simply stating that
the current service will no longer be provided if change does not
happen. Thus, although values of addressing the ‘human side’ of change
are espoused, the authors are not shy of using traditional ‘machine
metaphor’ classic top-down management theory\ :sup:`15` (p. 18) if they
think it will help towards achieving the goal. This seems to be in
contrast to the approach Berwick advocates in his work on patient safety
for the NHS, where he says, ‘Fear is toxic to both safety and
improvement’.\ :sup:`13`\ ‘\ *How will we know that a change is an
improvement*?’ is sometimes abbreviated to ‘measures’. This is all about
how to demonstrate the impact of change using data, evidence and
metrics. Three different types of measures are encouraged: outcome
measures that observe the outcome in question, process measures that
monitor whether activity to achieve the outcomes is performed, and
balancing measures that look at whether there are any unintended
consequences of change\ :sup:`14` (p. 96). One could argue that the
model encourages only superficial engagement with the ‘is the change an
improvement?’ part of the question by focusing on measures. For example,
in a healthcare system where increasing discharge is the aim, is there
enough challenging of the assumption that discharge is the right
thing?‘\ *What change can we make that will result in improvement?*\ ’
is often abbreviated to ‘changes’ and is about identifying initiatives
that could bring about change\ :sup:`14` (p. 93). Methods for developing
change are promoted, including ‘logical thinking about the current
system, benchmarking or learning from others, using technology, creative
thinking and using change concepts’\ :sup:`14` (p. 120). ‘Changes’ can
be opportunities to put evidence into practice, and could be an
application of evidence-based medicine, such as the implementation of
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
guidance.\ :sup:`16` Dozens of change methods are proposed that can be
used in the Model for Improvement and many of these, such as ‘use pull
systems’, ‘eliminate things that are not used’ and ‘match the amount to
the need’, have clear roots in lean thinking\ :sup:`14` (p. 358).
Langley and colleagues acknowledge the overlap with other improvement
approaches: ‘Several of the concepts are included in other approaches to
improvement, such as Total Quality Management, Reliability, Safety,
Six-Sigma, and Lean’\ :sup:`14` (p. 358).

With the three Model for Improvement questions answered, improvers are
ready to make use of the ‘plan–do–study–act’ (PDSA) cycle. PDSA can be
used to ‘turn ideas into action and action into learning’\ :sup:`14` (p.
97). There are four distinct phases to PDSA: the intervention or test
should be plannedthe plan should be executed and data recordeddata are
analysedreasonable action is taken on the findings (essentially action
is based on evidence).

The cycles of PDSA can be used to ‘build knowledge’ both of the
improvement challenge faced and potential solutions.\ :sup:`17` PDSA
cycles are recommended by NICE to bring about improvements through
implementing NICE recommendations.\ :sup:`16` A model akin to
‘plan–do–study–act’, called ‘plan–do–check–act’, has been used in lean
in, for example, work on patient safety.\ :sup:`18`

.. _sec6:

The Model for Improvement in practice: case examples
====================================================

East London NHS Foundation Trust (ELFT) adopted the Model for
Improvement, supported by the IHI. The trust's work to reduce violence
on in-patient wards saw a 40% reduction in violence across six wards and
reduced costs related to violence by £181 296 (data are for
2015–2016).\ :sup:`19` The Care Quality Commission (CQC), the UK's
healthcare regulator, has rated the organisation as ‘outstanding’ and
commented: “‘ELFT has invested over the previous two years in a wide
scale quality improvement programme. This has been embraced by staff.
The methodology has successfully encouraged innovation and improvement
which CQC inspectors were able to see throughout the inspection. There
was a genuine passion to ensure that the services provided are the best
possible.’\ :sup:`20`”

The teams used the Model for Improvement questions to define and drive
their work. They agreed what they wanted to *accomplish* (to reduce
physical violence by 30%) and the *measures* to determine whether a
change was an improvement (the main outcome measure used was ‘rate of
incidents of physical violence per 1000 occupied bed-days’). In
generating ideas for change, the team worked with staff and patients,
and then used PDSA cycles with wards from across the trust to test the
favoured change strategies. Staff came together at 6-weekly intervals to
learn from each other and review data to consider whether improvement
was happening.\ :sup:`21`

Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust has also
employed the Model for Improvement, launching it in 2015. Subsequently,
the 2016 national NHS staff survey reported that the percentage of staff
in the trust who said they were able to contribute to improvements had
increased to 76%, from 70% the previous year. The Picker Institute,
which analyses the data for the NHS, reported this as a statistically
‘significant improvement’ and above the national average for mental
healthcare.\ :sup:`22` The trust was also rated ‘outstanding’ by the CQC
in May 2019. It said: “‘The delivery of innovative and evidence based
high quality care was central to all aspects of the running of the
service. There was a true sense of desire to drive service improvement
for the benefit of patients, carers, and the wider system, evident
throughout the inspection. Staff included patients in service
improvement and used their feedback to change practice.’\ :sup:`23`”

.. _sec7:

Model for Improvement – evidence of impact
==========================================

Evidence for PDSA in a UK healthcare context is varied. A systematic
review of quality improvement methodologies carried out by NHS Scotland
found that the evidence for PDSA in the NHS was ‘mixed’. It found that,
in large projects taken forward by the NHS Modernisation Agency, work
often did not proceed beyond ‘plan–do’. Other initiatives, such as work
on the 4-hour emergency department (A&E) waiting target, could lead to
problems elsewhere in the system (such as the patient waiting in a
medical assessment unit instead). Success can be context dependent, with
‘striking differences’ between organisations using PDSA in quality
improvement collaborations.\ :sup:`24` Furthermore a multisite
cluster-randomised study comparing the effectiveness of different change
initiatives within healthcare services in the UK found no difference
between standard dissemination of guidance versus standard dissemination
plus PDSA in the implementation of the guidance.\ :sup:`25`

.. _sec8:

Conclusion – the essence of theories of improvement science
===========================================================

Considering these two approaches to quality improvement, a number of
factors emerge as the essence of these theories: They aim to be
pragmatic, seeking to clearly describe the problem and bring about
real-world change.Although they draw on scientific theory, they are
about implementing and applying scientific method to bring about
improvement.The sensible use of data, evidence and metrics is essential
in order to demonstrate change.They are about both processes and people.
Automation can enhance productivity, but it is people that bring about
change.They are sensitive to context. The evidence base demonstrates
that improvement methods can succeed and fail, but identifying win
factors can be a challenge. Leadership, engagement and culture are all
extremely important.They are not discrete. The various improvement
methods have considerable degrees of overlap and borrow from each other,
for example lean can employ a ‘plan–do–check–act’ cycle, the Model for
Improvement can use lean concepts.

The Health Foundation has summarised a similar list of ‘underlying
principles’, which include understanding the problem, understanding the
processes and systems, analysing demand, capacity and flow, choosing
tools for change and evaluating change\ :sup:`26` (p. 11). In September
2018, the CQC published a report into what it had learned about
embedding a quality improvement culture within healthcare organisations.
It states, ‘We would expect that a hospital trust committed to
delivering high-quality care should be embedding a systematic and
effective approach to QI’.\ :sup:`27` Regardless of the provenance of
the approaches and their evidence base, in the UK at least, it looks
like they are here to stay for the foreseeable future. Clinicians will
benefit from understanding quality improvement and could do much to
shape how it is received and applied in their context.

B.B. has received funding from The Health Foundation to support his
leadership development. This covers fees for a postgraduate
qualification and a grant (number 934842) to undertake activities to
further his continuing professional development (CPD). This paper was
written in the course of his CPD.

**Billy Boland** is a Consultant Psychiatrist in community psychiatry
and Deputy Medical Director at Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS
Foundation Trust, United Kingdom. He is the current Chair of the General
Adult Faculty of the Royal College of Psychiatrists.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest** B.B. is the faculty lead for quality
   improvement for the Faculty of General Adult Psychiatry at the Royal
   College of Psychiatrists; is on the advisory board of the Money and
   Mental Health Policy Institute; and periodically writes a blog on
   matters relating to leadership and quality improvement for The BMJ.
   As part of leadership development he visited GlaxoSmithKline to learn
   about its approach to quality improvement. GlaxoSmithKline has
   developed its own approach and did not specifically adopt lean or the
   Model for Improvement discussed in this article.
