=====================================
Section 12 approval: fit for purpose?
=====================================

Nidhi Gupta
William Calthorpe
:Date: 2020-06


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We compliment Rigby and McAlpine on a well-written editorial on Section
12 approval.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` The authors raise several pertinent issues
about Mental Health Act (MHA) detentions and note that there has been a
47% increase in the rate of detentions countrywide. They are of the
opinion that the increase in detentions is mainly attributable to
clinicians not being equipped with the necessary knowledge and training.
Rigby and McAlpine suggest more rigorous evidence-based training
reinforced by appropriate assessment, including summative assessment
using criteria-referenced methods with pass marks determined by the
Angoff method. The authors also feel that the approval and revalidation
processes need to be more robust.

We, however, are of the opinion that the authors have taken an Occam's
razor view by largely attributing the problem to clinicians’ training.
In our opinion, increases in detention rates are due to multiple
factors, and the ‘fix’ is not as binary as upgrading training of
clinicians or making the approval and revalidation processes more
robust. The process of MHA assessment requires two doctors, of which one
has to be an independent Section 12 doctor, and an approved mental
health professional (AMHP), who is usually (but not invariably) a social
worker. All three have to agree to detain a patient with a mental
disorder. It is pertinent that the final responsibility for detaining
someone under an MHA belongs to the AMHP, who then submits an
application to a local hospital for an in-patient bed.

We quote verbatim from the 2018 Care Quality Commission
report\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` on the use of the MHA to detain people: “‘1. The
apparent rise in rate of detention since 2010 is in part due to the
national data return being more complete.2. More people are being
detained on more than one occasion during a calendar year than was
previously the case.3. Bed numbers have fallen and more people with
severe mental health problems are living outside of a hospital setting,
and so are at greater risk of being detained.4. Some people are being
detained under the MHA who would previously not have been detained. This
is because clinicians are applying the criteria for detention
differently to people with certain types of disorder (such as dementia
or personality disorder). It could also be because more people with
mental health problems are coming to the attention of mental health care
workers (for example, through schemes that divert people from the
criminal justice system).5. People who need admission and who would
previously have agreed to informal admission are now refusing and are
being admitted as detained patients.6. Admissions (some of which would
be formal) that could in the past have been prevented are now not being
prevented because less restrictive alternatives in the community are not
available.7. There has been an increase in the total size of the
population of England and an increase in the size of those sections of
the population that are more at risk of detention.8. There has been an
increase in the prevalence of risk factors for detention, such as social
exclusion and problematic, untreated drug and alcohol misuse.’”

Glover-Thomas, in a recent review, notes that the availability of mental
health beds has decreased, thereby delaying the ‘preferred option’ of
voluntary admission of patients. Therefore, in circumstances when
clinicians deem a patient to be in need of care in hospital, resorting
to detention ‘may be the quickest means of opening up
services’.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` This factor – in our view – is consequential
in ‘bumping up’ detention rates.

The number of appeals to mental health review tribunals (MHRTs) in
England and Wales has risen steadily, from 904 in 1980(n.d.d) to 31 469
in 2014.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` This reflects the parallel increase in the
number detained. However, the percentage of patients who are successful
in obtaining discharge at MHRT hearings is relatively low (only 9% of
all hearings in 2013–2014 resulted in discharge\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`),
suggesting that patients have been detained appropriately. This, in
turn, suggests that training for Section 12 approval is not a factor.
However, we agree with Rigby and McAlpine that improvements in training
would be beneficial to clinicians in terms of increasing their
confidence and knowledge.

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.
