======================================================================================================
Psych Socs: student-led psychiatry societies, an untapped resource for recruitment and reducing stigma
======================================================================================================



Haridha Pandian
Zahra Mohamedali
George E. Chapman
Patricia Vinchenzo
Suhana Ahmed
Zoé Mulliez
Helen Bruce
Wendy Burn
Ania Korszun
Derek K. Tracy [1]_

:Correspondence: Dr Derek Tracy
(derek.tracy@nhs.net)

:date: 2020-06

:Abstract:
   Medical recruitment and retention are national problems. Psychiatry
   has been more affected than many specialties, as a result of stigma
   from the public and other healthcare professionals. The Royal College
   of Psychiatrists has undertaken several initiatives to redress this,
   notably the ‘Choose Psychiatry’ campaign. In this editorial we argue
   that student-led university psychiatry societies are a wonderful but
   frequently untapped resource to help attract the brightest and best
   medical students to our profession. We describe the activities of
   three ‘Psych Socs’ across the UK and propose next steps to continue
   this work.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

2019 saw the best psychiatry core trainee recruitment for some years,
with 92% of places filled.\ :sup:`1` However, the figures for higher
training remain a concern, with a cumulative fill rate of 52% and
considerable regional variation in both core and higher
training.\ :sup:`1` Staff recruitment and retention remain key
challenges across the National Health Service,\ :sup:`2` with overall
vacancies predicted to double by 2030.\ :sup:`3` Psychiatry has
historically faced unique difficulties, not least stigmatising attitudes
from the public, other doctors and medical students,\ :sup:`4` and we
need to remain active and focused on attracting the brightest and best
to our profession. The time at medical school is a key period when
attitudes and beliefs about psychiatry are most susceptible to
change,\ :sup:`5` and students' personal experience of psychiatry has
been described as the ‘critical variable’ in recruitment
rates.\ :sup:`6`

A survey by Curtis-Barton and Eagles\ :sup:`7` reported ‘push’ factors
that discouraged students from choosing psychiatry as a career,
including a perceived lack of scientific evidence underpinning
diagnoses, the perception that patients generally have a poor prognosis,
the amount of ‘paperwork’ in the specialty and general stigma about
mental illness. A qualitative study conducted at the University of
Bristol echoed these findings, adding that the emotional burden of
seeing patients at the lowest point of their lives and the focus on
‘non-medical’ social issues were also reasons reported by students
choosing not to pursue psychiatry.\ :sup:`8`

Psychiatry and general practice have been shown to attract most negative
comments or ‘bashing’ from academic staff, doctors and
students.\ :sup:`9` Halder *et al*\ :sup:`10` found that across 18
medical schools, 16% of medical students considered psychiatry as a
future career upon entering medical school; by the final year 17%
reported still seriously considering it, but only 3% had decided to
actually pursue the specialty. A total of 27% of students reported that
they had changed their future specialty choice as a result of ‘direct
bashing’.\ :sup:`9` By the latter years of undergraduate study, the
point at which many students begin direct psychiatry teaching, many more
medical students held negative beliefs about the specialty less
adaptable to change.\ :sup:`11,12`

Conversely, a positive experience of a psychiatry rotation and
extracurricular enrichment ‘pull factor’ opportunities, such as engaging
electives and special study modules, can ignite an interest and have
been found to be one of the strongest predictors of career
choice.\ :sup:`5,10`

.. _sec1-1:

Royal College strategies
========================

The Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych) has attempted to tackle
both push and pull factors. In 2016, it ran the ‘Anti-BASH’
campaign,\ :sup:`12` utilising the Twitter hashtag ‘#banthebash’ to
identify and address badmouthing, attitudes and stigmatising in
healthcare, in particular from clinicians in other specialties.

More recently, the College has emphasised positive pull factors,
offering free Student Associate membership\ :sup:`13` to the College and
providing free access to network events and College journals.\ :sup:`14`
The ‘Choose Psychiatry’ campaign\ :sup:`15` has adopted a strategy of
demonstrating the many positive aspects of a career in psychiatry, with
the use of short video-clips encompassing real-life patient stories and
the impact that psychiatry has made on their lives, as well as pieces by
psychiatrists explaining why they chose and enjoy their careers. This
encourages viewers to join the conversation on social media, using the
hashtag #choosepsychiatry.

The 1-year ‘Psych Star’ scheme supports medical students through
mentoring and financial support.\ :sup:`16` A 2-year ‘Foundation
Fellowship’ offers a parallel route for foundation year doctors, with
both schemes supporting candidates to act as local ambassadors for
promotion of the specialty. Although it is not possible to causally link
these efforts and the recent improved recruitment, we should still
acknowledge the College's work to achieve this result.

.. _sec2:

Psychiatry societies
====================

A less-explored area is the momentum generated by university psychiatry
societies (Psych Socs), which are led by students with support from
clinicians and the RCPsych. These bottom-up initiatives host diverse
local events with the aims of raising the profile of mental health
issues, challenging stigmatising attitudes by increasing understanding
of the central role that psychiatry has in medicine and inspiring
students to choose psychiatric careers. They also come together annually
for a national Psych Soc conference, hosted by one of the organisations.
Here we describe the types of activities undertaken across three UK
societies, in London, Birmingham and Belfast.

.. _sec2-1:

Augmenting the syllabus: guest lectures and exam practice
---------------------------------------------------------

The societies host diverse free guest lectures across the range of
psychiatric subspecialties complementing and extending the undergraduate
curriculum. Mukherjee *et al*\ :sup:`5` argued that placing a particular
focus on liaison psychiatry during undergraduate teaching allows
students to appreciate that psychiatry has a central role in the
aetiology and outcome of many medical disorders. In our Psych Socs, we
have had particularly positive experiences when collaborating with other
university societies to promote this understanding (see
`Box 1 <#box1>`__ for more detail): for example, gastroenterology
societies to discuss eating disorders; paediatrics and obstetrics and
gynaecology societies to discuss perinatal psychiatry, autism and
neurodevelopmental disorders; emergency medicine societies to learn
about patients presenting in crisis; and oncology societies to discuss
psycho-oncology. Some Psych Socs also organise additional examination
practice, for example via mock OSCEs and history-taking workshops, as
well as providing more links and discussion around psychiatry electives
and research opportunities. Box 1Examples of well-received Psych Soc
events ‘Evolution and the brain’, discussing how brain functioning and
psychopathology can be understood using evolutionary perspectives.‘Real
people sharing real stories’, five students shared their personal
experiences of living with mental illness.‘Time to put the psychedelics
back into psychiatry?’, a discussion on psychedelics in modern
psychiatry.‘Trauma and violence’ with trauma surgeons, a psychiatrist
and young victims of knife crime discussing post-traumatic stress
disorder.‘Through the lens’ mental health photography workshop with the
Health and Humanities society, discussing the portrayal of borderline
personality disorder in the arts.Psychiatric themes in Don Quixote and
Othello syndrome in ‘A Winter's Tale’‘Homelessness and healthcare’ with
individuals who had been street homeless, describing how this impacted
their ability to access care, and their experiences of living in the
streets.‘Disfigurement and quality of life’, with maxillo-facial
surgeons and psychiatrists discussing the impact of facial surgery on
perceived quality of life.‘Mental health in developing countries’ hosted
by psychiatry trainees and ‘Students for Global Health’, discussing
different practices in other countries, and career opportunities in
international assistance.‘Not guilty by reason of insanity’, exploring
the roles of forensic psychiatrists.‘Mental disorder and autonomy:
classical and romantic perspectives’, a seminar co-hosted with a
Philosophy Society discussing varying philosophical views of mental
illness across time.‘Sex and psychiatry’ seminar with the university
‘Sexpression’ group, discussing psychiatric bases for dyspareunia,
tocophobia and so forth.

Talks on novel fields not typically covered in lectures are usually very
popular, such as evolutionary psychiatry, psychosexual medicine and
cutting-edge research (for example, therapeutic use of psychedelics).
These have the additional value of attracting a wider range of medical
students who might not attend more ‘standard’ psychiatry talks, and
indeed are often enriched by pulling in students from different
disciplines, such as philosophy and the arts, and members of the local
community. This reinforces a message of mental health at the centre of
medicine and society, and challenges stigmatising attitudes.

Crucially, as membership is open to all students, these events are great
opportunities to attract pre-clinical medical students several years
before their psychiatry teaching and placements, and potentially before
more significant exposure to any ‘psychiatry bashing’.

.. _sec2-2:

Tackling stigma and discussing student mental health
----------------------------------------------------

Brown and Ryland\ :sup:`17` emphasised the importance of involving
people with mental health disorders in student education, particularly
those who have recovered, as placements are often too short for students
to experience this. Psych Soc speakers are encouraged to explore
relevant case studies, and we endeavour to invite speakers with lived
experience. One Psych Soc has published a single-arm pre–post comparison
study, which demonstrated statistically significant reductions in
student stigma in the domains of knowledge, attitude and behaviour
following exposure to a perinatal event when a mother spoke of her
personal journey.\ :sup:`18`

Students can feel less able to disclose their own mental health problems
because of perceptions of peers’ negative views,\ :sup:`12` and
successful Psych Soc events have also discussed and promoted resources
for student well-being especially during examination periods.
Psychiatrists have helped with this, with events on ‘Mental Health in
Healthcare’ and ‘Bipolar Disorder: Don't Believe Everything You Hear’
hosted by health care professionals who themselves have recovered from
psychological problems.\ :sup:`19` This also addressed psychological
challenges and pressures students might face once qualified.

.. _sec2-3:

Work in the arts
----------------

Broader Psych Soc initiatives involving the arts have proved very
popular. These have included a student film and book club (one in
conjunction with the local psychiatry trainees’ book group) and
exploring the perception of mental illness in popular literature and
media. Popular talks have discussed the portrayal of psychopathology in
historic literature, such as Othello syndrome in ‘A Winter's Tale’ and
wider psychiatric themes in ‘Don Quixote’. The ‘MedFest’ film festival
is a popular international event for Psych Socs and mental health more
broadly, displaying and discussing short films that touch on pertinent
issues in mental health.

.. _sec2-4:

Dissemination through new tools: social media
---------------------------------------------

Psych Socs successfully use a range of social media, from Facebook to
Twitter and Instagram, and more ‘old-fashioned’ email to reach students.
These regularly share information regarding wider opportunities, such as
summer schools (unlike many parallel schemes in other specialties, most
of these are free), RCPsych events, prizes and bursaries,
student-selected components in psychiatry, research and elective
opportunities and so forth. They also provide guidance and encouragement
to students on becoming College Associate Members of the College, and
advertise College resources, articles and podcasts. Anecdotally, many
students have informed us that Psych Soc posts on social media have
alerted them to opportunities of which they had previously been unaware.

In October 2019, Queen's University Belfast ‘Mind Matters’ Psych Soc
hosted a highly successful 1-hour ‘Twitter Takeover’. Numerous
psychiatrists and other Psych Socs across the country participated,
answering questions on how medical students can get involved with
psychiatry early, personal reasons for choosing psychiatry, upcoming
events and interesting books and articles relevant to students. Twitter
in particular affords an opportunity to engage and connect with the many
psychiatrists and medical students online, unhindered by distance.

.. _sec2-5:

Starting a Psych Soc
--------------------

Medical students and psychiatrists interested in starting a Psych Soc at
their own local university should firstly endeavour to recruit a core
committee of students for the academic year. The committee should
attempt to make contact with the Undergraduate Lead for Psychiatry at
their university, the RCPsych regional division and other local
psychiatrists. Such contacts may be called upon to act as speakers at
evening lecture events, mock OSCE examiners and mentors.

Psych Socs should also contact the RCPsych to receive funding for
events, as each university society receives a grant of £500 per annum.
The College also offer free promotional material such as pens, key rings
and leaflets, which can be handed out as ‘freebies’ during events. The
RCPsych website includes detailed advice for setting up a local Psych
Soc, event ideas and contact details for useful stakeholders.\ :sup:`20`

.. _sec3:

Psychiatrists’ perspectives and next steps
==========================================

As senior clinicians, we recall the difference that enthusiastic and
passionate trainers, teams and rotations made to our career choices at
all stages, from medical school through to our own training.\ :sup:`21`
Sadly, we have also all experienced the negative effect of ‘bashing’ of
psychiatry and our patients by other medical students and doctors. All
psychiatrists need to remain proud advocates for our profession and
remember that every contact counts. The recent College initiatives for
recruitment appear to be paying dividends with the positive message of
‘Choose Psychiatry’ particularly pleasing.

The Psych Socs, however, speak to students in a way we cannot, and it is
heartening to see the positive energy they generate. Enthusiastic
medical students deliver the compelling message that psychiatry is a
mainstream part of medicine and offers a diverse and rewarding career
and a flexible work–life balance. Their bottom-up initiatives relevant
to their local teaching and training, identification of gaps and novel
areas they wish to explore, and the fun, interesting and culturally
broader events in turn have refreshed us. The Psych Socs typically offer
compensation to speakers through covering their expenses, but in our
experience the real payment is the pleasure of sharing and contributing
to their enthusiasm.

Several next steps can be recommended both locally and nationally.
Students require enthusiastic engagement from local psychiatrists: as
guest speakers, mock OSCE examiners and mentoring via ‘buddy schemes’.
The relationship should be reciprocal: assisting students with areas
they request as needing redressing, but also using our contacts and
experience to suggest and link-up additional input. Students often need
discrete guidance in organising events and making sure that these are
well balanced in the views that are expressed.

Nationally, the RCPsych has created a supportive linking webpage to
share ideas and learning; this and the annual National Student
Psychiatry Conference need to be nurtured and grown. In a time of
austerity, there are inevitable challenges about ‘who funds’ travel and
attendance, but medical schools and the College need to continue to
encourage and maximise subsidised student engagement, including through
poster presentations, oral presentations, student sections and prizes.
This is not just a ‘central’ issue, it falls to all divisions and
faculties to review their engagement. We propose that Psych Socs are an
excellent opportunity for outreach to catch the best future colleagues.
As a College we need to be better at recognising, celebrating and
sharing what is working with our medical students. A recently published
RCPsych report\ :sup:`22` makes explicit recommendations for a range of
initiatives on enhancing interest in psychiatry, including developing
medical student psychotherapy schemes and Balint groups, and better
working with Psych Socs. The College's Choose Psychiatry Committee has
an initiative to make sure that each Psych Soc for the next academic
year has a link senior member of the Committee to help support local
initiatives.

We believe that university Psych Socs are a secret, but as yet not fully
exploited, tool to improve recruitment into psychiatry, as well as
promoting respect for the profession and mental health amongst those who
do not become psychiatrists. They offer a valuable opportunity for
students and psychiatrists to work together, and for us to continue to
encourage the brightest and best to join what we know to be the most
rewarding of medical specialties.

**Haridha Pandian** is a medical student at the Medical School of King's
College London, UK, and President of the King's College London Psych
Soc. **Zahra Mohamedali** is a medical student at the Medical School of
King's College London, UK, and Vice President of the King's College
London Psych Soc. **George E. Chapman** is the former Vice President of
the Psych Soc in the College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University
of Birmingham, and a foundation year doctor at Hampshire Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Hampshire, UK. **Patricia Vinchenzo** is a medical
student at Queen's University Belfast, UK, and President of Queen's
University 'Mind Matters' Psych Soc. **Suhana Ahmed** is a consultant
psychiatrist at South West London & St Georges NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
**Zoé Mulliez** is Policy and Campaigns Manager at the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, UK. **Helen Bruce** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at Great
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, UK.
**Wendy Burn** is President at the Royal College of Psychiatrists, UK.
**Ania Korszun** is Professor of Psychiatry and Education in the Wolfson
Institute of Preventative Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, UK.
**Derek K. Tracy** is a consultant psychiatrist and clinical director at
Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust and a senior lecturer in the Department of
Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience,
King's College London, UK.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

All authors met all four ICMJE criteria for authorship, jointly
conceiving and writing the manuscript.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
