---
author:
- Lei Yang
- Dongmei Wu
date: 2020-08
institute:
- "Assistant Professor, Chengdu Medical College, China, email:
  <tastylei@126.com>"
- "Associate Professor, The Clinical Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science
  Institute, China, email: <wudongmei_2001@163.com>"
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
title: Management measures for non-medical staff on psychiatric hospital
  wards during the COVID-19 pandemic
---

A notice issued by the National Health Commission in China on 18 March
2020 highlighted the need for psychological counselling for those
affected by COVID-19, vulnerable groups, health workers and those
fighting the virus on the frontline.^1^ Data shows that 323 patients
with severe mental disorders had been diagnosed with COVID-19 across the
country as of 19 February 2020.^2^ The development of an epidemic poses
great challenges for psychiatric hospitals.

There are visitors and non-medical staff who work in hospitals, such as
cleaners, who have no medical experience or knowledge about prevention
of infectious diseases. In order to ensure the safety of in-patients and
staff, it is necessary to formulate management measures for non-medical
staff.

First, there needs to be strict implementation of a system for
non-medical staff to sign in and out of the ward. The following details
should be entered into a table: name, date of going out, time of going
out, reason for going out, estimated return time, actual return time,
temperature at return, exact location of outing, etc. They can leave the
ward only after a nurse has signed it.

Second, it is essential to follow procedures formulated by the wards and
service providers. Wards should undertake temperature monitoring of
non-medical staff at least twice a day. Wards should be responsible for
monitoring the non-medical staff\'s work, including the wearing of
protective clothing and ensuring that proper hand washing is carried
out. Cleaners are required to clean and disinfect tableware and dining
tables after meals. Staff need to strictly implement management
regulations when transporting patients' specimens. Unless essential,
wards and service providers should not replace permanent staff with
temporary or agency staff. There must be epidemiological screening of
new recruits to ensure that these personnel do not have a history of
epidemiological exposure, fever or any respiratory symptoms.

Third, wards need to provide training and guidance. The ward\'s head
nurse needs to consider the different educational levels of non-medical
staff when developing and undertaking training regarding epidemic
prevention knowledge and skills to ensure all training is appropriate.
The training needs to focus on disinfection, isolation, hand hygiene and
wearing protective clothing. The responsible nurse is in charge of daily
guidance for non-medical staff. When problems are identified with
epidemic prevention they should correct issues without delay.

Fourth, wards and service providers need to work together on management
supervision. The ward\'s head nurse needs to evaluate the impact of
training on non-medical staff daily. Service provider managers need to
check the results of training and keep corresponding records. The head
nurse of the department needs to supervise the work of non-medical staff
in wards under their jurisdiction. Then, they need to check the
preventive knowledge and skills of the non-medical staff members and
report the results to the director of nursing. The chief manager needs
to undertake special inspections to assess the mastery of epidemic
preventive knowledge, skills and the quality of work in the hospital on
a weekly basis.

Finally, it is important to keep an eye on the psychological status of
non-medical staff on wards. On account of the long-term exposure to a
dangerous environment, coupled with patients' uncooperative attitudes,
loud yelling or violent behaviour, their visitors and caregivers are
prone to psychological difficulties.^3^ As cleaners frequently enter or
leave wards, the exposure risk increases. If there are any signs of
anxiety or panic, non-medical staff should receive psychological
interventions to help them properly handle negative feelings.

Recently, the number of cases of COVID-19 outside of China has become
very serious. This letter aims to formulate epidemic prevention and
control measures for non-medical workers in psychiatric hospitals. It is
hoped that these measures will be of value for both domestic and foreign
epidemic prevention efforts.

None.

This work was supported by the Sichuan Science and Technology Program
(grant number 2018JY0306 to D.W.).
