==================================================
The effects of COVID-19 on self-harm in UK prisons
==================================================

Thomas Hewson
Russell Green
Andrew Shepherd
Jake Hard
Jennifer ShawCorrespondence to Dr Thomas Hewson
(tomhewson@doctors.org.uk)
:Date: 2020-7-16

:Abstract:
   Self-harm is a major international public health concern and is
   especially prevalent among prisoners. In this editorial, we explore
   recent trends in prisoner self-harm during the coronavirus lockdown,
   and consider strategies for improving the prevention and management
   of self-harm in prisons as we emerge from the pandemic.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The frequency and severity of self-harm have been increasing within UK
prisons over recent years, with rates far exceeding those observed in
the general population.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` We postulated that the
coronavirus pandemic could adversely affect the mental health of
prisoners and further increase rates of self-harm, given the rapid
changes and reductions to prison regimes and the negative psychological
effects of quarantine.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` However, internal reports from
Safer Custody Units in 31 prisons where healthcare is provided by CareUK
(R. Green, personal communication, 2020) have revealed fewer
implementations of ACCT (assessment, care in custody and teamwork)
processes since lockdown; these processes initiate care plans for
prisoners at risk of self-harm or suicide. Across the 31 prisons, there
were 1079 ACCTs implemented in February 2020, compared with 828 in April
2020, a relative reduction of just under 25%. Furthermore, a closer
analysis of eight of these prisons revealed overall reductions in
recorded incidents of self-harm, decreasing by a third from 324 in
February 2020 to 214 in April 2020. There are many possible reasons for
these apparent reductions, with important lessons to be learned.

The accurate recording and maintenance of ACCT processes is a legal
requirement stipulated in Prison Service Instructions,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`
supporting the reliability of the above figures. However, minor acts of
self-harm may be more likely to be missed or unrecorded during the
pandemic owing to potentially reduced face-to-face contact with
prisoners and staffing issues. There have been national reports of fewer
Accident & Emergency attendances for various health
problems,\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` raising the possibility that prisoners have
similarly been less likely to seek healthcare interventions for
self-harm throughout the lockdown. A reduction in ACCTs is also not
synonymous with reductions in self-harming behaviour, as multiple
factors, including staff discretion, affect ACCT implementation;
furthermore, Humber et al found that ACCTs were more likely to be opened
following identification of risk factors for self-harm or suicide,
rather than following an act of self-harming behaviour.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`
The data are, however, mirrored by internal reports of recent reductions
in prison violence and referrals to mental health teams, as well as
fewer calls to see prisoners already known to mental health services (R.
Green, personal communication, 2020). These data may not be
representative of all prisons, owing to individual differences between
establishments, but those included encompassed all security levels and
prisoners of varying age, gender and sentence type.

Assuming that self-harm rates have dropped, why might that be and what
can we learn for future self-harm risk management? First, although
numerous negative psychological consequences are associated with
confinement and social isolation,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` spending increased
time in cells has probably reduced prisoners’ exposure to negative and
intimidating behaviours, such as bullying, threats and violence from
other inmates. This could increase their overall sense of safety and
security. Previously, prisoners may have resorted to self-harm to
express their safety concerns, occasionally using this behaviour as a
last-resort measure to seek transfer to segregation or another
prison.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` Furthermore, conflicts with other inmates can
cause significant emotional distress, and the most frequently cited
reason for self-harm is emotional dysregulation.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`
Prisoners may be less likely to experience such tensions in the context
of reduced peer contact.

Anecdotally, drug use has recently decreased within prisons, probably
owing to suspension of prison visits and enhanced difficulties in
trafficking illicit substances into custodial settings. There are
multiple links between drug use and self-harm, although it is difficult
to establish causality.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` For example, prisoners may harm
themselves while intoxicated because they have less conscious control of
their actions, or while withdrawing because of unpleasant physical
symptoms. Substance misuse is linked to the aetiology, perpetuation and
relapse of various mental disorders, including psychosis, which are
associated with increased rates of self-harm and violence. Stress,
anxiety and depression may be induced by problems such as accumulation
of debt, extortion and violence arising from drug use.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`
Prisoners may self-harm to communicate distress about these difficulties
or to seek escape from them.

The anticipated negative influence of coronavirus on prisoners’ mental
health may have encouraged a more pro-active approach among all staff to
identify and support prisoners at risk of mental distress. This could
have resulted in timely interventions before symptoms escalated to
involve self-harm or require high-level input, potentially explaining
the apparent decreased number of ACCTs and referrals to mental health
teams. Although there have been staffing shortages due to COVID-19,
staff who are present may have more time for one-to-one conversation
with prisoners, owing to fewer violent incidents and group activities
requiring their attention. Staff morale may also be higher owing to
greater public recognition of ‘key workers’, which could improve the
quality of their interactions with inmates. Furthermore, prisoners may
feel more valued, having witnessed various measures being implemented to
protect their health. Increased societal cohesion has been observed
during prior public health crises, with less differentiation between
societal groups and more focus on ‘coming together’ and responding
collectively to tackle emergent issues;\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` anecdotally,
this same cohesion has been observed within prisons. Prisoners may also
feel better connected to wider society owing to increased communication
about external affairs throughout the pandemic. Feeling part of a group
is associated with increased self-esteem; particularly among young
people, self-harm can be used to achieve a sense of belonging when this
is felt to be lacking.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

The pandemic has created more of a ‘level playing field’ within prisons,
as many of the previously extended rewards for good behaviour are no
longer feasible for reasons of infection control, whereas others, such
as telephone access, have been made more widely available to increase
support for all prisoners during the crisis. This is likely to have
reduced feelings of injustice and inequity among prisoners, which can
sometimes fuel mental distress and make institutional adjustment more
difficult. It could be argued that increasing access to such privileges
helps to improve mental well-being; furthermore, it may increase
prisoners’ sense of self-worth, an important factor related to
self-harm, as those who previously enjoyed fewer rewards may have felt
inferior to fellow inmates.

Although prison visits are temporarily suspended, approximately half of
English and Welsh prisons have provided secure phone handsets to
risk-assessed prisoners,\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` and some have been trialling
virtual family conversations through video platforms; therefore, contact
with family and friends may have actually increased for some prisoners,
albeit through electronic methods. Such contact can provide much-needed
emotional support and act as a protective factor against suicide and
self-harm. Increased communication may also alleviate concerns about
loved ones and make prisoners feel better connected to outside society.
However, the effects of this may vary, and prisoners at the greatest
risk of suicide and self-harm, particularly those with serious mental
health problems, are more likely to be alienated from support networks;
contact with family and friends may be unchanged for these individuals.

Interestingly, suicide rates among the general population have initially
dropped during the immediate aftermath of prior national
disasters.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` This has been attributed to evolving social
connectedness and a renewed sense of vigour and purpose, which may shift
a person's focus to surviving. Worryingly, this has previously often
represented a ‘honeymoon period’, with subsequent increases in
suicidality among the general population;\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` the same may
occur with rates of prisoner self-harm. Although there are several
possible reasons self-harm may have recently decreased in prisons, there
are also multiple mechanisms by which COVID-19 could have profound
negative effects on prisoners’ mental health. It is likely that prisons
will maintain current reverse cohorting and shielding measures for some
time; this is essential to protect against ‘explosive outbreaks’ of the
virus, but it further heightens the need for vigilant monitoring of
mental well-being, given that prolonged quarantine is associated with
poorer psychological outcomes.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Reasons for engaging in
self-harm vary widely between prisoners, and changes to prison regimes
will likely affect different prisoners differently, depending on
individual coping styles, personalities and the presence of pre-existing
mental health problems. Prisons must be mindful of these differences and
potential future challenges to pre-emptively plan strategies for
preventing and treating any future increase in suicidal and self-harming
behaviours. Potential difficulties could arise if social distancing
measures are eased more quickly in wider society, as this dissonance
could reduce prisoners’ sense of ‘social connectedness’ with outside
communities and worsen feelings of isolation. Where possible, prisons
should coordinate their pandemic responses with external society,
ensuring clear communication to prisoners throughout the process.

Multiple measures already exist within prisons to prevent and
effectively manage self-harm; examples include ACCT processes, mental
health screening and support services, peer support schemes such as
‘Listeners’, and various initiatives for promoting staff understanding
of self-harm and positive prisoner–staff
relationships.\ :sup:`(n.d.l),(n.d.m)` Assuming that the recent
reductions in recorded incidents of self-harm and initiations of ACCT
processes equate with actual reductions in self-harm in prisons, we must
consider what can be learned from the pandemic to improve prisoner
safety post COVID-19. The data highlight a need for mental health to be
addressed in the prison as a ‘social whole’, with an enhanced focus on
preventive social measures to reduce self-harm and creating therapeutic
environments; the importance of a whole-prison approach, and of
environmental stressors, has been identified
previously.\ :sup:`(n.d.l),(n.d.m)` A recent rapid evidence assessment
identified a lack of research on protective factors for self-harm in
prisons;\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` consequently, researchers, prison staff and
inmates need to work together to identify factors helping to reduce
self-harm in recent months and how these could be sustained in the
future. For example, prisons could consider continuing increased
provision of certain ‘privileges’, such as telephone and video
communications with external support networks, and must continue
implementing strategies to reduce bullying, violence and substance
misuse. The increased forms of communication available to prisoners and
methods for facilitating in-cell activities should also continue post
COVID-19. Importantly, staff must remain alert to any potential future
deteriorations in mental health and increases in self-harm throughout
the pandemic, ensuring that the negative psychological effects of
quarantine are reduced wherever possible, while protection from
coronavirus is maintained.

We thank Juliet Lyon CBE (Chair of Independent Advisory Panel on Deaths
in Custody) and Jenny Talbot OBE (Director of the Care not Custody
programme at the Prison Reform Trust) for their support in proofreading
the editorial.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec1:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.83.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

**Thomas Hewson** is an Academic Foundation Doctor at Manchester
University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. **Russell Green** is
National Lead Psychiatrist Health in Justice at CareUK Healthcare
(Health in Justice). **Andrew Shepherd** is a Clinical Lecturer in
Forensic Psychiatry at the Division of Psychology and Mental Health,
University of Manchester, UK. **Jake Hard** is Chair of the Royal
College of General Practitioners Secure Environments Group. **Jennifer
Shaw** is a Professor of Forensic Psychiatry at the Division of
Psychology and Mental Health, University of Manchester, UK, the Greater
Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK, and the
Independent Advisory Panel on Deaths in Custody, London, UK.

All authors were involved in the planning and creation of content for
the editorial, and all authors reviewed the final manuscript.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.
