=========================================================
The mental health of doctors during the COVID-19 pandemic
=========================================================

Niall Galbraith
David Boyda
Danielle McFeeters
Tariq Hassan [1]_Correspondence to Niall Galbraith
(n.galbraith@wlv.ac.uk)
:Date: 2020-4-28

:Abstract:
   Doctors experience high levels of work stress even under normal
   circumstances, but many would be reluctant to disclose mental health
   difficulties or seek help for them, with stigma an often-cited
   reason. The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) crisis places
   additional pressure on doctors and on the healthcare system in
   general and research shows that such pressure brings a greater risk
   of psychological distress for doctors. For this reason, we argue that
   the authorities and healthcare executives must show strong leadership
   and support for doctors and their families during the COVID-19
   outbreak and call for efforts to reduce mental health stigma in
   clinical workplaces. This can be facilitated by deliberately adding
   ‘healthcare staff mental health support process’ as an ongoing agenda
   item to high-level management planning meetings.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Research has consistently shown that the healthcare professions
experience higher levels of work stress than the general population,
even under normal circumstances,\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` and stress in
doctors is associated with both physical\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` and mental
health problems.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.e)` Healthcare professionals also
have a higher likelihood of suicidality relative to other occupational
groups,\ :sup:`(n.d.f),(n.d.g)` and work-related stress is a common
factor in those who complete suicide.\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.i)`

Studies have also shown that many doctors find it difficult to tell
their colleagues or employers about their mental health
difficulties.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` The most commonly cited reasons are
perceived stigma and anticipated damage to future career
prospects.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)–(n.d.l)` Suicidal ideation in doctors can
present particularly strong fears of stigmatisation.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`
Such concerns may be underpinned by feelings of shame and professional
failure, and associated worries about fitness to practise and licence
restrictions.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)–(n.d.o)`

Not only do doctors find it difficult to share mental health concerns
with colleagues, they are also often reluctant to get professional help.
Research shows that many doctors would rather seek help from friends and
family than look for psychological/psychiatric
consultation.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` Again, the same worries about career
prospects and stigma underpin these preferences. Furthermore, there is
evidence that many doctors are even reluctant to disclose mental health
problems to their friends and family.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)`

.. _sec1:

The mental health challenges faced by doctors during the COVID-19 crisis
========================================================================

During acute health crises, healthcare services are placed under excess
pressure, making working life even more stressful than
normal.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` In a pandemic, the number of patients requiring
treatment increases significantly, placing strain on healthcare
resources and on personnel alike. Additionally, doctors perceive a
greater risk to self owing to their exposure to the patients who are
most poorly – adding further stress.\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.s)` Compounding
this stress is the shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE) that
can arise during a pandemic.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` The perceived risk of
infection is warranted: a meta-analysis of the occupational risk from
the 2009 swine flu pandemic (influenza A (H1N1)) reports that the odds
of healthcare personnel contracting the virus were twice those of
comparison groups.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` This heightened risk for doctors and
nurses might be due to their greater exposure to the respiratory
secretions of patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)`

A further stressor is the increased risk of infection for the families
of healthcare professionals on the front line.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` Data from
the 2009 swine flu pandemic shows that 20% of doctors and nurses with
symptoms reported symptoms in at least one of their family
members.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` One way for front-line doctors to mitigate
infection risk to their families is through social distancing. However,
although the protective benefits of social contact and support at times
of stress are well demonstrated,\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` social distancing
deprives the individual of a crucial buffer against mental health
difficulties precisely when they are at greater risk of
stress.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)`

Research from previous epidemics/pandemics (such as the SARS outbreak
from 2003, the MERS epidemic from 2012 or Ebola outbreaks in West
Africa) shows that healthcare professionals can experience a broad range
of psychological morbidities, including
trauma,\ :sup:`(n.d.aa),(n.d.ab)` which might endure for many months
after the outbreak.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac),(n.d.ad)` The relationship between
traumatic life events and suicide is well documented\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)`
and trauma from disaster events can increase suicidal ideation in
emergency workers.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` Fears over risk to health and social
isolation contribute to psychological distress,\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` as do
perceptions of ‘infection stigma’ from the community.\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)`
However, the negative effects on mental health can be found in doctors
irrespective of whether or not they worked directly with infected
patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)` Although the strains of front-line healthcare
during an infectious outbreak can lead to sickness absence and higher
staff turn-over,\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.aj)` most evidence suggests that
doctors and nurses feel a strong professional obligation to continue
working in spite of the danger.\ :sup:`(n.d.ak),(n.d.al)` However, given
the pressures of needing to maintain high-quality healthcare provision
during a pandemic, combined with doctors’ reluctance to seek help or
disclose their difficulties, it is possible that this kind of
professional commitment might relate strongly to presenteeism. Indeed, a
recent review reported that physicians were at the highest risk of
‘infectious illness presenteeism’ when compared with a range of other
occupational groups.\ :sup:`(n.d.am)`

Having to balance their own safety with the needs of patients, family
and employers and in the face of limited resources can lead to
distressing ethical dilemmas for doctors and, potentially, to moral
injury. Moral injury can arise when one feels compelled to make
decisions that conflict with one's ethical or moral
values.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)` The effect of moral injury on subsequent mental
health can depend on the quality of support provided to employees during
and after such events.\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)`

.. _sec2:

Managing doctors’ stress at the organisational level during the outbreak
========================================================================

There is evidence that employer support for healthcare professionals
during pandemics and disaster management can be very protective. Such
support should include safeguards such as care for those doctors and
nurses who become ill, in addition to medical and financial support for
their families and protection from malpractice threat. Healthcare
professionals’ motivation and morale are significantly improved when
they perceive that their efforts are recognised and reciprocated by
employers and authorities in these ways.\ :sup:`(n.d.ap),(n.d.aq)` An
important part of this support is the perceived efficacy of the training
and personal protective equipment that healthcare professionals receive
as well as the general quality of organisational leadership and
communication.\ :sup:`(n.d.t),(n.d.ar),(n.d.as)` These factors are
important not just for motivation – they are also associated with better
psychological outcomes in healthcare professionals on the front line
during epidemics.

There are also many ways to tackle mental health stigma in the
workplace. The foundation for this is creating a culture that encourages
open communication and seeks to reduce the stigmatisation of
psychological vulnerability.\ :sup:`(n.d.at)` This may include devising
activities that challenge unhelpful attitudes and that instead promote
desired values, as well as expanding knowledge and encouraging positive
behavioural change.\ :sup:`(n.d.au)` The anti-stigma project Time to
Change,\ :sup:`(n.d.av)` provides a suite of simple interventions for
implementation in the workplace.\ :sup:`(n.d.aw)` Elsewhere there is
good evidence for peer support training in health crises or disaster
management. One example is the Trauma Risk Management programme (TRiM),
where non-clinical personnel are trained to assess peers following
traumatic events and provide short-term support or access to
professional care if required. Mental Health First Aid (MHFA) operates
on a similar model and both it and TRiM can be effective in reducing
mental health stigma in the workplace.\ :sup:`(n.d.aq),(n.d.as)`

.. _sec3:

Stress management at the individual level
=========================================

There is evidence that psychological interventions for work stress can
be effective in healthcare professionals.\ :sup:`(n.d.ax)` Recent
reviews attest to the effectiveness of mindfulness-based interventions
for work stress and suicide ideation;\ :sup:`(n.d.ay)–(n.d.az)`
mindfulness-based interventions also have a sound theoretical
basis.\ :sup:`(n.d.ba),(n.d.bb)` Mindfulness skills are particularly
suited to high-stress work settings, in that they can be practised
privately or in groups, in almost any environment and can be conducted
as briefly as time permits. Negative automatic cognitions are a key
trigger in stress reactions.\ :sup:`(n.d.bc)` Mindfulness interventions
encourage us to ‘notice’ our thoughts and to view them as objective
events that happen *to* us. This enables us to objectify our own
negative thoughts, gaining a new perspective on how those thoughts
influence our emotions and behaviour and enabling better management of
the distress that would normally accompany them. The effectiveness of
online mindfulness courses also has a good evidence
base.\ :sup:`(n.d.bd)`

.. _sec4:

Conclusions
===========

Healthcare executives and managers should be aware of the potential for
the COVID-19 outbreak to elevate the risk of psychological distress and
suicidal ideation in doctors. The literature shows that, although
healthcare professionals place high value on provision of training and
equipment during such pandemics, effective leadership and managerial
support for clinicians and their families are also highly protective
against negative psychological outcomes. One of us (T.H.) is involved in
setting up a support network of psychiatrists with the sole aim of
supporting all physicians during this unprecedented event. Managers and
clinicians might also remember that many doctors are reluctant to reveal
their difficulties even when experiencing significant psychological
distress. Workplace interventions that reduce mental health stigma and
promote sharing and support for colleagues with psychological
difficulties might improve help-seeking behaviour and attitudes.
Mindfulness practice has versatility and a strong evidence base in
workplace stress reduction and is therefore a viable technique for
groups or individual clinicians to manage stress during the COVID-19
outbreak.

**Niall Galbraith**, Reader in Health Psychology, Department of
Psychology, University of Wolverhampton, UK. **David Boyda**, Senior
Lecturer in Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of
Wolverhampton, UK. **Danielle McFeeters**, Senior Lecturer in
Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of Wolverhampton, UK.
**Tariq Hassan**, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry, Queen's
University, Providence Care Hospital, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

All authors contributed to the design, analysis of literature, writing
and revision of the article.

None.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.44.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref37

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref39

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref40

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref41

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref42

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref43

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref44

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref45

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref46

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref47

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref48

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref49

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref50

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref51

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref52

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref53

      n.d.ay.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref57

      n.d.az.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref58

      n.d.ba.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref59

      n.d.bb.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref60

      n.d.bc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref61

      n.d.bd.

.. [1]
   A video abstract for this article is available at
   https://vimeo.com/414651981.
