=========================================================
COVID-19: the perfect vector for a mental health epidemic
=========================================================

Idura N. Hisham
Giles Townsend
Steve Gillard
Brishti Debnath
Jacqueline SinCorrespondence to Idura N. Hisham (m1502672@sgul.ac.uk)
:Date: 2020-6-01

:Abstract:
   In times of crisis, people have historically had to band together to
   overcome. What happens when they cannot? This article examines the
   reality of people forced to isolate from one another during one of
   the most turbulent events of their lives: the COVID-19 pandemic.
   Connecting the dots of topics including fear, social stigmas, global
   public response and previous disease outbreaks, this article
   discusses the negative mental health effects that individuals and
   communities will likely suffer as the result of social distancing,
   isolation and physical infection.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

The rise of a new pandemic
==========================

On 31 December 2019, the Chinese authorities reported a disease that had
appeared in the Hubei province to the World Health Organization (WHO) as
a ‘pneumonia of unknown aetiology.’\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` That ‘pneumonia’ is
now known as the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19). As of 13 May
2020, there are 4 170 424 confirmed cases of COVID-19 with 287 399
deaths reported globally, and these numbers are continuing to
grow.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`

While current strategies to fight the outbreak primarily focus on
curbing the spread and treating the infected, it is crucial to consider
the effects of COVID-19 on the wider population's mental health, in the
short, medium, and long term. By studying past new emerging infections
(NEIs), in particular, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2003,
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) in 2012 and 2015, and H1N1 in
2009 (the only one to also be declared a pandemic),\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` we
can better understand, potentially predict, and thus counteract the
possible effects of COVID-19 on mental health.

The 2003 SARS epidemic is one such case study of how infectious disease
outbreaks affect mental health, with this particular epidemic described
as a mental health catastrophe.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

Hong Kong was disproportionately affected in the SARS epidemic, with up
to 1755 individuals infected and 299 deaths.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)–(n.d.e)` A
study conducted soon after the outbreak indicated that a significant
proportion of the Hong Kong population, including those not infected
with the disease, displayed moderate to severe psychiatric symptoms,
meeting diagnostic thresholds of common mental disorders such as
depression and generalised anxiety disorder.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` These
effects are not specific to SARS, but are a feature seen in most, if not
all, infectious disease outbreaks. A study of a hospital in South Korea
found that 70% of MERS patients admitted to hospital presented with a
psychiatric symptom, and 40% of them were later prescribed medication to
alleviate the symptoms.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` In both SARS and MERS, the
psychiatric implications continued far beyond the outbreak, with many
having persistent mental health issues years
afterwards.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.f)–(n.d.g)` The same effects, albeit of
varying ferocity, could also be seen during the H1N1 outbreak.

COVID-19 is of a scale that the current generation has never seen
before, with the ‘Spanish flu’ of 1918 potentially being the last
outbreak to have had such widespread effects. However, owing to the
scarcity of literature evidencing the mental health effects of the
Spanish flu pandemic, and the time-gap of more than a century, in which
our society, health and financial systems have all changed beyond our
forefathers’ imagination, limited parallels can be drawn between current
and older pandemics other than mortality. Drawing parallels with SARS
and MERS also has its limitations. Studies of SARS patients have varying
degrees of reliability owing to inconsistent study design, research
methods, and standardised measures being used across the different
studies – a common problem with research done in the early aftermath of
a disaster.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` The existing literature surrounding SARS and
MERS is also primarily focused on Asian countries, as they were most
affected by the outbreaks; this potentially limits its generalisability
to Western countries, which have a more ‘individualistic’ structure
compared with the ‘collectivist’ societal systems of those nations. To
minimise this limitation, our focus was to identify and learn from
themes that recur in different disease outbreak settings. Given that the
COVID-19 pandemic is already more global and longer lasting than any
outbreaks we have faced in recent memory, one may extrapolate that its
mental health implications will be at least as severe as those of others
NEIs. We provide a brief overview of the potential negative
ramifications in store if mental health is not given more priority in
the current outbreak response.

.. _sec2:

Why do NEIs contribute to increases in mental health issues?
============================================================

Throughout history, the emergence and increasing prevalence of
infectious agents have coincided with an increased risk of psychiatric
manifestations. NEIs such as SARS and COVID-19 adversely affect mental
health in a multitude of ways, permeating at individual, communal and
societal levels. The most common psychological morbidities include
worries, anxiety, mood disturbances, poor sleep and hypochondriac
beliefs.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)–(n.d.j)` Pervasive feelings of hopelessness,
uncertainty and fear tend to dominate society during such outbreaks, as
a result of life as we know it stopping or
changing.\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.k)–(n.d.l)` Such feelings may be born out
of an increased perceived threat, which drives ‘safety’ behaviours in
individuals and community that can be maladaptive.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` The
most common behaviours of this nature include hypervigilance (i.e.
looking out for potential dangers) and avoidance (i.e. keeping ourselves
from sources of danger or threat).\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` Intense fear and
panic are also used as excuses, albeit often unintentionally, for
unjustified discriminatory behaviour such as xenophobia and
stigmatisation of particular groups, or patterns of hoarding
supplies.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)`

.. _sec3:

Fear
====

‘\ *This is a time for facts, not fear. This is the time for science,
not rumours. This is the time for solidarity, not
stigma*,’\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` said Tedros Adhanom, the Director-General of
the WHO, in reference to COVID-19 on 12 February 2020.

Fear was preponderate in affected populations (including healthcare
workers) during SARS: not only for personal safety but for the safety of
others. At the time, SARS was unique in its psychosocial effects,
evoking a deep-rooted fear of infecting family and community
members.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.h),(n.d.p)` In Hong Kong, the government's
perceived lack of control in containing the SARS outbreak led to a
pervasive sense of hopelessness in the citizenry, a psycho-emotional
factor amplified and perpetuated by the media. This, in turn, led to
general apprehension and panic.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` The influence of the
‘rumour mill’ during an outbreak must be taken seriously; as the desire
for facts escalates, any absence of clear and accurate messaging can
augment popular anxiety, driving people to seek information from less
reliable sources. This same trait is now evident in the context of
COVID-19, exacerbated by media and popular discourse promulgating
paranoia and anxiety.\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.s)`

Social media has an important role in shaping the public's risk
perception;\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` however, it can also be a vessel for the
fast dispersal of false news, which can bring with it disastrous
consequences. During the H1N1 pandemic, widespread misinformation
surrounding the vaccine has been implicated in reduced uptake and
increased hesitancy.\ :sup:`(n.d.t),(n.d.u)` The current COVID-19
outbreak has seen a repeat of this, with the spread of ‘fake news’
through social media contributing to significant misinformation, leading
to fear, panic and even non-compliance with infection control measures.
The influence of social media in propagating misinformation during
COVID-19 has even led to protests against lockdown measures in the UK
with protestors chanting phrases such as ‘Stop 5G!’ – referring to a
theory made popular through social media.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` This influence
has persisted despite the UK government forming a rapid response unit to
tackle issues on misinformation early in the outbreak
response.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)`

Fear can be beneficial to a point during an outbreak, leading to
behaviours which reduce the spread of the disease. Excessive fear,
however, can lead to irrational beliefs that impede infection control
measures and can probably precipitate maladaptive coping techniques,
albeit unintentionally.\ :sup:`(n.d.x),(n.d.y)` A survey showed that 66%
of young adults in the UK avoided news on COVID-19 as it was unhelpful
for their mental health.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` This highlights how, although
fear is an important tool in public health messaging, excessive fear can
not only impede its reach but also potentially exacerbate a different
public health issue.

.. _sec4:

Stigma
======

Stigma was also linked to mental health morbidity in the SARS
outbreak.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` This included self-stigmatisation
(individuals continuing to feel ‘polluted’ or ‘contaminated’ up to 16
months after the outbreak), professional stigmatisation (denigration of
healthcare workers and figures of authority) and, of course, racial
stigmatisation (people of Asian descent being painted as social
pariahs).\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.p),(n.d.aa)` In another parallel with the
SARS and MERS outbreaks, the COVID-19 pandemic has spurred racial
stigmatisation, especially toward those of Chinese heritage, in the form
of xenophobia and discrimination.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)–(n.d.ac)` A systematic
review identified that the perception of having been a victim of
stigmatisation due to SARS was one of the most consistent aetiological
factors for the development of psychiatric disorders and chronic fatigue
syndrome.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Therefore, preventing stigmatisation during
COVID-19 should be made a priority in order to prevent similar adverse
outcomes in COVID-19 patients and in the wider population.

Stigma not only affects the mental health of individuals, it can also
disrupt infection control measures. Barrett and Brown\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)`
identified four elements of stigma that can contribute to this. •Stigma
can present major barriers against healthcare-seeking, thereby reducing
early detection and treatment and furthering the spread of
disease.•Social marginalisation often can lead to poverty and neglect,
thereby increasing the susceptibility of certain groups to infectious
diseases.•Potentially stigmatised populations may distrust health
authorities and resist cooperation during a public health
emergency.•Social stigma may distort public perceptions of risk,
resulting in mass panic among communities and the disproportionate
allocation of healthcare resources by politicians and health
professionals.

Stigmatisation and discrimination have socioeconomic ramifications
within populations, as well as being related to feelings of fear,
creating a destructive, mutually reinforcing dynamic.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)`

.. _sec5:

Quarantine and social isolation
===============================

The negative influences of quarantine and isolation on mental health
have been described at length.\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.ae)` Adverse effects
on mental health often persist for months after the end of isolation,
and those with pre-existing mental health conditions are at higher risk
of prolonged adverse effects, as shown by both the SARS and MERS
outbreaks.\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.af),(n.d.ag)` Discrimination, social
shunning, violence and vandalism of property are among the consequences
of the maltreatment faced by quarantined people at the hands of others
in society.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)`

Most adverse effects from quarantine stem from restricted liberties,
whereas voluntary quarantine is associated with less distress and fewer
long-term complications.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` Earlier in the pandemic
response, the UK relied on the altruistic nature of the public to
practice ‘social distancing’, but as of 23 March 2020, police have had
the authority to enforce this through fines and other penalties.
According to a recently published report, the specific concerns of the
UK population in regards to isolation measures included having to
separate from others in the household (45%), getting supplies (41%),
mental health implications (37%), social life implications (24%), loss
of income (22%) and finding someone to cover caring responsibilities
(12%). In addition, those between 18 and 34 years old were more likely
to report negative mental health effects.\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)`

The economic sequalae of COVID-19 lockdown measures in the UK have led
to businesses closing and many losing employment; the Bank of England
has warned that unemployment rates could rise to 9% (compared with 4%
earlier this year).\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)` Increased unemployment poses
significant public health risks. For instance, in 1981, when
unemployment rates in the UK increased by 3.6%, suicide rates also
increased by 2.7%.\ :sup:`(n.d.aj)` Reports from the 2008 recession
echoed this and showed that the resultant mass unemployment was
associated with a 4.45% increase in suicide rates in 26 European Union
countries.\ :sup:`(n.d.aj)` Although the end of lockdown is expected to
improve the economic downturn, many that have lost their jobs will
struggle to find new employment as companies reduce
hiring,\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)` further protracting the financial and
psychological effects of COVID-19.

Quarantine and isolation are necessary measures and, as of now, appear
to be among the most effective means of containing the
outbreak.\ :sup:`(n.d.ak),(n.d.al)` With the possibility of mass
quarantine measures having to be reimplemented owing to ‘second waves’
of COVID-19, as seen in several countries,\ :sup:`(n.d.am)–(n.d.an)` the
concerns of the public must be addressed to mitigate the negative
effects of this potentially recurring ‘necessary evil’.

.. _sec6:

Loss of protective factors
==========================

Rutter defined protective factors as those that ‘modify, ameliorate or
alter a person's response to some environmental hazard that predisposes
to a maladaptive outcome’.\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)` Protective factors may exist
in individuals or in the family, and in institutional or community
contexts. They can also be biological or psychosocial in
nature.\ :sup:`(n.d.ap)` In times of duress, social support is one of
the protective factors against the development of mental health
disorders such as depression and post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD).\ :sup:`(n.d.aq),(n.d.ar)` Nevertheless, social distancing is a
necessary public health response to NEIs. In the UK, people are now
prohibited from both large and small gatherings with those from
different households. This has, for example, led to religious
institutions cancelling services, which ordinarily constitute a major
source of support, particularly for the elderly.\ :sup:`(n.d.as)`

Social support is just one of many examples of a lost protective factor
resulting from COVID-19. The public also has to face financial
instability, unemployment and disrupted routine.

Pandemics and epidemics not only increase the many risk factors for
mental health morbidities but also pull away protective factors
simultaneously; these effects compound one another.

.. _sec7:

Increased risk of abuse
=======================

Reports have already emerged of increased cases of domestic abuse among
the populations affected by COVID-19, with a UK abuse charity, Refuge,
seeing a 700% increase in traffic to their hotline website in a
day.\ :sup:`(n.d.at)` It is important to note that domestic abuse is not
always physical – it can also be psychological, financial or sexual. Not
only can COVID-19 exacerbate existing cases of abuse, the stress
associated with it can also lead to new cases. Social isolation can mean
spending significantly more time at home with abusive family members,
with no escape or respite.\ :sup:`(n.d.au)` Furthermore, a pandemic
increases financial and psychological stresses, which are associated
with increased likelihood of abusive behavior.\ :sup:`(n.d.av)`

The significant risk of abuse towards the elderly should not be
overlooked. A study carried out by Reay and Browne in 2001 identified 15
risk factors in caregivers that increase the risk of mistreatment. Three
of them are particularly relevant during the current outbreak: (a)
caregivers who are subject to high stress and strain; (b) those who live
with elderly patients; and (c) those who are isolated and lack community
and personal support.\ :sup:`(n.d.aw)` Furthermore, feelings of anxiety
in caregivers are also associated with neglect.\ :sup:`(n.d.aw)` For the
elderly who require greater assistance with daily activities, as well as
those with dementia, caregiver stress is a predominant factor in the
onset of abuse.\ :sup:`(n.d.ax)` COVID-19 intensifies all these risk
factors in caregivers, thus placing the elderly at a higher risk of
abuse or neglect. Although the UK government has already issued measures
to address abuse,\ :sup:`(n.d.ay)` there remains a question of how
accessible and practical these technology-driven measures are for the
elderly population.

Pandemics such as COVID-19 may also make it more difficult for victims
to receive help, owing to its influence on an already overwhelmed public
health infrastructure,\ :sup:`(n.d.az)` including effects on the social
care system, reduced philanthropic donations to abuse charities and
imposed travel limitations.\ :sup:`(n.d.au)` Involvement in abuse,
either as a perpetrator or a victim, exerts an enduring effect on both
physical and mental health.\ :sup:`(n.d.ba)` The stress factors
associated with COVID-19, if not properly mitigated, will make the
current pandemic an ideal environment for abuse to thrive, with
lifelong, adverse effects on the health of those involved.

.. _sec8:

COVID-19, PTSD and intensive treatment
======================================

Approximately one in five critically ill patients and their partners
will develop clinical symptoms of PTSD and reduced reported
health-related quality of life as a result of their intensive treatment
unit (ITU) stay.\ :sup:`(n.d.bb)` The estimated number of COVID-19
patients requiring intensive care owing to, for instance, acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) currently stands at about
15–30%.\ :sup:`(n.d.bc)` Patients admitted to ITUs, as well as their
families, are at risk of developing post intensive care syndrome (PICS)
– a physical, cognitive and mental disorder associated with an ITU stay.
The mental health impairments that can arise among these patients
include depression, anxiety and PTSD.\ :sup:`(n.d.bd)` Existing mental
health conditions also increase the risk of developing PICS, in both
patients and their families.\ :sup:`(n.d.be)`

Furthermore, the use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), also
known as extracorporeal life support, in the treatment of COVID-19 poses
a specific mental health risk that warrants
consideration.\ :sup:`(n.d.bf),(n.d.bg)` ECMO, which supports the lungs
and/or the heart, is considered one of the most invasive rescue
therapies and has high rates of adverse mental health outcomes (e.g.
PTSD) in patients post-treatment. The prevalence of PTSD in patients who
were on ECMO is estimated to be between 11 and 27%, at least a four- to
five-fold increase from general population prevalence
figures.\ :sup:`(n.d.bh),(n.d.bi)` Moreover, compared with other ARDS
survivors, those who were on ECMO also reported lower quality of life
and lower rates of return to employment.\ :sup:`(n.d.bh)`

.. _sec9:

Mental health services and COVID-19
===================================

The UK government does not currently recognise people with existing
mental health conditions as part of the ‘vulnerable population’, because
their risk of getting seriously ill from COVID-19 is perceived as low.
However, these groups are vulnerable to an exacerbation of pre-existing
mental health conditions. Those with pre-existing mental health
conditions often suffer greater psychological distress in instances of
an adverse event or situation.\ :sup:`(n.d.bj),(n.d.bk)`

Moreover, this cohort is often in poorer physical health, with fewer
protective factors such as healthy lifestyle or an active social support
network, making them physically and mentally vulnerable to the effects
of COVID-19. One example is smoking, which is estimated to be twice as
prevalent among people with mental disorders, with higher reported
mental health disease severity directly correlated with numbers of
cigarettes smoked.\ :sup:`(n.d.bl)` In addition, these patients have a
higher incidence of chronic infections owing to substance abuse and
socioeconomic deprivation.\ :sup:`(n.d.bm)` This is particularly
relevant to COVID-19, as those with chronic respiratory illness, such as
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (which is directly correlated with
smoking frequency), are at higher risk of death from the disease.

For current mental health patients, the American Psychiatric Association
has already raised the alarm that the spread of COVID-19 can create
barriers for access to psychiatric services.\ :sup:`(n.d.bn)` One prime
example concerns patients on medication-assisted treatment (MAT) such as
methadone and buprenorphine, who may face difficulty in physically
attending their drug service or pharmacy at the frequency needed. In the
UK, reports have emerged of pharmacies restricting access to MAT owing
to reduced capacity, and patients stopping their treatment because of
anxieties surrounding COVID-19.\ :sup:`(n.d.bo),(n.d.bp)` The
implications for access to other medications that require frequent
monitoring, such as clozapine, also need to be considered carefully.
This is especially so when monitoring is indicated owing to the
treatment's side-effect profile, which could also increase mental health
patients’ vulnerability to COVID-19.\ :sup:`(n.d.bq)`

In a recent survey by the Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych), 43%
of psychiatrists reported an increase in emergency cases, despite seeing
a 45% decrease in their routine appointments.\ :sup:`(n.d.br)` Professor
Wendy Burns, president of RCPsych, stated::sup:`(n.d.br)` “‘Our fear is
that the lockdown is storing up problems which could then lead to a
tsunami of referrals’.”

As well as leading to increased incidence of mental health disorder,
COVID-19 can also exacerbate existing conditions in current mental
health patients and unmask existing symptoms in those without a current
mental health diagnosis. Patients’ reluctance to seek help during the
current pandemic, coupled with the reduced availability of routine
appointments, could lead to a ‘tsunami of referrals’ post-lockdown – a
situation that could easily overwhelm an overstretched and underfunded
mental health service.\ :sup:`(n.d.br),(n.d.bs)` This is further
exacerbated by reduced provision for services deemed ‘non-essential’ in
treating the acute medical problem, such as mental health services, in
response to the outbreak.\ :sup:`(n.d.az)` Without timely and adequate
interventions, the compromised mental health system might not be able to
cope with the potential surge in demand, as in Hong Kong during the SARS
outbreak.\ :sup:`(n.d.bt)`

.. _sec10:

COVID-19 – the perfect vector
=============================

Anxiety, anger and stress are normal reactions to extremely adverse
events such as the COVID-19 pandemic.\ :sup:`(n.d.bu)` For this reason,
it is important that early mental healthcare intervention is provided to
prevent progression into longer-term psychiatric conditions such as
PTSD. The psychological needs of the population must be part of the
public health response.\ :sup:`(n.d.bu)`

As discussed, infected individuals are more likely to face severe
psychological crises and secondary trauma after the disaster, a fact
that must be taken into account when devising treatment strategies for
COVID-19 patients. Efforts must be focused on identifying vulnerable
populations, such as those with pre-existing mental health conditions,
healthcare workers and families of affected
individuals.\ :sup:`(n.d.bv)` Establishing key target groups during the
initial stage of the outbreak, where the burden on services is
significant and resources are scarce, allows for efficient and optimal
use of limited resources.\ :sup:`(n.d.bw)` Providing precise and clear
information regarding measures that enhance individuals’ perceived
control over the threat may help engender coping methods that limit
anxiety.\ :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.x),(n.d.y)` Specific measures should also
be taken to ensure that the psychological needs of quarantined or
isolated individuals are accounted for.

Mental health services should brace themselves for a ‘mental health
tsunami’\ :sup:`(n.d.br)` in the months and potentially years to come,
as the question of a secondary mental health epidemic is not a matter of
whether it will happen, but rather to what extent will it happen. The
concept of ‘flattening the curve’ in response to COVID-19 cases has been
repeated by Prime Minister Boris Johnson on multiple
occasions;\ :sup:`(n.d.bx)` similarly, steps should be taken to account
for the mental health effects of COVID-19 as part of the curve which
needs to be flattened, so as to not overwhelm our already overstretched
mental health services.

**Idura N. Hisham** is a medical student at the Faculty of Medicine, St
George's Hospital Medical School, London, UK. **Giles Townsend** is
Consultant Old Age Psychiatrist at Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS
Foundation Trust, The Meadows Inpatient Unit, Older Adults and
Specialist Services, West Park, Epsom, UK. **Steve Gillard** is a
Professor of Social & Community Mental Health at the Population Health
Research Institute, St George's, University of London, UK. **Brishti
Debnath** is a medical student at the Faculty of Medicine, St George's
Hospital Medical School, London, UK. **Jacqueline Sin** is a NIHR Post
Doctoral Research Fellow at the Population Health Research Institute, St
George's, University of London, UK, and an Associate Professor in
Clinical Health at the School of Psychology and Clinical Language
Sciences, University of Reading, UK.

I.N.H. conceived the project and developed the initial draft. B.D.
contributed with the management of references and refinement of writing
for the initial draft. S.G., J.S. and G.T. contributed to the revision
and refinement of the writing. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

None.

.. _sec11:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.60.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.bv.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref37

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref39

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref40

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref41

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref42

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref43

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref44

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref45

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref47

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref48

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref49

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref50

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref51

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref52

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref53

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref54

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref55

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref56

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref57

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref58

      n.d.ay.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref59

      n.d.az.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref60

      n.d.ba.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref61

      n.d.bb.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref62

      n.d.bc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref63

      n.d.bd.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref64

      n.d.be.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref65

      n.d.bf.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref66

      n.d.bg.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref67

      n.d.bh.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref68

      n.d.bi.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref69

      n.d.bj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref70

      n.d.bk.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref71

      n.d.bl.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref72

      n.d.bm.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref73

      n.d.bn.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref74

      n.d.bo.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref75

      n.d.bp.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref76

      n.d.bq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref77

      n.d.br.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref78

      n.d.bs.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref79

      n.d.bt.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref80

      n.d.bu.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref81

      n.d.bw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref82

      n.d.bx.
