---
abstract: |
  In times of crisis, people have historically had to band together to
  overcome. What happens when they cannot? This article examines the
  reality of people forced to isolate from one another during one of the
  most turbulent events of their lives: the COVID-19 pandemic.
  Connecting the dots of topics including fear, social stigmas, global
  public response and previous disease outbreaks, this article discusses
  the negative mental health effects that individuals and communities
  will likely suffer as the result of social distancing, isolation and
  physical infection.
author:
- Idura N. Hisham
- Giles Townsend
- Steve Gillard
- Brishti Debnath
- Jacqueline SinCorrespondence to Idura N. Hisham
  (<m1502672@sgul.ac.uk>)
date: 2020-6-01
institute:
- 1St George\'s Hospital Medical School, UK
- 2Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 3St George\'s, University of London, UK
- 4University of Reading, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
- id: ref38
- id: ref39
- id: ref40
- id: ref41
- id: ref42
- id: ref43
- id: ref44
- id: ref45
- id: ref46
- id: ref47
- id: ref48
- id: ref49
- id: ref50
- id: ref51
- id: ref52
- id: ref53
- id: ref54
- id: ref55
- id: ref56
- id: ref57
- id: ref58
- id: ref59
- id: ref60
- id: ref61
- id: ref62
- id: ref63
- id: ref64
- id: ref65
- id: ref66
- id: ref67
- id: ref68
- id: ref69
- id: ref70
- id: ref71
- id: ref72
- id: ref73
- id: ref74
- id: ref75
- id: ref76
- id: ref77
- id: ref78
- id: ref79
- id: ref80
- id: ref81
- id: ref82
title: "COVID-19: the perfect vector for a mental health epidemic"
---

# The rise of a new pandemic {#sec1}

On 31 December 2019, the Chinese authorities reported a disease that had
appeared in the Hubei province to the World Health Organization (WHO) as
a 'pneumonia of unknown aetiology.'^1^ That 'pneumonia' is now known as
the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19). As of 13 May 2020, there are
4 170 424 confirmed cases of COVID-19 with 287 399 deaths reported
globally, and these numbers are continuing to grow.^2^

While current strategies to fight the outbreak primarily focus on
curbing the spread and treating the infected, it is crucial to consider
the effects of COVID-19 on the wider population\'s mental health, in the
short, medium, and long term. By studying past new emerging infections
(NEIs), in particular, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2003,
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) in 2012 and 2015, and H1N1 in
2009 (the only one to also be declared a pandemic),^3^ we can better
understand, potentially predict, and thus counteract the possible
effects of COVID-19 on mental health.

The 2003 SARS epidemic is one such case study of how infectious disease
outbreaks affect mental health, with this particular epidemic described
as a mental health catastrophe.^4^

Hong Kong was disproportionately affected in the SARS epidemic, with up
to 1755 individuals infected and 299 deaths.^4--7^ A study conducted
soon after the outbreak indicated that a significant proportion of the
Hong Kong population, including those not infected with the disease,
displayed moderate to severe psychiatric symptoms, meeting diagnostic
thresholds of common mental disorders such as depression and generalised
anxiety disorder.^4^ These effects are not specific to SARS, but are a
feature seen in most, if not all, infectious disease outbreaks. A study
of a hospital in South Korea found that 70% of MERS patients admitted to
hospital presented with a psychiatric symptom, and 40% of them were
later prescribed medication to alleviate the symptoms.^8^ In both SARS
and MERS, the psychiatric implications continued far beyond the
outbreak, with many having persistent mental health issues years
afterwards.^4,8--13^ The same effects, albeit of varying ferocity, could
also be seen during the H1N1 outbreak.

COVID-19 is of a scale that the current generation has never seen
before, with the 'Spanish flu' of 1918 potentially being the last
outbreak to have had such widespread effects. However, owing to the
scarcity of literature evidencing the mental health effects of the
Spanish flu pandemic, and the time-gap of more than a century, in which
our society, health and financial systems have all changed beyond our
forefathers' imagination, limited parallels can be drawn between current
and older pandemics other than mortality. Drawing parallels with SARS
and MERS also has its limitations. Studies of SARS patients have varying
degrees of reliability owing to inconsistent study design, research
methods, and standardised measures being used across the different
studies -- a common problem with research done in the early aftermath of
a disaster.^11^ The existing literature surrounding SARS and MERS is
also primarily focused on Asian countries, as they were most affected by
the outbreaks; this potentially limits its generalisability to Western
countries, which have a more 'individualistic' structure compared with
the 'collectivist' societal systems of those nations. To minimise this
limitation, our focus was to identify and learn from themes that recur
in different disease outbreak settings. Given that the COVID-19 pandemic
is already more global and longer lasting than any outbreaks we have
faced in recent memory, one may extrapolate that its mental health
implications will be at least as severe as those of others NEIs. We
provide a brief overview of the potential negative ramifications in
store if mental health is not given more priority in the current
outbreak response.

# Why do NEIs contribute to increases in mental health issues? {#sec2}

Throughout history, the emergence and increasing prevalence of
infectious agents have coincided with an increased risk of psychiatric
manifestations. NEIs such as SARS and COVID-19 adversely affect mental
health in a multitude of ways, permeating at individual, communal and
societal levels. The most common psychological morbidities include
worries, anxiety, mood disturbances, poor sleep and hypochondriac
beliefs.^14--17^ Pervasive feelings of hopelessness, uncertainty and
fear tend to dominate society during such outbreaks, as a result of life
as we know it stopping or changing.^13,15--18^ Such feelings may be born
out of an increased perceived threat, which drives 'safety' behaviours
in individuals and community that can be maladaptive.^19^ The most
common behaviours of this nature include hypervigilance (i.e. looking
out for potential dangers) and avoidance (i.e. keeping ourselves from
sources of danger or threat).^19^ Intense fear and panic are also used
as excuses, albeit often unintentionally, for unjustified discriminatory
behaviour such as xenophobia and stigmatisation of particular groups, or
patterns of hoarding supplies.^20^

# Fear {#sec3}

'*This is a time for facts, not fear. This is the time for science, not
rumours. This is the time for solidarity, not stigma*,'^21^ said Tedros
Adhanom, the Director-General of the WHO, in reference to COVID-19 on 12
February 2020.

Fear was preponderate in affected populations (including healthcare
workers) during SARS: not only for personal safety but for the safety of
others. At the time, SARS was unique in its psychosocial effects,
evoking a deep-rooted fear of infecting family and community
members.^7,11,12^ In Hong Kong, the government\'s perceived lack of
control in containing the SARS outbreak led to a pervasive sense of
hopelessness in the citizenry, a psycho-emotional factor amplified and
perpetuated by the media. This, in turn, led to general apprehension and
panic.^22^ The influence of the 'rumour mill' during an outbreak must be
taken seriously; as the desire for facts escalates, any absence of clear
and accurate messaging can augment popular anxiety, driving people to
seek information from less reliable sources. This same trait is now
evident in the context of COVID-19, exacerbated by media and popular
discourse promulgating paranoia and anxiety.^23,24^

Social media has an important role in shaping the public\'s risk
perception;^24^ however, it can also be a vessel for the fast dispersal
of false news, which can bring with it disastrous consequences. During
the H1N1 pandemic, widespread misinformation surrounding the vaccine has
been implicated in reduced uptake and increased hesitancy.^25,26^ The
current COVID-19 outbreak has seen a repeat of this, with the spread of
'fake news' through social media contributing to significant
misinformation, leading to fear, panic and even non-compliance with
infection control measures. The influence of social media in propagating
misinformation during COVID-19 has even led to protests against lockdown
measures in the UK with protestors chanting phrases such as 'Stop 5G!'
-- referring to a theory made popular through social media.^27^ This
influence has persisted despite the UK government forming a rapid
response unit to tackle issues on misinformation early in the outbreak
response.^28^

Fear can be beneficial to a point during an outbreak, leading to
behaviours which reduce the spread of the disease. Excessive fear,
however, can lead to irrational beliefs that impede infection control
measures and can probably precipitate maladaptive coping techniques,
albeit unintentionally.^29,30^ A survey showed that 66% of young adults
in the UK avoided news on COVID-19 as it was unhelpful for their mental
health.^31^ This highlights how, although fear is an important tool in
public health messaging, excessive fear can not only impede its reach
but also potentially exacerbate a different public health issue.

# Stigma {#sec4}

Stigma was also linked to mental health morbidity in the SARS
outbreak.^32^ This included self-stigmatisation (individuals continuing
to feel 'polluted' or 'contaminated' up to 16 months after the
outbreak), professional stigmatisation (denigration of healthcare
workers and figures of authority) and, of course, racial stigmatisation
(people of Asian descent being painted as social pariahs).^11,12,32^ In
another parallel with the SARS and MERS outbreaks, the COVID-19 pandemic
has spurred racial stigmatisation, especially toward those of Chinese
heritage, in the form of xenophobia and discrimination.^33--35^ A
systematic review identified that the perception of having been a victim
of stigmatisation due to SARS was one of the most consistent
aetiological factors for the development of psychiatric disorders and
chronic fatigue syndrome.^11^ Therefore, preventing stigmatisation
during COVID-19 should be made a priority in order to prevent similar
adverse outcomes in COVID-19 patients and in the wider population.

Stigma not only affects the mental health of individuals, it can also
disrupt infection control measures. Barrett and Brown^36^ identified
four elements of stigma that can contribute to this. •Stigma can present
major barriers against healthcare-seeking, thereby reducing early
detection and treatment and furthering the spread of disease.•Social
marginalisation often can lead to poverty and neglect, thereby
increasing the susceptibility of certain groups to infectious
diseases.•Potentially stigmatised populations may distrust health
authorities and resist cooperation during a public health
emergency.•Social stigma may distort public perceptions of risk,
resulting in mass panic among communities and the disproportionate
allocation of healthcare resources by politicians and health
professionals.

Stigmatisation and discrimination have socioeconomic ramifications
within populations, as well as being related to feelings of fear,
creating a destructive, mutually reinforcing dynamic.^32^

# Quarantine and social isolation {#sec5}

The negative influences of quarantine and isolation on mental health
have been described at length.^23,37^ Adverse effects on mental health
often persist for months after the end of isolation, and those with
pre-existing mental health conditions are at higher risk of prolonged
adverse effects, as shown by both the SARS and MERS outbreaks.^13,38,39^
Discrimination, social shunning, violence and vandalism of property are
among the consequences of the maltreatment faced by quarantined people
at the hands of others in society.^23^

Most adverse effects from quarantine stem from restricted liberties,
whereas voluntary quarantine is associated with less distress and fewer
long-term complications.^37^ Earlier in the pandemic response, the UK
relied on the altruistic nature of the public to practice 'social
distancing', but as of 23 March 2020, police have had the authority to
enforce this through fines and other penalties. According to a recently
published report, the specific concerns of the UK population in regards
to isolation measures included having to separate from others in the
household (45%), getting supplies (41%), mental health implications
(37%), social life implications (24%), loss of income (22%) and finding
someone to cover caring responsibilities (12%). In addition, those
between 18 and 34 years old were more likely to report negative mental
health effects.^40^

The economic sequalae of COVID-19 lockdown measures in the UK have led
to businesses closing and many losing employment; the Bank of England
has warned that unemployment rates could rise to 9% (compared with 4%
earlier this year).^41^ Increased unemployment poses significant public
health risks. For instance, in 1981, when unemployment rates in the UK
increased by 3.6%, suicide rates also increased by 2.7%.^42^ Reports
from the 2008 recession echoed this and showed that the resultant mass
unemployment was associated with a 4.45% increase in suicide rates in 26
European Union countries.^42^ Although the end of lockdown is expected
to improve the economic downturn, many that have lost their jobs will
struggle to find new employment as companies reduce hiring,^41^ further
protracting the financial and psychological effects of COVID-19.

Quarantine and isolation are necessary measures and, as of now, appear
to be among the most effective means of containing the outbreak.^43,44^
With the possibility of mass quarantine measures having to be
reimplemented owing to 'second waves' of COVID-19, as seen in several
countries,^45--47^ the concerns of the public must be addressed to
mitigate the negative effects of this potentially recurring 'necessary
evil'.

# Loss of protective factors {#sec6}

Rutter defined protective factors as those that 'modify, ameliorate or
alter a person\'s response to some environmental hazard that predisposes
to a maladaptive outcome'.^48^ Protective factors may exist in
individuals or in the family, and in institutional or community
contexts. They can also be biological or psychosocial in nature.^49^ In
times of duress, social support is one of the protective factors against
the development of mental health disorders such as depression and
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).^50,51^ Nevertheless, social
distancing is a necessary public health response to NEIs. In the UK,
people are now prohibited from both large and small gatherings with
those from different households. This has, for example, led to religious
institutions cancelling services, which ordinarily constitute a major
source of support, particularly for the elderly.^52^

Social support is just one of many examples of a lost protective factor
resulting from COVID-19. The public also has to face financial
instability, unemployment and disrupted routine.

Pandemics and epidemics not only increase the many risk factors for
mental health morbidities but also pull away protective factors
simultaneously; these effects compound one another.

# Increased risk of abuse {#sec7}

Reports have already emerged of increased cases of domestic abuse among
the populations affected by COVID-19, with a UK abuse charity, Refuge,
seeing a 700% increase in traffic to their hotline website in a day.^53^
It is important to note that domestic abuse is not always physical -- it
can also be psychological, financial or sexual. Not only can COVID-19
exacerbate existing cases of abuse, the stress associated with it can
also lead to new cases. Social isolation can mean spending significantly
more time at home with abusive family members, with no escape or
respite.^54^ Furthermore, a pandemic increases financial and
psychological stresses, which are associated with increased likelihood
of abusive behavior.^55^

The significant risk of abuse towards the elderly should not be
overlooked. A study carried out by Reay and Browne in 2001 identified 15
risk factors in caregivers that increase the risk of mistreatment. Three
of them are particularly relevant during the current outbreak: (a)
caregivers who are subject to high stress and strain; (b) those who live
with elderly patients; and (c) those who are isolated and lack community
and personal support.^56^ Furthermore, feelings of anxiety in caregivers
are also associated with neglect.^56^ For the elderly who require
greater assistance with daily activities, as well as those with
dementia, caregiver stress is a predominant factor in the onset of
abuse.^57^ COVID-19 intensifies all these risk factors in caregivers,
thus placing the elderly at a higher risk of abuse or neglect. Although
the UK government has already issued measures to address abuse,^58^
there remains a question of how accessible and practical these
technology-driven measures are for the elderly population.

Pandemics such as COVID-19 may also make it more difficult for victims
to receive help, owing to its influence on an already overwhelmed public
health infrastructure,^59^ including effects on the social care system,
reduced philanthropic donations to abuse charities and imposed travel
limitations.^54^ Involvement in abuse, either as a perpetrator or a
victim, exerts an enduring effect on both physical and mental
health.^60^ The stress factors associated with COVID-19, if not properly
mitigated, will make the current pandemic an ideal environment for abuse
to thrive, with lifelong, adverse effects on the health of those
involved.

# COVID-19, PTSD and intensive treatment {#sec8}

Approximately one in five critically ill patients and their partners
will develop clinical symptoms of PTSD and reduced reported
health-related quality of life as a result of their intensive treatment
unit (ITU) stay.^61^ The estimated number of COVID-19 patients requiring
intensive care owing to, for instance, acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) currently stands at about 15--30%.^62^ Patients admitted
to ITUs, as well as their families, are at risk of developing post
intensive care syndrome (PICS) -- a physical, cognitive and mental
disorder associated with an ITU stay. The mental health impairments that
can arise among these patients include depression, anxiety and PTSD.^63^
Existing mental health conditions also increase the risk of developing
PICS, in both patients and their families.^64^

Furthermore, the use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), also
known as extracorporeal life support, in the treatment of COVID-19 poses
a specific mental health risk that warrants consideration.^65,66^ ECMO,
which supports the lungs and/or the heart, is considered one of the most
invasive rescue therapies and has high rates of adverse mental health
outcomes (e.g. PTSD) in patients post-treatment. The prevalence of PTSD
in patients who were on ECMO is estimated to be between 11 and 27%, at
least a four- to five-fold increase from general population prevalence
figures.^67,68^ Moreover, compared with other ARDS survivors, those who
were on ECMO also reported lower quality of life and lower rates of
return to employment.^67^

# Mental health services and COVID-19 {#sec9}

The UK government does not currently recognise people with existing
mental health conditions as part of the 'vulnerable population', because
their risk of getting seriously ill from COVID-19 is perceived as low.
However, these groups are vulnerable to an exacerbation of pre-existing
mental health conditions. Those with pre-existing mental health
conditions often suffer greater psychological distress in instances of
an adverse event or situation.^69,70^

Moreover, this cohort is often in poorer physical health, with fewer
protective factors such as healthy lifestyle or an active social support
network, making them physically and mentally vulnerable to the effects
of COVID-19. One example is smoking, which is estimated to be twice as
prevalent among people with mental disorders, with higher reported
mental health disease severity directly correlated with numbers of
cigarettes smoked.^71^ In addition, these patients have a higher
incidence of chronic infections owing to substance abuse and
socioeconomic deprivation.^72^ This is particularly relevant to
COVID-19, as those with chronic respiratory illness, such as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (which is directly correlated with smoking
frequency), are at higher risk of death from the disease.

For current mental health patients, the American Psychiatric Association
has already raised the alarm that the spread of COVID-19 can create
barriers for access to psychiatric services.^73^ One prime example
concerns patients on medication-assisted treatment (MAT) such as
methadone and buprenorphine, who may face difficulty in physically
attending their drug service or pharmacy at the frequency needed. In the
UK, reports have emerged of pharmacies restricting access to MAT owing
to reduced capacity, and patients stopping their treatment because of
anxieties surrounding COVID-19.^74,75^ The implications for access to
other medications that require frequent monitoring, such as clozapine,
also need to be considered carefully. This is especially so when
monitoring is indicated owing to the treatment\'s side-effect profile,
which could also increase mental health patients' vulnerability to
COVID-19.^76^

In a recent survey by the Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych), 43%
of psychiatrists reported an increase in emergency cases, despite seeing
a 45% decrease in their routine appointments.^77^ Professor Wendy Burns,
president of RCPsych, stated:^77^ "'Our fear is that the lockdown is
storing up problems which could then lead to a tsunami of referrals'."

As well as leading to increased incidence of mental health disorder,
COVID-19 can also exacerbate existing conditions in current mental
health patients and unmask existing symptoms in those without a current
mental health diagnosis. Patients' reluctance to seek help during the
current pandemic, coupled with the reduced availability of routine
appointments, could lead to a 'tsunami of referrals' post-lockdown -- a
situation that could easily overwhelm an overstretched and underfunded
mental health service.^77,78^ This is further exacerbated by reduced
provision for services deemed 'non-essential' in treating the acute
medical problem, such as mental health services, in response to the
outbreak.^59^ Without timely and adequate interventions, the compromised
mental health system might not be able to cope with the potential surge
in demand, as in Hong Kong during the SARS outbreak.^79^

# COVID-19 -- the perfect vector {#sec10}

Anxiety, anger and stress are normal reactions to extremely adverse
events such as the COVID-19 pandemic.^80^ For this reason, it is
important that early mental healthcare intervention is provided to
prevent progression into longer-term psychiatric conditions such as
PTSD. The psychological needs of the population must be part of the
public health response.^80^

As discussed, infected individuals are more likely to face severe
psychological crises and secondary trauma after the disaster, a fact
that must be taken into account when devising treatment strategies for
COVID-19 patients. Efforts must be focused on identifying vulnerable
populations, such as those with pre-existing mental health conditions,
healthcare workers and families of affected individuals.^16^
Establishing key target groups during the initial stage of the outbreak,
where the burden on services is significant and resources are scarce,
allows for efficient and optimal use of limited resources.^81^ Providing
precise and clear information regarding measures that enhance
individuals' perceived control over the threat may help engender coping
methods that limit anxiety.^19,29,30^ Specific measures should also be
taken to ensure that the psychological needs of quarantined or isolated
individuals are accounted for.

Mental health services should brace themselves for a 'mental health
tsunami'^77^ in the months and potentially years to come, as the
question of a secondary mental health epidemic is not a matter of
whether it will happen, but rather to what extent will it happen. The
concept of 'flattening the curve' in response to COVID-19 cases has been
repeated by Prime Minister Boris Johnson on multiple occasions;^82^
similarly, steps should be taken to account for the mental health
effects of COVID-19 as part of the curve which needs to be flattened, so
as to not overwhelm our already overstretched mental health services.

**Idura N. Hisham** is a medical student at the Faculty of Medicine, St
George\'s Hospital Medical School, London, UK. **Giles Townsend** is
Consultant Old Age Psychiatrist at Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS
Foundation Trust, The Meadows Inpatient Unit, Older Adults and
Specialist Services, West Park, Epsom, UK. **Steve Gillard** is a
Professor of Social & Community Mental Health at the Population Health
Research Institute, St George\'s, University of London, UK. **Brishti
Debnath** is a medical student at the Faculty of Medicine, St George\'s
Hospital Medical School, London, UK. **Jacqueline Sin** is a NIHR Post
Doctoral Research Fellow at the Population Health Research Institute, St
George\'s, University of London, UK, and an Associate Professor in
Clinical Health at the School of Psychology and Clinical Language
Sciences, University of Reading, UK.

I.N.H. conceived the project and developed the initial draft. B.D.
contributed with the management of references and refinement of writing
for the initial draft. S.G., J.S. and G.T. contributed to the revision
and refinement of the writing. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

None.

# Supplementary material {#sec11}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.60.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::
