================================
Is COVID-19 changing psychiatry?
================================



David M. ForemanCorrespondence to David M. Foreman
(David_Foreman@doctors.net.uk) [1]_
:Date: 2020-9-03

:Abstract:
   Two articles on the potential impact of the current coronavirus
   pandemic on psychiatry reveal agreement on many points, but opposing
   positions on the methodology, philosophy and politics of psychiatry's
   response. This points to the need for psychiatry to audit its
   approach to evidence when agility is required.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

All disasters stress-test the societies they impinge upon. The current
coronavirus pandemic is no exception. In this issue of *BJPsych
Bulletin*, two authors\ :sup:`1,2` consider the impact the virus might
have.

Perhaps surprisingly, there is much agreement. Neither finds dire
forecasts of an imminent psychiatric epidemic convincing, although both
recognise that there are risks, for some more than others. Both are
concerned that the understandable worries associated with COVID-19 may
be excessively medicalised and recommend interventions that will limit
this. They also implicitly agree that diagnosis is central to
psychiatry's identity and validity, focusing on how diagnostic
procedures should respond to a change in our average level of fear,
though from opposing positions.

Behind the disagreement lies a clash of methodology as well as
philosophy and politics. Like the mills of God, orthodox research into
diagnostic validity and reliability both improves diagnosis and
clarifies its flaws painstakingly but glacially, through peer-reviewed
publication and replication. In contrast, networks of critical
professionals and patients can both flag difficulties and propose
persuasive solutions, using conferences and social media to promote them
rapidly as ‘grey literature’, for incorporation into reports from
stakeholder organisations. Crises demand rapid responses, and the
rapidly rising tide of concern about the quality of academic literature
on COVID-19 suggests that our current approach to evidence lacks agility
when that is needed. We hope that these articles spark a conversation
about how psychiatry should audit its response to the pandemic, so it
can learn and improve.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

D.M.F. is on the editorial board of *BJPsych Bulletin*.

**David M. Foreman**, Affiliate Senior Lecturer, King's College London,
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, UK.

.. [1]
   Commentary on… Does COVID-19 pose a challenge to the diagnoses of
   anxiety and depression? A psychologist's view; and Does coronavirus
   pose a challenge to the diagnoses of anxiety and depression? A view
   from psychiatry. See this issue.
