=================================================================
Digital psychiatry and COVID-19: the Big Bang effect for the NHS?
=================================================================



Subodh Dave
Seri Abraham
Roshelle Ramkisson
Shevonne Matheiken
Anilkumar S. Pillai
Hashim Reza
J. S. Bamrah
Derek K. Tracy

:Correspondence: Subodh Dave (subodhdave@nhs.net)

:date: 2020-10-21

:Abstract:
   The COVID-19 pandemic has brought untold tragedies. However, one
   outcome has been the dramatically rapid replacement of face-to-face
   consultations and other meetings, including clinical
   multidisciplinary team meetings, with telephone calls or
   videoconferencing. By and large this form of remote consultation has
   received a warm welcome from both patients and clinicians. To date,
   human, technological and institutional barriers may have held back
   the integration of such approaches in routine clinical practice,
   particularly in the UK. As we move into the post-pandemic phase, it
   is vital that academic, educational and clinical leadership builds on
   this positive legacy of the COVID crisis. Telepsychiatry may be but
   one component of ‘digital psychiatry’ but its seismic evolution in
   the pandemic offers a possible opportunity to embrace and develop
   ‘digital psychiatry’ as a whole.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The COVID-19 outbreak has posed an unprecedented challenge to healthcare
systems and to society as a whole, with millions infected globally and
tens of thousands of deaths in the UK alone. Stay-at-home and lockdown
guidance was instituted to ensure that the National Health Service (NHS)
had the capacity to deal with a possible surge in COVID-19-related
presentations, not least as NHS staff were equally affected by
quarantine and sickness challenges. Remote consultations, or
‘telemedicine’, hitherto a somewhat niche offering in the NHS led
primarily by technology enthusiasts, saw an explosive growth, with the
New York Times reporting: ‘Telemedicine arrives in the U.K.: “10 years
of change in one week”’.\ :sup:`1`

The urgent need to deliver patient care effectively and safely in the
pandemic was supported by new NHS guidance\ :sup:`2` that facilitated a
rapid rollout of remote consultations in most areas of psychiatric
practice.

This occurred despite the pre-existing cautionary digital guidance from
the Royal College of Psychiatrists echoing the General Medical Council
(GMC) in its advice that ‘standards expected of doctors […] apply
equally to digital and conventional consultation settings’ and that
doctors must give ‘consideration to the potential limitations of the
medium used’.\ :sup:`3` In particular, for psychiatrists, perhaps more
than any medical specialties, there have been long-standing concerns of
loss, potentially harmfully so, of the ability to pick up by distance
the subtle interpersonal cues of the mental state examination.

‘Telepsychiatry’ is not new. Defined as the provision of psychiatric
services remotely through various technological communication
platforms,\ :sup:`4` technology-based mental healthcare has been in
operation for several decades. Samaritans, the well-known telephone
helpline service, started its operations in 1953. However, a more
important contemporary phrase is ‘digital psychiatry’, which moves
beyond just the digital delivery of a consultation to the provision of
an on-demand, highly personalised, confidential and secure care made
available through an easy-to-use, intuitive interface. However, digital
psychiatry is much more than that. Rethinking conventional psychiatry,
heavily reliant on the written and printed word to store medical
information, often distributed by traditional methods such as by post,
to move to a world where digital tools can record, analyse and make
intelligent interpretations of data will require a clinical,
administrative and intellectual evolution.

The NHS Long Term Plan outlines its vision of every patient (in England)
being able to access digital services – at least at the primary care
level – by 2024, putatively saving 30 million patient trips and over
£1 billion/year in costs.\ :sup:`5` However, the possibility of
delivering a socially distanced but safe and effective service has
provided a fresh fillip for the adoption of digital health in both
primary and secondary healthcare. Will the relatively enthusiastic
adoption of virtual assessments provide a template for the wider rollout
of new technologies in clinical practice beyond the pandemic?

If such promise is to be realised, remote consultations, digital
self-help, electronic patient record systems, triaging using artificial
intelligence (AI) and a range of other digital tools will need to be
scaled up sustainably, paying attention to patient preference, patient
safety and clinical outcomes, including the concept of precision
psychiatry. This article outlines the key factors that need urgent
consideration to ensure the integration of digital solutions in routine
clinical practice.

.. _sec1:

Is digital psychiatry safe, effective and acceptable to patients and clinicians?
================================================================================

The justifiable clinical concern of coronavirus infection during the
pandemic has shifted the fulcrum of safety significantly away from
face-to-face consultations. The use of telemedicine in post-disaster
situations is well-established.\ :sup:`6`

Systematic reviews demonstrate substantial evidence to support the
effectiveness of remote psychiatry.\ :sup:`7,8` Most of the evidence has
emerged from the need to overcome accessibility barriers to psychiatric
care, for example in areas isolated owing to disasters such as hurricane
Katrina or to their geographical location, such as rural Canada and
Australia. Studies looking at the effectiveness of remote clinical work
are mainly head-to-head and non-inferiority studies demonstrating
equivalence with face-to-face interactions. These show effectiveness
comparable with face-to-face assessments in terms of patient engagement,
validity/reliability of assessments, and clinical outcomes.\ :sup:`9,10`

Rapidly emerging evidence shows that telepsychiatry is being
successfully utilised globally, in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Yellowlees et al\ :sup:`11` reported the process, challenges and lessons
learned from a rapid conversion of a direct psychiatric clinic to a
virtual one within the space of 3 working days in Northern California.
Rosic et al\ :sup:`12` provided an interesting patient and provider
perspective on the transition to a virtual clinic following the onset of
the pandemic in Canada. Sharma et al\ :sup:`13` have discussed a similar
transition in a child and adolescent setting in Seattle. Duan &
Zhu\ :sup:`14` have described the development of mobile phone and social
media-based platforms to provide psychological care in China. These
examples demonstrate the point that COVID-19 has propelled the global
psychiatric community into a new era with the use of technology in
delivery of psychiatric care.

Remote access has been noted to be effective for treating a variety of
conditions, such as depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) and psychosis. It has been particularly useful for individuals
who face specific difficulties attending out-patient appointments, such
as some with psychosis and social anxieties, and social difficulties
such as housing instability.

In child and adolescent psychiatry, we have evidence for the
effectiveness of digital psychiatry for the psychiatric assessment and
management of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and early
psychosis, as well as delivery of therapy for obsessive–compulsive
disorder and tic disorder.\ :sup:`15` Hantke et al\ :sup:`16`
demonstrated the effectiveness of remote working in a variety of older
person's settings, such as nursing home, community and hospital settings
for individuals with cognitive, functional and sensory impairment. Such
interventions have also been associated with reduced transfers to
hospital and benefits for patients with limited mobility.

Benefits have been shown in criminal justice and other forensic
settings, where safety concerns about physical movement of high-risk
patients can be mitigated through remote assessments and remote expert
testimony.\ :sup:`17` Remote psychiatry has also been demonstrated to
have a positive impact on the assessment and management of individuals
with intellectual disabilities, with some data showing no loss in
therapeutic engagement compared with face-to-face assessments and even
some evidence for improved engagement among children with severe anxiety
and autism.\ :sup:`18` In addiction psychiatry, remote treatment of
opioid use disorder produced similar outcomes as face-to-face treatment
in both general\ :sup:`19` and obstetric settings.\ :sup:`20`

Interestingly, healthcare providers were more likely than patients to
express concerns regarding adverse effects of remote assessments on
therapeutic alliance.\ :sup:`7` Although there is considerable evidence
for remote therapy,\ :sup:`21` Norwood et al\ :sup:`22` found that
working alliances were inferior compared with face-to-face work, even
though symptom reduction was equivalent.

However, the (few) studies on the topic tend to report overall high
levels of satisfaction with digital consultations,\ :sup:`23` including
for children and adolescents.\ :sup:`15,24`

Bashshur et al\ :sup:`25` identified telemedicine as a cost-effective
solution for triage, consultation, prescribing medications,
provider-to-provider discussions, appointment scheduling and reminders.
Furthermore, the study also found that remote interventions in primary
care were at least as effective as traditional care.

Given these effectiveness and experience data and the evidence that
telepsychiatry is cost-effective compared with face-to-face treatment,
one must question the historical factors limiting adopting technological
solutions in the value-driven public NHS.

.. _sec2:

Potential barriers to implementing digital psychiatry
=====================================================

The potential barriers to digital working fall into three broad
categories – regulatory concerns, technological hurdles and human
factors.

NHS practice is influenced by several bodies, including the GMC, the
medical Royal Colleges and medical defence unions, clinical guidance
from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), and
local and national commissioning protocols involving a host of
stakeholders, such as clinical commissioning groups, NHS trusts and so
forth. None preclude digital working, and indeed all generally support
the principles. However, their nature, number and potentially
conflicting messaging can make them inherently resistant to swift
changes, even for interventions with proven clinical benefit and
cost-effectiveness.

There is a wide variation in the technological maturities among mental
health providers across the country. Technological and security concerns
include clinical governance issues, safeguarding, legal liability,
confidentiality and secure storage of digital information, with worries
about reliability of technology and variation in bandwidth across the
country.

Human factors can be a potent barrier, with clinician anxieties centring
on: building rapport in a digital interview; being ‘recorded’, with
potential consequences for personal liability; and perhaps most
powerfully, the lack of personal incentives to change. The densely
populated nature of the UK may make some accessibility problems seem
less relevant. The edict of *primum non nocere* – first do no harm – is
so embedded in medics’ psyche that it perhaps makes clinicians
inherently cautious about change. This is likely only exacerbated by
many doctors’ adverse perceptions of restrictive, stifling information
governance rules and regulations.

For patients and carers, lack of access to technology on account of
financial, technological, physical or cognitive factors may be a
barrier. Global evidence, however, demonstrates that patients show a
clear preference to having alternatives in addition to face-to-face
assessments.

The COVID-19 crisis demonstrated that all these barriers can be rapidly
overcome. NHSX provided timely and much needed guidance and assurance on
the use of a variety of methods to enable and support working.\ :sup:`3`
Despite inevitable hiccups, internet and technology solutions worked in
a manner perhaps not attainable had the pandemic occurred say even 5
years ago. Clinician and patient experiences have surely buried the
‘unacceptable’ argument.

.. _sec3:

Digital psychiatry: the future
==============================

Recent experiences have exemplified the differences between
older-fashioned ‘telepsychiatry’ and the innovations possible with
‘digital psychiatry’. Doing ‘the same’ but via video calls is limited
progress, though perhaps the initial leap made by most clinicians. A
variety of platforms have been made available with new features such as:
a waiting room (simulating clinics); multiple participants (to enable
multidisciplinary team working); a screen sharing feature to show
written information (to aid explanations and education during the
clinical interview); and inbuilt capability to email or message the
patient, carer or other colleagues and to save these communications
directly in the electronic clinical records. Recent developments have
also shown clinician benefits beyond ‘just’ the flexibility of working
from home, including examples of offering more flexibility in hours of
work and timings of clinics, such as evening and weekend working (no
longer needing office buildings to be kept open). Asynchronous meetings
are allowing staff to read, comment on and contribute to documents
outside of the ‘standard meeting’ time, as well as message and add
written comments as meetings progress.

Simultaneously, there have been some anecdotal concerns about ‘sharing’
one's home environment with others, whether colleagues or patients,
alongside some sense of fatigue at engaging many participants online
without full human engagement. The range of competing platforms is
potentially confusing and we are still learning to navigate these, and
when and how to use the novel technologies within.

But while we attempt to master the etiquette of how and when to speak
across large meetings, digital solutions have also emerged to support
home-based care for our patients. From the surge in the use of digital
apps for mental health and well-being to the rise in digital
prescribing, digital dictation and even digital therapies as people
adapted to the lockdown world, technology has felt more palpable for
both clinicians and patients. Innovations such as AVATAR therapy for
auditory hallucinations in chronic schizophrenia or individualised risk
stratification using AI machine learning to ‘read’ patient records that
are currently being piloted seem that much closer to routine practice.

Although the outcomes for patients receiving digital psychiatric care do
not seem to be inferior to in-person care, we need better data about the
subgroups of patients for whom this might not hold true. For example,
early evidence suggests caution for individuals with cognitive
impairment, at high-risk, with significant concomitant physical health
needs and so forth. National data-sets from agencies such as NHS Digital
or the Care Quality Commission may help inform this.

The legal, ethical and regulatory framework relating to remote
consultations also needs clarification. Both patients and clinicians
need to feel safe participating, and key issues include consent,
capacity, confidentiality, need for chaperones, safeguarding for
vulnerable patients, escalation arrangements, security of data and
indemnity for clinicians. Early and successful resolution of these
issues will avoid the stifling of innovation and will enable a more
rapid adoption of wider digital enhancers to patient care.

The theme of integration is key to the NHS Long Term Plan and features
prominently in the new community mental health framework.\ :sup:`26`
Digital psychiatry in its broadest sense offers a unique opportunity to
realise this integration, albeit virtually, of primary care, social
care, third-sector partners, the criminal justice system and other
stakeholders working with patients and clinicians to improve clinical
outcomes. From virtual meetings to seamless patient-owned records, the
possibilities are limitless.

A central feature of UK health policy and service delivery is its focus
on person-centred care and this is particularly true for psychiatric
practice and training.\ :sup:`2` Co-production has largely been absent
in the evolution of digital psychiatry and it is vital that patients and
carers have a central role in further rollout of this new technology.
Current guidance issued for the pandemic will need to be updated on the
basis of emerging evidence on indications and pathways and it will also
need to take into account patient and professional feedback.

Workforce implications will need to be carefully considered. Roles and
responsibilities for clinicians working remotely need to be clearly
defined. Current arrangements enable the enforcement of national
regulatory jurisdictions, and this might be challenged by some forms of
virtual working. For example, licensure arrangements across several
states in the USA have been relaxed to allow licensed clinicians to work
remotely from outside normal state boundaries. This may be particularly
relevant for countries such as the UK, where there has been a
traditional reliance on international healthcare workers to provide an
adequate clinical service: both an opportunity and challenge in working
with clinicians outside of traditional workforce bases emerge.

Finally, the workforce will need appropriate training to deliver remote
consultations safely and effectively. Currently, in the UK there are no
curricula-specific training requirements, either at core or higher
specialty level, for psychiatry trainees to demonstrate competence in
digital skills that may be considered essential to good clinical
practice, e.g. managing digitally enabled consultations, extracting
clinically meaningful data from electronic patient records or
prescribing evidence-based digital apps. Examinations may be moving
online, as is the case with MRCPsych examinations beginning later this
year, but embedding digital literacy in the training and assessment
framework will require a significant shift in culture and practice.

.. _sec4:

Conclusions
===========

The COVID-19 pandemic has given the NHS permission to rapidly review its
ways of working to embrace technological advances. These offer the
potential of flexible home-based consultations for clinicians and
patients; the opportunity to connect multiple agencies more quickly to
deliver a person-centred care plan; accessibility to communities who
might otherwise not be reached; a window into the personal and home life
of our patients; and all this potentially with a smaller carbon
footprint and lower costs.

However, if we are to fully tap into the potential gains of digital
psychiatry, we must realise how much more than this is on offer: an
integrated use of technology in mental healthcare, supported by
multidisciplinary, diverse teams of technologists, designers, health and
care professionals and those with lived experience. It is about agile
methodologies, user research, behaviour-change science, data science and
social science blending together in organisations with less hierarchical
power play and a more pragmatic and courageous approach to risk, as has
been the case during this pandemic.

Our aspiration for digital psychiatry should reflect the expectations of
the internet age – on-demand entertainment on a mobile digital device,
real-time customer logistics so that one knows where a parcel is and the
name of the driver, universal standardisation of our experience through
‘operating systems’ that allow fine-grained personalisation. We have
much more to achieve than remote consultations, and certainly far more
than doing video calls. And it is truly ‘digital’ platforms – ubiquitous
computing through standardised operating frameworks on highly
personalised and network-connected mobile devices – that have allowed us
to achieve the adoptions we have in a matter of months.

We propose that what we have described as the barriers to adopting
digital psychiatry are solved through harnessing the values, culture,
practice and technological capabilities of the internet age.

Although the growth of digital psychiatry in the NHS may have been more
of an evolution than a revolution, with the right leadership, training,
research on digital innovations, and the necessary clinical, ethical and
legal guidance we can dispel the digital darkness and usher in a new era
of integrated, personalised and accessible psychiatric care. We call on
the Royal College of Psychiatrists to set up a task force to develop
national guidance to ensure that the Big Bang effect of COVID-19 on
digitisation of clinical practice and training is sustained and
amplified in the future.

**Subodh Dave**, FRCPsych, is a consultant psychiatrist with Derbyshire
Healthcare Foundation Trust, working at the Radbourne Unit, Royal Derby
Hospital, Derby, UK. **Seri Abraham**, MBBS, MRCPsych, MSc, is a
consultant psychiatrist with Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust in
Oldham, Greater Manchester, UK. **Roshelle Ramkisson**, MBBS, MRCPsych,
PGDip, MSc, is a consultant psychiatrist and Director of Medical
Education, Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust, Oldham, Greater
Manchester, and Training Programme Director for Core Psychiatry in the
North West School of Psychiatry. She also holds a NICE Fellowship.
**Shevonne Matheiken**, MBBS, MRCPsych, is a Speciality Doctor at the
Northamptonshire Healthcare Foundation Trust and an education attaché at
the Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Anilkumar S. Pillai**,
MRCPsych, is a consultant old age psychiatrist with Bradford District
Care Foundation Trust, working at Horton Park Medical Practice,
Bradford, and Training Programme Director in Old Age Psychiatry with
Health Education England Yorkshire and Humber, UK. **Hashim Reza**,
MBBS, MRCPsych, is a specialist advisor in health informatics at the
Royal College of Psychiatrists, and a consultant psychiatrist with
Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. **J. S. Bamrah**, FRCPsych, is
a consultant psychiatrist with Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS
Foundation Trust, UK. **Derek K. Tracy**, FRCPsych, is a consultant
psychiatrist and Clinical Director at Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust,
London, and a senior lecturer at the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology
and Neuroscience, King's College London, UK.

All eight authors are responsible for the article concept and design.
S.D., S.A., R.R., S.M. and A.S.P. undertook the literature review and
contributed to writing the first draft of the manuscript. H.R., J.S.B.
and D.K.T. contributed to critically revising the final manuscript. All
eight authors have reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.114.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
