==============================================================================
COVID-19, medical education and the impact on the future psychiatric workforce
==============================================================================

Flora Greig [1]_Correspondence to Dr Flora Greig (flora.greig2@nhs.net)
:Date: 2020-10-21

:Abstract:
   Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic the UK's National Health
   Service (NHS) has been transformed to meet the acute healthcare needs
   of infected patients. This has significantly affected medical
   education, both undergraduate and postgraduate, with potential
   long-term implications for psychiatric recruitment. This article
   discusses these ramifications, and the opportunities available to
   mitigate them as well as to enhance the profile of psychiatry.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

When it became clear that the first two cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection
reported in the UK in January 2020\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` represented an
emerging pandemic, the National Health Service (NHS) completely
reconfigured its services. To meet the needs of patients diagnosed with
COVID-19, elective treatments were cancelled, face-to-face appointments
moved online and huge numbers of healthcare workers were redeployed.
While mass transfers of staff to front-line roles were facilitated,
movements of other healthcare workers were delayed or cancelled: 20 000
junior doctors due to rotate training placements on 1 April 2020 were
informed by Health Education England that, except in exceptional
circumstances, their rotations were cancelled.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` At the
same time, medical students throughout the country faced widespread
disruption of their studies.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Both these events have
resulted in a significant number of undergraduate and postgraduate
medical trainees missing out on psychiatry placements, with potentially
significant consequences for future recruitment into the specialty.
These have not gone unnoticed.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

.. _sec1:

The recruitment crisis in psychiatry and its wider workforce implications
=========================================================================

Concerns about recruitment into psychiatry are not new. A review of
medical student career choices over 40 years demonstrated that the
number choosing to specialise in psychiatry has remained constant – at
4–5% – despite the increasing mental health needs of the
population.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` Surveys of career choices of foundation
doctors show a similarly fixed number applying for core psychiatry
training.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` A recent estimate suggests that, if the
projected increase in Certificate of Completion of Training (CCT)
holders is accurate (based on numbers applying to training), by 2033
there will be a per capita reduction in psychiatrists of around
11%.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

A number of reasons for this crisis have been suggested. These include
stigma towards the profession, perceived lack of a scientific basis to
diagnosis and treatment, and erosion of the role of the psychiatrist
within mental health teams.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Poor teaching and clinical
experience at medical school have also been implicated.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`
In contrast, experience of psychiatry during foundation training has
been found to have a positive influence in choosing the
specialty.\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.k)` During medical school, the length,
quality of teaching and types of patient interaction have been
identified as important.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`

Knowledge of the push and pull factors for the specialty has led to the
development of a number of initiatives to promote recruitment.
University-based enrichment activities\ :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.n)` such as
Psych Socs,\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` special study modules (SSMs) and summer
schools have emerged to support and encourage medical students with an
interest in the field. Nationally, the Royal College of Psychiatrists
(RCPsych) has developed the Psych Star Scheme and student Associate
role, to enable enthusiastic medical students to further their interest
in the field.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` Following graduation, ‘flexible pay
premia’ encourage applications for hard-to-fill posts,\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`
including psychiatry. In parallel, the RCPsych's Choose Psychiatry
campaign promotes psychiatry to medical students and foundation doctors
through the use of videos, social media and podcasts.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)`

All of these complement the recent expansion in the number of psychiatry
posts within the UK Foundation Programme. This was a direct response to
concerns regarding recruitment into psychiatry and was recommended in
the 2014 Broadening Foundation Programme report.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` It is
recognised that the structure of the NHS and provision of healthcare
need to change to meet the challenges of treating a population that is
older, with increasing numbers of chronic health conditions. It
emphasised the need for the Foundation Programme to provide broad-based
training for junior doctors, giving them adequate experience and
education in community and mental healthcare.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` Key for
psychiatry was the recommendation that 22.5% of Foundation Year 1 (FY1)
doctors and 22.5% Foundation Year 2 doctors (FY2) should have a post in
psychiatry.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` Alongside the hope that this would boost
recruitment into the specialty, it also represented an acknowledgement
that there are numerous skills, including communication, empathetic
understanding and multidisciplinary learning, acquired within a
psychiatric placement, that are valuable whatever specialty the post
holder ends up practising in.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)`

Despite this increase, many foundation doctors still have limited
clinical experience of psychiatry. To address this the RCPsych,
alongside the UK Foundation Programme, has developed Psychiatry
Foundation Fellowships.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` These offer access to additional
education and supervision resources to support doctors with an interest
in the field during their foundation years through to specialty
application. Academic Foundation Posts in psychiatry offer opportunities
for trainees interested in research, directly challenging the negative
assumptions regarding the lack of scientific basis to the
field.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Additionally, pilot Longitudinal Integrated
Foundation Training (LIFT) posts in psychiatry are being developed,
following the success of these in general practice.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)`

A recent announcement by the RCPsych suggests that these initiatives are
working. In England, fill rates for core psychiatry training have
increased for the third year running, with almost 100% of places filled
for August 2020.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)`

.. _sec2:

The impact of COVID-19 on medical education
===========================================

On 12 March 2020, all doctors in the UK were informed that they would
need to respond ‘rapidly and professionally’ to the challenge of
COVID-19 and might be required to work in areas outside their usual
practice.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` Although it was initially suggested that
foundation doctors currently in mental health placements would not be
redeployed,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` different local arrangements meant that some
were moved from psychiatry to front-line roles.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` This was
followed by the cancellation of all medical training rotations in April,
May, June and July.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.z)`

There are approximately 15 000 foundation doctors in the
UK,\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` and thanks to the changes to the Foundation
Programme, a significant number now undertake a post in psychiatry
across their 2-year foundation training. One-third of these were due to
start on 1 April 2020 but did not. If undertaking a high-quality
psychiatry post during foundation training increases the likelihood that
a trainee will apply to the specialty,\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` this is likely to
have a negative impact on the recruitment cycles for 2021 and 2022.

Undergraduate medical education has also faced significant upheaval. In
the early weeks of March 2020, universities across the UK suspended
face-to-face teaching and other educational activities. For medical
students this meant the widespread cancellation of their clinical and
elective placements,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` and a move to online education.
While final year medical students were being fast-tracked through
pre-registration to support the front line,\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` students in
other years missed out on vital educational
experiences.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)` The impact of these changes is already
emerging.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` A recent survey of final year medical
students found that over a third had their final year objective
structured clinical examinations (OSCEs) cancelled and almost half had
assistantships cancelled, with significant effects on self-reported
ratings of preparedness to start as FY1 doctors.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)`

For psychiatry recruitment, the effects could be profound. Psychiatry
placements often take place in the penultimate year of medical school.
These students will now move into their final year, where the focus is
on preparing for practice, with little time in the curriculum to make up
for missed clinical placements. Given the uncertainty regarding the
status of clinical placements during a second wave of the pandemic, it
is highly likely that further year groups will similarly miss out on
vital face-to-face psychiatry experience. In addition, the impact of the
cancellation of the SSMs, elective placements and other enrichment
activities, known to be key to fostering positive attitudes to a career
in the specialty,\ :sup:`(n.d.m)–(n.d.o)` is perhaps more concerning.
These activities are available throughout medical school. The legacy of
these losses therefore, means that the after-effects of the pandemic on
psychiatric recruitment could be felt for years.

.. _sec3:

The impact of COVID-19 on mental health
=======================================

The potential impact on recruitment is particularly concerning given the
postulated effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the population's mental
health.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` There is already evidence of psychological
sequelae in those who were infected with SARS-Cov-2.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)`
More broadly, the impact of the public health measures, including
shielding, social distancing and quarantine, is starting to emerge; a
recent national survey demonstrated an increase in mental health
problems across all age groups in April 2020.\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` In the
longer term, the consequences of the predicted economic
recession\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)` will further increase psychiatric morbidity.
These effects will be against a back-drop of a pre-pandemic predicted
increase in mental healthcare needs within the
population\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)` and ongoing workforce supply
difficulties.\ :sup:`(n.d.aj)`

.. _sec4:

Opportunities to mitigate the potential impact of COVID-19 on recruitment into psychiatry
=========================================================================================

What can be done and what are the opportunities? Over the coming months,
there will hopefully be some time to consider what we can do to mitigate
any negative impact the acute response to COVID-19 has on recruitment
into psychiatry. There are a number of dimensions to this.

Foundation trainee rotations have now resumed. In addition to the
recommendations for these placements made by the
RCPsych,\ :sup:`(n.d.ak)` trainers should take the opportunity to
highlight some of the positive effects the NHS response to the pandemic
has had on the delivery of mental healthcare, for example the
cross-specialty collaborations demonstrated by initiatives such as the
CoroNerve,\ :sup:`(n.d.al)` the potential for telehealth, or new
research avenues such as the role of the immune system in emerging
psychiatric symptoms.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` These clearly demonstrate how
central psychiatry is to the health and scientific communities' response
to COVID-19, helping challenge many of the negative views of the
specialty.

For those doctors who missed out on their chance to undertake a
psychiatry foundation post, there are other opportunities for their
potential enthusiasm to be encouraged. Existing initiatives for
foundation doctors should be strengthened,\ :sup:`(n.d.am)` with
targeted invites to those doctors affected by the cancellation of
rotations, if possible. For FY1 doctors there remains the opportunity to
undertake taster days in psychiatry as FY2s. These are usually limited,
but given the flexibility foundation doctors demonstrated to facilitate
the NHS's acute COVID-19 response, supporting them to make up for lost
clinical experience by extending these seems reasonable.

Foundation doctors are increasingly not applying directly to specialty
training, instead undertaking F3 and F4 years.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` The
expansion of clinical fellowships in psychiatry – which offer full
access to supervision and the other educational opportunities that core
trainees receive – may offer alternative opportunities for those who
missed out first time round.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)`

The Medical Schools Council has outlined the need for clinical
placements to restart,\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)` with priority given to those
closer to graduation. Further cohorts of medical students are therefore
likely to be affected by the loss of clinical experience in psychiatry.
In recent years, virtual work experience programmes have been developed
to support school-age students considering a career in
medicine.\ :sup:`(n.d.ap)` Universities should consider learning lessons
from these, to create virtual psychiatry placements, with an emphasis on
patient interaction and high-quality clinical teaching. This could
complement the number of psychiatric summer and autumn schools that have
already moved online.\ :sup:`(n.d.aq)`

Although developing imaginative alternatives to face-to-face clinical
placements is important, it is essential that this does not become the
default. Positive attributes of undergraduate psychiatry education
include time on placement, working directly with the multidisciplinary
team and the influence of role models from within the psychiatric
team.\ :sup:`(n.d.ar)` It is hard to see how these can be achieved
remotely. The continued facilitation of face-to-face psychiatry
experience for medical students should therefore remain a priority.

It has been suggested that time for enrichment activities such as SSMs
should be redirected towards core clinical placement
activity.\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)` It is vital that undergraduate psychiatry
departments are involved in these discussions. Not only are enrichment
activities in psychiatry important for recruitment, they help fight
stigma towards the specialty and the patient population. These should be
viewed not as optional extras, but as essential to creating a generation
of doctors who view mental illness in parity with physical illness.

One of the positive outcomes of the COVID-19 pandemic has been the speed
and readiness with which medical education departments have adapted to
the use of online learning. The Medical Schools Council is recommending
the use of a number of online platforms to support undergraduate
education.\ :sup:`(n.d.as)` It is vital that psychiatric education is
embedded throughout these. The potential for moving SSMs and other
psychiatric enrichment activities online should also be fully explored.
The use of webinars has greatly expanded as a result of the pandemic,
with the RCPsych producing a number that are freely available, and grand
rounds and journal clubs now frequently take this form. Delivering
psychiatric education this way offers great scope to widen the potential
audience, with the main barrier being the lack of awareness among
potential attendees. At a national level these resources should be
highlighted within the Choose Psychiatry campaign. More locally,
promotion of online educational material should be embedded within
induction for medical students and via local postgraduate education
departments.

The expansion of simulation for psychiatry is another area of
potential.\ :sup:`(n.d.at)` These courses should be re-offered to those
who missed out on their clinical placements, as well as expanded to
supplement loss of clinical experience of future students. Although much
postgraduate education remains online, face-to-face foundation
simulation programmes continue. A number of providers have already
developed psychiatric simulation courses for foundation doctors, but
frequently these are available only to trainees undertaking a psychiatry
post. The skills of managing risk, communication, human factors and
de-escalation, inherent in these courses, are key outcomes of the
Foundation Programme Curriculum\ :sup:`(n.d.au)` and could easily be
incorporated into existing programmes. Through their inclusion alongside
other ‘core’ subjects, psychiatric simulation courses would reduce
stigma as well as encourage some to consider a future career in the
specialty.

.. _sec5:

Conclusions
===========

Developing a set of strengthened undergraduate and postgraduate
psychiatric educational resources can only benefit future recruitment
into the specialty. But as autumn continues, we are now are facing the
second wave of COVID-19 cases. Although the redeployments of healthcare
workers and cancellations of placements were necessary first time round,
it is essential that we reflect on their impact. Understanding the
effects of the acute management of the COVID-19 pandemic on psychiatric
recruitment is vital to inform decisions regarding future suspensions of
medical student attachments and movements of trainee doctors. These must
try to balance the acute requirements of COVID-19 patients with the need
to ensure that there is an adequate psychiatric workforce to address not
only the current, but also future mental health repercussions of the
pandemic.

Flora Greig is a general adult and old age psychiatry registrar at South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Croydon University Hospital,
London, UK.

.. _sec6:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.112.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref37

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref39

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref40

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref41

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref42

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref43

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref44

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref45

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref46

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref47

      n.d.au.

.. [1]
   **Declaration of interest:** None.
