================================================================================================
Does COVID-19 pose a challenge to the diagnoses of anxiety and depression? A psychologist's view
================================================================================================



Lucy Johnstone

:Correspondence: Lucy Johnstone
(LucyJohnstone16@blueyonder.co.uk)

:date: 2020-9-03

:Abstract:
   The COVID-19 pandemic has led to predictions of a widespread mental
   health crisis. However, this makes little sense when fear and anxiety
   are so understandable in context. The individualisation and
   medicalisation of normal human reactions disconnects us from our
   feelings and from the appropriate solutions, in relation to the
   pandemic and more generally. We have an opportunity to challenge this
   pervasive way of thinking, and thus be in a position to create a
   fairer society that is better for everyone's emotional well-being.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The COVID-19 pandemic is one of a series of interlinked global
emergencies that will affect everyone on the planet.\ :sup:`1` But it is
important to challenge the idea that, as numerous headlines are telling
us, we are now facing a ‘pandemic of mental health disorders’.\ :sup:`2`
We are apparently due for ‘an epidemic of clinical
depression’.\ :sup:`3` The Mental Health Foundation found that six out
of ten people were anxious about the crisis and at risk of ‘persistent
and severe mental health problems’.\ :sup:`4` We are exhorted to learn
the lessons from China and prepare for ‘a public mental health
crisis’.\ :sup:`5`

Yet if ever there was an example of our reactions being appropriate in
the circumstances, this is it. It has never been more obvious that the
thoughts, feelings and behaviours we call ‘mental illness’ are defined
in relation to social norms. Suddenly, being too scared to leave the
house for fear of contracting a fatal disease, and spending most of the
day washing our hands and wiping down doorknobs, are not signs of ‘OCD’
but of a responsible citizen. Arguably, the ‘abnormal’ people are now
the four in ten of us whose anxiety levels have not increased. Who can
say how we ought to be feeling at such a time?

Never was there a clearer illustration of the fact that judgements about
who is ‘mentally ill’ are social not medical ones. So, where do we draw
the line between ‘normal’ and ‘abnormal’? Can such a line even be drawn?
As Miranda Spencer notes in her analysis of US media responses, the
messages to the public are deeply confusing: “‘Becoming more anxious in
response to COVID 19 would be normal if you are mentally healthy and a
sign of illness if you're not, although apparently some normal people
might experience so much anxiety that they, too, could now be seen as
mentally ill. And […] everyone is now to practice behaviors that in the
past would be a sign that they had OCD, but now are considered
reasonable… unless one goes “too far”’.\ :sup:`6`”

These contradictions are not new, although the pandemic has thrown them
into sharp relief. They lie at the heart of psychiatric thinking. In
this article, I will discuss the implications for the diagnoses of
‘anxiety’ and ‘depression’ and by extension for all psychiatric
diagnoses. I will argue that the pandemic gives us a chance to
challenge, rather than reinforce, the narrative of ‘mental
health/illness.’

.. _sec1:

The truth behind the headlines
==============================

First, it is worth looking behind the dramatic headlines to see whether
people are in fact more distressed than before. Interestingly, this is
not the general picture. A UK survey of over 74 000 people has shown
that, despite an initial decline in happiness before the lockdown,
well-being rose during the first 3 weeks of April 2020 and anxiety
levels fell for people both with and without psychiatric
diagnoses.\ :sup:`7` Where increased distress has been identified, an
initial survey suggests that this is occurring for very obvious
reasons.\ :sup:`8` Those with children at home, a pre-existing health
condition, exposure to the virus, high estimates of personal risk and
facing loss of income were more likely to be feeling anxious and low in
mood.

As with every crisis, the impact is far greater on those who are already
more vulnerable, whether through physical illness and disability, having
an abusive partner, bringing up children without support or living in
poverty. COVID-19 and its consequences are not hitting us all equally.
In ordinary language, people with more to be exhausted, depressed and
anxious about are feeling more exhausted, depressed and anxious.
However, the general picture is, in the words of Shevlin et al, of a
population that is ‘largely resilient.’\ :sup:`8`

It is also worth noting that people with a psychiatric history are not
necessarily those in most distress. This is not to deny that some people
are suffering greatly, especially if they suddenly find that their usual
services are unavailable.\ :sup:`9` But equally, it is untrue and even
patronising to assume that everyone in this group will fail to cope. In
fact, some have described managing better than usual, as they draw on
talents for survival that the officially ‘normal’ population may lack.
One person tweeted: ‘For those of us who already live with trauma or the
significant impact of mental health on our daily life we are perhaps
more prepared/less complaining about self isolation, surviving on low
income, restrictions in movements and facing cuts in our health/social
care services’. Psychiatric survivors have set up an impressive list of
peer networks and resources in response to the pandemic,\ :sup:`10`
including a set of ‘lived wisdom’ strategies drawn from ‘hard won
expertise learned through traversing challenging life
experiences’.\ :sup:`11`

‘Most of us are managing our feelings reasonably well in these difficult
circumstances’ is not such an eye-catching headline, but it appears to
be a more accurate one. It is also consistent with research, which shows
that, although crises and disasters are painful, the vast majority,
including front-line staff, will cope without needing specialist mental
health support.\ :sup:`12`

.. _sec2:

Who is promoting the narrative – and why?
=========================================

How and why is the ‘mental health pandemic’ narrative being promoted
when it is contradicted by the evidence and the reality on the ground?
Part of the answer may lie in the high-profile public health campaigns
in schools, the media and so on, which urge us all to ‘talk about mental
health’ – this mysterious, indefinable but apparently fragile state of
mind – more or less constantly. We are encouraged to use the ubiquitous
term ‘mental health’ as a synonym for ‘how we all feel’ in relation to
any state of mind short of complete contentment. We then become
legitimate targets for mass professional and technical monitoring and
intervention, focused not on the real-life situations that evoke our
reactions, but on the newly defined ‘mental health problems’ themselves.
Moreover, while it is still generally believed that only a minority of
us is ‘mentally ill’, the new discourse reminds us that ‘we all have
mental health’. This apparently innocuous, indeed nonsensical, phrase
draws us all into the realm of surveillance and potential ‘treatment’.
The trend is as much of a global epidemic as the coronavirus, and just
as hard to counter. But the idea that we are facing two simultaneous
pandemics – a physical health one and, by a tragic coincidence, a
‘mental health’ one too – simply makes no sense at all.

To give a relatively benign example of how this plays out in practice,
Public Health England has promoted a commendable message of ‘It is
normal to feel anxious in a crisis’ and has suggested a range of
common-sense strategies and supports. However, the campaign headline
urges us to ‘look after our mental health’.\ :sup:`13` The phrase
immediately pulls us back into an individualising, subtly pathologising
narrative that evokes not collective resilience and resourcefulness, but
anxiety about how easily we might become unable to cope.

A more concerning example comes from an article in *The Lancet
Psychiatry*.\ :sup:`14` It sets the scene by predicting an increase in
‘anxiety, depression, self-harm, and suicide’, along with warnings that
quarantine and isolation also raise the risk for substance misuse,
gambling and so on. This is used to justify a call to fund a major
international research programme of ‘paramount importance’ and ‘urgent
need’. Demonstrating a bizarre disconnect between the very real social
ills that are likely to result from the pandemic (‘the potential fallout
of an economic downturn [… ] increasing unemployment, financial
insecurity and poverty’, etc.) and the suggested remedies, the article
lays out a vision of monitoring the entire population for ‘causal
mechanisms associated with poor mental health’. Those who lack the
required ‘digital resources’ to permit this unprecedented intrusion into
their personal lives through ‘digital phenotyping […] to ascertain early
warning signs for mental ill-health’ will be pursued through telephone
calls. Even if people manage to avoid exhibiting the digital markers of
unacceptable levels of (say) loneliness, they will still come under
pressure to adopt ‘a mentally healthy life’ supported by ‘mechanised
interventions’, once such a concept has been ‘mapped out’ in one of the
many putative research studies. Expert-defined and delivered training in
‘elicit[ing] community support’, exhibiting ‘altruism and prosocial
behaviour’ and other desirable qualities that have been systematically
eroded by austerity and a neoliberal agenda over the past 40 or so years
will then be available.

In fact, people have been spontaneously forming self-help communities
across the country without waiting for an app to instruct them or being
required to complete a rating scale about their ‘mental health’
afterwards. This article represents a terrifying combination of
opportunism and empire-building. Not a single new research study is
needed to confirm that being poor, jobless, isolated, ill and bereaved
makes people unhappy, or to work out the appropriate remedies.

.. _sec3:

Reframing the problem, reclaiming the discourse
===============================================

There is emerging evidence for long-term neurological effects in some
COVID-19 patients, and this certainly needs funding and research; but
these are not ‘mental health’ problems, although often conflated with
them. One of the reasons it is important to counter these dire
predictions is to stem an unnecessary rush to ‘treatments’, both
psychiatric and psychological. Psychiatric drugs benefit some people,
but with nearly a quarter of us already being prescribed
them,\ :sup:`15` we do not need to increase the well-documented risks of
dependence and withdrawal. Equally, we know that formal psychological
interventions are unnecessary for most, and can actually be harmful if
implemented too early.\ :sup:`12` In fact, the media experts have
nothing specialist to recommend; with or without a psychiatric history,
we are advised to keep up social connections, exercise, maintain a
routine, not watch too much news and distract ourselves from gloomy
thoughts.\ :sup:`6`

If we are not facing an outbreak of ‘anxiety disorders’ and ‘clinical
depression’, but human reactions to difficult circumstances, it is time
to reclaim some of the territory increasingly occupied by the ‘mental
health’ discourse, and translate it back into ordinary language.
Deconstructing ‘I have depression’ into ‘I feel miserable and hopeless’
makes it obvious that the first response should not necessarily be to
prescribe a pill (although that might have a role) but to look for
reasons for those feelings. Similarly, the statement ‘I'm worried and
scared’ invites us to ask, in line with the well-known survivor slogan,
not ‘What is wrong with you?’ but ‘What has happened to you?’ In the
context of a pandemic, the answers are not too hard to find and the
solutions are obvious, if not always easily available. In the current
jargon, popular in both psychology and psychiatry, we need a formulation
– a shift from ‘patient with illness’ to ‘person with
problem’.\ :sup:`16` The pandemic poses a particularly stark challenge
to these diagnostic assumptions which, like an ever-mutating virus, have
infected not just our mental health system but our whole society; and
the Global Mental Health Movement
(https://www.mhinnovation.net/organisations/movement-global-mental-health-mgmh)
is transmitting it even further. As soon as we start assuming the
existence of an entity called ‘depression’ or ‘anxiety’ – whether a
medical or a psychological one – that people *have*, in the same way
that they might ‘have’ a tumour, a broken leg or a viral infection, we
are in trouble. As colleagues and I have argued in a recent outline of a
conceptual alternative to the diagnostic model, these very real and
painful experiences are better seen as what we *do* – in other words, as
meaningful patterns of responses to threats.\ :sup:`17`

This applies beyond ‘anxiety disorders’ and ‘clinical depression’.
Diagnostic categories are described as unscientific even by the
professionals who draw them up.\ :sup:`18` A large body of evidence
(see, for example,
`acestoohigh.com/research/ <https://acestoohigh.com/research/>`__) tells
us that the various forms of distress diagnosed as ‘psychosis’, ‘bipolar
disorder’, ‘personality disorder’ and so on are causally related to
experiences of trauma, abuse, neglect, loss, poverty, unemployment,
discrimination and inequality. The hostile voices that some people hear
often echo the words of real-life abusers. People who have been hurt and
rejected may be angry and distrustful. In other words, when placed in
context, these very real and agonising experiences are also
understandable responses to adversities. While it may take time for the
personal story to become clear, a formulation-based approach assumes
that ‘at some level, it all makes sense’.\ :sup:`19`

.. _sec4:

Collective trauma needs a collective response
=============================================

If we allow psychiatric diagnoses to individualise and depoliticise our
responses, we will simply revert to a way of life that, even before
COVID-19, was leading many people to self-harm, despair and suicide.
Instead, we need the courage to stay connected with our feelings, and
the feelings of those around us, not file them away in boxes marked
‘anxiety disorders and depression’. People who have lost their jobs are
likely to feel desperate, but we don't have to describe this as
‘clinical depression’ and prescribe drugs for it. Those with backgrounds
of severe trauma may find that their worst memories are being triggered,
but we don't have to describe this as a relapse of their ‘borderline
personality disorder’.\ :sup:`20` The economic recession that will
follow the pandemic may lead to as many suicides as austerity measures
did, but we don't have to say that ‘mental illness’ caused these deaths.

The COVID-19 pandemic is an opportunity to implement what we already
know about universal human needs for social contact, financial security
and sufficient material resources, protection from trauma, abuse and
neglect, especially in early years, decent healthcare, and a sense of
purpose and belonging. As an editorial in *The Lancet* puts it, COVID-19
is ‘overturning core values, norms, and rules that sit at the heart of
long-standing market-oriented political agendas’ and presenting us with
the need for ‘re-making the social contract’.\ :sup:`21` It is giving us
an opportunity to reduce income inequality.\ :sup:`22` In other words,
as urged by Psychologists for Social Change, we need to ‘Build back
better’ so that ‘participation, community, trust and connection might be
valued over status, individualism, and competition.’\ :sup:`23` We
already know that these measures will do more to reduce fear and misery
than any number of psychological or psychiatric interventions.

Psychologists use the term ‘trauma’ to describe difficult events that
overwhelm our usual ways of coping. In ‘collective trauma’, there is a
challenge to the lifestyle, values and identity of a whole
society.\ :sup:`24` In the case of COVID-19, the crisis extends beyond
national borders and, like the climate change crisis to which it is
linked, raises profound questions for our whole way of life. Community
action around common purposes is healing for all of us. Journalist
Johann Hari, who has described his own escape from the ‘mental illness’
identity, prefers the term emotional health, not mental health. In his
words: ‘This is a collective crisis and giving people exclusively
individual solutions is not going to work’.\ :sup:`25` As he says, many
people were already ‘in quarantine’, marginalised from society; we
already had a rise in distress linked to ‘junk values’; and ‘depression
and anxiety are not malfunctions. They are signals’. The real
‘antidepressants’ are financial security, human connection and having a
sense of value and purpose. The real crisis is one of meaning.

The more we can challenge the ‘mental health’ narrative, the clearer our
current dilemmas and future directions will become. It is not a pandemic
of ‘mental health’ problems that we need to fear, but a pandemic of
‘mental health’ thinking.

**Lucy Johnstone** is a consultant clinical psychologist, author and
independent trainer, working in Bristol, UK. Her work currently focuses
on the Power Threat Meaning Framework (PTMF), an alternative to
functional psychiatric diagnosis.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

L.J. is an independent trainer and offers training in formulation and
the Power Threat Meaning Framework (PTMF). She has published books and
articles on formulation and is one of the lead authors of the PTMF.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.101.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
