=============================================================================================
Model for ethical triaging of electroconvulsive therapy patients during the COVID-19 pandemic
=============================================================================================



Phern-Chern Tor
Jacinta Tan
Colleen Loo

:Correspondence: Phern-Chern Tor
(phern_chern_tor@imh.com.sg)

:date: 2020-8-19

:Abstract:
   Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is an essential treatment for severe
   mental illnesses such as depression with suicidality and catatonia.
   However, its availability is being threatened by resource limitations
   and infection concerns due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This may
   necessitate the triage of patients for ECT but there is no
   established ethical framework to prioritise patients. We offer an
   application of an ethical framework for use of scare medical
   resources in the ECT setting.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is the most effective acute treatment
for severe depression.\ :sup:`1` It is also effective in reducing
psychotic symptoms in treatment-resistant schizophrenia and in treating
mania and catatonia. The National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) treatment guidelines for ECT\ :sup:`2` and the Royal
College of Psychiatrists’ position statement on ECT\ :sup:`3` state that
ECT should be a first-line treatment where rapid response is required
because of high suicide risk, poor oral intake or other conditions where
the patient's physical health is at risk. These guidelines also state
that valid informed consent should be obtained without pressure or
coercion, in the context of significant stigma, discrimination and
controversy associated with the treatment.\ :sup:`2` A substitute
decision maker should be available to patients lacking capacity to give
consent, as there is increasing evidence that patients lacking capacity
have equivalent\ :sup:`4` to superior responses\ :sup:`5` to ECT
compared with capacitous patients. Despite its impressive effectiveness
and broad spectrum of effect, ECT has experienced at least 20 years of
decreasing in-patient use in the USA. In 2017 a study reported that only
1 in 10 US hospitals offered ECT and only 1.5% of severely depressed
in-patients received ECT,\ :sup:`6` the most effective treatment for
severe depression. These trends are also evident in the UK and
Ireland.\ :sup:`7` Furthermore, the use of ECT is controversial and has
its detractors and some consider it unacceptable in modern
psychiatry.\ :sup:`8`

With the COVID-19 pandemic, ECT challenges have compounded from a
problem of getting patients to accept ECT to an additional challenge of
struggling to continue providing ECT for existing patients. Already
scarce ECT resources have been further reduced by lack of personal
protective equipment (PPE), restriction of anaesthesia and limited
institutional support.\ :sup:`9` The International Society of ECT and
Neurostimulation (ISEN) has published a position statement on ECT during
COVID-19 which includes classifying cases into elective,
urgent/essential and emergency and suggests triaging patients to reduce
demand for ECT.\ :sup:`10` This recommendation to triage patients is a
relatively novel situation for many ECT practitioners, who are more
accustomed to a ‘first come, first served’ situation in routine ECT
practice. We suggest a useful ethical model that can be used in
conjunction with existing ethical frameworks to assist ECT practitioners
to take a consistent approach to triaging patients for ECT, rather than
relying on individual institutional norms or clinician intuition.

.. _sec1:

General medical ethics applied to ECT
=====================================

A commonly accepted framework for medical ethics uses the ‘Georgetown
principles’ of beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy and justice.
Ottosson & Fink\ :sup:`11` suggest the following ECT-specific
considerations for each principle.

.. _sec1-1:

Beneficence
-----------

The highest priority for ECT should be patients who would gain the most
potential benefit from the treatment (e.g. those with psychoses and
involuntarily committed or with depression with high suicidality), have
the potential for fast response (e.g. catatonia) and have the highest
risk to life or long-term disability.

.. _sec1-2:

Non-maleficence
---------------

Given that mortality with ECT is lower than overall mortality associated
with general anaesthesia,\ :sup:`12` and lower than if the patient had
not received ECT,\ :sup:`13` the main side-effect of concern is
cognitive impairment. However, the cognitive impairment is often
transient, lasting for a shorter period than the therapeutic effect of
ECT and can be minimised using empirically derived dosing of
ECT.\ :sup:`14`

.. _sec1-3:

Autonomy
--------

ECT ideally should be administered with the patient's consent. However,
no patient should be denied ECT just because they lack capacity to
consent to treatment. Ottosson & Fink make a distinction between weak
paternalism in the patient's best interests and authoritarianism that
discounts the patient's autonomy. Prescribing ECT with a substitute
decision-making process or in patient's best interests is increasingly
supported by recent evidence of equivalent to superior outcomes in
patients lacking capacity to consent to ECT.\ :sup:`5`

.. _sec1-4:

Justice
-------

There are three broad forms of distributive justice: egalitarian (equal
access), libertarian (the right to social and economic liberty) and
utilitarian (maximise public utility). During a time of limited
resources, Emanuel *et al*\ :sup:`15` argue that a utilitarian approach
is the most appropriate, i.e. emphasising population outcomes by
triaging patients who are most likely to respond and derive the most
benefit from ECT with the least risk of harm to the patients and the ECT
team. This could even mean pausing ECT for a patient with low
utilitarian potential in order to start ECT for a patient with high
utilitarian value.

For the purposes of this discussion, the context is that of a
predominantly public or taxpayer-funded healthcare system rather than
one that is predominantly insurance or self-funded. The former system is
more likely to face the problems of scare resources requiring healthcare
rationing\ :sup:`16` and the libertarian aspects of justice may be less
dominant.

.. _sec2:

What has changed for ECT during COVID-19?
=========================================

Beyond decreased ECT availability, there are at least five other factors
to take into account when considering ECT during COVID-19: disruption of
routine care delivery during the crisis, leading to increased risk of
harm to patients’ healthincreased risk of patients getting COVID-19
owing to lack of ECT (e.g. delayed discharge from hospital while their
illness resolves more slowly and higher vulnerability to COVID-19 among
severely mentally ill patients\ :sup:`9`)increased risk of patients
getting COVID-19 while attending for ECT (e.g. repeated out-patient
appointments for ECT, requiring patients to travel more
frequently)increased risk to the team delivering ECT, due to the higher
risk of infection from patients receiving general anaesthesia and
potential aerosolisation of patients’ respiratory materialutilisation of
highly skilled staff during a time of scarcity, in particular the
services of anaesthetists, who could otherwise be redeployed running
intensive treatment units (ITUs).

.. _sec3:

How should we ethically triage ECT patients during COVID-19?
============================================================

Emanuel et al\ :sup:`15` provide a four-point framework to guide
rationing of scarce healthcare resources during COVID-19: (a) maximise
benefits; (b) treat people equally; (c) promote and reward instrumental
value; and (d) give priority to the worst off.

| Maximising benefits is achieved by prioritising limited resources for
  saving the most lives and with maximal improvement in patients’ lives
  after treatment. Treating people equally refers to not letting a
  patient's financial resources or status affect treatment allocation.
  Promoting and rewarding instrumental value is giving priority to those
  who can save or have saved others. Lastly, giving priority to the
  worst off could be interpreted as giving priority to the sickest or to
  younger people, who would have lived the shortest lives if untreated.
  `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ lists Emanuel et al's principles, with a column
  added describing how they could be applied to an ECT setting. Table
  1Ethical values to guide rationing of scarce healthcare resources in
  the COVID-19 pandemic, adapted for electroconvulsive therapy
  (ECT)\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ Ethical values and guiding
  principlesApplication to COVID-19 pandemicSpecific ECT
  applicationsMaximise benefitsSave the most livesReceives the highest
  priorityPrioritise in-patients with severe psychotic depression,
  lethal catatonia, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, manic delirium
| Deprioritise patients with predictors of poorer outcome to ECT (e.g.
  personality disorder, depression that is more chronic or treatment
  resistant, without suicidality or dangerousness)
| Deprioritise patients with high medical risk during ECT
| Deprioritise patients who must expose themselves to greater risk of
  COVID-19 infection to access ECT (e.g. living far from the ECT
  facility)
| Give higher-dose ECT and avoid milder ECT modalities, to minimise
  number of sessions and patient and staff risk of exposure to
  COVID-19Save the most life-years –   maximise prognosisReceives the
  highest priorityTreat people equallyFirst come, first servedShould not
  be usedUse random allocation to prioritise patients with similar
  prognosisRandom selectionUsed for selecting among patients with
  similar prognosisPromote and reward instrumental value (benefit to
  others)Retrospective – priority to those   who have made relevant
    contributionsGives priority to research participants and healthcare
  workers when other factors, such as maximising benefits, are
  equalPrioritise patients who are healthcare workers or work in
  essential services
| Deprioritise patients who pose a higher risk of infecting the ECT
  team, to conserve ECT resourcesProspective – priority to those   who
  are likely to make   relevant contributionsGives priority to
  healthcare workersGive priority to the worst offSickest firstUsed when
  it aligns with maximising benefitsPrioritise younger premorbidly well
  patients with acute onset of an ECT-responsive psychiatric
  disorderYoungest firstUsed when it aligns with maximising benefits
  such as preventing spread of the virus [1]_

.. _sec4:

Applying these principles to clinical scenarios
===============================================

Applying Emanuel et al's principles and the ECT-specific considerations
outlined above, a high-priority patient might be a young healthcare
worker in your healthcare institution with no psychiatric history and
admitted for an acute onset of psychotic depression, catatonic symptoms
and a serious suicide attempt, whose family is supportive of ECT. Two
clinical scenarios are presented for further discussion.

.. _sec4-1:

Scenario 1
----------

A 33-year-old labourer with a long history of well-controlled
schizophrenia is brought to the psychiatric emergency room with symptoms
suggestive of acute onset of stuporous catatonia (mutism, negativism,
posturing) and poor oral intake for 2 weeks. His BMI is 16, he is
clinically dehydrated and his blood pressure is borderline hypotensive.
Although he has no clear symptoms of COVID-19, he lives in a large
accommodation facility with dozens of people who have tested positive
for COVID-19. The facility already follows recommended infection control
procedures and screening, instituted several weeks before this
presentation.

This is a challenging clinical scenario where there is a psychiatric
emergency (catatonia with poor oral intake) that is highly responsive to
ECT, but in a patient with a primary psychiatric condition
(schizophrenia) that may not be indicated for ECT as a first-line
treatment and moderate to high risk of having COVID-19. Using the
proposed ethical framework below, the patient's youth and catatonia
would satisfy the principles of ‘maximising benefits’ and ‘giving
priority to the worst off’, but it would be contrary to the principle of
‘promoting and rewarding instrumental value’, as treating the patient
would expose the ECT team and other patients to a significant risk of
getting COVID-19, especially if the ECT unit is not fully prepared to
deal with suspected or positive COVID-19 patients.

As with many ethical scenarios, the initial approach to resolution would
be a medical solution. If the patient's catatonia responds to high-dose
benzodiazepines (e.g. lorazepam), then there would be no need to
consider the use of ECT. If benzodiazepine treatment failed, a negative
result on polymerase chain reaction testing for COVID-19, the lack of
other patients requiring ECT and the availability of specialised
treatment facilities (e.g. negative-pressure rooms) might mitigate the
risk of infection of ECT team members and allow ECT to proceed in an
ethical fashion.

.. _sec4-2:

Scenario 2
----------

Another challenging scenario is that of a 67-year-old woman who is
admitted to a psychiatric ward for the in-patient treatment of major
depressive disorder with acute suicidality. She also has a history of
borderline personality disorder, comorbid generalised anxiety disorder
and panic disorder and has not previously experienced much response to
full courses of psychotherapy and adequate pharmacotherapy. She
consented to a course of ECT and had already received five sessions
before a fellow ward patient was diagnosed with COVID-19. The entire
ward is quarantined as a result. The patient is keen to continue her ECT
course as she has not yet felt any improvement and other treatment
options have been relatively ineffective.

This scenario has a patient with both positive (depression, older age)
and negative (history of personality disorder and anxiety) predictors
for ECT response,\ :sup:`17` no response to the first five ECT
treatments and a significant risk of having presymptomatic COVID-19. The
principle of ‘maximizing benefits’ is less clear here, as her prognosis
of responding to ECT is mixed, and the principle of ‘promoting and
rewarding instrumental value’ would discourage continued ECT, at least
until she is cleared of COVID-19. The other two ethical principles, of
‘treating people equally’ and ‘giving priority to the worst off’, may be
useful to help clarify the ethical position. The former might suggest
that other patients in the same ward who are also receiving ECT with
similar prognosis would have an equivalent claim for ECT and the
patient's request for continued ECT should not give her higher priority.
The latter would further refine this point by considering the severity
of the woman's psychiatric diagnosis and perhaps giving sicker patients
priority to ECT (e.g. a patient with severe psychotic depression, who is
also highly likely to respond to ECT).

.. _sec5:

What is the road forward for ethical triaging for ECT during COVID-19?
======================================================================

Where treatment resources are limited, fair allocation of resources
requires careful consideration of all relevant ethical issues in the
context of the local resources and situation. The ideal solution is to
ensure adequate ECT resources, so that both high- and low-priority
patients can receive high-quality ECT. This requires deliberate short-
and long-term planning and negotiation for scarce resources within
healthcare systems, the exploration of new ECT resources (e.g. advanced
practice nurses for both anaesthesia and ECT delivery,\ :sup:`18`
dedicated ECT suites to avoid competition with surgical needs) and
adequate PPE for ECT staff and patients. The current COVID-19 crisis has
placed significant strain on healthcare resources for many months, and
at the height of the pandemic many non-emergency non-COVID services were
suspended to divert resources to deal with the COVID-19 emergency. This
has resulted in a significant backlog of untreated patients, with
consequent increased pressure on already scarce resources. Furthermore,
as healthcare systems reorient themselves to provide routine care and
begin to deal with the backlog, there remains a need to maintain social
distancing and scrupulous hygiene, for instance deep cleaning operating
theatres and equipment between each patient, which will reduce
efficiency and capacity. For all these reasons, these pressing ethical
dilemmas about how to prioritise patients must be addressed to ensure
that patients with non-COVID disorders continue to have their healthcare
needs met fairly and equitably in a fully accountable way. These efforts
should be a priority even after the COVID-19 situation eventually
resolves. Given the SARS outbreak in 2003\ :sup:`19` and the current
COVID-19 outbreak,\ :sup:`9` which both caught most of the world largely
unprepared, there is a strong ethical imperative to prepare for the
future third coronavirus outbreak or, indeed, second or third waves of
COVID-19 either locally or globally.

**Phern-Chern Tor**, MBBS, DFD(CAW), MMed(Psych), FAMS, is a consultant
psychiatrist and head of the Neurostimulation Service at the Institute
of Mental Health, Singapore. **Jacinta Tan**, MBBS, MA, MSc, DPhil,
FRCPsych, is a consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist at the
Specialist Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services, Aneurin Bevan
University Health Board, Newport, UK. **Colleen Loo**, MBBS, MD,
FRANZCP, is Professor of Psychiatry in the School of Psychiatry,
University of New South Wales, Sydney; Professorial Fellow at The Black
Dog Institute, Sydney; and a psychiatrist and clinical academic based St
George Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

P.-C.T. conceived the idea for the paper, J.T. contributed to the
ethical aspects of the paper and C.L. contributed to the ECT aspects of
the paper.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

C.L. is the Medical Director of Neurostimulation at the Northside
Clinic, Ramsay Health Care, Australia, and reports personal fees from
Ramsay Health Care, outside the submitted work.

.. _sec6:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.99.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. [1]
   Based on Emanuel et al's four-point framework.\ \ :sup:`13`
