---
abstract: |
  Doctors experience high levels of work stress even under normal
  circumstances, but many would be reluctant to disclose mental health
  difficulties or seek help for them, with stigma an often-cited reason.
  The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) crisis places additional
  pressure on doctors and on the healthcare system in general and
  research shows that such pressure brings a greater risk of
  psychological distress for doctors. For this reason, we argue that the
  authorities and healthcare executives must show strong leadership and
  support for doctors and their families during the COVID-19 outbreak
  and call for efforts to reduce mental health stigma in clinical
  workplaces. This can be facilitated by deliberately adding 'healthcare
  staff mental health support process' as an ongoing agenda item to
  high-level management planning meetings.
author:
- Niall Galbraith
- David Boyda
- Danielle McFeeters
- Tariq Hassan[^1]Correspondence to Niall Galbraith
  (<n.galbraith@wlv.ac.uk>)
date: 2020-4-28
institute:
- 1Department of Psychology, University of Wolverhampton, UK
- 2Department of Psychiatry, Queen\'s University, Providence Care
  Hospital, Kingston, Ontario, Canada
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
- id: ref38
- id: ref39
- id: ref40
- id: ref41
- id: ref42
- id: ref43
- id: ref44
- id: ref45
- id: ref46
- id: ref47
- id: ref48
- id: ref49
- id: ref50
- id: ref51
- id: ref52
- id: ref53
- id: ref54
- id: ref55
- id: ref56
- id: ref57
- id: ref58
- id: ref59
- id: ref60
- id: ref61
title: The mental health of doctors during the COVID-19 pandemic
---

Research has consistently shown that the healthcare professions
experience higher levels of work stress than the general population,
even under normal circumstances,^1,2^ and stress in doctors is
associated with both physical^3^ and mental health problems.^4,5^
Healthcare professionals also have a higher likelihood of suicidality
relative to other occupational groups,^6,7^ and work-related stress is a
common factor in those who complete suicide.^8,9^

Studies have also shown that many doctors find it difficult to tell
their colleagues or employers about their mental health
difficulties.^10^ The most commonly cited reasons are perceived stigma
and anticipated damage to future career prospects.^11--13^ Suicidal
ideation in doctors can present particularly strong fears of
stigmatisation.^14^ Such concerns may be underpinned by feelings of
shame and professional failure, and associated worries about fitness to
practise and licence restrictions.^15--17^

Not only do doctors find it difficult to share mental health concerns
with colleagues, they are also often reluctant to get professional help.
Research shows that many doctors would rather seek help from friends and
family than look for psychological/psychiatric consultation.^11^ Again,
the same worries about career prospects and stigma underpin these
preferences. Furthermore, there is evidence that many doctors are even
reluctant to disclose mental health problems to their friends and
family.^18^

# The mental health challenges faced by doctors during the COVID-19 crisis {#sec1}

During acute health crises, healthcare services are placed under excess
pressure, making working life even more stressful than normal.^19^ In a
pandemic, the number of patients requiring treatment increases
significantly, placing strain on healthcare resources and on personnel
alike. Additionally, doctors perceive a greater risk to self owing to
their exposure to the patients who are most poorly -- adding further
stress.^20,21^ Compounding this stress is the shortage of personal
protective equipment (PPE) that can arise during a pandemic.^22^ The
perceived risk of infection is warranted: a meta-analysis of the
occupational risk from the 2009 swine flu pandemic (influenza A (H1N1))
reports that the odds of healthcare personnel contracting the virus were
twice those of comparison groups.^23^ This heightened risk for doctors
and nurses might be due to their greater exposure to the respiratory
secretions of patients.^24^

A further stressor is the increased risk of infection for the families
of healthcare professionals on the front line.^25^ Data from the 2009
swine flu pandemic shows that 20% of doctors and nurses with symptoms
reported symptoms in at least one of their family members.^26^ One way
for front-line doctors to mitigate infection risk to their families is
through social distancing. However, although the protective benefits of
social contact and support at times of stress are well demonstrated,^27^
social distancing deprives the individual of a crucial buffer against
mental health difficulties precisely when they are at greater risk of
stress.^28^

Research from previous epidemics/pandemics (such as the SARS outbreak
from 2003, the MERS epidemic from 2012 or Ebola outbreaks in West
Africa) shows that healthcare professionals can experience a broad range
of psychological morbidities, including trauma,^29,30^ which might
endure for many months after the outbreak.^31,32^ The relationship
between traumatic life events and suicide is well documented^33^ and
trauma from disaster events can increase suicidal ideation in emergency
workers.^34^ Fears over risk to health and social isolation contribute
to psychological distress,^35^ as do perceptions of 'infection stigma'
from the community.^36^ However, the negative effects on mental health
can be found in doctors irrespective of whether or not they worked
directly with infected patients.^37^ Although the strains of front-line
healthcare during an infectious outbreak can lead to sickness absence
and higher staff turn-over,^20,38^ most evidence suggests that doctors
and nurses feel a strong professional obligation to continue working in
spite of the danger.^39,40^ However, given the pressures of needing to
maintain high-quality healthcare provision during a pandemic, combined
with doctors' reluctance to seek help or disclose their difficulties, it
is possible that this kind of professional commitment might relate
strongly to presenteeism. Indeed, a recent review reported that
physicians were at the highest risk of 'infectious illness presenteeism'
when compared with a range of other occupational groups.^41^

Having to balance their own safety with the needs of patients, family
and employers and in the face of limited resources can lead to
distressing ethical dilemmas for doctors and, potentially, to moral
injury. Moral injury can arise when one feels compelled to make
decisions that conflict with one\'s ethical or moral values.^42^ The
effect of moral injury on subsequent mental health can depend on the
quality of support provided to employees during and after such
events.^43^

# Managing doctors' stress at the organisational level during the outbreak {#sec2}

There is evidence that employer support for healthcare professionals
during pandemics and disaster management can be very protective. Such
support should include safeguards such as care for those doctors and
nurses who become ill, in addition to medical and financial support for
their families and protection from malpractice threat. Healthcare
professionals' motivation and morale are significantly improved when
they perceive that their efforts are recognised and reciprocated by
employers and authorities in these ways.^44,45^ An important part of
this support is the perceived efficacy of the training and personal
protective equipment that healthcare professionals receive as well as
the general quality of organisational leadership and
communication.^22,46,47^ These factors are important not just for
motivation -- they are also associated with better psychological
outcomes in healthcare professionals on the front line during epidemics.

There are also many ways to tackle mental health stigma in the
workplace. The foundation for this is creating a culture that encourages
open communication and seeks to reduce the stigmatisation of
psychological vulnerability.^48^ This may include devising activities
that challenge unhelpful attitudes and that instead promote desired
values, as well as expanding knowledge and encouraging positive
behavioural change.^49^ The anti-stigma project Time to Change,^50^
provides a suite of simple interventions for implementation in the
workplace.^51^ Elsewhere there is good evidence for peer support
training in health crises or disaster management. One example is the
Trauma Risk Management programme (TRiM), where non-clinical personnel
are trained to assess peers following traumatic events and provide
short-term support or access to professional care if required. Mental
Health First Aid (MHFA) operates on a similar model and both it and TRiM
can be effective in reducing mental health stigma in the
workplace.^45,47^

# Stress management at the individual level {#sec3}

There is evidence that psychological interventions for work stress can
be effective in healthcare professionals.^52^ Recent reviews attest to
the effectiveness of mindfulness-based interventions for work stress and
suicide ideation;^53--57^ mindfulness-based interventions also have a
sound theoretical basis.^58,59^ Mindfulness skills are particularly
suited to high-stress work settings, in that they can be practised
privately or in groups, in almost any environment and can be conducted
as briefly as time permits. Negative automatic cognitions are a key
trigger in stress reactions.^60^ Mindfulness interventions encourage us
to 'notice' our thoughts and to view them as objective events that
happen *to* us. This enables us to objectify our own negative thoughts,
gaining a new perspective on how those thoughts influence our emotions
and behaviour and enabling better management of the distress that would
normally accompany them. The effectiveness of online mindfulness courses
also has a good evidence base.^61^

# Conclusions {#sec4}

Healthcare executives and managers should be aware of the potential for
the COVID-19 outbreak to elevate the risk of psychological distress and
suicidal ideation in doctors. The literature shows that, although
healthcare professionals place high value on provision of training and
equipment during such pandemics, effective leadership and managerial
support for clinicians and their families are also highly protective
against negative psychological outcomes. One of us (T.H.) is involved in
setting up a support network of psychiatrists with the sole aim of
supporting all physicians during this unprecedented event. Managers and
clinicians might also remember that many doctors are reluctant to reveal
their difficulties even when experiencing significant psychological
distress. Workplace interventions that reduce mental health stigma and
promote sharing and support for colleagues with psychological
difficulties might improve help-seeking behaviour and attitudes.
Mindfulness practice has versatility and a strong evidence base in
workplace stress reduction and is therefore a viable technique for
groups or individual clinicians to manage stress during the COVID-19
outbreak.

**Niall Galbraith**, Reader in Health Psychology, Department of
Psychology, University of Wolverhampton, UK. **David Boyda**, Senior
Lecturer in Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of
Wolverhampton, UK. **Danielle McFeeters**, Senior Lecturer in
Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of Wolverhampton, UK.
**Tariq Hassan**, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry,
Queen\'s University, Providence Care Hospital, Kingston, Ontario,
Canada.

All authors contributed to the design, analysis of literature, writing
and revision of the article.

None.

# Supplementary material {#sec5}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.44.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::

[^1]: A video abstract for this article is available at
    <https://vimeo.com/414651981>.
