====================================================================================================
Does coronavirus pose a challenge to the diagnoses of anxiety and depression? A view from psychiatry
====================================================================================================



Lynne M. DrummondCorrespondence to Lynne M. Drummond
(lynnemd@sgul.ac.uk)
:Date: 2020-9-03

:Abstract:
   Some authors have suggested that the emergence of the novel
   coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, and the subsequent pandemic has meant that
   the constructs of pathological anxiety and depression are meaningless
   owing to widespread anxiety and depressive symptoms. This paper
   examines what is required to make a diagnosis of a depressive or
   anxiety disorder and how this may differ from fleeting symptomatology
   in response to specific situations or stimuli. All people experience
   the emotions of both anxiety and depression, but far fewer have a
   persistent anxiety or depressive syndrome which interferes with their
   quality of life and functioning. The pandemic and its issues are then
   discussed, and existing studies examining the reactions of people
   living through the pandemic are presented. Finally, the paper
   examines possible ways to cope at times of increased stress and how
   we can try to protect ourselves from long-term mental health sequelae
   of chronic stress.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

One of the challenges of conducting studies to examine the prevalence
and frequency of anxiety and depression is that these terms describe
symptoms rather than a diagnosis. Everyone has experienced these as
symptoms at some point in their lives. Diagnoses are made on the basis
of a recognised cluster of symptoms associated with anxiety and
depression. One of the difficulties is that these terms are also used in
general parlance to describe short-lived emotional changes which can
occur as an emotional reaction to a stimulus or event, rather than a
full-blown syndrome that affects the individual's quality of life.
Indeed, if we as a species did not experience anxiety responses in
threatening situations, we would undoubtedly have become extinct as we
walked over cliff edges, faced up to dangerous carnivores, or generally
partook in dangerous and risky behaviour. Levels of anxiety and
depression also vary between individuals without necessarily being
pathological. For example, we will all know some members of our social
circle who are thrill-seekers and attracted to danger, whereas others
are much more risk averse. Similarly, some people seem to be happy and
philosophical at all times, whereas others are more pessimistic and
prone to feel low and miserable at the slightest upset. Overall,
therefore, population studies are fraught with difficulties in
accommodating this area of potential self-reporting bias. For a
diagnosis of anxiety disorder or depression to be made, an individual
should be experiencing a range of symptoms associated with the anxiety
and depression, and the symptoms should be apparent for a period of time
(not just hours or minutes but weeks or months) and sufficiently severe
that they interfere with the person's ability to function fully in their
home, work, social or private leisure settings. The consistency of the
emotional symptoms is inherent in diagnostic instruments such as the
ICD,\ :sup:`1` and widely different prevalence figures may be obtained
in self-report questionnaires unless the same criteria are applied.

In medical and psychological parlance, stress is a physical, mental or
emotional factor that causes bodily or mental tension. Stresses can be
external (from the environment, psychological factors or social
situations) or internal (e.g. illness). Stress, both recent and in
childhood, is known to affect mental well-being. The coping ability of
the individual affects whether or not stress results in deterioration of
mental well-being.\ :sup:`2` Different individuals subjected to similar
trauma and stress do not all react in the same way; whereas some will
experience lasting symptoms, other will seem to have hardly any lasting
sequelae.

Population studies examining the prevalence of anxiety and depression
have demonstrated that these are among the most common conditions in
diverse societies. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that in
2015 the prevalence of depression was 4.4% globally; however, this
figure varied with gender, with women having a prevalence of 5.1% and
men 3.6%. Depression also increased with age in adulthood, peaking in
both genders at age 55–74 years, and varied among different countries.
The lowest rate of 2.6% was found in men in the Western Pacific region,
and the highest rate of 5.9% in women in the African region. These rates
of depression were found to have increased by 18.4% since
2005.\ :sup:`3` For anxiety, the prevalence was estimated to be 3.6%. As
with depression, anxiety disorders are more common among females than
males (4.6% compared with 2.6% at the global level). Again, anxiety
disorders were found to have increased since 2005 by 14.6%. As
depression and anxiety are often comorbid disorders, it is not accurate
to combine these two figures.\ :sup:`3`

A recent large study in the UK examined adults for a range of physical
and mental disorders (BioBank UK). A questionnaire asking about mental
disorders found that 21.2% had received a diagnosis of depression at
some time in their lives and 14% had been diagnosed with anxiety. The
sample who answered the questionnaire were not representative of the
whole population, as the participants were aged 45–82 years, with 53%
aged 65 or over, 57% were female and 45% had a degree (compared with
census data in which 23% had a degree).\ :sup:`4`

.. _sec1-1:

History of SARS-CoV-2
=====================

On 31 December 2019, the WHO was informed of an outbreak of pneumonia of
unknown cause in Wuhan City, in Hubei Province, China. It was then
announced on 12 January 2020 that a novel coronavirus had been
identified in samples from infected individuals. This virus was referred
to as SARS-CoV-2 and the associated illness as COVID-19. China acted by
completely closing down Wuhan and Hubei Province, but this was not
before the virus seemed to have travelled widely globally. In the UK,
people arriving from Wuhan or those believed to have been in contact
with SARS-CoV-2 were quarantined, but transmission within the UK and
people affected by the virus who had not been abroad was first
documented on 28 February 2020. The WHO declared a pandemic on 11 March.
On 15 March, following observations of a larger outbreak in northern
Italy, the UK government asked people to work from home if possible,
avoid unnecessary travel and avoid contact with others. Anyone with
symptoms suggestive of SARS-CoV-2 was asked to self-isolate, and those
over the age of 70 years, pregnant women and people with underlying
conditions were asked to self-isolate for at least 7 weeks. However, on
20 March, the four governments of the UK shut all schools, restaurants,
pubs, indoor entertainment venues, non-food or non-essential shops, and
banned people from meeting anyone they did not live with. People were
prohibited from leaving their homes except for one period of exercise
per day and to obtain essential food supplies or attend to medical
needs. At all times, people were asked to stay at least 2 metres away
from those they did not live with (social distancing). On 13 May 2020,
some adjustments to the requirements were made in England only, with
people being allowed to exercise as much as they wished and to drive to
an area to exercise; everyone who could not work from home was urged to
return provided they could remain at least 2 metres apart, and plans
were made for children to return to school in June. The devolved
governments of Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland maintained their
‘stay at home’ policies. On 14 May 2020, the WHO reported 4 248 389
cases of COVID-19 globally and a worldwide death toll of
292 046.\ :sup:`5` In the UK, as of 09:00 h on 23 May, over 35 000
people had died having tested positive for the virus,\ :sup:`6,7`
although other sources state that the number of actual deaths of people
with symptoms suggesting COVID-19 was much as 55% higher than this
number.\ :sup:`8` Other countries worldwide have had varying numbers of
cases and deaths, and widely differing responses to the pandemic.

.. _sec1-2:

Studies of anxiety and depression symptoms since the arrival of SARS-CoV-2
==========================================================================

Given that we are facing an unknown and unseen threat to our health and
survival, it is unsurprising that there have been increased numbers of
people complaining of symptoms of stress, anxiety and depression. A
population survey of 1210 respondents from 194 cities in China found
that 28.8% of respondents reported moderate to severe symptoms of
anxiety, 16.5% reported moderate to severe depressive symptoms and 8.1%
reported moderate to severe levels of stress. Almost 85% were spending
20–24 h each day at home, and over 75% were worried about family members
contracting COVID-19. Women, students and those who reported poorer
general health were more likely to report distress.\ :sup:`9` Among
healthcare workers in China (over 60% from Wuhan), a much higher
proportion reported psychological symptoms, with over 70% suffering from
distress, more than half having symptoms of depression, and over 44%
having symptoms of anxiety. Unsurprisingly, those working on the front
line were more likely to report symptoms, as were those working within
Hubei Province.\ :sup:`10` In a Spanish population survey, 18.7% of the
sample had depressive symptoms, 21.6% anxiety symptoms and 15.8%
post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms. Fewer symptoms were found among
older people, those who were economically stable and those who felt they
had adequate information about the pandemic. A greater number of
symptoms were found in women and those who had symptoms consistent with
the virus, and those who had a close relative with symptoms were more
likely to report distress. Reported loneliness was also predictive of
more psychological symptoms.\ :sup:`11` A Turkish study using the
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale\ :sup:`12` and the Health Anxiety
Inventory Health Anxiety\ :sup:`13` found that almost 24% were above the
cut-off to suspect depression, and more than 45% were above the
threshold for anxiety. Being a woman, living in an urban area and having
a history of psychiatric disorder were found to be risk factors for
anxiety, and being female and living in an urban area were risk factors
for depression. Women with chronic physical disease and a psychiatric
history were at greater risk of health anxiety.\ :sup:`14`

.. _sec2:

Discussion
==========

Overall, it can be seen that anxiety and depression are normal emotions
existing within the population and experienced to a greater or lesser
extent by all people over time. The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has led to great
changes in our way of life, as well as a real fear that we and our loved
ones may contract a potentially life-threatening disease. In addition,
front-line workers, including healthcare workers, are under increasing
stress and heavier workload. It is therefore not surprising that there
is an increase in the symptoms of anxiety and depression in the general
population, particularly in people working in front-line healthcare. In
addition, many people have been indoors with restrictions on physical
activity and an inability to visit friends and family. This is even more
poignant and damaging as many are not able to be with loved ones at the
end of their life and are unable to attend funerals.

The National Health Service has issued guidance for the population to
look after their mental health. This includes setting a structure to the
day whether or not you are working, making time to speak to friends and
family using remote methods, and looking after diet and exercise, as
well as restricting the amount of new reporting an individual is
watching if this is leading to distress.\ :sup:`15` Preventive measures
such as these may help to reduce some of the symptoms. Indeed,
structuring the day and including a balance of activities which give a
sense of mastery as well as those that give pleasure can be helpful in
combating depressive symptoms.\ :sup:`16` Ensuring a good balanced
healthy diet and adequate hydration, and avoiding smoking, alcohol and
drugs are also useful in reducing anxiety and depressive
symptoms.\ :sup:`16,17` Working on sleep hygiene and trying to get a
good sleep at night using tried and tested methods can also be
useful.\ :sup:`17` Exercise is also important and known to be beneficial
to our mental state\ :sup:`18`. Extreme isolation such as that
recommended in the UK for those aged over 70 years and those with severe
pre-existing medical conditions may have a detrimental effect not only
on physical health and the ability to withstand infection but also on
mental health.

.. _sec3:

Conclusion
==========

Overall, it can be seen that anxiety and depression are ubiquitous human
emotions which occur in response to certain situations and stimuli.
These symptoms are usually reversible once the situation changes.
However, continued stress at this time may result in longer-term anxiety
and depressive syndromes. There are some practical steps we can take to
try to limit the effects of the current situation on our own mental
health as well as that of our loved ones and our patients.

**Lynne M. Drummond**, Consultant Psychiatrist, National Service for OCD
and BDD, South West London and St George's Mental Health NHS Trust,
London, UK.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.102.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
