---
abstract: |
  The COVID-19 pandemic has put the UK\'s National Health Service under
  extreme pressure, and acute psychiatric services have had to rapidly
  adapt to a new way of working. This editorial describes the experience
  of a London psychiatric intensive care unit (PICU) where all nine
  in-patients ultimately tested COVID-19 positive.
author:
- Luke Skelton
- Ria Pugh
- Bethan Harries
- Lucy Blake
- Margaret Butler
- Faisil SethiCorrespondence to Luke Skelton
  (<luke.skelton@slam.nhs.uk>)
date: 2020-5-14
institute:
- South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
title: "The COVID-19 pandemic from an acute psychiatric perspective: a
  London psychiatric intensive care unit experience"
---

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has put healthcare
systems across the world under immense strain, with over 1.2 million
cases across 211 countries causing over 70 000 deaths as of 31 March
2020. COVID-19 is a highly infectious novel coronavirus which spreads
via droplet transmission, causing a spectrum of disease from mild
illness to severe bilateral pneumonia necessitating intensive care
treatment.^1^ While acute hospitals prepare for an influx of cases by
increasing intensive care capacity and retraining staff, at the time of
the events described here there was a lack of specific public health
guidance for psychiatric services. In the following weeks, the Royal
College of Psychiatrists produced COVID-19 guidance for the acute
psychiatric setting and the National Association of Psychiatric
Intensive Care and Low Secure Units has published guidance for
management of acute disturbance in a psychiatric intensive care unit
(PICU) setting.^2^^,^^3^

COVID-19 presents a unique challenge to the in-patient psychiatry
setting owing to the nature of psychiatric illness and its treatment.
The London PICU described here is a female, 10-bed locked ward
comprising two corridors, each with five single bedrooms and two shared
bathrooms. There is an extra care area, a seclusion suite, a communal
area, including a dining room, and sensory, interview and clinical
rooms. At the time of the outbreak, nine of the ten beds were occupied.
The tenth bed remained empty over the period described.

Patients who require care in a PICU are in an acutely disturbed phase of
a serious mental disorder where the associated risks -- to self and
others -- cannot be safely managed on an acute ward. Their behaviour
includes externally or internally directed aggression, unpredictability
and vulnerability (overactivity and disinhibition). The PICU model --
including ward size, staffing ratio and reduced-stimulus environment --
allows for the rapid assessment, management and stabilisation of these
patients.

During the COVID-19 outbreak, support and advice were provided by the
hospital trust\'s infection control team. The ward was closed to
visitors and staff began wearing full personal protective equipment
(PPE) at the point that the first COVID-19 case was suspected. This
editorial uses the experience of this London PICU to highlight the
challenges that in-patient psychiatric services will face over the
coming weeks and offer learning from an evolving situation.

# Timeline of events {#sec1}

In mid-March 2020, case 1 developed a pyrexia of 40.1°C. She had no
respiratory symptoms or recent travel history and, owing to the presence
of lower urinary tract symptoms, a urinary tract infection was
suspected. On day 1 she developed respiratory symptoms and was tested
for COVID-19. After developing symptoms, she was encouraged to
self-isolate in her room. Over the following 24 h she became
increasingly medically unwell, with a deteriorating score on the
Modified Early Warning Score (MEWS) assessment and required emergency
transfer to an acute hospital. A diagnosis of COVID-19 was confirmed
later that day. [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"} outlines the
clinical features and management of the cases on the PICU, with day 0
being the onset of fever for case 1. The median age for the cohort is 34
years (interquartile range: 7.5 years). Table 1Presenting symptoms,
underlying vulnerability factors, adherence to the COVID-19 risk
mitigation plan, severity of illness and need for medical transfer in
nine infected patients on a psychiatric intensive care unitCaseSymptom
onsetUnderlying vulnerability factorsClinical featuresCOVID-19 risk
mitigation planAdherence to isolationCOVID-19 illness
severity[^a^](#tfn1_2){ref-type="table-fn"}Medical transfer required1Day
0PMH: asthmaPyrexia, cough, tachypnoea \>30 breaths per minute,
tachycardia, hypotension, saturations\<94% on air, reduced
GCSIsolation  
Intermittent observations and intentional rounding  
0.5- to 4-hourly vital signsYesSevereYes2Day 3On lithium  
PMH: obesity, asthma, smokerCough, sore throat, coryzal, tachycardia
pyrexiaIsolation  
Intermittent observations and intentional rounding  
4-hourly vital signsNoMild - ModerateNo3Day 4On ACE inhibitors  
PMH: hypertension, asthma, obesity. Recent aspiration pneumonia,
pulmonary embolismPyrexia, shortness of breath, tachypnoea 30 breaths
per minute, tachycardia, deliriumIsolation.  
Intermittent observations and intentional rounding  
Episodic segregation and seclusion  
2- to 4-hourly vital signsNoSevereNo4Day 4On clozapine and lithium  
SmokerHeadache, cough, tachycardiaIsolation  
Intermittent observations and intentional rounding  
4-hourly vital signsNoMildNo5Day 6On clozapine  
SmokerCough, pyrexia, tachycardiaIsolation  
Intermittent observations and intentional rounding  
4-hourly vital signsNoMildNo6Day 7On clozapine and lithium  
PMH: obesityCough, pyrexia, myalgia, tachycardiaIsolation  
Intermittent observations and intentional rounding  
4-hourly vital signsNoMildNo7Day 7On lithium  
SmokerPyrexia, sore throatIsolation  
Intermittent observations and intentional rounding  
4-hourly vital signsNoMildNo8Asymptomatic  
Infection confirmed by swab on day 7SmokerPyrexia (one temperature spike
recorded in 2 weeks with no other symptoms)Isolation  
Intermittent observations and intentional rounding  
4 hourly vital signsNoMildNo9Day 13On lithiumCoughIsolation  
Intermittent observations and intentional rounding  
4-hourly MEWSNoMildNo[^1][^2]

# The challenges facing acute psychiatric services {#sec2}

The situation in this PICU highlighted some of the challenges faced when
managing COVID-19 in an acute psychiatric setting. First, in those with
serious mental disorder there is poorer management of physical health
than in the general population, particularly comorbidities found to be
prognosticators of COVID-19 disease severity: diabetes, hypertension,
obesity and smoking.^4^^,^^5^ In addition, this patient cohort is often
prescribed psychotropic medication that conveys an independent health
risk, such as the cardiovascular and haematological risks associated
with clozapine therapy, yet it is not fully understood whether this
interacts with COVID-19 pathophysiology.^6^

The management of behavioural disturbance in the context of COVID-19 was
particularly challenging because of additional risks, which included:
non-adherence to self-isolation procedures and physical health
monitoring, the need for interventions such as restraint, rapid
tranquillisation and one-to-one nursing. This huge challenge on the PICU
contributed to the rapid transmission of COVID-19 between patients.
Patients rarely maintained isolation measures and the enclosed layout of
psychiatric in-patient wards makes it very difficult to follow social
distancing and isolation procedures. There is one clinical room used for
medical assessments, investigations and treatment administration. It is
difficult to adapt this environment to meet the infection control
standards needed to reduce the transmission of COVID-19 while continuing
to deliver safe and effective care to patients.

Another challenge is that the mental health nursing workforce undergoes
different training and registration from the general nursing workforce,
limiting knowledge and experience in managing an acutely medically
deteriorating patient. The patients on this PICU presented with a
variety of symptoms, many had significantly deranged physical
observations and complex comorbidity, yet did not meet the threshold for
medical admission during this pandemic and so were treated on the PICU.
As a result, their medical management was prioritised while also
delivering effective psychiatric care. Many of the staff had little
experience of the necessary high-level infection control procedures
implemented to manage virus transmission, and this included PPE. This
steep learning curve increased staff anxiety levels, potentially further
contributing to sickness levels among staff.

Acute psychiatric services will face a number of ethical challenges over
the coming months. During this pandemic many patients will be detained
to in-patient units under the Mental Health Act 1983 for assessment
and/or treatment of their mental disorder. If they become symptomatic
for COVID-19 they will be expected to isolate in their room; when this
is not adhered to how should it be enforced? Do we need to consider
whether they fulfil the capacity criteria to make this decision? A
patient\'s decision no longer affects only them: it also affects other
patients, legally detained to the ward, unable to socially distance from
the affected individual. The Coronavirus Act 2020 empowers public health
officers to authorise initial restrictions to ensure assessment and
screening for COVID-19, followed by up to 14 days' isolation. However,
at present it is unclear how this will be implemented. The Mental Health
Act allows for a detained individuals' liberty to be restricted in the
context of their mental illness to protect themselves or others, but how
should COVID-19 infection affect this? As clinicians and
multidisciplinary team members, we are going to have to make difficult
ethical decisions using the guidance and frameworks available to us, and
our risk assessments must become more complex.

# Summary of learning {#sec3}

Although at the time of writing London is an epicentre for the COVID-19
outbreak in the UK, other acute mental health units will soon be facing
similar situations, so it is important to share what has been learnt.
All nine patients in this PICU tested positive for COVID-19: two had
severe illness, with one requiring transfer to an acute hospital for
treatment. One had moderate illness, five had mild illness, and one was
asymptomatic at the point of testing but spiked a temperature on day 8.
The proportion of severe illness was slightly higher than reported in
the emerging global data,^5^ despite the younger age range of the
cohort. It is likely that the burden of medical comorbidity among the
cohort is the reason for the higher prevalence of severe illness.

As infection control measures were implemented from day 0, with staff
utilising full PPE, it was assumed that transmission occurred between
patients secondary to the index case. However, this conclusion cannot be
made with certainty. As COVID-19 is most infective early in the illness
trajectory,^8^ the timeline ([Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}) and
the possibility of asymptomatic transmission means that alternative
sources and transmission patterns cannot be excluded, reaffirming the
need for strict adherence to infection control measures by staff
members.

In response to the COVID-19 outbreak the ward had to significantly
modify practice. The pace at which new processes were implemented is
likely to have been beneficial. Weekly patient-facing ward rounds were
suspended and daily multiprofessional meetings were held instead,
followed by individual reviews. A risk mitigation plan was developed for
each patient; this consisted of a minimum of 4-hourly physical
observations, intermittent psychiatric observations plus intentional
rounding, and a daily review of their physical status. Increased
priority was given to physical health, with daily reviews of physical
observations and paracetamol prescription, plus physical examination and
phlebotomy where necessary. Before day 4, at which there could be
cohorting of COVID-19-positive and -negative patients, medication and
meals were taken to the isolating patients. Once cohorted into
corridors, a similar process was employed to these distinct areas.

The team liaised closely with the acute medical team to guide supportive
management and advise on transfer to the acute hospital. Psychotropic
medication was carefully reviewed, with consideration of safe clozapine,
lithium and benzodiazepine therapy in the context of COVID-19. Clinical
teams could consider reducing the frequency of medicine administration
to reduce staff exposure to those with COVID-19. There was close working
with the infection control team to quickly implement barrier nursing and
upskill ward staff to ensure compliance with public health infection
control guidance.

To ensure safe management of acute psychiatric disturbance, the risk
assessment was adapted to include COVID-19 infectious status.
Encouraging patients to uphold self-isolation was challenging ([Table
1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}). To manage this, the ward was separated
into COVID-19-negative and -positive corridors until all patients were
confirmed positive. At the point from which the first case was
suspected, patients were encouraged to wear masks to minimise
transmission, given the poor adherence to self-isolation. Face-to-face
assessments were limited to one interaction to prevent repeated staff
exposure. Each interaction included all necessary interventions,
including mental state assessment, physical examination and phlebotomy.
Where physical restraint was indicated, personal protective equipment
was worn, including a visor to protect from spitting, and the emergency
response team was briefed about the nature of the risks. Zoning,
segregation and seclusion were used to manage high-risk behaviours, but
not solely as a means of preventing transmission. Where safe to do so,
one-to-one nursing took place at the recommended 2 m distance. When
rapid tranquillisation was required, consideration was given to the risk
of respiratory decompensation in a COVID-19-positive patient.

The guidance and understanding for managing COVID-19 in an acute
psychiatric setting is evolving daily, and inevitably will have changed
during the timeline of this article. However, the core principles on
which clinical teams must base the difficult decisions ahead will
remain. The Mental Health Act will remain clear in its remit, but use of
the Mental Capacity Act 2005, Coronavirus Act 2020 and common law is
likely to increase over the coming weeks when considering how to
mitigate the additional and serious risk factors of COVID-19 in our
patient cohort.

**Luke Skelton**, MBChB, BSc, MSc, MRCPsych, is a Psychiatry Registrar
at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Ria Pugh**,
BSc, BMBS, MRCPsych, is a Core Psychiatry Trainee at South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust. **Bethan Harries**, BA, AKC, BMBS, DMCC,
is a Trust Grade Doctor at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust. **Lucy Blake**, MBChB, MRCPsych, is a Psychiatry Registrar at
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust. **Margaret Butler**,
BSc, MSc, MBBS, MRCPsych, is a Core Psychiatry Trainee at South London
and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust. **Faisil Sethi**, MA(Cantab), MBBS,
FRCPsych, MScDIC, DipStat, LLM, is a Consultant Psychiatrist at South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust.

All authors meet all four ICMJE criteria for authorship. L.S. was first
author and primary contributor for this paper. All authors contributed
to the production of this paper.

None.

# Supplementary material {#sec4}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.54.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::

[^1]: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; MEWS, Modified Early Warning
    Score assessment; PMH, past medical history.

[^2]: Clinical severity of COVID-19. Mild: mild fever, dry cough, sore
    throat, headache, myalgia; Moderate: mild symptoms plus shortness of
    breath; Severe: fever, tachypnoea \>30 breaths/min, hypoxia with
    saturations \<94% on air (adapted from Cascella et al^7^).
