---
abstract: |
  The editor of the *BJPsych Bulletin* reflects on the extraordinary
  recent events triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic. Mental health
  professionals are at the front line of managing the pandemic and
  emergency changes should lead to a much needed refocus on what is
  really vital. In these unsettling times we ought to review how we
  manage the crisis, and its aftermath, both personally and
  professionally.
author:
- Norman A. PooleCorrespondence to Dr Norman A. Poole
  (<BJPBulletin@rcpsych.ac.uk>)
date: 2021-02
institute:
- Department of Neuropsychiatry, St George\'s Hospital, South West
  London and St George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
title: If not now, when?
---

# 21 March 2020 {#sec1}

My 3-year-old daughter woke this morning with a cough. Rather sweetly,
she claimed she\'d 'Caught hold of the cough' which she knows is making
people ill. Instead of the group cycle I\'d planned, I rode out on my
bike alone, giving others an acceptably wide berth. Well, I say
acceptably wide, but how wide is that? Two metres or more? Should I even
have been out exercising? Is it a cold or COVID? How worried should I
be? Pedalling into a cold northerly squall, it suddenly dawned on me:
'I\'m scared'. Not so much for myself -- although perhaps I\'m not yet
willing to admit that -- but for my daughter, my family, friends, their
families, colleagues and, of course, our patients. We are taught that
insight in psychosis is impaired, but I\'ve often found anxiety to be
less well recognised by patients, and me it turns out, than the
textbooks tell us.^1^ It was an unsettling discovery because at that
moment I also realised how powerless I am.

The neuropsychiatry team at St George\'s where I work had spent the
previous week switching to remote clinics, mainly from home, but also
seeing neurology in-patients at St George\'s Hospital. We learned that
the liaison psychiatry service, led by the unflappable Marcus Hughes,
had split into red and green teams; the former working exclusively in
the new COVID-19 unit. 'How noble?', I thought. 'How long will they
last?', I fretted. Everyone accepts that at some point they will have to
take their turn in the red team. We heard how our in-patient colleagues
on the mental health wards are also dividing themselves into teams and
containing units to mitigate the virus\'s spread. 'How ironic?', I
mused. Doctors were first sent to the asylums some 200 years ago to
prevent contagion seeping out into the community at large.^2^ Now we are
struggling to do the opposite. Community teams are restructuring
services on the hoof to maintain care despite all the limitations
imposed on them. As I write, it still feels like a phoney war, yet so
unnerving to watch our futures unfolding before us in daily despatches
from the frontlines in Italy and Spain. In this war against an invisible
enemy the frontline is long, and thin. And mental health professionals
are as much part of it as anyone.

I personally hate Churchill\'s quip about 'Not letting a good crisis go
to waste', which so blithely ignores human cost and personal tragedies.
Yet I am surely not alone in believing that COVID-19 must change how we
deliver mental healthcare for good. The pandemic, from which we will
hopefully recover, and our catastrophic mismanagement of the environment
are not unrelated events. Pathogens are increasingly likely to cross
species barriers as we pillage natural habitats.^3^ Tomlin\'s
editorial^4^ draws attention to healthcare\'s contribution to poisonous
greenhouse emissions and a previous article in this journal described
the damage that excreted SSRI medications could be wreaking on our
marine environment.^5^ We are currently working towards a special
edition of the *BJPsych Bulletin* on the climate crisis and psychiatry,
which will highlight the problems and point to some solutions. In this
vein, I am hopeful that many of the new ways we are working --
telepsychiatry^6^ and stripped-back bureaucracy -- will outlive the
current crisis. Psychiatry must resist successive governments' fantasy
that individual risk can be managed on the basis of population-level
statistics.^7,8^ It can\'t, and we must say so. The reality is, we would
probably have the workforce to deliver a world-class mental health
service if everyone wasn\'t so tied up inputting pointless data. If not
now, when?

The virus has also exposed glaring injustices in our society. Some have
the resources to weather the storm either through accumulated wealth or
the luxury of being able to work from home. Many others live
hand-to-mouth in insecure jobs while paying extraordinary housing costs.
How will they fare? The sacrifices being made across the board must lead
to a rewriting of the social contract, as happened after the Second
World War. The debts currently being accrued cannot be repaid with
regressive income taxes while personal and corporate wealth remains
undertaxed.^9^ Unlike post-2008,^10^ corporate bailouts must come with
conditions that benefit the majority. Later this year, with Peter
Byrne\'s support, *BJPsych Bulletin* will publish a themed edition on
inequality as a major source of mental disorder. I\'d say it is timely,
but we have known this stuff for years yet not always, it seems,
accepted the corollary: psychiatry must argue unflinchingly for a fairer
society. If not now, when?

This crisis will be demanding on us all, but social distancing also
provides opportunities. As I cycled alone, which I expect to be doing a
lot more of, I realised just how addicted I\'d become to the relentless
news cycle. I\'ve resolved to limit my intake to once a day. Much better
to repurpose these new uninvited evenings spent at home. Sadly, I doubt
it\'ll be to learn the piano but in these strange times I\'m opening up
to music recommended by others (please send some suggestions!) and have
been live streaming gigs from my favourite venue (Café Oto, if you\'re
interested: <https://www.cafeoto.co.uk>). There are various writing
projects that I aim to complete before unwinding with movie nights. I
have already had an evening in a virtual pub and reconnected with
long-lost friends. All the while knowing that these are mere
displacement activities to manage a gnawing fear. It will be harder
still for the completely self-isolating over-70s. Many I know are
self-organising to support the vulnerable locally, and it will be a
testament to our society if these activities endure. Closer to home,
I\'ve started a book club with my mum to help keep her spirits up in the
long months ahead and allow us to chat about something, anything, else.
And there are plenty of books that have sat on my to-do list far too
long. My apocalyptic reading starts here: *If Not Now, When?*^11^

**Norman A. Poole** is Editor of the *BJPsych Bulletin* and a consultant
neuropsychiatrist at St George\'s Hospital, South West London and St
George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust, UK.

# Declaration of interest {#nts2}

None.
