==========================================================
Running a journal club in 2020: reflections and challenges
==========================================================



Isabel Mark
Motaz Sonbol
Cyrus AbbasianCorrespondence to Isabel Mark (isabel.mark@swlstg.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2020-11-13

:Abstract:
   The online environment brings both challenges and opportunities. The
   skills learned in journal clubs remain highly relevant where the
   ability to critique rapidly generated information and apply evidence
   to patient care is vital. Creativity and flexibility are needed to
   ensure that learners’ needs are met and efforts are made to involve
   those who may not be naturally drawn to online environments. This
   article explores how journal clubs have been approached in the past,
   both in person and more recently online, considers techniques for
   maintaining engagement in online teaching and proposes new approaches
   for future journal clubs.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Royal College of Psychiatrist’s curriculum for core trainees
requires the development of critical appraisal knowledge, skills and
habits for practising evidence-based medicine (EBM).\ :sup:`1` Since
1999, critical appraisal skills have been assessed in MRCPsych written
examinations.\ :sup:`2` It is accepted that attending a journal club
offers trainees a key opportunity to learn and practise critical
appraisal skills. Attending and presenting at a journal club are
recommended for all trainees, being a workplace-based assessment (WPBA)
for core trainees within their curriculum and required for annual review
of competency progression (ARCP).\ :sup:`1` Monitoring of attendance and
reinforcement of its importance are likely to vary within UK deaneries
and internationally.

.. _sec1:

Journal clubs of the past
=========================

Doctors assembling to review current literature has been recorded as far
back as 1875.\ :sup:`3` However, recent difficulties in engaging doctors
in journal clubs have been discussed.\ :sup:`2` In 2009, Agell wrote of
a ‘journal club syndrome,’ in which he reported an observed correlation
between reported ‘mishaps’ preventing trainees from engaging in the
learning process and the timing of their scheduled
presentations.\ :sup:`4` This somewhat cynical view highlights the
long-standing anxieties and struggles with engagement that trainees
might face.

In 2008, Deenadayalan et al recommended establishing an overarching goal
for a journal club which is reviewed and agreed by participants,
recording and expecting attendance, establishing sustainable leadership
with access to a statistical expert as needed and providing incentives
such as food.\ :sup:`5` Other aspects, such as article choice, are also
specified. In psychiatry, Swift built on these strategies, highlighting
the importance of structure, clear aims, a social aspect for the group
and discussing selection of the facilitator (with critical appraisal and
teaching skills but also able to provide enthusiasm and approachability
for more junior colleagues).\ :sup:`2,6` Moving away from the
traditional format by introducing ‘evidence-based journal clubs’ has
been suggested.\ :sup:`2,7` Such sessions would address a specific
clinical problem by referring to available literature.

.. _sec2:

Journal clubs online: what we know so far
=========================================

Although the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a rapid move to online
learning, journal clubs have existed in the virtual world for some time.
These can take the form either of synchronous learning, when a teacher
is present at the same time as students, or of asynchronous learning,
when a teacher directs study but is not present when the learning takes
place.

Many asynchronous options for journal review have been developed,
supporting the face-to-face meetings. MacLaren et al have discussed the
internet possibilities, using social media platforms such as Facebook,
Twitter handles and Mentimeter as a means to widen potential journal
club participation and support learning.\ :sup:`8` Other e-sources are
available for accessing mental health information, an example being the
Mental Elf, which has used blogs, social media and gamification to
incentivise users.\ :sup:`9`

There has been a recent surge of asynchronous Twitter journal
clubs,\ :sup:`10–13` in which participants contribute via tweets over a
specified time period (typically between 1 h and 1 week), providing free
participation, open journal access, time efficiency and a diverse
international forum for discussion. Instructions for those wishing to
set up an asynchronous journal club can involve a number of steps,
including incorporating other social media platforms and considering the
most convenient time for its target audience, to make their
establishment accessible to all.\ :sup:`14` Plante et al note that
content may be unregulated and that some might struggle to learn from
reviewing past discussions, and suggest that Wiki Journal Club (a
website that allows collaboration in writing summaries, critical
analysis and reviews of chosen papers, similar to Wikipedia) overcomes
these barriers by providing editorial and professional moderation,
easily referenced and referred to.\ :sup:`15` MacRae et al found a
significant improvement in critical appraisal skills among participants
of their surgical journal club, compared with a control group, but
acknowledged that those involved in a Twitter journal club are likely to
be more motivated than the general surgeon population.\ :sup:`10`

Synchronous online journal clubs have had less exploration. Among Lin &
Sherbino's suggested steps for setting up an online journal club is the
added possibility of ‘live’ video panel discussions using technology
such as Google ‘Hangouts on Air’ and YouTube.\ :sup:`16` More recently,
the *BJPsych* has collaborated with university psychiatric societies to
help successfully launch live virtual journal clubs, with student
presentations followed by expert-panel discussion.\ :sup:`17` A similar
approach has been followed with dental trainees, highlighting the
benefits of accessibility, ease of interaction and effective
learning.\ :sup:`18`

Although additional online options may increase the potential for
journal club participation, they are unlikely to suit all trainees.
Twitter is the most popular form of social media communication among
healthcare professionals,\ :sup:`19` but the exact prevalence of use
among doctors, or more specifically trainees, is to our knowledge not
reported. If medical education becomes dependent on social media
platforms, the risk is that some will be alienated or simply not
reached.

.. _sec3:

Techniques for maintaining engagement with online learning
==========================================================

Difficulties in engaging learners online are a recognised challenge for
educators; traditional face-to-face teaching methods cannot simply be
adopted in the online environment.\ :sup:`20` Additional considerations
are needed (`Box 1 <#box1>`__). Box 1Instructor considerations for
maximising engagement in online learning Consider three domains:
cognitive, affective and managerial\ :sup:`21`\ Existing face-to-face
options cannot simply be replicated online; a new approach is
needed\ :sup:`20`\ Initial resistance is to be expected and learners may
need additional support at the outset\ :sup:`24`\ Clinical scenarios
improve perceived relevance/authenticity\ :sup:`24`\ Consider the
diversity of the group and individual learner needs and
preferences\ :sup:`25,26`

Coppola et al proposed that the online instructor's role has three
domains: cognitive, affective and managerial, achieving a balance
between imparting information effectively, communicating
approachability, enthusiasm and intimacy, and being an effective
organiser and administrator.\ :sup:`21` A recent Best Evidence in
Medical Education (BEME) review describes techniques used by educators
to maximise student engagement online, necessitated by
COVID-19.\ :sup:`22` These include the need for effective organisation
and structure, and varied options for student interaction, such as using
online chat features, polling, hand-raising and breakout
rooms.\ :sup:`22` Warren et al argue the need for flexibility in this
process, incorporating different learning modalities, considering
technical resources and support.\ :sup:`23` Engagement can still be
delayed unless a learner is willing to change habits and thus suspend
their disbelief in a new approach, with additional support and time
needed for them to do so.\ :sup:`24`

Online learning is often more effective when activities are ‘authentic’,
using complex clinical scenarios and tasks to increase the perceived
level of relevance for the learner.\ :sup:`24` In the current climate,
using cases or studies involving COVID-19 specifically might assist with
this.

One must consider all students rather than just the most vocal or
communicative.\ :sup:`25` Haggis proposes that teachers address student
diversity by shifting their approach away from the struggling learners
towards a more dynamic stance, considering the overall student–teacher
interactive process.\ :sup:`25` Problematic areas need to be addressed,
including acceptance of the wide range of students’ experience, motives,
interaction and communication preferences. The instructor could consider
using diverse examples when setting problems/tasks and fostering social
relationships within the group, while still respecting the student's own
responsibility for driving their learning and seeking help.\ :sup:`26`
Forcing some students to contribute, when not part of a shared
collaborative process, could endanger their autonomy and
motivation.\ :sup:`27`

.. _sec4:

Recent learning following COVID-19 restrictions
===============================================

In 2020, since the COVID-19 pandemic, psychiatry training has depended
on online technology to replace all face-to-face journal club meetings.
Within months, our use of platforms such as Zoom and Microsoft Teams
became the ‘new normal’ and the only option for teaching and networking.
Although some participants were already familiar with the array of
online options, many may not have been and could still be struggling to
keep up.

Within South West London and St George's Mental Health NHS Trust, we
have continued to run a weekly journal club using the virtual platform
of Microsoft Teams, supported by a WhatsApp group to offer further
discussion as needed. Efforts were made to boost the effectiveness of
the journal club by recruiting additional higher trainees to support the
sessions, increasing the level of support offered to the lead presenter
and making particular efforts during journal club meetings to encourage
all to contribute. Although the numbers in the virtual room have been
noticeably higher than those in face-to-face meetings before March 2020
– up to two or three times as many – engagement levels have been
difficult to measure, with many of those present in the virtual room not
taking an active part. In the absence of visual cues, with most turning
off their screen camera and not using the ‘chat’ function, we struggle
to assess who is actively engaging in the group and who finds it useful.
Several trainees have commented on missing the social aspect of the
group.

As it has become unclear how long COVID-19 restrictions will continue,
morale has declined. The initial high level of discussion has not been
maintained; not all trainees have appeared confident to engage, either
by speaking openly, using the written chat/Q&A function or through the
WhatsApp group. This experience is, of course, likely to vary between
different hospitals, trusts and deaneries, depending on the confidence
of trainees, as well as the ethos and culture of the organisation.

Reflections and feedback from trainees are continuously sought and
contribute to future planning (`Box 2 <#box2>`__), but we are aware that
those most disengaged from the process are less likely to communicate
their needs. Box 2Lessons learned from recent experience Assessing and
maintaining engagement in online forums is a challengeUncertainty about
the future can be unsettling and disempowering for some traineesTrainees
feel a loss of the social aspect of journal clubsLearning and training
opportunities have been threatened by clinical workload, technological
limitations and noisy surroundingsFacilitator encouragement, support and
continuity are criticalTrainees appear to appreciate a flexible
approach, such as presenting articles in pairs, structuring their
session in varied ways and focusing on different aspects of the paper.
Some are interested in statistical methods and details, whereas others
prefer to focus on how the research relates to previous and future
research or how they can make use of the data in their practice

.. _sec5:

Journal clubs of the future
===========================

Journal clubs continue to be a valued part of psychiatry training,
offering a key opportunity to learn and practise critical appraisal
skills, presenting skills, critical thinking and structured discussion.
There is no current alternative within the RCPsych curriculum that
offers these opportunities, and journal club remains a WPBA for core
trainees.\ :sup:`1` The current pandemic reminds us how critical
evidence-based medicine is to our practice, with a flurry of new
research on COVID-19, and the need to recognise how new research should
be integrated into practice. The transition to online journal clubs now
requires a new set of organiser and administrator skills, which is a
challenge in some departments. Even before 2020, journal clubs were
struggling with participant engagement.\ :sup:`2,6` Online journal clubs
might be embraced by those with research or education focus; but there
is a high risk that others could feel excluded. Others might be starting
to get online fatigue.

Considering techniques for effective engagement in online teaching can
enhance our ability to facilitate journal clubs.\ :sup:`20–23` The use
of clinical problems and specific tasks, similar to the previously
introduced evidence-based journal clubs, may provide additional
relevance and authenticity for learners.\ :sup:`6,7,24` Considering the
diverse range of learner needs and preferences is advised.\ :sup:`25`
The online platform potentially supports educators in managing diversity
by improving accessibility, in particular for those shielding or working
on a different clinical site. Publicising and encouraging the use of
additional asynchronous learning resources\ :sup:`8,9` such as Twitter
journal clubs to support sessions\ :sup:`14` is worthwhile.

When running future synchronous online journal clubs, instructors need
to transform their approach, not only in offering appropriate guidance
and knowledge, but also in helping to establish an approachable
atmosphere, optimising the potential for discussion and
collaboration.\ :sup:`22` Trainee uncertainty about the future and
feelings of social loss need to be acknowledged, as does the
consideration of variability in resources and skills, with limited
availability of functioning computers for some. Trainees have fed back
that they appreciate additional guidance on presentation style, paper
choice and additional resources. They have expressed a preference for
flexibility, not defining the style of presentation and allowing the
option of multiple communication forms (speaking in person, typing in
the written ‘chat’, as well as using WhatsApp and other social media
platforms). A challenge of measuring active participation remains, as
the administrative resources required to record contributions might not
be feasible within all training programmes. Forcing contribution could
endanger trainee autonomy,\ :sup:`26` although it should be recognised
that it is an expected and important part of the trainee
curriculum.\ :sup:`1`

This article can only be the start of a more complex discussion and
re-evaluation of the function, purpose and delivery of online journal
clubs and the part they play in the psychiatry curriculum, as well as
considering the level of support provided to trainees and by whom.
Collaboration and discussion between professional educators in
neighbouring training programmes will help explore and expand the wider
networking potential of journal clubs.

We thank the core trainees at South West London and St George’s Mental
Health NHS Trust whose opinions and views contributed to the conclusions
of this article.

**Isabel Mark** is a Specialty Trainee Year 5 (ST5) general adult
registrar at South West London and St George's Mental Health NHS Trust
and a clinical teaching fellow and honorary clinical lecturer at St
George's University of London, UK. **Motaz Sonbol** is an ST5 general
adult registrar at South West London and St George's Mental Health NHS
Trust. **Cyrus Abbasian** is a consultant psychiatrist at South West
London and St George's Mental Health NHS Trust and an honorary senior
lecturer at St George's University of London.

I.M. developed the concept for the article, wrote the main draft and
revised it following comments from the other authors. M.S. and C.A.
substantially contributed to the design, made critical revisions and
approved the final version. All authors are accountable for the work.

.. _nts3:

Declarations of interest
========================

None.

.. _nts3-a:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.121.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
