---
author:
- Marcus Evans
date: 2021-10
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
title: "Freedom to think: the need for thorough assessment and treatment
  of gender dysphoric children -- CORRIGENDUM"
---

pmc

# Editor\'s note {#sec1}

The article 'Freedom to think: the need for thorough assessment and
treatment of gender dysphoric children' was published online on 21 July
2020. In response, the *BJPsych Bulletin* received a number of letters
both for and against the paper. The letters of complaint raised several
similar issues, which were presented to the author for response. At our
request, the author has addressed some omissions in the original
article, particularly in relation to a declaration of interest of which
we had been unaware. Also, some clarifications and additional references
have been added to support a number of statements. An updated article is
being published and we are publishing this corrigendum outlining the
changes made -- the original article remains available, as supplementary
material to the updated article. We are keen to pursue an informed,
transparent debate via the eLetters section, in line with the journal\'s
eLetters policy. See also my editorial 'Publishing controversy'
(<https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.127>).

**Norman Poole,** Editor of the *BJPsych Bulletin*

# Amendments and clarifications, by Marcus Evans {#sec2}

The opening sentences 'There has been a 400% rise in referrals to the
national gender identity service at the Tavistock and Portman NHS Trust
in London over the past 5 years. The profile of referrals has also
undergone a major transformation: we have seen a reversal of the gender
ratio from two-thirds male:female to two thirds female:male, with a new
diagnostic category, 'recent-onset gender dysphoria', making up a
substantial proportion." should read: "'There has been a 3264% rise in
referrals to the national gender identity service at the Tavistock and
Portman NHS Trust in London over the past 10 years (from 77 in
2009--2010 to 2590 in 2018--2019).^c1^ The profile of referrals has also
undergone a major transformation: we have seen a reversal of the gender
ratio from two-thirds male:female to two-thirds female:male, with a
recently described clinical phenomenon of as yet uncertain diagnostic
significance making up a substantial proportion. This gender dysphoria
of recent onset among adolescents (sometimes termed 'recent-onset gender
dysphoria' or ROGD, 'rapid-onset adolescent dysphoria'^c2^ or
'adolescent-onset transgender history^c3^) lacks an agreed name or
established diagnostic criteria, but its emergence has been documented
by a number of gender clinics worldwide.^c4^'"

The following should then be added: "'Bernadette Wren, the then
associate director of the Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust\'s
Gender Identity Development Service (GIDS), gave evidence to a House of
Commons select committee in which she summarised the GIDS intake in the
following terms: "many of the young people, and increasing numbers of
them, have had a gender-uncontentious childhood, if you like, and it is
only when they come into puberty and post-puberty that they begin to
question. That now represents a substantial proportion of our
group".^c5^'"

The sentence 'The affirmative approach to gender dysphoria has been
adopted by the majority of children\'s services in the UK.' should read:
"'The affirmative approach to gender dysphoria appears to have been
adopted by the majority of NHS and privately provided children\'s
services in the UK. Again, Bernadette Wren stated in the House of
Commons: "I work in a service where a lot of the young people -- and
anybody who wants it -- have physical intervention. We have no record of
turning people down for physical intervention".^c5^'"

The section 'Cantor says "Although almost all clinics and professional
associations in the world use what\'s called the 'watchful waiting
approach' to helping gender diverse children, the AAP statement instead
rejected that consensus, endorsing gender affirmation as the only
acceptable approach'.^1^ This is despite research findings which
strongly suggests that most of these cases would eventually desist if
left untreated.^2,3^' should read: "'Cantor says "Although almost all
clinics and professional associations in the world use what\'s called
the 'watchful waiting approach' to helping gender diverse children, the
AAP statement instead rejected that consensus, endorsing gender
affirmation as the only acceptable approach'.^c6^ This is despite
research findings which strongly suggest that most of these cases would
eventually desist if left untreated.^c7,c8^'"

The sentence 'The British Psychological Society\'s review of the
literature found the current medical approach to be "well-intentioned
advice \[which\] is based on extremely limited evidence".^15^' should
read: "'*Research Digest,* published by the British Psychological
Society, reported on an Australian review which concluded that the
current medical approach is based on extremely limited evidence.^15^'"

The sentence 'There is considerable evidence that children are signing
up to treatments with long-term implications, with very little real
understanding of the consequences for their future adult lives.' should
read: "'Children are signing up for treatments that permanently modify
their bodies, but they may not fully understand the life-long
consequences of their decision or acknowledge the potential risks and
uncertainties of treatment. Their ability to provide informed consent
has been questioned, including by some clinicians working in gender
clinics.^c9,c10,c11^'"

The following sentence should be added after the first paragraph of the
section 'Patients that regret treatment': "'A number of clinicians have
called for research into desistance, detransition and regret among
gender dysphoric adolescents. The US National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Sexual & Gender Minority Research Office (SGMRO) recently named
detransition in its report outlining scientific research gap areas in
the field of sexual and gender minority health.^c12^ The 8th edition of
WPATH\'s Standards of Care will include a section on
detransitioning.^c13^'"

The following was omitted from the declaration of interest statement and
should be included: "'M.E. and his wife Sue Evans have provided witness
statements for a UK judicial review examining whether minors are able to
provide informed consent for gender-affirming treatments. M.E. has
previously raised concerns about such treatments with the Board of
Governors and the CEO of the Tavistock Trust. Sue Evans administrates
the online pages for a crowd justice fund, which will be used to pay the
legal fees of the judicial review. Neither M.E. nor Sue Evans has
received or will receive any financial reward for participation in the
case.'"
