========================================
Children and youth in the climate crisis
========================================



Ann Sanson
Marco Bellemo

:Correspondence: Ann Sanson (annvs@unimelb.edu.au)

:date: 2021-08

:Abstract:
   This editorial is co-written by a developmental psychologist and a
   young climate activist. We start by showing how the climate crisis is
   imposing a heavy psychological burden on children and youth, both
   from experiencing climate-related disasters and from the knowledge
   that worse is to come. We then describe the global movement of youth
   demanding urgent climate action. We conclude that health
   professionals can support young people in many ways, but particularly
   by supporting their capacity to take action, raising awareness about
   the impact of the climate crisis on youth mental and physical health,
   and taking action themselves to work for a secure climate future.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _sec1:

The climate crisis poses an existential threat
==============================================

Climate change is well underway and poses a critical threat to the
future. Although the Earth is currently only about 1.1°C above
preindustrial levels,\ :sup:`1` it is clearly already too hot.

The Global South (also referred to as low- and middle-income countries
or the majority world) is currently bearing the brunt of climate change
effects, but they are rapidly becoming more common globally; for
example, unprecedented wildfires in the Amazon, Australia and
California, record-breaking hurricanes in North America and
record-breaking heatwaves in the UK and Europe. Glaciers and icecaps are
melting faster than predicted, rising sea levels have already forced
coastal and island populations to relocate, and droughts and resource
shortages have already contributed to conflict and refugee
crises.\ :sup:`2` Global warming is contributing to the Earth's sixth
mass extinction, with about 1 million animal and plant species under
threat.\ :sup:`3` All these serve to heighten young people's awareness
of the reality of the climate crisis.

We are fast approaching irreversible tipping points and, without moving
speedily to net zero emissions and draw down the excess greenhouse gases
already in the atmosphere, we face an existential threat to the global
ecosystem and human civilisation.\ :sup:`4` The well-being and even
survival of today's children are at risk. As Aran Cosentino (Italy, aged
18 years) said, ‘I am worried about climate change because the future of
us young people is in danger. If governments do not act quickly, we will
not have a future where we can live in peace with our children’.

.. _sec2:

Impact of climate change on child and youth physical and mental health
======================================================================

Both the causes and consequences of climate change are inequitably
distributed. It has been disproportionately caused by the Global North,
also referred to as high-income countries, the minority world or the
WEIRD nations (Western, educated, industrialised, rich democracies),
comprising 12% of the world's population,\ :sup:`5` However, it will
most severely affect the Global South,\ :sup:`6` where 85% of children
live\ :sup:`7` but the institutional capacity to respond is
weaker.\ :sup:`8,9` Further, although predominantly caused by the
current generation of adults, the worst consequences will occur during
the lifetimes of today's children and young people,\ :sup:`10` as
reflected by Emma Demarchi (Australia, aged 17 years): ‘Young people are
facing climate related inter-generational theft and its effects on us
are astounding’. Also, climate change will also reinforce societal
inequalities based on income, ethnicity, race and class. For example,
the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
(UNICEF)\ :sup:`11` vividly illustrates how climate change exacerbates
pre-existing socioeconomic inequalities. When confronted with an extreme
weather event, like a drought, a child from a wealthier family may
experience temporary hardship, but can recover relatively fast – their
family can safely relocate and stay together, purchase food even when
prices escalate, access clean water even when scarce, access healthcare
even when services are overstretched, and maintain the child's education
and reduce other social stressors. None of these may apply for a child
in poorer circumstances, who may find themselves on an escalating
downward pathway through the accumulation of negative repercussions, to
result in long-term, and sometimes lifelong, deprivation.

Climate change has both direct and indirect effects on the physical and
mental health of children and youth. Because of their immature
physiological systems, reliance on adults and likely repeated exposure
to climate events over time, children are more vulnerable to the
negative effects of climate change than adults.\ :sup:`12,13` Both
sudden extreme weather events and slower, longer-lasting climate effects
(e.g. rising sea levels, droughts) are increasing in frequency and
ferocity. These, in turn, directly cause deaths and injuries, physical
ill health (e.g. through malnutrition, lack of clean water, infectious
diseases) and mental health problems, including post-traumatic stress
disorder, anxiety and depression, phobias and panic, sleep disorders,
cognitive deficits and intellectual disabilities.\ :sup:`14–16` As one
example, after floods in Pakistan, 73% of 10- to 19-year-olds displayed
high levels of post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms, with displaced
girls affected most seriously.\ :sup:`16` Reactions to climate disasters
also include distress, grief, anger, feelings of helplessness and
hopelessness, and increased aggression and violence.\ :sup:`17`

More broadly, climate change threatens the underlying social, economic
and environmental determinants of children's health.\ :sup:`18` By
disrupting families and communities, climate change can have an indirect
impact on children; for example by increases in rates of domestic
violence and child abuse after hurricanes and wildfires.\ :sup:`19`
Climate change causes and exacerbates conflict\ :sup:`20`, being
described as a ‘threat multiplier’ for intra- and interstate
conflict.\ :sup:`21` There are already millions of so-called ‘climate
refugees’, forced to seek new homes, where they are often met with
hostility and resistance.\ :sup:`22` The resultant disrupted parenting,
education and social connections all have long-term sequelae for
children and youth.\ :sup:`16,23` Particularly for Indigenous youth,
breaking their connection with the land can lead to mental health
problems, including depression, despair and suicide.\ :sup:`24`

.. _sec3:

Emotional responses to the climate crisis
=========================================

Although adults may wish to protect children from knowledge of the
climate crisis, this is neither possible nor right: the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child\ :sup:`25` confirms their right to
know about, and be involved in, issues that will affect their future.
Research around the world shows that most children and youth know about
the climate crisis and are worried about it. A 2013 survey of British
11- to 16-year-olds found that 74% were worried about its impact on
their future.\ :sup:`26` A more recent study of Australians aged 7–24
years indicated that 96% considered climate change a serious problem,
and 89% were worried about its effects.\ :sup:`27` Even more recently,
16 young people summarised the results of a survey of 1477 young
Australians (aged 10–24 years) as thus: ‘We are aware of climate change,
and we are worried about climate change. We are concerned about the
repercussions of climate change globally, regionally and here at home.
We are concerned about experiencing climate-related disasters due to a
lack of action by those in power, and we are worried about what that
means for us, our families, and our friends, in the present, and in the
future’.\ :sup:`28` A recent survey by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists\ :sup:`29` found that 57% of child and adolescent
psychiatrists reported seeing children and young people distressed about
the climate crisis and the state of the environment.

The emotional impact of knowing about the climate crisis is not limited
to ‘worry’. Children and youth also experience anger, frustration,
depression, sadness, grief, anxiety and a sense of powerlessness about
its impact on their lives.\ :sup:`26,30` Interviews with 10–12-year-olds
in the USA found that strong feelings of fear, sadness and anger were
expressed by 82% of the children.\ :sup:`31` In a 2019 survey of over
15 000 Australians aged 14–23 years, one in five reported planning to
have no children, or fewer children, because of their concerns about
climate change,\ :sup:`32` as illustrated by Alice Hardinge (Australia,
aged 23 years): ‘My future feels dire, and my decision to have children
has been impacted by the fear of food shortages, droughts, fires and
floods’.

Burgeoning rates of ecoanxiety (severe and debilitating worry) and
ecological grief (grief related to current or anticipated ecological
loss) are commonly described.\ :sup:`33` However, despite these
emotional reactions being uncomfortable and, in extreme cases,
debilitating, it should be recognised that they are based on a rational
understanding of the climate science, and hence should not be regarded
as unreasonable, illogical or pathological.

.. _sec4:

Children and youth taking action
================================

For decades, children and youth have been responding to their knowledge
of, and fears about, the climate crisis by demanding climate action from
older generations and those in power. In the past 2 years, Greta
Thunberg has been the face for the millions who have mobilised across
the world, but back in 1992, 12-year-old Severn Cullis-Suzuki gave a
speech at the United Nations Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit that ‘silenced
the world for 5 minutes’. Severn said to world leaders, ‘You grown-ups
say you love us. But I challenge you, please, make your actions reflect
your words’.\ :sup:`34` Almost three decades later, in 2018, Greta
Thunberg made a very similar speech to world leaders at the 24th United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP24) in Katowice,
Poland: ‘You say you love your children above all else, and yet you are
stealing their future in front of their very eyes’.\ :sup:`35` The
similarities between the two speeches, almost three decades apart,
starkly show how little has changed and how children and young people
are right to feel frustrated.

Greta Thunberg began striking from school on 20 August 2018, vowing to
stay until the Swedish election 3 weeks later. Initially it was just
Greta and her sign ‘Skolstrejk för klimatet’ (‘school strike for the
climate’), but from the second day others started joining her. After
this first strike, Greta began boycotting class every Friday, announcing
the strikes as ‘Fridays For Future’, which quickly gained international
attention.

Showing how her actions resonated with children around the world, just a
few months after Greta's first day of striking, school students across
the world had coordinated national school strikes involving thousands of
children and youth, such as in Australia, where over 150 000 students
took action in November 2018. The first global day of action followed on
15 March 2019, with strikes in over 100 countries, and by 20 September,
just 13 months from the first climate strike, an estimated 4–6 million
people participated in >2500 events in over 163 countries. This is
estimated to be the largest climate mobilisation in world
history.\ :sup:`36`

Despite these massive displays of child and youth fear, anger,
frustration and determination, their demands have ‘not translated into
action’ and emissions have continued to rise whilst ‘the changes
required are still nowhere in sight’, as Greta Thunberg said to world
leaders at 25th United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP25) in Madrid, Spain, on 11 December 2019.\ :sup:`37` Now, in a time
of global unrest, with concurrent crises facing young people, they
continue to organise mobilisations with demands centred in an
understanding of the fundamental ways in which social and economic
issues are interlinked with the climate catastrophe.

.. _sec5:

Action is the antidote to despair
=================================

Conversations with students who have engaged in school strikes or other
forms of activism show how their activism has helped them manage their
anxiety about the future and channel it into determination, courage and
optimism. As Alice Hardinge said, ‘Climate despair is real and
dangerous, the best cure is action … [taking action] creates a sense of
solidarity, of cooperation and productivity in the face of despair’.
This idea that ‘the best antidote to anxiety and despair is action’
suggests that an important way to build young people's resilience,
self-efficacy and agency is by encouraging and supporting their
involvement in activities to both mitigate and adapt to climate
change.\ :sup:`38`

Young people involved in climate activism appear to have learned many
valuable positive skills and attributes through their involvement. The
Melbourne School Strike organiser and volunteer for the Australian Youth
Climate Coalition, Andeli Zuz (Australia, aged 20 years), said: ‘Without
the skills I learned in activism I simply would not have been able to do
this job, as simple as that. It has taught me far more about community
organising and event management than school ever could’. Another
Melbourne school strike organizer, Emma Demarchi said: ‘Taking action on
climate change can be incredibly rewarding and fulfilling and has
certainly built many of my skills up’.

It is interesting to note that these skills and capacities which young
people report developing through taking action on the climate crisis
match well with those describing positive youth and young adult
development,\ :sup:`39,40` including self-regulation of behaviour and
emotions, ‘bigger-than-self’ values such as social justice, conflict
resolution skills, teamwork skills and social and civic engagement
skills. As Alice Hardinge said: ‘I've learnt how to …  talk to authority
figures, recognise my rights, speak confidently in public …  not let
keyboard warriors impact my self-worth … communicate non-violently and
how to work effectively in a non-hierarchical and consensus based
collective’. These skills will stand them in good stead throughout their
lives.

Yet, although taking climate action is highly rewarding and beneficial
for young people, the burden and scale of the climate crisis is often
overwhelming. For example, Emma Demarchi said: ‘Climate action can also
very often feel just as lonely and full of despair and anxiety. Young
people often feel like they are fighting a battle they need to win but
know they might never and the impacts on mental health can be great’.
Andeli Zuz commented: ‘Sometimes it [climate action/advocacy] makes me
feel empowered, like I have some control, other times deflated as I feel
like no matter what I do it won't work’.

Young people who feel immense pressure and responsibility to do all they
can to protect the future are thus at risk of burnout and mental strain.
To sustain their mental health, engagement and empowerment, strong
communities and support networks that are honest and hold space for
their feelings are vital. Mental health professionals have an important
role in validating such feelings, helping young people manage them and
supporting their activism. It is encouraging to see some resources to
support such work now being developed. For example, the Royal College of
Psychiatrists has recently produced a resource to help young people cope
with ecodistress.\ :sup:`41` However, equally critical is to demonstrate
to young people that they are not being asked to take the whole burden
themselves; this entails mental health professionals themselves taking
action, and using their influence and expertise to work for speedy and
effective policy change to help secure a habitable planet and a safe
future for the next generation.

There are other important roles for mental health professionals. For
example, in response to the confusion that many parents express about
how to talk to, and support, their children in the context of the
climate crisis, parent-focused resources were developed by the
Australian Psychological Society,\ :sup:`42,43` and can be used in
community workshops. Not all children and young people, nor all mental
health professionals, are aware of the implications of the climate
crisis for the next generation, creating an ongoing need for education
in work places, practice and through written material. It also needs to
be acknowledged that facing up to the reality of the climate crisis is
challenging for mental health professionals themselves. In Australia,
Psychology for a Safe Climate
(https://www.psychologyforasafeclimate.org) has developed resources and
methodologies for supporting activists, including health professionals,
to manage their climate grief. In advocating for policy change, strong
position statements from our professional organisations can be a
valuable tool.

.. _sec6:

Concluding comments
===================

The climate crisis is already placing significant psychological burdens
on children and young people, from both direct experience and simply
knowing the dangers it poses for their future. Yet until recently,
children's voices have been neglected in discussions of the climate
crisis. But the courage and determination of Greta Thunberg acted as a
catalyst for children in their millions to raise their voices and demand
to be taken seriously, and to demand action.

Mental health professionals can help to protect the next generation and
prepare them for the future. Clinicians need to be aware of how the
climate crisis can cause emotional distress, and recognise and respond
to the psychological consequences of exposure to the effects of climate
change, especially in the Global South, where psychological help is
scant.\ :sup:`8` Supporting young people in speaking out and taking
action, whether to protect their communities from the effects of climate
change or to demand action by politicians and others, may be the most
beneficial approach that mental health professionals can take. Such
action builds beliefs in self-efficacy and collective efficacy,
practical active citizenship skills, courage and hope,\ :sup:`9,13`
which is reinforced when young people can see that mental health
professionals are also taking action. This editorial seeks to help give
voice to youth and provide an example of intergenerational partnership.

However, without speedy action at a global scale to prevent catastrophic
climate change, it will not be possible to protect young people's
psychological well-being, or even their survival. Today's adults may be
the last generation that can ensure a liveable world for future
generations. They need to act as citizens to demand effective and speedy
climate action, and not rely on young people to carry this burden alone.
For mental health professionals who have responsibility for protecting
human health and well-being, there is a particular moral imperative to
use their status and expertise, individually and collectively, to speak
out on behalf of the children and youth of today and tomorrow.

.. _sec7:

Ethics and consent
==================

No ethical approval was required for this editorial. Young people
provided quotes voluntarily and explicitly agreed to them being used.
This paper includes quotes volunteered by young people aged 17–24 years,
who were known to the second author through their joint engagement in
the school strike movement. They were invited to provide responses to a
series of questions for the purposes of this editorial, and gave their
written consent to them being used herein.

**Ann Sanson** (PhD) is an Honorary Professorial Fellow at the
Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Australia. **Marco
Bellemo** is an organiser with School Strike For Climate in Australia.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The quotes used in this editorial were provided specifically for this
purpose. Access to them would require further consent from the
participants. The corresponding author (A.S.) can be contacted for
further information.

Both authors made substantial contributions to this editorial, jointly
planning and co-writing it.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
