=============================================================================
Patients with young-onset dementia in an older people's mental health service
=============================================================================

Michael Yeung
Katherine MacFarland
Vincent Mlilo
Nathan Dean
Benjamin R. UnderwoodCorrespondence to Michael Yeung (mjyy2@cam.ac.uk)
:Date: 2021-04

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Currently, no separate service exists for patients with young-onset
   dementia in Cambridgeshire. These patients are managed together with
   late-onset dementia patients within old age psychiatry services. To
   inform service design, we sought to characterise young-onset dementia
   patients in our population. We first analysed service-level data and
   supplemented this with a detailed case review of 90 patients.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Young-onset dementia remains a relatively rare condition. Only a
   small proportion of those referred for assessment receive a diagnosis
   of dementia. Data collected on presenting complaints, comorbidities,
   medication and Health of the Nation Outcome Scales scores associated
   young-onset dementia with a greater incidence of depression than
   late-onset dementia. Outcomes in the two groups did not appear to
   differ.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The data presented here do not suggest a need to create a separate
   service. Practitioners should be aware of the increased incidence of
   depression observed in this group.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Dementia is a growing national and international problem with associated
personal and societal costs. For example, in Cambridgeshire, the number
of individuals with dementia is predicted to increase by 86% from 8600
in 2016 to 16 110 by 2031.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Of specific interest are
those who develop dementia at a young age. Young-onset dementia (YoD) is
defined as a diagnosis prior to the age of 65, a cut-off based on the
previous retirement age and not on any biological
underpinning.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Both YoD and late-onset dementia (LoD)
represent heterogeneous groups of patients, which differ from each other
in various features besides age. Although the incidence of dementia
increases with age, those who develop dementia at a young age have a
different profile of diagnosis compared with older people. A greater
proportion of YoD patients suffer from frontotemporal lobar
degeneration, and they may experience delays in
diagnosis.\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.d)` Furthermore, studies have shown a
higher neuropsychiatric symptom burden and greater carer
stress.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` These differences have prompted discussions
regarding the need for a separate specialist service for those with
YoD.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

Currently, YoD patients are treated together with LoD patients within
old age psychiatry services. Referrals are made to the same memory
clinic, where patients are assessed by a consultant specialising in old
age psychiatry, or by a trainee or middle-grade doctor under their
supervision. Over the past 4 years, older people's mental health (OPMH)
services have undergone a radical transformation in
Cambridgeshire.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` In order to inform future service
design, we therefore sought to evaluate our patients with established
YoD and patients under 65 referred for memory assessment, in comparison
with those with LoD.

.. _sec1:

Methods
=======

This project was conducted as a service evaluation with the relevant
internal trust approvals from Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
Foundation Trust. The trust covers a population of ~1 000 000 people, of
whom >165 000 are over the age of 65. The trust provides the countywide
memory assessment service, which receives ~2000 referrals per year.
Other condition-specific services exist (for example, for Huntington's
disease) and sit within the neurology department at the local acute
trust.

Referral data are routinely collected by the trust. Health of the Nation
Outcome Scales (HoNOS) data were collected as previously
described.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` We manually reviewed a sample of 90
electronic patient records. This was divided into data for 30
consecutive patients with an established diagnosis of YoD, 30
consecutive patients with a diagnosis of LoD, and 30 consecutive
patients under the age of 65 who had been referred to the memory clinic
for diagnostic assessment. For each patient, we searched their records
to identify the following: presenting complaint, diagnosis, presence of
comorbidities, time from symptom onset to diagnosis, current medication,
and scores on the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination (ACE) and HoNOS.
We attempted to minimise the possibility of interrater variability by
looking for specific data and using the same source data in the records
(the core assessment). The date of symptom onset was determined from the
information provided in the core assessment, which is a mandatory form
that includes a detailed patient history, completed by a clinician for
each patient. Data for individuals identified with dementia in the young
referral group were combined with data from the YoD group during
statistical analysis in order to increase statistical power.
χ\ :sup:`2`-test, unpaired t-test and Fisher's exact test were used as
appropriate for statistical analysis of the data (see supplementary
material, available online at https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.89).
*P*-values were not adjusted for multiple testing.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

We began by looking at high-level data regarding case-load, referrals
and outcomes of people with YoD. In March of 2020, the trust had a total
of 5818 registered patients with a diagnosis of dementia, i.e. patients
on our electronic patient record but not necessarily currently receiving
a service. Of these, 135 (2.3%) were under the age of 65. Of 7473
individuals referred for memory assessment between 2016 and 2020, 210
were under the age of 65, corresponding to 2.8% of all referrals. We
re-analysed a large data set of HoNOS scores which we had previously
reported, in order to investigate differences in presentation and
outcomes between YoD and LoD. This comprised data for 173 patients with
YoD and 3553 patients with LoD,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` representing the subset
of total referrals that had a HoNOS score on admission and discharge.
Using this methodology, we found significant differences in HoNOS scores
on entry to the services (data not previously presented), with higher
scores on the behaviour (*P* = 0.01), cognition (*P* < 0.001),
hallucinations (*P* = 0.01) and living conditions (*P* = 0.04) domains
in the LoD group; and higher scores for depression (*P* < 0.001),
occupation (*P* = 0.01) and ‘other’ (*P* < 0.001) in the YoD group
(`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). There were no significant differences in the
other domains. We have previously published data looking at outcomes
based on HoNOS scores for both YoD and LoD. Both groups improved in all
domains except cognition, disability and activities of daily living.
Although some of these changes did not reach statistical significance in
the YoD group, this is likely to reflect the lower numbers in that
group.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Fig. 1Bar chart showing mean scores across HoNOS
scales for late- and young-onset dementia on presentation. Late-onset
dementia: *N* = 3553. Young-onset dementia: *N* = 173. \*\ *P* < 0.05,
\*\*\ *P* < 0.01, \**\*\ *P* < 0.001. ADLs, activities of daily living.

In order to conduct a more comprehensive investigation into the
differences between our YoD and LoD patients, we undertook a detailed
case-note review of 30 cases from each group. The demographic details
are given in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. We found significant differences
between the YoD and LoD groups in terms of comorbidities (*P* = 0.002
for both cardiovascular and depressive) and medication (*P* = 0.0003 for
antidepressants, *P* = 0.004 for donepezil and *P* = 0.03 for
benzodiazepines). Specifically, we saw a higher incidence of mood as a
presentation (`Fig. 2a <#fig02>`__), a greater variety of diagnoses with
less Alzheimer's disease (`Fig. 2b <#fig02>`__), fewer cardiovascular
and more depressive comorbidities (`Fig. 2c <#fig02>`__), a generally
shorter time from symptom onset to diagnosis (40% diagnosed in less than
1 year for YoD compared with 30% for LoD, although these differences
were not significant, nor was the difference in mean time to diagnosis
of 27 *v.* 28 months for YoD *v.* LoD, respectively, `Fig.
2d <#fig02>`__), and more treatment with donepezil, antidepressants and
sedative medication in the YoD group (`Fig. 2e <#fig02>`__). We found no
statistical difference in total ACE scores or subscores between YoD and
LoD (`Fig. 2f <#fig02>`__). Two patients in the YoD group who initially
received a diagnosis of dementia subsequently had that diagnosis
removed, as it became clear that their symptoms were a result of other
psychiatric disorders. Fig. 2(a) Bar chart showing presenting complaints
in each group. (b) Bar chart showing proportions of different diagnoses
in each group. (c) Bar chart showing number of individuals associated
with different comorbidities in each group. (d) Bar chart showing time
from symptom onset to diagnosis in each group. (e) Bar chart showing
percentage of patients prescribed different medication classes in each
group. (f) Bar chart showing mean ACE scores in each category for each
group. \*\ *P* < 0.05, \*\*\ *P* < 0.01, \**\*\ *P* < 0.001. Table
1Sample demographics of late-onset dementia, young-onset dementia and
young referrals without dementia groupsLate-onset dementiaYoung-onset
dementiaYoung referral without dementiaMean age at diagnosis
(s.d.)\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ 83.4 (±6.8)56.4 (±5.4)55.8 (±7.8)Minimum
age\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ 724535Maximum
age\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ 976464Male141617Female161413Mean age of
males\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ 82.456.054.2Mean age of
females\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ 84.356.957.6 [1]_

We also evaluated 30 cases of patients under 65 years of age referred
for memory assessment. When comparing patients referred to our service
under the age of 65 with those in the same age group who had received a
diagnosis of dementia, we found a number of differences. First, despite
the similar average ages of the two groups, there was a greater range in
those referred, with one individual as young as 35 years of age who was
not subsequently diagnosed with dementia. For total and subscores on the
ACE and cognitive scores on HoNOS, those referred scored significantly
higher (mean ± s.d. for total ACE: 84 ± 11 *v.* 69 ± 17), were less
likely to have difficulties with memory as a presenting complaint and
were more likely to have neurological comorbidities. The prevalence of
diagnosis of dementia in this group was low (27%). No other significant
differences were found.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The absolute numbers of patients with YoD referred or managed are low,
representing just over 2% of referrals and case-load. This is lower than
the figure found in the national memory service audit for referral (7%)
and at the lower end of the range (0–22%).\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` It is also
lower than many estimates of the prevalence of dementia in this age
group.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` For example, there are an estimated 210
individuals with YoD in Cambridgeshire, but only 135 (64%) of these are
currently known to the trust. This difference might be explained by many
of the estimates of prevalence being based on epidemiological data,
meaning there are likely to be individuals who have the condition but
have not yet been diagnosed. Given the increased prevalence of certain
conditions leading to dementia in this group, including Huntington's
disease and frontotemporal dementia, it is also possible that they are
looked after in the relevant specialist neurological clinic rather than
by generic mental health services. This may also explain the low
percentage in terms of referrals, if doctors in primary care are
preferentially referring young patients to neurology rather than
psychiatry for assessment.

For the cohort under 65 who were referred for diagnostic assessment,
only eight out of 30 (27%) received a dementia diagnosis. This is much
lower than national figures for generic memory clinics or those from our
previously published audits of our own service, where 60–70% of those
referred received a diagnosis of dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` However, this
supports previous data from the London memory audit services, where only
15% of those referred under 65 received a dementia
diagnosis.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Instead, the majority in this group were
diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment or other psychiatric disorders.
Our analysis of HoNOS scores of patients on entry to the service did not
broadly support the idea that YoD patients, at least at presentation,
suffer from more neuropsychiatric disturbance. However, the evidence
presented here based on HoNOS scores, presenting complaint, comorbidity
and medication suggests that this group is associated with a greater
burden of depression.

The association of depression with LoD has been well documented, with
large-scale studies suggesting that depression is both a prodromal
symptom of and a risk factor for dementia, while dementia is itself a
risk factor for depression.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` A recent meta-analysis
reported a prevalence of depression of 25% in those with
LoD.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` This is in contrast to studies of YoD, where
depression was found in 66% of individuals.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` Although
assessing depression is difficult in those with dementia, and criteria
differ among studies, our data support the idea that patients with YoD
may suffer more from depression. From a diagnostic perspective, this is
potentially an important consideration when seeing patients in later
mid-life who are suffering from mood disorder, which may be comorbid
with or indeed be a presentation of YoD. This is also important in terms
of management, as depression is both under-diagnosed and under-treated
in this population, which may negatively affect
prognosis.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`

However, our study did not support previous suggestions of a delayed
diagnosis in those with YoD, although we acknowledge the small sample
size and difficulty people experience in precisely recalling when the
onset of an insidious condition might have been. One possible
explanation is that a greater proportion of those with Alzheimer's
disease are seen in our service, and fewer of those with rarer and
therefore more difficult to diagnose dementias such as frontotemporal
lobar degeneration, who may instead be referred to a different service
such as neurology.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` Another possibility is that our
patient population may not be representative of studies in other
populations. In terms of socioeconomic background, Cambridgeshire and
Peterborough benefit from a slightly higher than average employment rate
(78.5% in those aged 16–64 compared with 76% nationwide), as well as a
higher percentage working in professional occupations (25.1% compared
with 21.5% nationwide).\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` A better socioeconomic
background may provide the freedom for individuals to access health
services at an earlier stage of the disease, which may be more difficult
for those from less advantaged backgrounds. However, this would not
explain why a difference between YoD and LoD groups was seen, as there
is no reason to expect a greater effect in one group over another, and
we are unaware of any facility for private dementia assessments
available in the county.

We were interested to see that two cases initially diagnosed as YoD were
subsequently reclassified with a diagnosis of another psychiatric
disorder. This is a rare event in LoD and may reflect the lower pre-test
probability of dementia in younger people, as well as the frequency of
cognitive impairment in other psychiatric conditions. We were reassured
that outcomes between patients with YoD and LoD did not appear to differ
significantly.

In Cambridgeshire, we have used these data to inform the design of our
services for YoD patients. We do not have a specialist YoD team. The low
number of patients spread across more than 1300 square miles of a
predominantly rural county makes having a specialist team practically
challenging. A separate service dealing with YoD would be small by its
nature and therefore not robust to any challenge such as staff sickness.
Similarly, we do not have specialist clinics within the trust for those
with YoD. The data suggesting a high level of psychiatric morbidity in
this group make assessment by a consultant psychiatrist appropriate, and
we have close links with local neurologists, including cognitive
neurologists, for second opinions on cases which might represent
Huntington's disease or unusual tau- or synucleinopathies. We do
recognise the differences we see in our population and more broadly in
the literature in those with YoD and the specific challenges this group
can face. Our solution for their management has been to identify an
advanced practitioner in each of our community memory teams who leads
for YoD. This allows that practitioner to acquire expertise and
experience in this area, forming part of a specialist professional
group, as well as being part of a larger, multidisciplinary, clinical
dementia service, which means the service offer is robust. We have also
forged links with our local acute trust to ensure that patients seen in
other related services, such as neurology, who receive a diagnosis of
dementia are referred to our trust for post-diagnostic support and
follow-up. One significant weakness in the data presented here was the
lack of direct patient feedback. We do routinely collect quantitative
and qualitative data from patients and caregivers. However, owing to
incomplete returns from an already small group and not differentiating
respondents in terms of age, this remains a significant gap in our
knowledge. We will seek to address this in time with a targeted and more
detailed assessment of patient experience, as well as detailed
exploration of patients’ and carers’ ideas for service development.

In summary, our data suggest that patients with YoD form a small
minority of our OPMH dementia work, and that the size of the population
would make the creation of specialist teams difficult when operating
over a large area. Young patients referred for assessment were less
likely to receive a dementia diagnosis than older patients and were more
likely to have psychiatric comorbidities. For those with YoD, their
presenting complaint, medication, comorbidity and HoNOS scores all
suggested a greater burden of depression. This information has helped us
to inform and adapt our generic memory services to ensure a robust
response led by staff experienced in this condition.

.. _sec4:

About the authors
=================

**Michael Yeung** is a medical student at the University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK. **Katherine MacFarland** is a junior doctor at North
Middlesex University Hospital NHS Trust, London, UK. **Vincent Mlilo**
is a clinical research nurse in the Department of Clinical Neurosciences
at the University of Cambridge, based in the Windsor Research Unit,
which delivers clinical trials in dementia and mild cognitive impairment
for patients in the NHS, and at Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
Foundation Trust, Fulbourn, UK. **Nathan Dean** is a medical student at
the School of Clinical Medicine, Jesus College, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK. **Benjamin R. Underwood** is a consultant psychiatrist at
the Windsor Unit, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust,
Cambridge, UK.

Supplementary material is available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.89.

M.Y. was involved in data collection, data analysis and writing of the
manuscript. K.M., V.M. and N.D. were involved in data collection. B.R.U.
contributed to writing the manuscript.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

B.R.U. has been PI for a number of drug treatments for dementia for
commercial pharmaceutical companies and has received personal fees, is
the lead for dementia for the eastern region for the CRN and the
clinical director for CPFT, and does occasional case reviews in dementia
for the NHS ombudsman, outside the submitted work; B.R.U.'s wife is the
lead commissioner for mental health in West Suffolk.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.89.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

.. [1]
   Age in years.
