==============================================================================================================
The case for cautious paternalism in the emergency management of patients with borderline personality disorder
==============================================================================================================



Giles Newton-HowesCorrespondence to Giles Newton-Howes
(giles.newton-howes@otago.ac.nz)
:Date: 2021-04

:Abstract:
   Principlism is the dominant ethical theory in modern medicine.
   Autonomy is ‘king’ of the principles espoused and operationalised in
   consent. Consent is the mechanism by which all medical interactions
   occur. In borderline personality disorder (BPD) there is often a
   diffuse sense of self, emotional instability and impulsivity that can
   lead to medically dangerous non-suicidal self-injury, acute medical
   intervention and then a withdrawal of consent while the potential
   threat to the person's well-being remains high. Claims of lack of
   capacity lack veracity, and simply acting against the patient's will
   may be illegal. Understanding the will and preferences of patients is
   a step forward, but it is not always possible in time-sensitive
   situations. A cautious paternalism is therefore warranted both to
   ensure the patient's well-being while being honest as to the reasons
   for this, and to possibly build epistemic trust between the medical
   system and the patient with BPD.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Principlism has been the dominant force in medical ethics for more than
half a century.\ :sup:`1` Its four principles – autonomy, beneficence,
non-maleficence and justice – form a common touchstone in medicine,
particularly when hard choices need to be made.\ :sup:`2` Although
neither Beauchamp nor Childress, the authors of this bioethical
approach, weighted any one of these principles as more important than
any other, autonomy has risen as the prominent principle.\ :sup:`3` This
is not surprising, as autonomy is operationalised into informed consent,
the tool doctors use to assess capacity and then engage in clinical
action.\ :sup:`4` Capacity assessment based on principlism is purely
process driven, based on whether a patient understands, retains, weighs
and answers questions. The content of the decision is explicitly
ignored. Where doctor and patient agree, or where the patient agrees
with the doctor, an assessment of autonomy through capacity is rarely
detailed. There is little need, as all parties agree as to the best
approach to take. This is not true, however, when the patient disagrees
with the doctor. In these cases, the medical mind is more likely to
focus on the issue of capacity, as if it is not present a ‘duty of care’
may suggest a course of action that contravenes the patient's explicitly
stated desires.\ :sup:`5` Most conventional wisdom and practice dictate
that a loss of capacity is, largely, the only legitimate rationale for
acting in such a way, and to act differently requires confirmation by
the court. Specific mental health legislation is a glaring exception,
and efforts to restrict its use or abolish this legislation are
occurring in multiple jurisdictions (for example, the new fusion
legislation of Northern Ireland). As the risks of a poor outcome
increase, so does the doctor's desire to act differently from the
patient's stated desire, if her desire may have a possible catastrophic
outcome. Even if this is the case, the court may honour the patients'
autonomy, despite a guaranteed outcome of death. Put simply, autonomy is
king, and to dethrone the king is socially and legally increasingly less
acceptable. The question is whether this approach is the best one for
patients with borderline personality disorder (BPD).

.. _sec1:

The challenge of BPD
====================

BPD is characterised by a diffuse sense of self, difficulty in
understanding affect, intense unstable interpersonal relationships and
impulsivity.\ :sup:`6` These features of the disorder are pervasive,
reaching into all areas of a person's life. They commonly, but not
exclusively, arise in adolescence and cause considerable morbidity to a
young population.\ :sup:`7` Health services are often engaged in the
management of patients with BPD, as they are treatment-seeking,
recognising their emotional and interactive difficulties and
experiencing significant distress because of them. Psychotherapeutic
approaches support long-term improvement; however, personal responses to
short-term distress often include thoughts of suicide and non-suicidal
self-injury (NSSI). Both expressions of suicide and NSSI cause
significant distress to healthcare workers inside and outside mental
health and can be difficult to manage. For actions that lead to
self-harm, it can be difficult to ascertain whether the antecedent to
the action is an effort to end life, or some other cause such as to
regulate emotional distress or ‘feel something’. If the purpose of NSSI
is to regulate emotion, then the support and investigation of emergency
services may provide sufficient supportive human contact to allow the
emotional storm to pass. Now the patient sees no need for treatment, and
this can be very distressing to medical staff, particularly if the NSSI
is potentially lethal. Life-threatening overdose is an excellent example
of this. In these circumstances, medical staff can see the potential
danger of non-adherence to emergency treatment, whereas the patient,
with a clear sensorium and who clearly understands the information
provided, may still demand to go home as their immediate emotional needs
have been met.

.. _sec2:

The clinical conundrum
======================

This is a clinical conundrum: in observing the patient's autonomy, one
appears ethically obliged to do what may be (or certainly is)
life-threatening. Disregarding the patient's autonomy to preserve life
appears ethically dubious, as autonomy is after all king.

.. _sec3:

Questioning capacity
====================

In such cases, the default position has largely been to question
capacity. This is internally consistent with the bioethics of
principlism, which is built on a normative moral philosophy. Such
normative moralities are not dependent on a series of complex ethical
foundations, rather, central to their claim is the idea that the
morality of a society's members, common sense and tradition are its
basis (see Ref. 2, pp. 3–10, where the notion of a ‘common morality’ is
spelt out). Principlism is, however, in direct conflict with the growth
of a human rights ethic, which values autonomy as separate from any such
normative requirement. Indeed, this human rights ethic challenges the
normative position of enabling one person to do something to another
without their consent. This recognises the increasingly diverse
components of society and the need to ensure all have equal rights. The
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)\ :sup:`8`
is the clearest example of this. The CRPD, of which most nation states
are signatories, requires signatories to uphold the equal rights of
those with disabilities, including those with mental health conditions,
as being equal to those without such disorders. The basis of this is a
social model of disability.\ :sup:`9` The social model directly
challenges the normative tradition of our bioethics, on which ethical
clinical practice is based. It suggests that a key problem with the
medical model is the way society limits freedom and choices. For
example, a medical model states that those who cannot see should not
drive. This seems obvious and incontrovertible. The social model of
disability challenges this to say that those who cannot see should be
allowed to drive, in cars appropriately equipped to ensure they and
others are safe, for instance, self-navigating cars. This combination of
a human rights ethic and the social model of disability challenges the
ethical validity of principlism, its common morality.

In the clinical conundrum described above, the appeal to a failure of
capacity usually relates to an inability to weigh the evidence in the
balance (by way of process). On these grounds, capacity – and ergo
autonomy – fails, and the doctor has a duty of care to step in. This
stance is not the case for many people with BPD, who largely retain this
ability. This means that preventing a patient with BPD from leaving
hospital, as described above, breaches their human right to autonomy.
This ‘medical model’ approach is also challenged by the social model of
disability. This model places the need for care in society (for example,
by providing care at home) and would not support retaining someone in
hospital despite the potentially life-threatening consequences of
leaving. There are, therefore, no ethical grounds to act in such a way
using either a principlist or a human rights ethic. So, if patients with
BPD can make cross-sectional autonomous choices that may have
catastrophic consequences, should they be freely allowed to do so?

.. _sec4:

The third way: will and preferences
===================================

Using a purely process approach to capacity clearly fails to ensure the
well-being of a patient with BPD in a situation such as a
life-threatening overdose if she refuses medical treatment. Simply
withdrawing treatment may also fail to ensure the well-being of patients
with BPD in the same circumstances. Are clinical staff doomed to fail
such patients? The answer to this seems to lie in a clearer
consideration of the notion of autonomy. Regardless of whether autonomy
is normative (as the bioethicists purport) or idiosyncratic (as the
human rights proponents purport), it implies a sense of self, a notion
of understanding ‘who I am and what I want’. Further, it implies a sense
of continuity to these expressed desires, desires that could be
reasonably expected to change only slowly over time. Without these two
implied requirements, a clear sense of self and a temporal stability to
this sense of self, both idiosyncratic and normative judgement become
mere chaos, a changeable noise without foundation. This identifies a
third way forward: rather than focusing on the capacity process, an
understanding of the content of the decision and the context of the
person may allow a more nuanced understanding of autonomy and,
subsequently, capacity. The focus then shifts from a response to the
cross-sectional assessment of how you are now to an assessment of what
you may want across time. Such a shift necessarily requires
consideration of the content of the decision, as well as the process of
decision-making. This has been described as weighing an individual's
will and preferences,\ :sup:`10` as opposed to focusing on the process
of decision-making in capacity or a cross-sectional assessment of this
decision at this time. This appears to be a more authentic form of
considering decision-making capacity.\ :sup:`11` In the case of the
patient who has taken a life-threatening overdose, this might lead to a
completely different decision. Rather than allowing such a person to
leave the emergency department, considering their process of
decision-making to be intact, they may be kept to ensure their safety
based on their longer-term will and preferences (for example, plans for
the future). This move towards will and preferences-based
decision-making in medicine appears to be a significant step forward. It
recognises the individual and idiosyncratic rights of the person. It
supports the person to make the best choices for them in their context,
and enables the medical system to be clear that it is doing the best for
the patient, not simply leaving them to their fate. Although only
required in cases of disagreement, this process is likely to be lengthy,
and requires information from collateral sources and repeated interviews
to develop such a nuanced sense of will and preferences.

.. _sec5:

The case for a cautious paternalism
===================================

None of this is likely to be possible in emergency settings where
decisions are time critical. Added to this in people with BPD is a
diffuse sense of self, a core characteristic. Such a clear understanding
of will and preferences is likely to be an order of magnitude more
difficult to understand in such circumstances. The patient herself may
not understand her own drives or why life is so emotionally and
interpersonally distressing. In these circumstances, the reality of
clarifying will and preferences in an appropriate and consistent manner
is very unlikely. Rather than defaulting to an obviously flawed argument
to suggest the patient lacks capacity, a cautious paternalism may be
more honest, supportive and applicable. Despite some of the difficulties
for people with BPD in general, a sense of understanding others is
clear, and using a flawed system, in which they are considered to lack
capacity, simply increases distrust in the medical system and medical
model of care. Cautious paternalism recognises the difficulties of a
consistent sense of self for people with BPD and of understanding their
will and preferences in a timely manner. It does not rely on a
tautological suggestion of a lack of capacity for patients who disagree
with medical decisions (because you disagree with me, you *ipso facto*
lack capacity). Rather, it provides medical support for well-being and
potentially increases epistemic trust\ :sup:`12` between the patient and
the medical system, a trust that people with BPD have significant
problems with. This is likely to require the time and skill to engage
with the patient to persuade them of the need for review and reassure
them of the intent to support autonomy while at the same time
recognising the limits to this inherent in their presentation. If they
leave, then accessing support (for example, via family or police) to
return them to the emergency department recognises the limits to
autonomy implied by this presentation and prevents possible
ill-considered catastrophic harm.

Such a cautious paternalism may help to find a way forward that enables
people with BPD to both receive adequate medical care in emergencies and
develop trust in a system with the possibility of longer-term
therapeutic support.

**Giles Newton-Howes** is an Associate Professor at the University of
Otago, Wellington, New Zealand.

None.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

.. _sec6:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.148.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
