==============================================================
Encouraging recruitment into psychiatry: practical initiatives
==============================================================



Neel Halder
Zoé Mulliez
:Correspondence: Neel Halder (neel.halder@nhs.net)

:date: 2021-02

:Abstract:
   This article highlights key findings from a recent Royal College of
   Psychiatrists project showing that many UK medical schools are
   embracing the dual challenge of raising students’ interest in
   psychiatry and ensuring that all doctors can support patients with
   mental illness. It focuses on two novel approaches to boosting
   recruitment into psychiatry: I'm a Medic Get Me Out of Here, an
   online outreach activity enabling schoolchildren to ask questions of
   health professionals in real time; and a living library, which
   creates a safe space for dialogue where topics are discussed openly
   between human books (professionals) and readers (undergraduate
   students) to challenge stereotypes. It is recommended that sharing
   these and other examples of good practice will help all medical
   schools encourage recruitment in psychiatry more widely.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Showing initiative – encouraging students to choose psychiatry
==============================================================

Over the past two years, the Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych)
has gathered and analysed information from medical schools and students
to produce practical guidance on how to enhance the undergraduate
experience of psychiatry. After hearing many positive examples of
activities and initiatives, as well as finding out what students found
less appealing, they identified four key action areas for medical
schools: excellence in teaching; high-quality psychiatry placements;
leadership from psychiatrists; and psychiatry-based enrichment
activities.

.. _sec1-1:

Excellence in teaching
----------------------

To start with, the focus should be on students’ experiences of
psychiatry teaching in the classroom or lecture setting. Many students
fed back that they would like psychiatry content to be more prominent
earlier and throughout the course. Not only would this reflect how
psychiatry is an integral part of medicine (rather than just an add-on),
but it would allow students to explore at an earlier stage their
potential interest in helping patients recover from episodes of mental
illness.

A widely held view was that learning in ‘real-life’ contexts should be
further promoted, through simulation teaching, learning videos,
case-based discussions, testimonies from people with lived experience as
patients or carers, and lectures involving a panel of psychiatrists
working in a range of subspecialties. The ‘living library’ initiative
outlined later in this article is an example of this.

Students also highlighted the importance of accentuating how psychiatry
is unique in its integration of science with a whole-person approach,
and the role it has in driving the most exciting medical advances to
transform treatments and foster overall health and well-being globally.

.. _sec1-2:

High-quality placements
-----------------------

Providing high-quality psychiatry placements is an intuitively sensible
way to increase the number of students interested in it as a career. Of
the 792 students who participated in our survey, 52.2% said they were
more inclined to choose psychiatry after their placement.

But what does a good placement look like? `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__
illustrates a few components of medical students’ experiences of
psychiatry placements. Fig. 1Students’ experiences of placements in
psychiatry. A total of 792 students throughout the UK completed the
survey. Note: it is rare to find undergraduate settings providing
opportunities for undergraduates to offer talking therapy to patients
under supervision, as students may not have received enough training to
be able to deliver this. Source: unpublished survey run by the Royal
College of Psychiatrists between 15 October 2018 and 7 January 2019.

While there is no singular ‘best’ model for placements, students did
report aspects that were more positive.

They particularly enjoyed the variety of experiences provided by
psychiatric placements, in contrast to other specialties. Appeal also
lies in the ability to talk to patients, more so than in other
placements, and learn their history in greater detail. Some medical
schools have set up longitudinal placements to provide the opportunity
to follow patients during several weeks and observe the longer-term
benefits of psychiatric interventions.

Introducing medical students to patients and clinicians in extreme
environments such as prisons or secure hospitals arguably has a larger
impact on improving attitudes to psychiatry. Archer et al\ :sup:`1`
showed that a single-day visit to Broadmoor Hospital, a high-security
psychiatric hospital in Berkshire, was effective in changing the
attitudes of medical students towards forensic psychiatry, with 75% of
participants stating that their attitude towards psychiatry had
improved.

There is a common stereotype of psychiatrists working alone with
patients. To combat this, students need to meet all members of the
multidisciplinary mental health team. This will ensure that they
understand how extensively professionals from a range of disciplines
work together to treat patients’ needs holistically.

Students need to understand how psychiatric care fits into the
healthcare system and see for themselves the high level of need. One way
to do this would be for psychiatric placements to be better combined or
coordinated with placements in other specialties and *vice versa*. The
students would be able to (a) witness the interactions between general
practitioners (GPs), doctors from other specialties and psychiatrists,
(b) understand the benefits of integrated psychiatric care and (c) gain
further skills in psychiatry, which will be helpful whatever specialty
they end up choosing.

How can medical schools help students make the most of their placements?
Some students said that they would like to feel better prepared before
starting their placements in psychiatry. Budd et al\ :sup:`2` had
previously suggested that this is important, particularly addressing
their potential fears and negative perceptions of the specialty. The
RCPsych's Choose Psychiatry guidance for medical schools includes
suggestions of what inductions might cover based on feedback from
students, including: basic guidance on the type of symptoms to expect
from patients with different illnesses and how they should respond; a
briefing on procedural issues involved in working in psychiatric
settings, including health and safety; and information on how a
placement in psychiatry might affect their own emotions and mental
health
(`www.rcpsych.ac.uk/become-a-psychiatrist/choose-psychiatry <www.rcpsych.ac.uk/become-a-psychiatrist/choose-psychiatry>`__).

Medical students also said that they need reassurance about getting
adequate mental health and well-being support. Some medical schools have
set up Balint groups to provide a safe space for students to discuss
their emotional reactions to their patients’ experiences. These should
be supported and further expanded where possible.

.. _sec1-3:

Leadership from psychiatrists
-----------------------------

Everyone can remember someone who inspired their career choices. Medical
students highlighted the importance of talking to inspiring consultant
psychiatrists and trainees during their time at medical school. Some
suggested that medical schools could create a ‘bank’ or database of
psychiatry mentors.

To raise the profile of psychiatrists in undergraduate education, the
RCPsych encourages medical schools to reflect on whether their senior
leadership teams are composed of a multispecialty and diverse group of
individuals, including psychiatrists, so that students can see them in
leadership roles.

Psychiatrists’ progressive and thoughtful leadership could play an
integral role in driving the strategic direction of medical schools. The
RCPsych advises medical schools to ensure that psychiatric education is
designed and led by psychiatrists with both clinical and educational
expertise, and that students are presented with up-to-date research in
psychiatry throughout the medical curriculum.

.. _sec1-4:

Enrichment activities
---------------------

How can you help immerse students in psychiatry? Many medical schools
have implemented enrichment activities to enhance students’ exposure to
and experience of psychiatry, which are highly valued by the medical
students we talked to.

Psychiatry societies (‘PsychSocs’) are student-led university societies
set up to raise the profile of mental healthcare among medical students
and to promote careers in psychiatry. Several next steps are recommended
both locally and nationally to take advantage of PsychSocs to improve
recruitment into psychiatry – including fostering enthusiastic mentoring
by local psychiatrists via ‘buddy schemes’ and continuing to share ideas
and learning across the country, as explained by Pandian et al\ :sup:`3`
earlier in 2020.

The Psychiatry Early Experience Programme (PEEP) provides medical
students with the opportunity to shadow core trainees in psychiatry.
This initiative was developed by South London and Maudsley NHS
Foundation Trust and King's College London Medical School. Given the
success of the scheme, students asked for improved availability and
access to such schemes.

Special study modules (SSMs) or student-selected components (SSCs) in a
psychiatry-related subject are short courses and/or projects in subjects
that students can select according to their personal interests. They
offer opportunities to learn in innovative ways and have been
recommended by the General Medical Council.

Career enrichment courses (often referred as summer, autumn or winter
schools) offer an intensive programme of lectures, seminars, debates and
networking opportunities to students who are considering a career in
psychiatry.

Psychotherapy schemes give medical students the unique opportunity to
deliver psychotherapy to one patient for an extended period. Yakeley et
al\ :sup:`4` highlighted that projects that involve medical students
offering psychodynamic therapy (under the close supervision of staff)
have contributed to an increase in the number of students choosing
psychiatry as a career.

Extra-curricular initiatives to give students further opportunities to
spend time with people with mental illness are also being developed
across the country. The Time for Dementia initiative is an example of
collaborative work that has had a demonstrable impact on students’
understanding of people with dementia.

Other schemes offered by the RCPsych that can be promoted to medical
students include the Psych Star scheme, Student Associate membership,
and Divisional and Faculty prizes.

.. _sec2:

Case studies: two novel approaches to increase students’ interest in psychiatry
===============================================================================

The RCPsych project highlighted that students who were in the early
stages of their medical course were more likely than peers later in the
course to feel uninformed about psychiatry. Some students in the later
years of study also felt that there was a lack of information on mental
health and psychiatry and wanted to be better informed.

A key recommendation made by students was to raise awareness of
psychiatry at an earlier stage in their medical course and at
secondary-school level. The following case studies provide examples of
how this recommendation could be implemented.

.. _sec2-1:

A ‘living library’
------------------

Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust decided to use an
innovative approach based on the ‘living library’ concept, where
experienced clinicians working in their respective fields (‘the books’)
were available ‘on loan’ to students (‘the readers’). This was
implemented to improve the student experience, enrich students’
learning, provide them with an insight into other professions, encourage
the sharing of institutional knowledge and develop interprofessional
learning.

The concept is designed to build a positive framework for conversations
that can challenge stereotypes and prejudices through dialogue. It is
based on the idea of interprofessional learning (defined as ‘when
professionals learn with, from and about each other’) that has been
identified as an innovative strategy that can help bolster the medical
workforce.\ :sup:`5` Literature reviews suggest that learning with, from
and about other healthcare students has the potential to improve
communication between professionals and, ultimately, care for
patients.\ :sup:`6`

`Figure 2 <#fig02>`__ depicts the book covers that were designed and
displayed for students to help decide which ‘book’ they wanted to
borrow. Fig. 2Living library book covers, designed by Lorna Dawson,
Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust.

In total, 25 living-library cards were made available to students on
placement within the trust.

After signing up to the library and reviewing potential book choices,
all readers were given a library card and were invited to reserve one of
the books at a slot during the morning. There were six slots available
throughout the day and readers would have around 20 min with each of
their books. In theory, each reader could have conversations with six of
the nine books.

In total, 22 readers booked places on the event, 13 of whom attended.
`Figure 3 <#fig03>`__ shows which disciplines were the most popular and
`Fig. 4 <#fig04>`__ describes what attracted the readers to them.
`Figures 5 <#fig05>`__ and `6 <#fig06>`__ show the impact of the
initiative on readers’ views about both professions and the benefits of
interprofessional practice. Fig. 3Responses of students (*n* = 13) to
the question: ‘Which living book(s) did you read?’. Fig. 4Responses of
students (*n* = 13) to the question: ‘What attracted you to the living
book(s) you selected?’. Fig. 5Responses of students (*n* = 13) to the
question: ‘Do you feel that your experience at the living library
changed your views about another profession?’. Fig. 6Responses of
students (*n* = 13) to the question ‘Has the living library changed your
views about the benefits of interprofessional practice?’.

After the event, 9 (69%) of the 13 respondents rated their overall
experience of the living library as ‘Excellent’ and 4 (31%) as ‘Good’;
100% of respondents would recommend living books to others; 11 readers
(85%) strongly agreed that the living library was a good way to
challenge prejudices and encourage interprofessional learning, with the
other 2 (15%) also agreeing with this.

.. _sec2-2:

I'm a Medic Get Me Out of Here
------------------------------

I'm a Medic, Get Me Out of Here (shortened to I'm a Medic) is an online,
student-led outreach programme, funded by Health Education England and
designed to provide equality of opportunity for all school students to
engage with the National Health Service (NHS) workforce. The aim is to
help inform schoolchildren about a particular career and let them
explore whether that career could be for them. The idea is based on
research showing that young people start to develop their career
aspirations early in secondary school, if not earlier.\ :sup:`7,8`
Findings from a survey with over 20 000 children showed that parents
(and parents’ friends), the TV and media were most likely to influence
children's career aspirations. Less than 1% of children had heard about
the jobs through people coming to their school.\ :sup:`7`

I'm a Medic was trialled in psychiatry for the first time in 2019. With
supervision from teachers, schoolchildren had secure access via a
website to healthcare professionals, who answered questions in real time
during a 30-min lesson. An online moderator was available for each chat.
Pupils could also post a question to be answered at a later stage.

Three healthcare workers took part as individuals: a consultant
psychiatrist (N.H.), a mental health nurse and an NHS mental health
trust's head of human resources, responsible for managing and advising a
wider team. Four healthcare teams based in various locations across
England took part as a group: an arts therapy team, an early
intervention team, a home treatment team and a psychiatry ward team.

Students were mainly in year 8 (generally 11.5–13 years old) from
schools across England. A total of 47 classes from 20 schools
participated in 40 live chats. Over 1000 students logged in, with
approximately 85% participating in live chats, asking questions or
leaving comments. Students could vote for who they felt they most
engaged with and who answered their questions to their satisfaction.
`Figure 7 <#fig07>`__ depicts the words most often used by students in
these conversations. Fig. 7Frequent words used by schoolchildren in live
online chats in the I'm a Medic, Get Me out of Here programme. The size
of the word represents its popularity.

Students often asked what led healthcare workers to choose their jobs.
They would, for instance, ask questions such as ‘What encouraged you to
take this job?’ or ‘What inspired you to start what you've done?’.

They also asked healthcare workers about their qualifications and the
qualifications they would need to attain certain roles in the sector.
These were mostly focused on GCSE qualifications, as opposed to
A-Levels.

When discussing mental illnesses, students focused heavily on more
commonly known illnesses such as depression and anxiety, including how
to discuss or treat them.\ :sup:`9`

During focus groups, students fed back that they particularly enjoyed
the ability to interact directly with healthcare workers, in real time
and in a ‘conversational’ way. Being able to vote also contributed to
the engaging nature of the experience.

Additionally, interacting online provided some distinct advantages that
face-to-face interactions might not provide. The first one is the
ability for children in remote areas to interact with professionals who
may not have visited the schools in person. Second, students often
appreciated the opportunity to ask questions anonymously without being
judged by their peers: “‘It was better because you're not actually
speaking to them. It's, like, all the questions that you ask online you
might feel embarrassed to ask them to their face. Then they just find
out, because it's easier to type it than to actually say it.’‘I said
some stuff that I would not have said in real life, online. So, it's
just easier to, like, speak anonymously.’”

This benefit was also highlighted by their teachers: “‘Some of the
quieter girls and boys definitely asked a few questions that flagged
them up on my radar.’”

Data also suggest that the personal and direct nature of the experience
helped achieved the desired impact: “‘I think [I connected most with]
Neel because of the job that I wanted to be, and he, kind of, helped me,
because I'm bad at science, he helped me how to get through it and what
qualifications I need. So, that, kind of, helped.’\ :sup:`9`”

Fifty responses were collected through a post-survey questionnaire. 82%
of the children (*n* = 41) agreed/strongly agreed that they had learnt
more about ‘what it's like to work in healthcare’ and felt that they
knew more about what they would need to study to get their ideal job;
66% (*n* = 33) agreed that they might get a job working in healthcare,
and 60% (*n* = 30) said that they would enjoy working in healthcare.
This is an increase from the pre-survey, with responses to those
questions being 43% and 45%, respectively.\ :sup:`9`

.. _sec3:

Conclusions and future plans
============================

The findings and recommendations detailed in the RCPsych Choose
Psychiatry guidance for medical schools and the two case studies
included in this article would help lay the foundations for developing a
strong medical workforce, comprising both psychiatrists and doctors
working in all specialties able to give people with mental illness the
best possible care.

The RCPsych project highlighted that students’ consideration of both the
importance of mental healthcare in medicine and psychiatry as a career
were largely determined by: the integration of psychiatry courses into
the curriculum as widely and as early as possible, the high quality of
placements in psychiatry, the students’ ability to be in contact with
inspiring psychiatry leaders and the availability of enrichment
activities to enhance students’ exposure to, and experience of,
psychiatry.

Opening up the living library to medical students in the early years of
studying could also help increase the number of students choosing to
enrol in psychiatry enrichment activities – such as psychiatry modules
or psychiatry societies – which in turn will hopefully drive up numbers
choosing psychiatry as a career.

We know that schools may have limited resources for careers advice. I'm
a Medic is a time-efficient and gratifying initiative that can reach
many students without them needing to be taken out of school or
disrupting the timetable.

The next step will be to produce a practical booklet to support
PsychSocs with their activities. It will include the ideas given above
and many others that may not have been considered or shared otherwise,
following a consistent framework. The booklet would be particularly
helpful to PsychSocs around the UK, but could also be used by foundation
doctors and other trainees.

N.H. will contact all UK PsychSocs for contributions but welcomes any
authors (from undergraduates to consultants) who wish to contribute.
Feedback for this project is also welcome. Please contact the
corresponding author.

Meanwhile, the RCPsych is creating an online hub showcasing case studies
of psychiatry extra-curricular activities at medical schools across the
UK. The case studies will be represented visually on a map of the UK,
and users will be able to click to reveal more information about an
initiative which will explain how the activity works and may highlight
its impact on students’ interest in psychiatry and/or mental healthcare
more generally.

Medical schools are also encouraged to use the Gatsby Wellcome
Neuroscience Project run by RCPsych to integrate the latest research on
neuroscience into their curriculum.

Examples of good practice of how students are being inspired to learn
about better mental healthcare have been compiled into a practical
guidance published on the RCPsych website as part of the Choose
Psychiatry campaign.\ :sup:`10`

For information on the living library we thank: Daniel Livesey, Library
and Knowledge Service Manager, and Lisa Brown, Practice Education
Facilitator, at Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust.
For information on I'm a Medic we thank: Jen DeWitt, PhD, Research and
Evaluation Consultant, author of the summative evaluation
report,\ :sup:`9` and Michaela Butler, Events Wrangler and Coordinator
of Correspondence. Thanks to Alice Shuttleworth, Amy McGregor and George
Roycroft for their helpful edits of this manuscript.

**Neel Halder**, MBCHB, FRCPsych, MSc, CTDip, MBA, is a lead consultant
psychiatrist at St Mary's Hospital, Warrington, which is part of Elysium
Healthcare. He is also the recruitment lead for the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, North West division and an honorary senior lecturer at
the University of Manchester, UK. **Zoé Mulliez** is Policy and
Campaigns Manager at the Royal College of Psychiatrists. She undertakes
policy analysis to inform and fulfil the College's strategic objectives,
and manages influencing and public-facing campaigns to secure the best
outcomes for people with mental illness. Before joining the College, she
worked in policy and research teams in various organisations, such as
the World Health Organization, the French Department of Health and
Social Affairs, and the Urban Development Institute of Australia.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, N.H., upon reasonable request.

N.H. led in the co-ordination of the article, wrote the sections on
'Living Library' and 'I'm a medic get me out of here' primarily, edited
drafts of the whole article and approved the final version. Z.M. wrote
the section on 'Showing Initiative' primarily and edited drafts of the
whole article and approved the final version.

N.H. is on the editorial board of the *BJPsych Bulletin*.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.53.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
