---
abstract: |
  Growing student numbers are producing greater demand for teaching, and
  resources allocated for education are being placed under increasing
  strain. The need for more student clinical placements and more
  clinician teaching time is expanding. Psychiatrists have successfully
  drawn attention to the importance of parity between mental and
  physical illness. We now have a responsibility to ensure enhanced
  opportunities to teach psychiatry to our medical students. This is set
  against a background of an increasing number of psychiatry consultants
  leaving the profession and an already stretched National Health
  Service environment. Many consultants contribute to teaching but do
  not have this activity included in their job plans. Although clinics
  and clinical meetings are inevitably slower when students are present,
  there is often no backfill provided. As outlined below, trusts receive
  substantial funding to cover costs related to the teaching of medical
  students, but most of us don\'t know what actually happens to this
  money. Here, we discuss how teaching is currently funded and make
  recommendations regarding improving accountability.
author:
- Aileen O\'Brien
- Ania KorszunCorrespondence to Aileen O\'Brien (<aobrien@sgul.ac.uk>)
date: 2021-04
institute:
- 1St. George\'s University of London, UK
- 2Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
title: "Follow the money: how is medical school teaching funded?"
---

As increasing student numbers cause greater demand for teaching,
clinicians may struggle to meet the conflicting pressures on their time.
This is against a background of an increasing number of psychiatry
consultants leaving the profession and an already stretched National
Health Service (NHS) environment.

Many consultants who contribute to teaching do not have this activity
included in their job plans. Clinics and clinical meetings are
inevitably slower when students are present, but there is often no
backfill provided. The psychiatry recruitment crisis has been
successfully challenged by the Choose Psychiatry campaign;^1^ however,
to sustain this and encourage retention, jobs need to be manageable and
stimulating with contributions to education adequately recognised.

Trusts receive substantial funding to cover teaching medical students,
but most of us don\'t know what actually happens to this money.

In the 1970\'s film *All the President\'s Men*, 'follow the money' was
the catchphrase, suggesting that the way to shine a light on
questionable dealing is to follow financial transfers. Although we are
not suggesting that the allocation of funding for medical student
education is as questionable, systems for funding education are mostly
opaque and surprisingly poorly understood.

So, for those who would like to increase their understanding, we offer
some answers to the most frequently asked questions.

# Who funds undergraduate teaching? {#sec1}

The world of medical education is nothing if not acronym heavy ([Box
1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}). Health Education England (HEE) was
established in the *Health and Social Care Act 2012* as a special health
authority within the Department of Health. It is a non-departmental
public body which supports the delivery of education, training and
development of the NHS health and public health workforce.^2^ It
provides oversight of strategic planning and development of the health
and public health workforce, and allocates (and accounts for) funding
for education and training resources on behalf of the Department of
Health and Social Care (DHSC). Box 1Educational BodiesHEEHigher
Education EnglandAn executive body of the Department of Health. It
provides coordination for education and training within the health and
public health workforce in England.LETBELocal Education and Training
BoardStatutory regional committees of HEE, responsible for workforce
planning, and education and training.OFSOffice for StudentsRegulator
established in January 2018. It merged HEFCE and OFFA, and inherited
their responsibilities, also taking charge of the granting of
degree-awarding powers and university titles.SIFT (now undergraduate
medical tariff)Service Increment for TeachingNHS levy that was given out
as extra funds to NHS institutions that participate in training
undergraduate studentsOFFAOffice for Fair AccessSafeguarded and promoted
fair access to higher education by approving and monitoring access
agreementsHEFCEHigher Education Funding Council for EnglandDistributed
public money for teaching and research to universities and colleges.

From April 2018, the Office for Students (OFS) became the regulatory
body for higher education in the UK, bringing together the functions of
the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE), the Office for
Fair Access, the Department for Education and the Privy Council in a
single organisation.

Undergraduate medical training is essentially funded in England and
Wales by: •DHSC (via HEE) -- for clinical placement costs, more for the
final years;•OFS -- this is because medicine counts as a 'high cost'
course as opposed to, for example, many arts courses;^3^•tuition fees
paid by the students.

The OFS gives each university a grant based on the number of medical
students at their institution. The numbers of students that universities
can admit are regulated by the OFS and controlled through its intake
targets.

# How are placements funded? {#sec2}

The money from HEE is now known as the undergraduate medical tariff or
'the tariff' (formerly and often still in fact known by professionals as
SIFT (Service Increment for Teaching)). The tariff, set by the Secretary
of State for Health, is not a direct payment for teaching but is
supposed to cover the additional costs incurred by trusts and other
placement providers in delivering medical student teaching.

The money is paid directly to the trusts by HEE, and the amount is based
on student numbers that are provided by the university (but not on
quality of teaching). So, although the universities are responsible for
monitoring the quality of their students' clinical placements, they have
little influence on how the tariff funds are disbursed at trust level.
The universities do liaise directly with trusts to determine the number
of placements offered and monitor the quality of the teaching provided
at those placements. If quality standards are not met by the trusts, the
university can in theory withdraw those placements and, consequently,
the funding that goes with them. However, for many universities there
are no alternative trusts that they can approach. The overall training
activity provided by trusts, including that for medical students and
doctors in training, is governed by individual learning development
agreements between trusts and HEE, which list all education, training
and learning activities commissioned by HEE.

Increasingly, patients are cared for in primary care, or by third sector
or independent providers. This can lead to practical challenges such as
enabling patient contact in patients' homes. Undergraduate education is
rarely considered at the commissioning level, so many providers can
decide whether or not to participate in teaching; this adds another
level of complexity to the university\'s obligation to monitor the
quality of teaching, as well as the practical difficulties of securing
placements.

# What is included in the tariff? {#sec3}

The tariff for undergraduate medical placements was introduced in
2013--2014. Tariffs are adjusted by a market forces factor to compensate
for the differences in cost of providing training placements in
different parts of the country.

The tariff covers funding for all direct costs involved in delivering
education and training, and the list provided by the government is
comprehensive:^4^ •direct staff teaching time within a clinical
placement;•teaching and student facilities, including access to library
services;•administration costs;•infrastructure costs;•pastoral and
supervisory support;•trainee study leave and time for clinical
exams;•health and well-being (excluding any occupational health
assessments);•course fees and expenses (as required to achieve
professional registration);•student/trainee accommodation
costs;•in-course feedback and assessment;•formal examining;•staff
training and development relating to their educational role.

# What is the tariff worth (for a year\'s worth of placements)? {#sec4}

In 2019--2020, a non-medical tariff (for an allied health professional
(AHP)) is set at £3720, the medical postgraduate tariff is £11 418 and a
medical undergraduate tariff is £33 286.

In summary, in England, teaching one medical student in the clinical
years is currently supported by:^5^ •the OFS teaching grant -- £1500 per
student for the non-clinical years and £10 000 per student during the
clinical years (depending on holiday entitlement at different schools,
this is about £250 per week for the clinical years);•placement tariff --
healthcare providers receive an average tariff of around £36 000 to
provide a year\'s worth of placements to students in the clinical
years;•tuition fees -- £9250 per year for all years.

AHPs are a core part of the NHS people plan,^6^ and traditional
'medical' tasks and roles are increasingly being taken on by physician
associates, advanced nurse associates, nurse prescribers and other AHPs.
Although this is welcomed, with many doctors recognising the necessity
in terms of long-term workload reduction, in the immediate term, doctors
are increasingly asked to teach and supervise AHPs despite the
non-medical tariff being substantially lower.

# Where does all the money go and how is it regulated? {#sec5}

In 2007, the British Medical Association investigated the use of the
tariff (or SIFT, as it was then known) using the Freedom of Information
Act. Of the 33 trusts contacted, 23 either did not respond, did not know
or did not detail how the money was spent. From the ten trusts that did
respond, the most frequent response was that funding had historically
been incorporated into their baseline budgets, and its use was therefore
not recorded separately. As one trust responded (Orwell would be
impressed), 'this income ... constitutes part of the totality of the
Trust\'s income base and therefore is embedded within the totality of
the Trust\'s expenditure'. Only seven of the 23 trusts could give any
information about consultant teaching time, and this tended to consist
of a statement that consultants nominally have one PA per week allocated
for teaching.^7^

# That was over 10 years ago. Have things moved on? {#sec6}

There has been some progress in that most medical schools have developed
a 'minimum teaching standards' document that they use as a shared
document between them and trusts. New medical schools have had to start
this process from scratch and work with their trusts to provide clear
explanations of where and how the money is spent. Tariff funding is
still often absorbed into trusts' finances, but increasingly trusts are
being asked to demonstrate where the money is actually going.

# That\'s England; what about the rest of the UK? {#sec7}

Medical universities in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are funded
by the devolved governments in very similar ways to HEFCE, although the
fee element of their income varies from no fees (Scotland) to lower fees
(Wales) to the same as England (Northern Ireland).

Funding for medical education to the medical universities comes from the
higher education budget and then goes to the NHS institutions through an
equivalent of the tariff. The scheme in Wales is still named SIFT-W (for
Wales); in Scotland, it is the ACT (Additional Costs of Teaching); and
the Supplement for Undergraduate Medical and Dental Education (SUMDE) in
Northern Ireland.^8^

# Conclusion: use it or lose it! {#sec8}

The level of scrutiny regarding this teaching funding currently only
goes in one direction. We believe that trusts need to wake up to the
fact that if they are being paid for providing teaching to students,
they need to be able to demonstrate this in a transparent way. In *All
the President\'s Men*, the assiduous undercover reporters expose
Watergate, leading to the downfall of the president of the USA.
Following the money when it comes to trust teaching tariffs is likely to
show that the funding is generally poorly accounted for and monitored,
rather than deliberately diverted. However, in the current financial
climate, trusts are unlikely to continue getting these large amounts of
money unless they can demonstrate that funds are going where they are
meant to go, and where they say they are going, and that the teaching
provided is of at least an adequate standard. In the coming year, HEE
will be formally gathering information from trusts on how money is being
spent, and many trusts are likely to be unprepared. Effective and clear
job planning is probably the most obvious way to demonstrate that the
funding is going towards the most expensive and essential resource:
clinician time. This needs to be evidenced and protected.

With the current workforce challenges, alternatives to consultant
teaching should also be considered, and medical students also need
teaching and experience of working in a multidisciplinary team. Clinical
teaching fellows are higher trainees funded by the tariff, with
protected teaching time in their week (typically around 60%), and
anecdotally they make a big difference to student experience. AHPs too
can usefully support medical student teaching. The use of simulation
training and involvement of expert patients, as well as buying sessions
for students to attend specialist clinics in other sectors, may also
represent good ways of spending the money available.

There is no doubt that by continuing to 'follow the money' we can also
improve and track where these precious resources are being used to train
safe and competent doctors with the necessary skills to look after our
patients' complex needs in the future.

# Addendum in the time of COVID-19 {#sec9}

We originally wrote this piece in the now seemingly distant days before
the COVID-19 pandemic. The points we made in the conclusion are now even
more relevant. New problems arise as we are forced into a situation
where the necessary teaching of basic psychiatry skills must be
accomplished without students being able to attend hospitals and clinics
to get direct clinical experience in psychiatry. Also, these students
will be qualifying as doctors at a time when there will be even greater
needs for the skills necessary to deal with the epidemic of mental
illness that will follow COVID-19. It is therefore essential to
accelerate our efforts in developing alternative ways of teaching, but
this is a time when consultants and their teams have even greater
pressure on their \'time to teach\' as they prioritise new clinical
commitments that arise from the COVID-19 pandemic.

The use of digital technologies can no doubt play an increasingly
valuable role in teaching. However, distance learning alone will not be
adequate; this is a time when the input of all our clinical colleagues
remains vital. Students are not currently on clinical placements and
their dates of return are uncertain. However, the tariff continues to be
paid to Trusts and they should not lose sight of their responsibility
for active involvement in creatively addressing educational and training
needs. In particular, the mental health risks of their patients will
persist and be even greater after COVID-19. These will be further
exacerbated if we allow our students to leave medical school with
inadequate training in psychiatry.

**Aileen O\'Brien** is Dean for Students and Reader in Psychiatry and
Education at St George\'s University of London, UK. **Ania Korszun** is
Professor at the Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Barts and the
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, UK.

Both authors participated in the writing of this paper and saw the final
version. Both meet the criteria for authorship.

# Declaration of Interest {#nts3}

None.

## Supplementary material {#sec10}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.50.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::
