====================================================================
The value and benefit of narrative medicine for psychiatric practice
====================================================================



Sabina Dosani

:Correspondence: Sabina Dosani (s.dosani@uea.ac.uk)

:date: 2021-10

:Abstract:
   This article describes how applying techniques from literary studies
   and considering patient histories as texts helps me understand and
   formulate systemic issues in psychiatric assessments. Psychiatrists
   are not generally taught to pay close attention to aspects of
   language, including metaphor and syntax, but I argue that paying
   attention to the form, as well as to the content, of the stories
   patients bring us, can make us better attuned to the contexts of
   their needs and distress, and therefore better placed to help.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
My clinic list says that the mother I am about to meet has come for an
autism assessment for her son. As it turns out, she has come to tell a
story, one she cannot yet make sense of. This particular mother tells me
a nativity story. Her opening scene is an acute abdominal pain, ‘like a
fire’, bending her in half and making her scream, at an office Christmas
party. Not appendicitis, but a surprise of a baby son, born into
precarious temporary accommodation, to a single young woman, in late
December. Her story included a vivid retelling of his first visitors:
‘three wise women from East London’, she joked, ‘a midwife, a heath
visitor, a social worker’.

‘Did they come bearing gifts?’ I asked.

‘Forms!’ she replied, but also told me about the three wise women's
support for her instinct, two Christmases later, that something was not
quite right with her son. ‘You could call it an epiphany’, she said.

You might wonder why I let her talk like this, encouraged it even, with
my gift-bearing question. It took her less than 8 minutes to summarise
her first concerns about her son and the following 6 years of worries,
that were mostly dismissed by ‘the system’ as naughtiness, wilfulness or
lax parenting. As a psychiatrist, my job is to make a diagnosis and
formulation, but I also spend time thinking about the narratology in
consultations, by which I mean how clinical histories and related
stories are framed and presented, because narratives are consequential.
They have the capacity to heal or harm. ‘Narrative employment’ is the
creation of narratives that help people accommodate and make sense of
distress, pain or loss, and find a new sense of inclusion, hope and
agency. Too often, this process is carried out against the grain of
clinical work.

The privilege and joy of psychiatry is that we look after whole people.
We gain skills in decoding subtle nuances of language for evidence of
psychopathology and we are trained in understanding symptoms in the
contexts of patients’ lives and cultures. Yet, at times, our training
and psychiatric practice, with the current hyperfocus on biological
aetiology and treatments, hint that we might be dealing with brains in
isolation, risking objectifying patients. Literature, which emphasises
the use of language, reminds us of their humanity and our own.

In common with other medical humanities, narrative medicine in general,
and literary studies in particular, allows psychiatrists to widen the
epistemic genres we traditionally draw from, in formulating and
answering academic and clinical questions. This is especially important
in the 21st century, as our patients live longer, with more illness
complexity and comorbidity than in previous generations. Narrative
medicine can help us to respond to contemporary health challenges by
looking beyond traditional medical sciences.

For example. by attending to the manner in which the mother framed her
story as a Biblical illusion, and by acknowledging this with my
gift-bearing question, I was better able to read between the lines of
the developmental history she gave, hearing her previously unspoken
fears of divine punishment and her secret hope for a miracle cure.

.. _sec1:

Reading illness narratives
==========================

Writing in the *BMJ* about the evidence-based treatment of neonatal
jaundice and the safety of infants on aeroplanes, Thomas Newman,
Professor of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, made a cogent case for the
power of stories over statistics, concluding that ‘the brains of human
beings seem built to process stories better than other forms of input’.1
Dreadful things happen, Newman concludes, but when they happen to a
storyteller this enables connections with readers beyond what would be
possible if the story were recounted by a dispassionate observer. A
narrative trajectory offers solutions or hope, which statistics cannot
offer.

Arthur Frank develops Newman's theory further, suggesting that, ‘telling
stories is the attempt, initiated by the body's disease, to give voice
to an experience that medicine cannot describe’.\ :sup:`2` In his
classic text *The Wounded Storyteller*, Frank suggests a typology of
medical narrative, classifying illness narratives into ‘chaos
narratives’, ‘quest narratives’ and ‘restitution narratives’. The
restitution narrative, in which the doctor is presented as a hero and
the end result is healing, could not be more distinct from the stories
psychiatrists often hear in clinic, stories that Frank would classify as
chaos narratives, in which one terrible thing after another happens,
events which are often temporally dislocated. Frank's so-called quest
narratives are more hopeful, written by patients who have been able to
learn from their illnesses and reconstruct a new future. As a
psychiatrist, the question of how to respond to ‘the experience medicine
cannot describe’ is important. Frank, however, advocates keeping
professionals away from written illness narratives. His suggestion seems
to be that scientific scrutiny will diminish and devalue patients’
accounts. I think he is overly pessimistic and commend his thesis to
colleagues seeking to understand, without reframing and rewriting.

.. _sec2:

Patients as texts
=================

Literary studies have had a direct and unexpected impact on my clinical
practice. For example, in my work as a child and adolescent
psychiatrist, I apply close reading techniques from literary studies
when listening to parents’ histories and children's stories. I was
influenced by Professor Rita Charon, a physician with a doctorate in
English literature.

In her book *Narrative Medicine*, Charon offers a drill for reading
texts and likens it to the familiar drill that medical students are
taught when reading chest X-rays.\ :sup:`3` She invites us to consider a
patient's history as a text, deciding, for example, which genre it comes
into. It might be a short story, an obituary, an epistolary novel, a
Gothic tale, a black comedy, a lyric poem or a parable. She asks us to
consider how the patient's narrative is framed, asking: where did this
text come from? How did it appear? What does it answer? How was it
answered? How does it change the meaning of other texts? What is left
out of this text? I use the literary techniques of close reading, where
one pays attention to all aspects of the literary devices in a text,
including ambiguity, irony, paradox, tone, semiotics, gender, sexuality,
colonial status of the narrator. Attending to close reading teaches us
to query the meaning of breaks, tempo and the message in the rhythm.
Charon invites us to question the narrator's engagement in the story,
her access to events, her point of view (vocalisation). Is she remote,
sceptical, unforgiving, judging? Charon's point throughout is that
studying literature can make us better doctors.

Following Charon's drill has taught me to interrogate patient narratives
differently and gave me new insights into their construction. The mother
I described at the beginning of this article framed her story as a
Biblical natal scene. Her 8-year-old son told a different story,
delivering crisp classroom anecdotes in the style of a successful
stand-up comic. He had a tabloid headline writer's love of puns and
spoke about his aspiration to be a writer of Christmas cracker jokes, a
nod, perhaps, to his mother's nativity story. When I shared my
formulation, I encouraged him to write it down in his own words, with a
punning title. We looked at some YouTube videos of comedians who have
spoken about their shared diagnosis.

His most recent school report was written in the form of a lament, a
chorus of cries from an exasperated class teacher, appended with a
headteacher's refrain of despair. When I sent a copy of my assessment
report to the school, I wrote a brief covering note, acknowledging the
profound sense of sadness, frustration and failure in the school report
and raising the possibility of his disruptive classroom humour being a
form of tragicomedy, possibly because the boy himself shared these same
feelings. His class teacher wrote a reply framed in educational academic
discourse, about performative spaces and classrooms. My hope is that by
writing differently about him, she might be thinking differently about
him too.

I do not know yet how this clinic story ends. The pages of this little
boy's life are still turning. Unlike novels, I am rarely there to
witness concluding chapters or the many plot turns of these young lives.
The last time his mother and I met, she referred back to her nativity
story, reframing the birth as a gift and telling a parable about
neurodiversity. The language of implied self-blame and defeat was edited
out of her new story. There may be times in future when she writes them
back in. I think part of my job is making sure those close to her notice
if and when she does.

.. _sec3:

Narrative education
===================

Thirty years have passed since David Fraser and Leah Smith presented
their findings from their surveys of medical graduate cohorts from 1955
to 1982, asking ‘what changes would you have made to your
education?’.\ :sup:`4` The responses were overwhelmingly in favour of
having more humanities education, particularly in history, art, music
and literature. Doctors felt that their education failed to meet the
need for their ‘skill in dealing with people’. Asked about their regrets
about their education, the cohorts said they were taught too much
biology and too much chemistry for admission to medical school. For a
more satisfying personal life they would have chosen art, history,
literature and music, and to work better with patients, they would have
chosen philosophy, modern languages, art and psychology.

This is old research, arguably ‘yesterday's news’, conducted in the USA,
and has yet to be repeated in UK graduate cohorts. However, Richard
Horton, writing in *The Lancet* a decade later, expressed similar views,
lamenting the poverty of scholarship in Western medical schools, which,
in my view, remains largely unchanged.\ :sup:`5` Horton's arguments feel
as current today as when he noted more than two decades ago that
medicine is unusual among academic disciplines in that it has no cannon
of texts. Horton calls this ‘a curious exception’. Horton said that ‘a
canonical work should display originality, rigorous argument and a
strong writing style’. I would like to suggest that the time has come
for us to define a cannon of works in psychiatry, spanning novels,
creative non-fiction and illness narratives, the study of which can
offer real benefit and value to psychiatrists.

As a doctor, there are ethical challenges inherent in writing about
patients. I have considered the General Medical Council's instruction to
'make the care of your patient your first concern'. Patients are often
mandated by court to see me, or are allocated to see me in clinic, with
limited choice. Given the power dynamics inherent in these assessments
of children and young people who are often vulnerable, I have concluded
that most of my patients would be unable to give meaningful and free
consent to be written about, even in retrospect. For these reasons, I
have written about a fictional patient for the purpose of this article.
To do so, I studied many of my assessment reports from the past three
years and then wrote new fictitious clinical scenarios, drawing on real
themes.

**Sabina Dosani** is a consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist with
Clinical Partners, London, and a PhD candidate in creative and critical
writing in the Department of Drama, Literature and Creative Writing,
University of East Anglia, UK.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
