---
abstract: |
  The National Health Service (NHS) was created 70 years ago to provide
  universal healthcare to the UK, and over the years it has relied upon
  international medical graduates (IMGs) to be able to meet its needs.
  Despite the benefits these professionals bring to the NHS, they often
  face barriers that hinder their well-being and performance. In this
  editorial, we discuss some of the most common challenges and the
  adverse effects these have on IMGs' lives and careers. However, we
  also propose practical measures to improve IMGs' experiences of
  working in psychiatry.
author:
- Emmeline Lagunes-Cordoba
- Raka Maitra
- Subodh Dave
- Shevonne Matheiken
- Femi Oyebode
- Jean O\'Hara
- "Derek K. TracyCorrespondence to: Dr Emmeline Lagunes-Cordoba
  (<emmeline.lagunescordoba@candi.nhs.uk>)"
date: 2021-10
institute:
- 1Camden and Islington NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 2Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 3Derbyshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 4East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 5National Centre for Mental Health, UK
- 6South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 7Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
- id: ref38
- id: ref39
- id: ref40
title: "International medical graduates: how can UK psychiatry do
  better?"
---

pmc

The staff of the National Health Service (NHS) includes many doctors who
have trained abroad. Unfortunately, despite their contributions, many
international medical graduates (IMGs) face considerably greater
difficulties than UK graduates. Longitudinal data clearly show
differential attainment of IMG doctors in both postgraduate examinations
and more senior clinical, academic and managerial positions.^1,2^ They
are also more likely to be reported to the General Medical Council (GMC)
for misconduct and to have such complaints upheld.^3^ This is
detrimental to their well-being and risks affecting the quality of care
provided by them.

There are many contributing factors, from direct discrimination, through
a lack of familiarity with and support from the UK system, to a failure
to harness IMGs' strengths. This editorial will explore this, taking the
available evidence and experiences of the authors to propose positive
next steps for individuals and organisations.

# IMGs: who are they? {#sec1}

## Definitions of IMGs: a heterogeneous group {#sec1-1}

The GMC defines an IMG as someone who has obtained their primary medical
qualification outside the European Economic Area (EEA).^4^ However, that
simple definition covers a range of complexities. It can encompass a
childhood in another culture and different intersectional experiences of
nationality, religion, gender and skin colour. It involves medicine
studied in a different healthcare system, with nuanced variations in
communication and therapeutic relationships. Some things, however, are
common to most IMGs: personal and professional loss from the country
they left; a need to build a network of friends and embrace a new life;
exposure to a new environment and health system; and the hope for a
better future, which despite any adversity keeps many motivated to
continue. However, every IMG\'s journey is unique, and the challenges
faced will depend on the interplay of many factors; for example, we note
that technically the term 'IMG' applies to a White British citizen who
studies abroad and returns to work in the UK, yet such an individual is
less likely to face attainment gaps.

There is no single route for an IMG to transition into the NHS. Those
from an EEA country or Switzerland (not considered IMGs by the GMC) are
eligible for full GMC registration and licence to practise medicine in
the UK as long as they demonstrate proficiency in English. For other
IMGs, the most common method of obtaining registration is by passing the
Professional and Linguistic Assessments Board (PLAB) examination,^5^ an
initiative designed to ensure parity of medical education and training
standards. Post-PLAB doctors are then free to apply to appropriate
training schemes, and to work as specialty and associate specialist
(SAS) or locally employed doctors. Another route is the Medical Training
Initiative (MTI) scheme sponsored by a UK Medical Royal College, faculty
or GMC-approved institution for postgraduate training. Some IMGs can
also gain registration if they hold a relevant postgraduate
qualification from an approved overseas awarding body.^6^ Finally, IMGs
can get their registration by applying for a Certificate of Eligibility
for Specialist Registration. This requires doctors to demonstrate that
their training matches the UK equivalent.^7^

However, once an IMG starts working in the NHS, they are expected to
adhere to the norms outlined in the GMC\'s *Good Medical Practice*
guide.^8^ Some trusts invest in providing appropriate induction and
extra support; however, there is currently no clear national guidance or
requirement for either organisations or IMGs on how to support this
transition into the UK.

## Data on IMG numbers and specialties/roles {#sec1-2}

A report from the House of Commons noted that of doctors in non-primary
care settings, 13% are from Asia, 9.1% are from the European Union and
4.8% are from Africa.^9^ IMGs account for 60% of non-consultant and
non-training doctors currently working in the UK.^10^ It is not clear
why IMGs are more likely to work as SAS or locally employed doctors.
Some might have found these roles more suitable to gain experience
before enrolling in formal training, while some might be less interested
in the recognised challenges that come with traditional training and
consultant roles. However, some people may prefer a more flexible role
for reasons including childcare, especially as they might have less
family and informal support than British doctors; while others might
find it practically easier to obtain such a job. Having said this, it is
also likely that for a fair few it is a second-choice career pathway on
account of failure to succeed in passing the relevant postgraduate
examinations. Having a non-UK primary medical qualification has the
largest influence on postgraduate examination attainment; the pass rate
in some postgraduate examinations is 35% for IMGs, compared with 80% for
UK graduates.^11^ These attainment differences have also been identified
between IMGs and UK graduate doctors training in psychiatry.^12^

Psychiatry is particularly popular among IMGs,^12^ who account for 44%
of psychiatry trainees.^10^ A preference for psychiatry has also been
demonstrated in the USA^13^ and among UK doctors from Black and minority
ethnic (BAME) backgrounds.^14^ The reason for this is not clear,
although psychiatry has long had a particular recruitment problem,^15^
and it is possible that a need to pass the residence labour market test
may be encouraging some to take posts that are more easily available.
The authors' own discussions include the reflection that many IMGs may
come from cultures where mind and body are not so separated, and find a
natural affinity with psychiatry.

# IMGs: challenges they face {#sec2}

## Practical and cultural aspects to change {#sec2-1}

Initially, many IMGs need to find a place to live, to become orientated
with public transport and potentially to learn to drive on the left side
of the road. They need to open a bank account, get a UK telephone and
identify where and how to access shops, sport clubs, religious centres
and schools. They must adapt to the UK\'s many regional accents, and
learn both local idioms and British colloquialisms. In addition, the
first few years are often clouded by financial and visa-related
stresses.

IMGs go through adaptation (changes in individuals or groups due to
environmental demands) and acculturation (cultural changes resulting
from encounters with members of different groups).^16^ This includes
learning appropriate new behaviours and unlearning behaviours that are
no longer appropriate. Refugee doctors merit additional comment. They
are also IMGs, but they have had to flee their home countries and lives
to escape persecution or other threats. So they often have experienced
trauma, more financial difficulties and less certainty regarding visas,
leading them to face greater isolation. Cohn et al^17^ noted that owing
to having to leave their homes rapidly and in fear, refugee doctors
might not have all the paperwork required for registration, or may not
be able to contact people in their home countries to get relevant
documents, which may complicate their ability to fulfil GMC
requirements.

## Loss of status, discrimination and racism {#sec2-2}

IMGs often not only leave behind family and friends, they almost always
leave a social status, identity and trust that they previously earned
and enjoyed. Many take up posts of lower grade or status than expected
or warranted by their expertise.^18,19^ IMGs have reported a loss of
autonomy in their decision-making,^20^ and a professional devaluation
which can lead to a loss of their confidence to perform or even defend
themselves in cases of harassment or where their practice is being
scrutinised.^19^

Many IMGs still suffer greater levels of direct and indirect
discrimination and harassment. IMGs have reported feeling discriminated
against by colleagues and at an institutional level.^20^ Institutional
racism has also been evidenced by bias regarding hiring practices of
doctors with foreign names.^21^ Subjective bias due to racial
discrimination has also been considered a factor associated with the
failure of the clinical skills assessment for UK BAME and IMG
doctors.^22^ A third of SAS and locally employed doctors in the UK, who
are predominately IMGs, have reported experienced bullying or harassment
in their workplaces, mainly characterised by rudeness.^23^

## Greater rates of complaints {#sec2-3}

The GMC\'s *Fair to Refer* report^3^ shows a disproportionate number of
fitness to practise referrals for overseas doctors (2.5 times greater)
and doctors from BAME backgrounds (two times greater) compared with
White UK graduates, and they are more likely to face harsher sanctions.
It is less clear whether this is compounded in IMGs from non-White
backgrounds. The report offers potential explanations, including
inadequate induction and support, lack of honest and effective feedback,
working patterns or contracts that lead to isolation, pervasive
insider--outsider dynamics, and a lack of confidence in raising concerns
or challenging accusations. This last factor fits with the finding of
Jalal et al that IMGs are less likely than UK graduates to report
bullying.^24^ The GMC report has been criticised for not addressing why
the GMC tends to give harsher sanctions to referred IMGs and BAME
doctors.^25^

# Existing evidence and initiatives {#sec3}

## IMGs' perspectives {#sec3-1}

Wolf et al^26^ found that IMGs and BAME trainees reported more
difficulties, cultural differences and lack of trust with senior
doctors, as well as biased assessments and recruitment processes.
Hashim^27^ identified challenges for IMGs in understanding the NHS
system and values, learning environments (with a lack of direct
guidance), receiving feedback and feelings of being undervalued by
colleagues. A survey of IMGs' understanding of the GMC regulatory
framework found that many were surprised or confused by the range and
specificity of the regulations, including the emphasis on individual
patient autonomy.^28^ It also identified that IMGs could have
difficulties with nuances of non-verbal communication and UK social and
behavioural norms. A key aspect was the lack of relevant information
prior to registration, variable levels of training and support, and
isolation in non-training posts.

## International literature on interventions {#sec3-2}

There is a limited evidence base to support interventions, including
international examples from Canada,^29^ the USA,^20^ and South
Africa.^30^ Two recent literature reviews^18,24^ summarised the
following recommendations: individual assessments prior to induction
with follow-up; making relevant information available; providing
comprehensive information about the role and job; addressing the culture
gap (providing supervisors and mentors, understanding clinical and
cultural differences); considering different learning styles; buddy
systems (for guidance and help); improving cultural awareness from the
organisation; and establishing a national induction programme,
complementary to local inductions. With regard to refugee doctors, Butt
et al (2019) showed that formal support to gain their licence to
practise was an effective intervention. Although all these could be
potentially effective interventions to improve IMGs' well-being, there
still seems to be no consensus regarding which organisations are
responsible for implementing them or overseeing these changes.

## Work by UK professional bodies {#sec3-3}

Some GMC initiatives have been put in place to address the differential
attainment; these include the optional 'Welcome to UK Practice'
workshop,^31^ which according to a recent report^32^ is highly valued by
doctors and their supervisors, improving knowledge on ethical issues,
GMC guidance and UK practice in general, as well as communication and a
focus on patient centredness. It provided opportunities to meet
colleagues, share learning and gain support, but the report also
suggested that IMGs feel a general lack of support once they are in
practice.

The MTI by the Association of Medical Royal Colleges^33^ is specifically
for IMGs and provides a helpful guide^34^ to aid with preparation for
relocation, as well as providing mentorship on starting the scheme. A
recent evaluation of the MTI psychiatry scheme reported that enrolled
IMGs highly rated their clinical supervision and overall experience with
this initiative.^35^ The British Medical Association (BMA) website also
has a section focusing on IMGs, including information regarding life and
work in the UK;^36^ while we were preparing this manuscript, the BMA
sent their very first IMG newsletter, focused on key news and
information relevant to IMGs. Online communities are mushrooming to
support IMGs while they redefine their identities in a new culture with
its evident uniqueness.

This differential IMG attainment also affects membership and
representation within the Royal Colleges, as SAS doctors do not have the
same rights as fully registered members of some Royal Colleges.
Positively, we note that the roles and representation of SAS doctors
within the Royal College of Psychiatrists is currently under review. The
Royal College of Psychiatrists has a trainee support group which
provides guidance regarding the needs of IMG trainees to heads of
schools of psychiatry across the UK to improve differential attainment,
while the Psychiatric Trainee Committee is currently drafting a guide
that will contain sections to support IMGs, including cultural induction
to the UK, training pathways, exams and visa information. The college
also organises workshops to help supervisors to gain the knowledge and
skills to mentor and supervise an IMG doctor, and conferences to foster
networking among IMGs. We also recognise that the College has recently
established two new professional leads on race equality.

# Next steps {#sec4}

## Recognising the wider societal issues: Black Lives Matter and Covid-19 {#sec4-1}

The Black Lives Matter movement has re-emphasised the social disparities
between White British people and those of BAME and immigrant
backgrounds. It reminds us that many of the adverse experiences of IMGs
are also encountered by UK BAME medical graduates, notably,
discrimination, racism and differential attainment. Compared with their
White counterparts, UK BAME doctors underperform academically;^35^ are
more likely to fail their clinical skills assessments;^22^ are less
likely to be accepted into a specialty training programme, apply for
consultant posts, or be shortlisted for and offered consultant posts;
and earn less.^37^ Wolf et al^38^ found that perceived difficulty in
talking about race with trainees and isolation or non-specificity of
interventions were the main barriers to improvement. The Covid-19
pandemic has also shown the different vulnerabilities of BAME staff and
patients, many of which are due to fundamental societal inequities, and
the need for appropriate support and care.^39^ As a positive note, it
was heartening to see the *BMJ* recently commit a whole issue to the
topic of racism.^40^

## Recognising IMGs' strengths: the 'problem' is not in the individual {#sec4-2}

Most discussion still unconsciously locates the 'problem' in the IMG
rather than adopting a systemic perspective and working to embrace IMGs'
strengths and their knowledge and experience of working in other
socioeconomic and healthcare systems.

Many IMGs not only achieve their goals but also go on to subsequently
become prominent and respected doctors, leaders in their field and
admired by their peers. Within psychiatry, we have many such examples
who have succeeded and developed internationally high-profile careers as
clinicians and academics; the simplest scan of UK psychiatry\'s output
and reputation will show its gains from many IMGs. The strengths of an
internationally trained, multicultural and multilingual workforce need
to be harnessed. [Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"} summarises our
recommendations for positive change, based on an assimilation of the
existing literature, our experiences as IMGs (all but one author) and
practising clinicians in the UK, and our application to UK psychiatry.
We have provided a suggested clustering of which organisations and
individuals might be best placed to provide these. Box 1Recommendations
for positive change, clustered by provider.Regulatory bodiesContinued
evaluation and addressing the disproportionality of GMC (and local)
complaints and investigations into IMGs.An open and transparent process
of data collection and a clear accountability framework to ensure that
progress, or its lack, in these areas can be monitored.Host IMG-specific
resources and disseminate via NHS trust websites, including sharing of
examples of good practice (for example, the MTI, while recognising that
there can be specialty-specific challenges and opportunities.The Royal
College of PsychiatristsExplicit investigation into differential
attainment in the MRCPsych examinations.Explicit inclusion of IMGs in
examination and curriculum design.Publishing data on IMG representation
on College bodies.Have IMG-specific events, resources and examples of
best practice for psychiatrists.NHS trustsTrusts have an IMG champion
working with Human Resources to informon all IMG appointments.Trusts' HR
staff to receive training to enable them to deal competently with IMG
issues.Trusts have explicit policy and action targeting racism, with
open publication and updates.Local induction programme specifically for
IMGs, mainly during the first 2 years of their career in the
UK/NHS.Focused support and mentoring for IMGs new to the NHS.Encourage
and facilitate IMGs' interaction with UK graduates (e.g. universities
host a Welcome Day for international students).Host events dedicated to
local IMGs -- to celebrate successful journeys and to foster a sense of
community.Continuing professional development events to learn how IMGs'
experience in their home countries can contribute positively to improved
patient care in the NHS.Individual services, teams, supervisors/mentors
and IMGsLink up IMGs with appraisers at the time of starting work so
that appropriate mentoring can be organised.Inclusion of modules focused
on IMG issues for educational and clinical supervisors.Encourage IMGs to
attend local Balint groups.Encourage IMGs to attend local academic days
for trainees in specific specialities.[^1]

# Conclusion {#sec5}

Our personal experience -- all but one of us are IMGs -- has been that
UK society is marked by a focus on fairness. This has motivated us to
raise some of the issues that many IMGs are currently facing. We are
grateful that British society and culture has, largely, welcomed IMGs
and given us the freedom to make these comments. However, we also feel
that for many local doctors, IMGs can become invisible and their
specific strengths and learning needs go unnoticed. We do recognise that
each IMG has had a different journey, with many factors affecting their
own challenges -- gender, ethnicity, skin colour, religion and sexual
orientation -- just like every non-IMG doctor. Motivated by personal
challenges, dreams of a new life or even external factors uncontrolled
by them, each IMG has to go through a process of acculturation, and loss
of former identity and building of a new one, influenced by their
professional and personal experiences.

For IMGs, there is much to learn personally and professionally upon
coming to the UK. In healthcare, this includes familiarising oneself
with the 'process of regulation, challenging, making appeals' and
fostering a culture of 'learning not blaming'. In society, every citizen
has the responsibility to respect the rights of others and to treat
others with fairness; in return, the UK offers freedom of speech and
freedom from unfair discrimination.

UK healthcare systems, regulatory bodies, Royal Colleges, NHS trusts,
medical leaders and indeed all of us are responsible for being aware of
IMGs' struggles, as these can have long-lasting effects not only on
IMGs' careers and lives but also on the care of the patients they serve.
If we can start to demonstrate a degree of compassionate curiosity about
IMGs, appreciating their diversity and strengths, the new knowledge,
skills and wisdom that we will acquire can only lead to better patient
care and a happier workforce.

**Dr Emmeline Lagunes-Cordoba,** Camden and Islington NHS Foundation
Trust, and the Department of Health Service and Population Research,
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s College
London, UK; **Dr Raka Maitra**, Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation
Trust, Trainee Support Group, Royal College of Psychiatrists, and
Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King\'s College London, UK; **Dr Subodh Dave**, Trainee
Support Group, Royal College of Psychiatrists, and Derbyshire Healthcare
NHS Foundation Trust, UK; **Dr Shevonne Matheiken**, East London NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK; **Professor Femi Oyebode**, National
Centre for Mental Health, Birmingham, UK; **Dr Jean O\'Hara**, South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and Department of Psychological
Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s
College London, UK; **Dr Derek K. Tracy**, Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK and Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s College London, UK. E.L.C., R.M.,
S.D., S.M., F.O. and D.T. identify as IMGs, and J.O.H. as a UK BAME
graduate. The authors note that their own journeys have informed this
piece. They further reflect that their challenges, opportunities, and
the various intersectional issues they have faced have all been unique,
and some have faced greater and lesser adversities than others.

All authors met all four ICMJE criteria for authorship, jointly
conceiving and writing the manuscript.

# Supplementary material {#sec6}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.118.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

# Declaration of interest {#nts4}

None.

[^1]: There is some overlap and the boundaries between these are only
    suggestions that might benefit from local change.
