---
author:
- Oluwadamilola Ajayi
date: 2021-08
institute:
- "Member of the Faculty of Psychiatry of the West Africa College of
  Physicians and an Associate Fellow of the National Post-Graduate
  Medical College of Nigeria. Currently, he is participating in the
  Royal College of Psychiatrists' Medical Training Initiative, working
  at St Charles Centre for Health Centre and Well Being, London, UK.
  Email: <ajayidami@gmail.com>"
---

pmc

Malawi, a south-eastern African country of approximately 20 million
people, has only three consultant psychiatrists. As grim as this ratio
is, it is not unique to Malawi; rather, it is a tendency within Africa
that begs interventions.

*The Malawi Quick Guide to Mental Health*, by the Scotland--Malawi
Mental Health Education project, is one such intervention. With Donncha
S. Mullin and Robert C. Stewart as lead editors, this is a seven-part
practical resource material adapted mostly from World Health
Organization\'s *mhGAP Intervention Guide Version 2.0* (2016) and the
Royal College of Psychiatrists' *Where There is No Psychiatrist* (2018).

The target reader is 'the busy primary care provider working at first-
and second-level healthcare facilities in Malawi' and the 90-page guide
is adapted to the practical realities of working in mental health,
paying attention to the country\'s official national language
(Chichewa), social mores, current mental health legislation and local
support institutions.

Written in accessible language and formatted in bullet-point
presentation style, the first three parts provide guidance about mental
health and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, mental health emergencies and
the principles of assessment and management of mental illnesses. The
other sections offer guidance about specific psychiatric disorders,
including epilepsy, which is identified within the neurologist\'s remit
but may present to mental health services.

A chapter is dedicated to special populations (pregnant women, older
adults, children and adolescents) and a final part contains information
leaflets on specific mental disorders written in English and Chichewa,
adapted from existing leaflets of the Royal College of Psychiatrists,
Mind and National Centre for Mental Health.

This guide fulfils its aim in providing support for the non-specialist
mental health worker in landlocked Malawi and neighbouring Anglophone
countries, by virtue of its being written in English. Always signposting
to other resource materials for additional information, this guide is a
primer for the curious non-specialist health worker.

The curious specialist reader will be furnished with aspects of the
Malawian world-view about mental illness and the country\'s mental
health legislation, the Malawi Mental Health Treatment Act 1948, a
functional colonial relic, which is also not unique to Malawi. *The
Malawi Quick Guide to Mental Health* is a pragmatic intervention
addressing the dearth of mental health specialists in Malawi but this
resource material will also serve other Anglophone low- and
middle-income countries in similar predicaments.
