==========================================================
Crisis care: tackling the climate and ecological emergency
==========================================================

Cate Bailey
Norman A. Poole
Adrian JamesCorrespondence to Cate Bailey (cate.bailey@nhs.net)
:Date: 2021-08

:Abstract:
   The climate crisis is a health crisis; it demands the urgent
   attention and action of healthcare professionals and organisations.
   In this issue of the *BJPsych Bulletin*, we consider what the
   destructive effects of the climate and ecological crisis entail for
   the mental health of populations, and what the response of
   psychiatrists, both individual and collective, must be. We also
   highlight the opportunities and benefits a more sustainable and
   preventative approach could offer individuals, communities and the
   planet.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
“‘We are perilously close to the collapse of civilization, we are all in
danger, and only a mobilization of our entire economy and society can
protect us’ – Margaret Klein Salamon, activist, psychologist and
author.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`\ ‘Undoubtedly climate change poses the most
profound long-term threat to the health of the nation’ – Simon Stevens,
Chief Executive, National Health Service in England.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`”

Without question, human activity throughout the past century and more
has led to the destruction of ecosystems on which we depend, and
contributed to unprecedented levels of greenhouse gases in our
environment. The results of these activities are a disrupted ecology:
extreme weather, severe storms, floods, droughts and heatwaves at a
frequency and intensity never before seen during the span of human
existence. Changing patterns of land use, rising sea levels, destruction
of habitats, biodiversity loss, deforestation, soil degradation, plastic
waste and air pollution combine with climate change to create food
shortages, forced migration, social upheaval and conflict, and increased
vulnerability to infectious disease.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` The World Health
Organization estimates that in the next 20 years, climate change alone
will lead globally to 250 000 additional deaths per
year.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

In this issue of the *BJPsych Bulletin*, we consider what the
destructive effects of the climate and ecological crisis entail for the
mental health of populations, and what the response of psychiatrists,
both individual and collective, must be. We also highlight the
opportunities and benefits that a more sustainable and preventative
approach could offer individuals, communities and the planet.

.. _sec1:

The climate crisis is a health crisis
=====================================

The climate crisis is a health crisis; it demands the urgent attention
and action of healthcare professionals and organisations. We at the
*BJPsych Bulletin* share this view with the authors of the *Lancet*
Countdown on Health and Climate Change,\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` editors of the
*BMJ*\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)` and members of the UK Health Alliance on
Climate Change (including the Royal Colleges of Nursing, Physicians,
General Practitioners, Emergency Medicine and Surgeons; Faculty of
Public Health; Royal Society of Medicine and Royal College of
Psychiatrists (RCPsych)).\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

While the RCPsych first appointed an Associate Registrar for
Sustainability in 2015, supported by an active committee, it has
recently prioritised its focus in this area. In a new position
statement, the College declared a climate and ecological emergency that
is impacting on the mental health of populations, including the
amplification of existing inequalities.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` The position
statement\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` describes the intimate connections between
health and the natural world; our species is one part of a complex
inter-dependent ecosystem. Depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress
disorder are associated with floods.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` Suicide is linked
to drought and hotter temperatures.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` People with severe
mental illnesses are three times more likely to die in a
heatwave.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` Psychiatric medications such as
antidepressants and antipsychotics affect heat-regulating
functions.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Dehydration and sweating can contribute to
lithium toxicity, which places those taking these treatments at
increased risk during heatwaves.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Food insecurity affects
childhood development.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` Air pollution is associated with
anxiety and depression,\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` and neurodevelopmental effects
in children,\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` and accounts for 6% of the modifiable risk
for dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` Climate change and ecological breakdown
leads to poverty, precarity and social unrest, with associated
psychological trauma.\ :sup:`(n.d.q),(n.d.r)` Extreme weather events are
likely to make it increasingly difficult for us to deliver healthcare to
communities. The secondary effects of the crisis include climate grief
and anxiety, which are particularly noticeable in children and young
people.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` Their anger, too, is understandable, as they
face a future where leaders have delayed action and misinformation
continues to permeate mainstream media. A burgeoning field of climate
psychology aims to help us understand how we reached this state, face
the losses that are already certain and deal with ‘present
traumas’.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` In the face of such threats, denial of the
crisis is a luxury we can no longer afford.

In this special issue, we will learn of the direct effects of extreme
weather events and habitat loss, and the resulting social
disintegration, on mental health, and the indirect effects of the
climate emergency and the sense of insurmountable challenge on our
mental well-being. Concepts such as eco-distress, climate grief and
solastalgia\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` (mourning for the degradation of one's home)
are explored. We also consider the way forward, and the potential
immediate and longer-term health and economic gains in urgent,
collective action.

The climate and ecological crisis can trigger a complicated set of
psychological reactions, including grief, guilt, fear, anxiety and a
fluctuating awareness of our own destructiveness, resulting in varying
forms of denial and disavowal.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` These responses have been
extensively documented by activists and experts in the field of climate
psychology. They can, in part, explain why so little action has been
taken at the necessary scale and pace, despite repeated
promises.\ :sup:`(n.d.t),(n.d.w)` Weintrobe describes how the neoliberal
mindset of ‘uncare’ and narcissistic entitlement perpetuates ways of
living that damage ourselves, our relationships to others and to the
planet.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` She argues that the more we are able to face the
violence beneath our convenient lives, the better we can turn to a more
moral path, but courage and kinship is required for facing these
realities.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)`

The consequences of ecological destruction fall first and worst on the
most marginalised people, including those who are poor, those with
severe mental illness, older people and children. Climate and
environmental justice is linked to racial justice globally, as the most
significant effects of the crisis are already being felt by indigenous
peoples and by those in the Global South, who are disadvantaged by
colonialism and exploitation. These populations are also least likely to
have contributed to the root causes of the climate crisis.

.. _sec2:

Healthy solutions
=================

Public health experts have clearly described what must be done to limit
the damage. The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
has advised that greenhouse gas emissions need to drop drastically by
2030 to give us any chance of avoiding the most catastrophic effects of
global warming.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` The *Lancet* Countdown describes the
pathway we are on, leading at its current trajectory to a possible 3°C
warming, and the second pathway, which aims to keep warming ‘well below’
2°C above pre-industrial levels.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` The reality of those
targets is already being felt in all parts of the world. Facing the
catastrophe of the climate emergency means putting in place a number of
correctives to the way we live today.

At this point, individual action to manage emissions will not produce
the rapid decarbonisation and restoration of our habitat that is needed
to prevent further loss of life and livelihood. Although many of us will
find solace in personal deeds, which are important, an overemphasis on
individual behaviour distracts from the collective action that is
necessary to face the challenge. We need governments to go beyond
goal-setting and begin to deliver on ambitious targets, to take brave
and bold steps. But they are unlikely to move far and fast enough
without firm instruction, including from healthcare professionals and
leaders.

Action to address the causes of the climate crisis improves the
well-being of populations, prevents disease, reduces inequalities and is
good for the economy.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` By reducing use and switching to
clean forms of renewable energy, and building active travel
infrastructure and sustainable food networks, we create a low-carbon
society with enormous health benefits.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` Modelling of the
potential effect of active travel in England and Wales suggests that
increasing walking and cycling could reduce ischaemic heart disease,
lung disease, dementia and cancer.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` Preserving and
increasing biodiverse, unpolluted green and blue spaces carries
significant benefits for patients, families, staff and communities.

Embracing our connectedness to the natural world is not only about
prevention, but also the potential for healing. Nature-based
interventions show a wide range of benefits, including improved
well-being and sense of coherence, and reduction of distress and anger
in both clinical and non-clinical populations.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)` The
RCPsych statement\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` highlights the importance of services
where staff and patients work together in ‘Choosing
Wisley’,\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` which could reduce waste and replication, and
improve sustainability and quality.

.. _sec3:

The role of doctors
===================

As engaged and informed doctors have long argued, healthcare
professionals need to be aware of, and able to articulate and engage in
the politics of the climate and ecological crisis. We are trusted
professionals, and as such have an opportunity and, furthermore, a duty
to act as leaders in our own organisations and communities. We must be
able to communicate the urgency of the problem and the immense benefits
of action in preventing unnecessary mortality and morbidity. The
National Health Service (NHS) is the single largest source of greenhouse
gas emissions in the UK public sector, and 60% of the carbon footprint
of the NHS relates to medication and medical equipment.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)`
The Greener NHS report, which sets accelerated targets for a net zero
NHS, makes reducing emissions a key responsibility of all NHS
staff.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` Drivers include professional and patient
transport, energy use and consumption, use of natural resources,
shifting to preventative practices and reducing unnecessary
prescribing.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)`

Increasingly, psychiatrists are raising awareness through direct and
coordinated action. Whether through activist groups, such as Doctors for
Extinction Rebellion and Psych Declares; through the RCPsych
Sustainability Committee; internationally, through the Climate
Psychiatry Alliance; or locally, through NHS Trust Green Plans, there
are ways for everyone to get involved. Health professionals play an
important role in drawing attention to the physical, mental, social and
psychological effects of the crisis, and the opportunities offered by
its solutions. Our ability to influence government decision-making and
public perceptions through awareness is likely to be at least as
important as action on reducing our own emissions.

The RCPsych's response to the climate and ecological crisis has been
robust and multifaceted. An important step was the February 2020
announcement of divestment from fossil fuels and signing up to the
Principles of Responsible Investment supported by the United
Nations.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` In 2020, a guide and podcast on eco-distress
was produced for parents, carers and young people.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` A key
aspect of these resources is the validation that climate anxiety is not
in itself pathological, but an appropriate reaction to the peril we
face.

Educating future generations of psychiatrists has been an important
focus of the RCPsych's work, and 2020 saw the inclusion of
sustainability as a core area of the new curriculum and the launch of a
Continuing Professional Development module on sustainable
healthcare.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)`

It is, perhaps, younger psychiatrists who best understand the
implications of today's climate and ecological crisis. In giving voice
to future leaders, the *BJPsych Bulletin* celebrates the winner of the
2020 Praxis Editorial Award, Dr Daniel Romeu, whose entry eloquently
argued the importance of action from psychiatrists. The competition
received entries from medical students, foundation doctors, trainees,
Specialty and Associate Specialist Doctors (SAS) responding to the
question ‘Is the climate a mental health crisis?’ They responded with an
emphatic 'yes'. We were impressed with their creativity, passion and
hope for improving individual and planetary health and addressing
inequalities. Congratulations also to the highly commended authors Dr
Karyn Ayre, Mr James Street, Dr Fergus Brown and Dr Kris Roberts. We are
grateful to our panel of judges: Anouchka Grose, Professor Alex Ford and
Dr Katherine Kennet.

.. _sec4:

Conclusions
===========

Psychiatrists are in a position to use their collective voice, medical
expertise and understanding of both individual and systemic factors, to
advocate for redressing inequalities and lead organisational change. The
climate crisis amplifies existing health disparities, and
disproportionately affects those already vulnerable owing to poverty or
underlying conditions.

This special issue of the *BJPsych Bulletin* contributes to the
compelling argument that the climate crisis is a mental health crisis,
and that working to redress this should become core business for
psychiatrists. Not only must this climate crisis issue induce alarm, but
it should also generate hope, resolve and action.

Sally Weintrobe reflected in a recent paper, ‘People, young and old, are
at the point of beginning to find the collective courage to face the
shock required to emerge from our retreat from reality’.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)`
We trust these papers motivate and inspire you not only to face the
reality of this emergency, but to engage creatively with action that
improves the health of the populations you serve, and the environment in
which you live and work.

We thank the editorial committee who commissioned and handled papers in
this special issue: Dr Norman Poole, Dr Cate Bailey, Dr Anouchka Grose,
Dr Neil Armstrong, Dr Harriet Stewart and Dr Nitin Gupta.

**Dr Cate Bailey** is an ST7 General Adult and Old Age Psychiatrist with
the East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Honorary Clinical Lecturer
with Barts and the London School of Medicine, UK; Trainees’ Section
Editor of the *BJPsych Bulletin*, on behalf of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, UK; and co-Chair of the Older Adults Section of the
Association for Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy in the NHS, UK. **Dr Norman
A. Poole** is Editor-in-Chief of the *BJPsych Bulletin*, on behalf of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists, UK; and a Consultant
Neuropsychiatrist at St George's Hospital, South West London and St
George's Mental Health NHS Trust, UK. **Dr Adrian James** is President
of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, UK.

C.B. devised and wrote first drafts of this article to frame a special
issue of the BJPsych Bulletin on the Climate Crisis. N.P. and A.J.
commented on these drafts and enhanced content on the potential benefits
of sustainable practices for the health of communities and the action
taken by the RCPsych.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

C.B. is Trainees’ Section Editor of the *BJPsych Bulletin*, and N.A.P.
is Editor-in-Chief of the *BJPsych Bulletin*.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.af.
