---
abstract: |
  # Background {#sec_a1}

  Bipolar disorder is a chronic mental health condition, which can
  result in functional impairment despite medication. A large evidence
  base supports use of psychological therapies and structured care in
  the treatment of mood disorders, but these are rarely implemented.
  e-Pathways are digital structures that inform and record patient
  progress through a healthcare system, although these have not yet been
  used for bipolar disorder.

  # Aims {#sec_a2}

  To assess the perceived benefits and costs associated with
  implementing a collaborative NICE-informed e-pathway for bipolar
  disorder.

  # Method {#sec_a3}

  Healthcare professionals and people with bipolar disorder attended a
  workshop to share feedback on e-pathways. Data were collected through
  questionnaires (*n* = 26) and transcription of a focus group, analysed
  qualitatively by a framework analysis.

  # Results {#sec_a4}

  Patients and healthcare professionals welcomed the development of an
  e-pathway for bipolar disorder. There were five elements to the
  framework: quality and delivery of care, patient--clinician
  collaboration, flexibility and adaptability, impact on staff and
  impact on healthcare services.

  # Conclusions {#sec_a5}

  Identification of benefits and costs ensures that future development
  of e-pathways addresses concerns of healthcare professionals and
  people with bipolar disorder, which would be essential for successful
  implementation. Recommendations for this development include making
  e-pathways less complicated for patients, ensuring sufficient training
  and ensuring clinicians do not feel their skills become invalidated.
  Limitations of the study, and directions for future research, are
  discussed.
author:
- Adele Louise Elliott
- Stuart Watson
- Guy Dodgson
- Esther Cohen-Tovée
- "Jonathan Ling**Correspondence**: Stuart Watson. Email:
  <stuart.watson@ncl.ac.uk>"
date: 2021-03
institute:
- Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University,
  UK
- Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University,
  UK; and North Locality, Central Business Unit, Cumbria,
  Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University,
  UK; and North Locality, Central Business Unit, Cumbria,
  Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- North Locality, Central Business Unit, Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne
  and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- Faculty of Health Sciences and Wellbeing, University of Sunderland, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
title: "Changing practice: assessing attitudes toward a NICE-informed
  collaborative treatment pathway for bipolar disorder"
---

# Bipolar affective disorder {#sec1-1}

Bipolar affective disorder has a lifetime prevalence of between 1 and
2.5% of the population.^1,2^ It is diagnosed on the basis of current or
prior manic or hypomanic episode(s);^3^ however, low mood that is
frequently persistent^4^ and can meet criteria for a depressive episode
is more common.^5,6^ The disorder is further characterised by functional
impairment^7^ and increased mortality rates, including from suicide.^8^
The estimated cost to the UK is £5.2 billion annually, with direct
National Health Service (NHS) costs of £342 million.^9,10^ Biological,
psychological and social treatment paradigms are used,^11^ and treatment
pathways differ between patients in depressed versus manic episodes, and
in patients who are between episodes.^12^ Pharmacological interventions
reduce relapse and treat episodes, if used appropriately^12^ Similarly,
psychological interventions specifically developed for adults with
bipolar disorder improve symptoms and prevent relapse and admission to
hospital.^13,14^ These interventions include enhanced relapse
prevention, group or individual psychoeducation,^15--17^
cognitive--behavioural therapy and family-focussed therapy.^18^ Group
psychoeducation arguably has the strongest evidence base. Research over
the past 15 years has concentrated on resource light strategies, with
groups integrated within existing treatment pathways (e.g.^19,20^).
However, these evidence-based treatments are not widely available within
the NHS.

# Care pathways {#sec1-2}

Care pathways represent a formalisation of the process that underlies
care and usually incorporate one or more protocols and guidelines,
provide a record of care and a variance record to show where deviations
from the planned pathway have occurred.^21^ Computerisation, thereby
creating e-pathways, should allow pathways to be integrated with
guideline-based decision support, the electronic health record and the
clinical workflow.^22^ The entry point to an e-pathway is through an
initial care plan. The patient engages in the development of a
formulation and the only outcome measure is CollaboRATE, a rating scale
for patients that measures how involved they feel in their care. The
e-pathways would be accessible to patients, both in the session and
accessible through the Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS
Foundation Trust website, therefore encouraging individuals to be aware
of, and request, evidence-based care. The treatment strategies suggested
by the e-pathway would be delivered as part of a collaborative care
plan. e-Pathways therefore have the potential to improve access to, and
use of, the current evidence base and guidelines, to embed values of
co-production by building a shared understanding of the difficulties
faced by people with bipolar disorder, and to allow formal evaluation of
deviations. e-Pathways thus enable identification of resource gaps,
training needs and guideline weaknesses. Our NHS mental health trust has
an expressed commitment to develop a series of e-pathways that
incorporate clinical algorithms. e-Pathways require collaboration
between our NHS trust and the electronic patient record provider, and is
still under development for bipolar disorder. A pilot showed that the
original proposed software package was too time-consuming for clinicians
to use. The focus is now shifting to examine options to develop the
e-pathway, using the existing capabilities of the electronic patient
record supported by a bespoke trust-led software package.

# Algorithm based care {#sec1-3}

Algorithm-based care refers to the use of clinical algorithms either to
aid diagnosis or treatment. Clinical algorithms often comprise
step-by-step instructions, often presented in flow-chart form, to guide
the clinician.^23^ Studies of unipolar depression have revealed that the
use of algorithms markedly improves outcome.^24,25^ In bipolar disorder,
the Texas Medication Algorithm Project^26^ has revealed feasibility and
efficacy in a public health setting. This has been replicated in a
Brazilian study.^27^ Our model incorporates the concurrent use of three
algorithms, biological, social and psychological, with different
algorithms for patients who are currently in a depressive episode; in a
manic, hypomanic or mixed episode; and out of episode (yielding a total
of nine algorithms). The algorithms are being produced iteratively, and
are based on National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
guidelines, with support as needed from other clinical guidelines --
notably that produced by the British Association of
Psychopharmacology^12^ and by the extant evidence base. An example
algorithm is shown in [Fig. 1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}. Fig.
1Psychological pathway for out-of-episode bipolar disorder. Note: Entry
onto the pathway is determined by a healthcare practitioner that the
patient has bipolar disorder and is currently not in episode. Green and
red arrows demarcate 'yes' and 'no', respectively. A diamond box
indicates a decision, and rectangular boxes indicate an action. Behind
each of these boxes is the necessary information to make a collaborative
decision or action, for example: behind 'Positive screen for sleep
disorder?' there is a rationale for screening for sleep disorders, and a
description and screening tools for sleep apnoea and restless leg
syndrome. If patients screen positive, the algorithm takes them to the
'Resolved?' decision box, where initial advice is given to address the
sleep disorder. If this fails to resolve the situation, the algorithm
takes the patient and healthcare practitioner to 'Refer to sleep
clinic', in which information is provided to inform the decision to
refer to local clinic, and if appropriate, a referral form. The
algorithm next presents a choice of five options, and the information
behind the boxes allows the healthcare practitioner to action the
choice, or to flag if the resource is not available, e.g. group
psychoeducation. The individual can follow the flow chart, e.g. starting
with CBT-I and progressing with some individual psychoeducation
delivered by the care coordinator, until the individual has confidence
to sign up to group psychoeducation. Once this is complete, the patient
and healthcare practitioner may feel that psychoeducation or sleep-work
is not appropriate. If 'Further psychological input needed?' is answered
'no', the patient is discharged from the psychological pathway, and
continues on the biological and social pathways. An asterisk indicates
that it is outside the scope of the National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence guidelines. CBT-I, cognitive--behavioural therapy for
insomnia; DBT, dialectical behaviour therapy; IPT, interpersonal
therapy.

# Practice change {#sec1-4}

The movement from the existing structure of care to an alternative in
which treatment decisions are made within a framework provided by
algorithms, which, in turn, are incorporated into an e-pathway,
represents a significant change in practice within our large
organisation. Implementation of such a change requires careful
consideration.^28^ In healthcare, it has been argued that allowing staff
to define problems and formulate solutions facilitates even those change
processes that are initiated by managers.^29^ Here, we therefore sought
to explore the views of healthcare professionals and people with bipolar
disorder; specifically looking at the benefits and costs that are
relevant to the development and implementation of an e-pathway for
bipolar disorder, to steer and facilitate this change.

# Method {#sec2}

## Study design and setting {#sec2-1}

Data collection took place in a single session, a day-long workshop
organised by the e-pathways team, to present the bipolar disorder
e-pathway for discussion.

## Recruitment and participation {#sec2-2}

Various methods were used to invite healthcare professionals and people
with bipolar disorder to the workshop. The workshop was advertised twice
via the Trust\'s weekly bulletin, which is sent to all employees of the
Trust. Individuals who had shown earlier interest in the event from a
previous bulletin were also directly invited, and invitations were
cascaded within the trust, such as via the allied Health Professional
Senior Leadership Team. Finally, an open invitation was extended to a
bipolar disorder patient/carer group, and other individuals who had
previously shown an interest in e-pathways. A combination of open
invites and targeted recruitment ensured that feedback from the
workshops spanned a variety of occupations and provided a range of
perspectives. In total, 28 people attended the workshop. Members of the
e-pathway team were also in attendance. Not all attendees provided their
job roles within the NHS Trust, although occupations of those in
attendance included clinical psychologists, peer-support workers,
student nurses, consultants and community psychiatric nurses. Two
employees of the NHS Trust in attendance also indicated they had a
diagnosis of bipolar disorder, allowing them to provide further insight
from the perspectives of healthcare professional and patient. Finally,
one person from the bipolar disorder support group was in attendance, as
was a carer for a family member with bipolar disorder. In total, three
participants had bipolar disorder.

## Format of the workshop {#sec2-3}

The day included presentations from the bipolar e-pathways team,
including presentation of the algorithms that were on display throughout
the day, a presentation from a person with bipolar disorder within the
Trust, and two focus groups, one of which gave feedback on the pathway
during a semi-structured group discussion that incorporated open-ended
questions, with prompting for further elaboration. The second focus
group explored the training implications of the e-pathway; however, as
this was not a focus of the present study, no data were recorded from
this group, although all participants from this second focus group
completed the questionnaire at the end of the workshop. Attendees had
free choice of breakout group. Two of the participants with bipolar
disorder attended the focus group that was transcribed.

## Data collection {#sec2-4}

### Transcription of focus group {#sec2-4-1}

At the start of the discussion, those within the focus group were made
aware that the session was to be transcribed. Before beginning,
participants were reassured that their responses would remain anonymous.
Audio recording was not possible because of logistical constraints. As
such, the researcher transcribed the discussion by hand. As much detail
was gathered as possible, and where individual fragments were missed, a
summary of the speaker\'s point was instead made. The handwritten
transcription was later transferred to computer and checked for accuracy
by the researcher.

### Questionnaire {#sec2-4-2}

A questionnaire was designed before the workshop, to explore views about
the development of an e-pathway for bipolar disorder. All respondents
were made aware of the purpose of the questionnaire. The questionnaire
(see [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}) was distributed and completed
at the end of the day. Following the session, responses were compiled
into a document for analysis Table 1Bipolar e-pathway
questionnaireQuestion1How do you think an e-pathway for people with
bipolar disorder will affect the quality of care you/the Trust
deliver/receive?2Would you welcome the development of such a pathway?
What do you see as the advantages?3Do you have any concerns about the
pathway? Are there potential negative consequences?4In what way do you
think support, guidance and/or training could be developed to improve
the quality of care you deliver/receive?5Do you have any further
comments about the Bipolar Pathway?6Would you be interested in helping
to develop the pathway? If yes, please give your contact details below

Data were analysed by framework analysis,^30^ to systematically
establish relationships within the data to answer relevant questions
through the generation of a framework. This method of analysis,
developed for applied policy research, is becoming increasingly used
within healthcare and medical research.^31^ It allows the flexibility to
examine ideas that arise from the data during analysis.^32^ Themes can
be described as concepts that aim to describe the data.^31^ We followed
the five stages to framework analysis: familiarisation, identification
of a thematic framework, indexing, charting, and mapping and
interpretation.

## Ethical approval {#sec2-5}

As a service evaluation, this study did not require consent to be
granted from Newcastle University nor NHS Research Ethical Committees.
However, all procedures contributing to this work comply with the
ethical standards of the relevant national and institutional committees
on human experimentation and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as
revised in 2008. Participants acknowledged their consent to discuss the
topic before participating in group discussions.

# Results {#sec3}

In total, 26 questionnaires were submitted at the end of the workshop.
All respondents indicated that they welcomed the development of the
e-pathway for bipolar disorder. Through analysis of the questionnaires
and focus group, we developed an analytic framework that comprised five
key concepts: quality and delivery of care, patient--clinician
collaboration, flexibility and adaptability, impact on staff and impact
on healthcare services.

## Quality and delivery of care {#sec3-1}

Participants were asked how they felt the quality of care, and care
delivery, would be affected as a result of implementation of e-pathways.
Overall, healthcare professionals and patients felt that the
implementation of an e-pathway for bipolar disorder would improve care.
A key theme was that the consistency of care would improve, and that
there would be a sense of equality of care. Another benefit for the
implementation of e-pathways was that it was felt that clinicians would
be more likely to deliver care concordant with NICE guidelines, which
would be associated with improved outcomes for patients. "'I\'d hope it
will create a more consistent baseline to good practice in offering
evidence-based interventions whilst understanding the subtleties of why
sometimes we alter our treatments' (questionnaire, no role given)."

Furthermore, a theme arose from the discussion that having standardised
care and the ability to record treatment progress would allow clinicians
who regularly deviate from NICE guidelines, without sufficient
justification, to be 'flagged'. This could assist with highlighting
areas where care is consistently substandard.

A further concept that arose was that e-pathways would be expected to
facilitate the development of evidence-based and value-based treatment
strategies. One healthcare professional indicated: "'I think it has
enormous potential in improving the quality of care of service users and
helping staff in deciding/delivering evidence-based practice'
(questionnaire, consultant clinical psychologist)."

Furthermore, another respondent felt that the e-pathway would help to:
"'\[i\]mprove the consistency of approach -- aligned to the evidence
base of what works \[and\] support recording of decision making about
treatment and variance from NICE recommendations' (questionnaire,
psychologist)."

Overall, following analysis, the idea that the quality and delivery of
care would improve was widespread; however, care must be taken to ensure
equality of availability of interventions.

## Patient--clinician collaboration {#sec3-2}

The collaborative relationship between clinician and patient as a result
of e-pathways, including a more holistic approach to care, increased
co-production, and increased patient engagement also emerged from the
data. A presumed benefit of e-pathways would be the ability to include
the patient in the decision process of treatment, as both clinician and
patient could view the algorithm within e-pathways, and discuss options
relating to each stage or intervention. Most questionnaire respondents
raised the idea of increased collaboration as a result of e-pathways,
with many also indicating they believed it would be a more holistic
model of care. "'It should improve quality outcomes and service user
experience by ensuring informed decisions about elements of care
packages, ensuring consideration to be given to a holistic
bio-psycho-social approach \[...\] better engagement with interventions
and service due to collaborative transparent approach' (questionnaire,
no role given)."

However, a potential barrier arose in the physical appearance of the
algorithm: "'Showing \[a\] patient the visual form would be
overwhelming. I feel overwhelmed looking at the flow chart. It could be
easier to follow or more friendly looking or I would not show it to a
patient' (focus group, psychologist)."

Therefore, consideration must be given to the appearance of the
decision-tree, or how it could be better presented to patients to
prevent this being a barrier.

The final element of collaboration related to family members or carers,
with one healthcare professional indicating e-pathways would be:
"'\[An\] extra resource to utilise when working with clients and their
families' (questionnaire, no role given)."

e-Pathways were perceived as providing an effective way to maintain
collaboration between the patient and those involved in their care,
including carers, family members and clinicians.

## Flexibility and adaptability {#sec3-3}

Flexibility and adaptability refer to how e-pathways for bipolar
disorder could change to provide optimal care. In relation to concerns
regarding implementation of e-pathways, one respondent indicated:
"'Possibility of being a little rigid but \[a\] clinician can utilise
\[their\] own clinical decision making to justify care and treatment
going forward in care plans, progress notes, etc.' (questionnaire,
community psychiatric nurse)."

Participants emphasised the importance of ensuring that clinicians were
aware of the scope to use their own clinical judgement to deviate from
the treatment algorithm, with justification and to adapt treatment to
suit specific groups and to be flexible to accommodate management of
other co-morbidities. One concern that arose from several healthcare
professionals related to individuals with co-morbidities and adapting
e-pathways to suit other groups, such as adolescents or the elderly:
"'Need to ensure co-morbidities are understood and that people don\'t
forget about problems that don\'t fit under this diagnosis'
(questionnaire, no role given)."

Healthcare professionals suggested that broadening the e-pathway process
to support both pre-engagement and recovery would be important in
improving care for patients with bipolar disorder. For example,
pre-engagement could include enabling the patient to be able to access
resources relating to the algorithms and/or interventions before
commencing treatment. "'If public-facing it could introduce the patient
early for \[their\] own research or mood diaries' (focus group,
consultant)."

Similarly, healthcare professionals believed it would be beneficial if
e-pathways could be adapted to support both post-engagement recovery.

## Impact on staff {#sec3-4}

Respondents reported that they felt that the implementation of
e-pathways would have an impact on staff such as clinicians and mental
health nurses, and that clinicians would benefit from the more
structured guidance and clearer expectations, which may increase
clinician confidence. "'I think a downstream advantage may be that
clinicians come to supervision with clearer expectations and questions
e.g. 'We got stuck doing X, how can I approach this with the client?',
which would drive the quality of care' (questionnaire, psychologist)."
"'\[The\] principle of an e-pathway which will guide clinicians is
excellent, having information and interventions/guides will enhance
confidence' (questionnaire, consultant clinical psychologist)."

However, sufficient guidance was felt to be needed to ensure that
individuals were aware of their job role expectation with regard to
delivery of e-pathways: "'There must be greater clarity re job role
expectations -- who is expected to deliver what and how this fits within
\[the\] broader job role' (questionnaire, psychologist)."

One benefit that was identified was the idea of an aspirational pathway,
that e-pathways provided the standard of care that should be aspired to,
which could give staff a clearer sense of purpose and boost morale.
However, this could present a possible barrier: some clinicians stated
that they may feel frustration if they are unable to deliver the
recommended standard of care such as through a lack of resources. One
respondent indicated that this could be 'demoralising' (focus group,
practitioner adolescent services). Another indicated: "'\[The\]
clinician may become overwhelmed if there are no staff resources to
develop care or do not have training to implement certain groups or one
to one session' (questionnaire, no role given)."

This sense of an impact on staff was mirrored by a potential impact on
patients: disappointment if a recommended intervention was not available
in all areas. This was thought likely to be especially difficult for
individuals in rural areas, or those with limited mobility that are
unable to travel: "'\[The\] risk of it being a "postcode lottery" --
shows what should be offered but if not available in that service \[due
to lack of funding in a particular location\]; it would be frustrating
for the service user' (questionnaire, no role given)."

A further cost stemmed from concerns regarding increased pressure and
demands on staff: "'Support to engage with the pathway, staff feeling
overwhelmed and overloaded and pressured to discharge' (questionnaire,
consultant clinical psychologist)."Although some indicated they felt
implementation of e-pathways could be time-saving and reduce their
workload, others indicated the pressures staff already faced could
present an issue in terms of uptake. A further factor that could affect
staff is the idea of 'process-driven care'. Several healthcare
professionals voiced concerns that e-pathways would become a 'tick-box
exercise' (questionnaire, perinatal mental health team). "'We need to
ensure we are using it with purpose, not because we have to'
(questionnaire, no role given)."

One issue was that the implementation of e-pathways would become a
method of monitoring staff performance as opposed to a tool to provide
guidance and resources. One respondent on the questionnaire indicated
that, despite the stated purpose of e-pathways to provide support for
and not to assess clinicians, they were concerned that it may 'become
part of a performance framework' (questionnaire, no role given).

Also, a key issue to implementation was the concern that it 'takes the
art out of nursing' (questionnaire, no role given) or '\[I\] worry that
it might unwittingly invalidate care working skills' (questionnaire,
psychologist); namely, that it may lead to a loss of instinct and
clinical judgement.

## Impact on healthcare services {#sec3-5}

This concept relates to how implementation of e-pathways would affect
healthcare services, with concerns relating to cost, training and
resources. "'My underlying concern is how it would be implemented,
resources, staff, training \[...\] and being put into practice' (focus
group, practitioner adolescent services)."One key benefit raised was
that implementation of a system such as e-pathways would facilitate the
auditing process: "'Agree it may help to highlight gaps in resources and
help us think about how to tackle this' (questionnaire, no role given)."

For example, if the treatment algorithm regularly recommends an
intervention that is not available in one locality, it is easier to
identify where care or resources are falling short.

A barrier with a potential to affect the implementation of e-pathways
was training, with many healthcare professionals indicating the
necessity of sufficient training to ensure correct implementation and
use of e-pathways: "'Need to establish \[the\] training needs of staff
of different professions and peer support workers and experts by
experience. Some of this will be awareness and care skills, some related
to specific interventions' (questionnaire, no role given)."

A specific concern related to training around interventions, as many
believed there were currently insufficient practitioners trained in the
interventions that would be recommended within the treatment algorithm.
This relates to similar concerns regarding availability of resources. A
further concern related to insufficient supervision being in place to
support training and implementation.

# Discussion {#sec4}

Overall, healthcare professionals and patients welcomed the development
of the e-pathway for bipolar disorder, and helped to define several
benefits supporting the implementation of e-pathways, including
improvements in the quality and consistency of care, increase in good
practice and NICE-concordant care, clearer guidelines resulting in
increased satisfaction for clinicians, a more collaborative approach to
care and ability to monitor care and resources. If e-pathways are to be
successful, the benefits identified by patients must remain central to
development and implementation. However, it is arguably of at least
equal importance to establish the barriers that could hinder
implementation in order for necessary solutions to be developed. Costs
and possible recommendations are discussed below.

In keeping with previous research,^33^ healthcare professionals feared
loss or invalidation of care skills, clinical instinct and confidence in
unsupported clinical decision-making by trainees. The potential
liability consequent on deviations from the algorithm was also a
concern. This highlights the importance for the pathway team of
adequately communicating that the standard of care recommended in
e-pathways is aspirational, and that healthcare professionals should
feel able to use clinical judgement and deviate from the algorithm. This
further emphasises the importance of collaborative algorithm
development.

The algorithm was seen as 'overwhelming' for healthcare practitioners
and patients because of its apparent complexity. A further concern was
that irrelevant aspects of the treatment algorithm would still be
visible for some patients, such as the inclusion of medications that
could be contraindicated. One individual suggested that a more
user-friendly version, such as a simplified paper handout, could be
developed. A further suggestion was that a 'step' within the algorithm
could change colour to indicate when it is completed, to make the visual
aspect of the flow, charts more intuitive and easier to follow from a
patient perspective. These recommendations need to be considered in the
e-pathway design and a combined approach may be needed in which the
healthcare practitioner and patient are able to see the whole algorithm
to give a sense of the treatment journey and future options with a more
focused view of the immediately relevant treatment decisions. Healthcare
practitioners felt that effective training and resources would be
central to successful implementation for e-pathways. This replicated
experience elsewhere,^34^ and is a timely reminder that sufficient
resources need to be allocated to training

It was notable that although the bipolar e-pathway team saw the
identification of gaps between best practice and actual practice as an
important function of the e-pathway -- a way of identifying gaps in
training and provision, and of informing service development -- these
gaps appeared to raise anxieties in the workshop attendees. This will
need careful consideration during the process of e-pathway development.

This project had several limitations. First, as this was a valuable
opportunity to have access to a task-specific group of healthcare
professionals and people with bipolar disorder, the research had to be
as pragmatic as possible. As such, only one researcher undertook data
collection and because of logistical constraints, and data from only the
most relevant focus group were transcribed. Further detail, which may
have helped to answer the research questions, may have therefore been
missed. Because of the lack of transcription, it may have been
beneficial to validate the derived transcript and arising themes with
participants; however, this was not possible within the current study.
Additionally, one researcher carried out the qualitative analysis, which
may have made it more susceptible to subjectivity. The researcher also
developed the analytical framework, and this was discussed and refined
with other members of the team.^35^ A further limitation is that few
people with bipolar disorder responded to the invitation to the
workshop, and therefore feedback was primarily from healthcare
professionals. Although clinicians will use e-pathways in day-to-day
practice, implementation will affect patients through the care and
interventions they receive. As such, it is vital to gain an
understanding of the views of patients in the development and
implementation process. Therefore, this process would have benefitted
from further contributions from people with bipolar disorder. One
patient in attendance agreed that they would take the concept of
e-pathways to their bipolar support group, with feedback shared in a
less formal setting, and their input will help to shape the development
of the pathway.

This research assessed attitudes toward a treatment pathway that is yet
to be implemented. Although it is essential to ascertain stakeholders'
views throughout development, it is also important to assess the system
once in practice. Future research should examine the use of e-pathways
once implemented. This could either be a quantitative assessment of the
magnitude of change in care, using outcome measures as described in
studies above, such as ratings on self-report measures and rates of
hospital admission. If the e-pathway functions correctly, it would be
predicted that patients with bipolar disorder will have lower rates of
readmission and relapse. A qualitative methodology, as used here, could
examine healthcare professionals and patients' views (e.g. at the onset
of implementation and 1 year later), to determine whether the perceived
benefits of e-pathways are realised in practice, and if the costs
identified in the current research are sufficiently overcome.

In conclusion, the provision of e-pathway-supported, algorithm-informed
care has huge potential to inform service development, identify training
needs, enhance collaborative clinical decision-making, streamline
processes and improve quality of care. There are considerable hurdles to
overcome before the development and subsequent delivery can occur, but
an optimised e-pathway has the potential to improve outcomes and equity
for patients with bipolar disorder.

# Data availability {#sec-das}

Data available on request due to privacy/ethical restrictions.

A.L.E. collected, collated and analysed the data, and wrote the first
draft of the manuscript and co-ordinated input from other authors. J.L.
supervised the qualitative analysis and data collection. S.W. provided
overview of the project. G.D. led on the e-pathway development work and
E.C.-T. led on its application to service development. All authors
contributed to study design and write-up, and agreed the final version
of the manuscript.

This project was funded using existing NHS Trust and University
salaries, with no additional costs.

# Declaration of interest {#nts3}

None.
