=========================================
Tom Arie, CBE, FRCP, FFPH, FRCPsych (Hon)
=========================================



Claire Hilton
:Date: 2021-02


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

**Professor Emeritus of Health Care of the Elderly, University of
Nottingham, UK**

Tom Arie was an old age psychiatrist who steered proactive,
treatment-focused mental health services for older people onto the UK
policy agenda. This vital step ranks alongside other ‘firsts’ that
created the specialty of old age psychiatry: in 1949, Aubrey Lewis
established the first dedicated older people's psychiatric assessment
ward and appointed Felix Post consultant; in 1955, Martin Roth
demonstrated the error of the premise that all mentally unwell older
people were ‘senile’; and in 1958, Sam Robinson established the first
comprehensive old age psychiatry service in the UK.

Tomas Arje was born into a Jewish family in Prague on 9 August 1933. In
1939, after 5 months living under Nazi occupation, Tom and his parents
fled to England, 2 weeks before war broke out.\ :sup:`1` They settled in
Reading, where his parents worked for the BBC, monitoring Nazi
broadcasts. In 1952, he went up to Balliol College, Oxford, to read
classics. After 2 years, with a first in ‘Honour Moderations’, he
followed his growing yearning and swapped to medicine.

Interested in the study of the hospital as a small society, he trained
in psychiatry at the Maudsley Hospital, London, and in social medicine
at the London (now, Royal London) Hospital. At the Maudsley, working
with Felix Post, he found old age psychiatry spellbinding. At the
London, Professor Jerry Morris introduced him to social medicine and its
leaders. By the time Tom was appointed consultant psychiatrist at
Goodmayes Hospital, Essex, in 1969 (‘an unposh place […] Most people
thought I had taken leave of my senses!’)\ :sup:`2` he was personally
acquainted with National Health Service and social policy leaders,
including Chief Medical Officer Sir George Godber.

Tom and a few other newly appointed consultant psychogeriatricians – a
‘happy band of pilgrims’ as one described them – began to meet. Through
Tom's links, they negotiated the content for the Department of Health
and Social Security's blueprint for service development, *Services for
Mental Illness Related to Old Age* (1972). A year later, and growing in
number, the group became the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Group (now
Faculty) for the Psychiatry of Old Age. Tom chaired the first meeting –
and then supported the election of Felix Post as chair, meanwhile
continuing to inspire and nurture behind the scenes.

Away from policies and politics, Tom led an enthusiastic
multidisciplinary clinical team characterised by a low hierarchical
structure, high morale and positive expectations. Unusually for the
1970s, it included a plethora of part-time women junior doctors, who
later became leaders in their own fields. The team pioneered ways to
improve the health and well-being of older people, including using
domiciliary assessments routinely. They achieved good clinical outcomes
and their work highlighted the fallacy of commonplace ageist
assumptions. They repeatedly evaluated all aspects of their work in a
way that today would be labelled ‘quality improvement’, but for Tom was
an instinctive, effective and fruitful way of working.\ :sup:`3,4` His
creative approach seeped into new teams led by those he
inspired.\ :sup:`3,4`

In 1977, Tom was appointed Professor of Health Care of the Elderly at
Nottingham University. There, he modelled and led a joint
geriatric–psychiatric team. His department was a magnet and inspiration
for politicians and clinicians. In the 1980s, with wide admiration for
UK psychogeriatrics and an international lack of trained
psychogeriatricians, the British Council, the UK's international
cultural relations body, sponsored psychogeriatric courses. These ‘Arie
courses’, based on the ‘Arie model’, took place in the UK (Nottingham),
Australia, Israel, Korea, Poland, Portugal and elsewhere, creating
significant long-term impact. Tom was Vice President of the Royal
College of Psychiatrists in 1985–1986. He was made CBE in 1995 for
services to medicine. He was awarded a College honorary fellowship in
2001 and the Old Age Faculty lifetime achievement award in 2012. The
British Geriatrics Society bestowed their highest honour on him, the
Founder's Medal, in 2004.

Tom's goals were humane and idealistic. Some of his ideas were, perhaps,
too idealistic, and could not break through bureaucratic, administrative
and ideological fashions. He fought for dignity for older people, always
sensitive to the moral and medical aspects of their care, not just
advocating but also agitating for them\ **.** Tom's style, and what he
enjoyed doing most, was to ‘make grass grow in the desert – enthusing,
fostering, encouraging, making things happen, fighting my
corner’.\ :sup:`2` Providing for some of society's most vulnerable
people seemed to be an echo from his childhood.

Outside work, Tom was a creator and collector, particularly of friends
and paper. He and his wife Eleanor (also a doctor) were always
wonderfully hospitable, with their enormous rustic kitchen being the
social hub of their home. He read voraciously on many subjects. When a
neighbour opened a 24/7 second-hand charity bookshop in her garden shed,
he would wander over and browse. He took pleasure in rescuing books from
there and the local charity shops that he thought needed love and
attention in his hands and on his bookshelves. He kept vast swathes of
his personal archives neatly filed, including his diaries; I e-mailed
him recently: on what precise date in 1970 did he present a certain
report on his work at Goodmayes? The answer flew back a few hours later.

‘I count my blessings every day’, Tom would say. His close-knit family
meant the world to him – and he to them – Eleanor and his children
Laura, Sophie and Sam, and grandchildren Blake, Zak, Max, Lucy, Eli and
Milo, and his wider family. Tom died of cancer at home on 24 May 2020
with his family around him. Now, with his passing, may his memory and
his teachings continue to be a blessing to others and inspiration to
future generations.
