---
abstract: |
  In the past decade there has been a rapid increase in gender
  diversity, particularly in children and young people, with referrals
  to specialist gender clinics rising. In this article, the evolving
  terminology around transgender health is considered and the role of
  psychiatry is explored now that this condition is no longer classified
  as a mental illness. The concept of conversion therapy with reference
  to alternative gender identities is examined critically and with
  reference to psychiatry\'s historical relationship with conversion
  therapy for homosexuality. The authors consider the uncertainties that
  clinicians face when dealing with something that is no longer a
  disorder nor a mental condition and yet for which medical
  interventions are frequently sought and in which mental health
  comorbidities are common.
author:
- Lucy Griffin
- Katie Clyde
- Richard Byng
- Susan BewleyCorrespondence to Lucy Griffin
  (<drlucygriffin@outlook.com>)
date: 2021-10
institute:
- 1Priory Hospital Bristol, Bristol, UK
- 2Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust, Hampshire, UK
- 3Faculty of Health, University of Plymouth, UK
- 4Department of Women & Children\'s Health, King\'s College London, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
- id: ref38
- id: ref39
- id: ref40
- id: ref41
- id: ref42
- id: ref43
- id: ref44
- id: ref45
- id: ref46
- id: ref47
- id: ref48
- id: ref49
- id: ref50
- id: ref51
- id: ref52
- id: ref53
- id: ref54
- id: ref55
- id: ref56
- id: ref57
- id: ref58
- id: ref59
title: "Sex, gender and gender identity: a re-evaluation of the
  evidence"
---

pmc

In 2018 the Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych) issued a position
statement to promote good care when dealing with transgender and
gender-diverse people that relates to 'conversion therapy'.^1^ In this
article we reappraise the phenomenology of gender identity, contrast
'treatments' for homosexuality with those for gender non-conformity,
analyse the relationship between gender dysphoria and mental disorders
with particular reference to the younger cohort of transgender patients,
and ask how psychiatrists can address distress related to gender while
upholding the central tenet of 'first do no harm'.

# Homosexuality and conversion therapy {#sec1}

Male homosexuality was outlawed in the UK in 1865 until the Sexual
Offences Act 1967 decriminalised sexual acts between men. During that
time, homosexuality was shameful, stigmatised and conceptualised as a
mental disorder. Psychiatry was instrumental in its treatment, which
continued even after the legal change.^2^

Attempts to 'cure' same-sex desire included psychotherapy, hormone
treatment and various behavioural interventions. These interventions are
now considered 'conversion' or 'reparative' therapy.^3^ One high-profile
failure for such 'treatments' was Alan Turing. After being found guilty
of gross indecency in 1951, he was prescribed oestrogen, which rendered
him impotent and caused gynaecomastia. He died by suicide in 1954.^4^

Conversion therapies lost popularity as evidence emerged of their
ineffectiveness,^5^ coupled with more tolerant social attitudes.
Homosexuality was removed from the World Health Organization (WHO)
ICD-10 classification in 1992. In 2014, the RCPsych published a position
statement explicitly rejecting conversion therapy and supporting a
ban.^6^ Same-sex orientation is regarded as a normal, acceptable
variation of human sexuality.

Enshrined in the Equality Act 2010, lesbians and gay men in the UK now
enjoy the same civil rights as heterosexuals in terms of healthcare,
marriage and raising of children, and equal employment. Although they
enjoy equal status and increased visibility in most Western societies,
there remain countries and cultures where same-sex practice is taboo or
criminal, and where people still seek treatment.

# Beyond sexual orientation {#sec2}

In recent years, increasing links have been forged between lesbian and
gay communities and those representing other gender identities.
Stonewall describes 'any person whose gender expression does not conform
to conventional ideas of male or female' as falling under the umbrella
term 'trans'.^7^

Definitions have evolved beyond those included in the 1992 ICD-10 under
'gender identity disorders', with which psychiatrists might be
familiar.^8^ Transsexualism was widely understood to mean 'a desire to
live and be accepted as a member of the opposite sex, and an accompanied
discomfort of one\'s anatomic sex'.^8^ Underlying mechanisms are poorly
understood, although there are similarities and overlaps with both body
dysmorphia and body integrity identity disorder.^9,10^ Sufferers might
embark on social and medical intervention to help them 'pass' as the
opposite sex. Historically, a diagnosis of gender dysphoria would have
been required for doctors to intervene in this group.^11^

Transgender, however, has become a much broader category ([Fig.
1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}). New terminology reflects a conceptual shift
from clinical disorder to personal identity.^12^ Crucially, gender
dysphoria is no longer integral to the condition. The World Health
Organization has renamed 'gender identity disorder' as 'gender
incongruence' and reclassified it as a 'condition related to sexual
health' rather than retaining it in the chapter pertaining to 'mental
and behavioural disorders',^13^ a somewhat discrepant placement,
reflecting a political rather than scientific decision-making process.
Fig. 1A page from *The Gender Book*^12^ (reproduced with permission of
[www.thegenderbook.com](www.thegenderbook.com)).

By contrast, DSM-5 has removed 'gender identity disorder', renaming it
'gender dysphoria'. It is possible to meet the criteria for a diagnosis
of gender dysphoria within DSM-5 without experiencing body dysphoria
relating to primary or secondary sexual characteristics,^14^ and the
American Psychiatric Association emphasises that 'not all transgender
people suffer from gender dysphoria'.^15^

The following is from the 2018 ICD-11:^16^ "'Gender incongruence of
childhood is characterized by a marked incongruence between an
individual\'s experienced/expressed gender and the assigned sex in
prepubertal children. It includes a strong desire to be a different
gender than the assigned sex; a strong dislike on the child\'s part of
his or her sexual anatomy or anticipated secondary sex characteristics
and/or a strong desire for the primary and/or anticipated secondary sex
characteristics that match the experienced gender; and make-believe or
fantasy play, toys, games or activities and playmates that are typical
of the experienced gender rather than the assigned sex.'"

Definitions are inadequate in explaining how anyone experiences the
gender of the opposite sex. Without further explanation of 'toys, games
or activities' that are typical of each sex, this is left to parents,
teachers and doctors to determine. The inference might be that
gender-congruent behaviours have some objective existence and not
fulfilling them might indicate a 'trans' identity. Children who do not
conform to social norms and expectations come to dislike their sexual
characteristics: that embodiment of their gender dissonance.

There is a lack of consensus demonstrated as to the exact nature of the
condition. Questions remain for psychiatrists regarding whether gender
dysphoria is a normal variation of gender expression, a social
construct, a medical disease or a mental illness. If merely a natural
variation, it becomes difficult to identify the purpose of or
justification for medical intervention.

# Conversion therapy relating to gender {#sec3}

The RCPsych gives a description within the position statement of
'treatments for transgender people that aim to suppress or divert their
gender identity -- i.e. to make them exclusively identify with the sex
assigned to them at birth'.^1^ Conversion therapy is described as 'any
approach that aims to persuade trans people to accept their sex assigned
at birth'. It goes on to include 'placing barriers \[to\] medical
transition'. Unfortunately, the statement does not define 'approach'
beyond alluding to psychoanalytic or behavioural talking therapies.
Thus, conversion therapy for transgender people appears conflated with
that for homosexuality. Furthermore, there is little evidence that it is
taking place in the UK.^17^ Historically, a diagnosis of gender
dysphoria was required before medical intervention;^10^ this is a part
of standard gatekeeping that is now being criticised as a 'barrier'
instead of regular safe medical practice.^2^ Now, a self-declaration of
being 'trans' appears to be indication enough for a patient to expect
their doctor provide a range of complex medical treatments, with no
evidence of dysphoria being required.^18^

The position statement^1^ could also be read as suggesting that full
medical transition is an ultimate goal in gender-diverse patients,
rather than considering a range of possible goals, which might include
limited interventions or reconciliation with one\'s own (sexed) body.
With regard to conversion therapy in children, the statement does not
refer to desistance; evidence suggests that the majority of children
left alone reconcile their identity with their biological sex; the
feelings of 60--80% of children with a formal diagnosis of gender
dysphoria remit during adolescence.^19--21^

# Definitions of sex, gender and gender identity {#sec4}

Gender theorists propose that all people must have a gender identity; it
is not waivable. For those people whose internal identity aligns with
their sex, the word cisgender and 'cis' terminology are used. Those
whose identity is wholly that of the opposite sex are described as
transgender or 'trans'. However, there are other identities for those
whose internal sense lies somewhere between or outside a neat fit into
either gender-binary category. Fluidity and fluctuation in gender
identity is also recognised, with categories such as 'non-binary',
'gender-fluid', 'genderqueer', 'pangender' and 'genderfuck' all recorded
by clinicians at the UK\'s Gender Identity Development Service (GIDS)
for under-18-year-olds.^22^ The social networking site Tumblr presently
describes over 100 different genders.^23^ Without a strong male or
female identification, 'agender' becomes itself another gender identity.

Some consider gender identity to be fixed and absolute, with some
neuroscientists asserting that it develops *in utero* in the
second-trimester brain.^24,25^ However, there is little to no convincing
evidence to support fundamental differences between the brains of
females and males.^26^ If one\'s 'internal sense of being a man or a
woman' no longer refers to a 'man' or 'woman' as defined by biological
sex^27^ then the definition of gender identity risks becoming circular.

Within current debates, if gender identity becomes uncoupled from both
biological sex and gendered socialisation ([Box
1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}), it develops an intangible soul-like
quality or 'essence'. As a pure subjective experience, it may be
overwhelming and powerful but is also unverifiable and unfalsifiable. If
this identity is held to be a person\'s innermost core concept of self,
then questioning the very existence of gender identity becomes equated
with questioning that person\'s entire sense of being, and consequently
risks being considered a threat to the right to exist, or even as a
threat to kill. Behaviours such as 'misgendering' or 'dead-naming' are
understood by proponents of gender theory to be destructive, debasing
and dehumanising.^28^ This might explain why the prevailing discourse
has become as sensitive and at times inflammatory as it has. Box 1Sex,
gender and gender identity**Sex**Humans are sexually dimorphic: there
are only two viable gametes and two sexes, whose primary and secondary
sexual characteristics determine what role they play in human
reproduction. Sex is determined at fertilisation and revealed at birth
or, increasingly, *in utero*. The existence of rare and well-described
'disorders (differences) of sexual differentiation' does not negate the
fact that sex is binary. The term 'assigned at birth' suggests a
possibly arbitrary allocation by a health professional, rather than the
observed product of sexual reproduction.**Gender**Gender describes a
social system that varies over time and location and involves shaping of
a set of behaviours deemed appropriate for one\'s sex. It operates at an
unconscious level via strong social norms, yet is also rigidly enforced
by coercive controls and sometimes violence.^18^ The 'rules' exist
regardless of how individuals feel about them. Gender can thus be
perceived as oppressive and potentially painful to all people of both
sexes within patriarchal societies, the dominant form of social
structure across most, although not all, of the globe. Feminist theory
holds that gender operates as a hierarchy, with men occupying the
superior position and women the subordinate. As long as this hierarchy
exists, all women are harmed to some extent, whether or not they conform
to their sex stereotypes.^19^**Gender identity**If sex refers to
biology, and gender to socialisation and role, then gender identity may
be viewed as the psychological aspect. The American Psychological
Association defines it as 'someone\'s internal sense of being a man or a
woman'.^20^ Gender identity is thus distinguished from biological sex
and gendered socialisations.^21^

Nonetheless, notions of gender identity are still contested and raise
some ethical questions for professionals working at the interface of
physical and mental disorder. Most psychiatrists reject Cartesian
dualism, whereby the mind is something imprisoned inside the body, or
the 'ghost in the machine'.^29^ How should doctors consider the body? We
are born as, and die as, a body; we *are* our bodies. How can someone be
born in the wrong body? Many patients bring a 'wrong' or 'wronged' body
to their doctor; these may be traumatised, wounded, diseased or disliked
bodies. How should doctors react when someone informs them that,
although they inhabit the body of a man, they are in all other respects
female? We must deal with all our patients with compassion but also make
safe medical decisions when demonstrable material reality is at odds
with a patient\'s subjectivity.

# Children and adolescents {#sec5}

The Gender Identity Development Service (GIDS), Britain\'s only
specialised gender service for children and adolescents and based at the
Tavistock Centre, London, has recorded a 25-fold rise in referrals since
2009, most marked in biological girls ('assigned female at birth'), who
make up the majority of referrals presently ([Fig.
2](#fig02){ref-type="fig"}).^30^ Fig. 2Referral rates to the Gender
Identity Development Service at the Tavistock Centre (Tavistock and
Portman NHS Trust) in London between 2009 and 2019.^30^

Despite gender dysphoria no longer falling within the remit of mental
illness in ICD-11, there is a substantial body of evidence of increased
levels of mental illness among adults, usually attributed to societal
responses to gender non-conformity or 'minority stress'.^31^ De Vries et
al measured psychiatric comorbidity among those referred to a child and
adolescent gender clinic in The Netherlands and also found increased
rates of depression, anxiety and suicidal ideation in this younger
group.^32^ However, a potentially worrying picture regarding causes and
consequences emerges from more recent research in this young,
increasingly natal-female population.

Kaltiala-Heino et al examined referrals to an adolescent gender identity
clinic in Finland over a 2-year period, finding high rates of mental
health problems, social isolation and bullying ([Fig.
3](#fig03){ref-type="fig"}).^33^ Most bullying pre-dated the onset of
gender dysphoria and was unrelated to gender incongruence. Fig.
3Referrals to an adolescent gender identity clinic in Finland over a
2-year period (from 2011--2013).^33^

Similarly, in the UK, Holt et al^34^ found that associated difficulties
were common in children and adolescents referred to the GIDS in London
([Fig. 4](#fig04){ref-type="fig"}). Same-sex attraction was particularly
common among natal females, with only 8.5% of those referred to the GIDS
describing themselves as primarily attracted to boys. This raises
important questions about current societal acceptance of young lesbians
even within youth LGBTQ+ culture. It is possible that at least some
gender-non-conforming girls come to believe themselves boys or 'trans
masculine non-binary' as more acceptable or comfortable explanations for
same-sex sexual attraction,^35^ a kind of 'internalised homophobia'.
Autism spectrum disorders are consistently overrepresented in referred
children and adolescents.^36^ Fig. 4Referrals to the Gender Identity
Development Service at the Tavistock Centre (Tavistock and Portman NHS
Trust) in London between 1 January 2012 and 31 December 2012.^34^ ASD,
autism spectrum disorder.

The RCPsych\'s position statement acknowledges these elevated rates of
mental illness within the transgender population,^1^ but appears to
attribute them primarily to hostile external responses to those not
adhering to gender norms (or sex-specific stereotypes).^37,38^ A deeper
analysis of mental illness and alternative gender identities is not
undertaken, and common causal factors and confounders are not explored.
This is worrying, as attempts to explore, formulate and treat coexisting
mental illness, including that relating to childhood trauma, might then
be considered tantamount to 'conversion therapy'. Although mental
illness is overrepresented in the trans population it is important to
note that gender non-conformity itself is not a mental illness or
disorder. As there is evidence that many psychiatric disorders persist
despite positive affirmation and medical transition, it is puzzling why
transition would come to be seen as a key goal rather than other
outcomes, such as improved quality of life and reduced morbidity. When
the phenomena related to identity disorders and the evidence base are
uncertain, it might be wiser for the profession to admit the
uncertainties. Taking a supportive, exploratory approach with
gender-questioning patients should not be considered conversion therapy.

# Suicide, self-harm and current controversies {#sec6}

Transgender support groups have emphasised the risk of suicide. After
controlling for coexisting mental health problems, studies show an
increased risk of suicidal behaviour and self-harm in the transgender
population, although underlying causality has not been convincingly
demonstrated.^39^ Then, expressed in the maxim 'better a live daughter
than a dead son', parents, teachers and doctors are encouraged to affirm
unquestioningly the alternative gender for fear of the implied
consequences. There is a danger that poor-quality data are being used to
support gender affirmation and transition without the strength of
evidence that would normally determine pathways of care. One 20-year
Swedish longitudinal cohort study showed persisting high levels of
psychiatric morbidity, suicidal acts and completed suicide many years
after medical transition.^40^ These results are not reassuring and might
suggest that more complex intrapsychic conflicts remain, unresolved by
living as the opposite sex.

Established risk factors for self-harm and suicidal behaviour appear to
be age related (younger trans patients are at higher risk) and include
comorbid mental health problems, particularly depression, and a history
of sexual abuse.^39^ Thus, all new patients of any age warrant thorough
assessment and formulation using a biopsychosocial model; the best
evidence-informed interventions should be provided. If this is followed
by an individual desisting it should not be considered conversion
therapy. That term should perhaps be reserved for coercive treatments.

Best psychiatric practice avoids oversimplification of the causes and
treatment of suicidal behaviour and self-harm. Preliminary data from a
small 'before and after' pilot study of the use of puberty blockers at
the Tavistock Centre in selected children found a reduction in body
image problems in adolescents following a year of puberty suppression.
However, positive effects were offset by increases in self-harm and
suicidal thoughts.^41^ Surprisingly, this unpublished study was deemed a
success such that prescribing of puberty blockers was introduced as
standard practice and commissioned with scaling up of services. There
was no development of alternative psychological approaches, nor were
randomised controlled comparisons made.

Evidence suggests that almost 100% of children commencing puberty
blockade go on to receive cross-sex hormones.^42^ This requires further
interrogation to ascertain whether the high figures are due to robust,
effective selection and gatekeeping or to a less palatable
interpretation that preventing physical and sexual maturation
crystallises gender dysphoria as a first step on a cascade of
interventions.^43^ The GIDS remains under intense scrutiny regarding
research criticisms.^44^ Although in the early 2000s it was criticised
for being too conservative and not offering puberty blockers, there
appears to have been a volte-face made in response to external
pressure,^45^ without the publishing of robust data showing that this
intervention is effective and safe.

Puberty blockers are known to affect bone and, possibly, brain
development. They put users at risk of developing osteoporosis^46^ and
are associated with reductions in expected IQ.^47^ They are described as
'buying time' for adolescents to make up their mind about whether to
proceed with transition. Long-term effects are not known, but
infertility appears inevitable when cross-sex hormones are introduced
shortly after puberty blockers.^48^ Loss of sexual maturation will also
be associated with lack of adult sexual function, although it is
unlikely that a pre-pubertal child can truly understand this side-effect
at the time of consent.

Those seeking transition are a vulnerable population who suffer from
high levels of suicidality, psychiatric morbidity and associated
difficulties. Medical and surgical transition is sought to relieve these
psychiatric symptoms. Plausibly, there is an initial reduction in
distress following transition, although no controlled trials exist.
Therefore, the long-term outcome of medical and surgical transition in
terms of mortality and quality of life remains unknown. No long-term
comparative studies exist that satisfactorily demonstrate that hormonal
and surgical interventions are superior to a biopsychosocial formulation
with evidence-based therapy in reducing psychological distress, body
dysphoria and underlying mental illness.

# Clinical implications {#sec7}

It is unclear what the role of psychiatry is in the assessment and
treatment of gender dysphoria, now that it is no longer considered a
diagnosable mental illness, and whether there is still a place for a
routine psychosocial assessment. It could be argued that patients should
be deterred from gender intervention pathways while comorbid mental
illness is treated ([Fig. 5](#fig05){ref-type="fig"}). Without long-term
follow-up data, it is not possible to identify those who might reconcile
with their sex and those who might come to deeply regret their medical
and/or surgical transition. Moreover, it is not transparent where
ultimate and legal responsibility for decision-making lies -- with the
patient, parents (if the patient is a child), psychologist,
endocrinologist, surgeon or psychiatrist. Fig. 5Are these scenarios
examples of good clinical practice or conversion therapy?

Psychiatrists understand that human development is necessary, but not
always comfortable. Puberty, although a normal physiological process, is
associated with particularly high levels of psychological and bodily
discomfort. Psychiatrists' role is to journey with patients as change is
navigated and to provide support through sharing uncertainty and
difficult decision-making. But in the current climate, psychiatrists may
be unsure whether addressing psychological and social antecedents will
lead to accusations of conversion therapy. Attempts to reconcile a
sufferer\'s discomfort with their actual body would be good practice in
other conditions involving body image disturbance, such as anorexia
nervosa.

The magnitude of any benefits of medical and surgical transition is not
clear. Follow-up studies are sparse, and with the new cohort of
adolescents, clinicians step even further into the unknown.^49^ These
young people are not comparable to adult, mainly male-to-female,
research participants on whom existing empirical clinical guidelines
were based. Doctors are now questioning the wisdom of gender-affirmation
treatment of children and young people, citing poor diagnostic certainty
and low-quality evidence.^50^ A recent review of evidence for the use of
gender-affirming hormones for children and adolescents states that these
drugs 'can cause substantial harms, including death' and concludes 'the
current evidence base does not support informed decision making and safe
practice'.^51^

Among a plethora of online videos by teenagers proudly displaying their
mastectomy scars a worrying increase in detransitioner testimonies can
now be found^52^ ([Fig. 6](#fig06){ref-type="fig"}). These are mainly
young women who have rejected their trans identities and are reconciling
with their birth sex. Fig. 6Reasons given for detransitioning in a
female detransition and re-identification survey run between 16 and 30
August 2016 and shared through online social networking sites.^52^

# Feminist concerns {#sec8}

In theory, universal human rights should not pit disadvantaged groups
against one another, but in practice, disputes occur. Women\'s rights
activists point to persistent global inequalities, sex discrimination
and violence against women and girls. They are concerned that ignoring
sex as a reality risks no longer being able to name, measure and
ameliorate sex-based harms. Endorsing old sex and gender stereotypes in
an attempt to validate young patients may inadvertently shore up
outdated notions of how men and women should look and behave. There is
no reason to believe that women have an innate love of pink and wearing
high heels and find map-reading difficult, any more than men have a
natural leaning towards blue and playing football and make excellent
leaders.

Inherent in the notion of 'gender identity' is that there already exists
a specific subjective experience of being a man or a woman. However,
there cannot be a significant intrinsic experiential difference between
male and female human beings when we cannot know what those differences
are. One cannot possibly know how it feels to be anything other than
oneself. Medicine may be in danger of reinforcing social norms and
reifying a concept that is impossible to define over and above material
biological reality. At present, many health, social, educational and
legal policies are being adapted to give gender primacy over
sex.^53--57^

# Conclusions {#sec9}

Language that confuses or conflates sex and gender identity, while
appearing inclusive, might have the unintended consequence of closing
down the means to understand complexity and respond appropriately to
patients' emotional and material reality. The medical profession must be
compassionate, accept differences and fight for those who are
marginalised and discriminated against.

However, viewing transgender as a fixed or stable entity, rather than a
state of mind with multiple causative factors, closes down opportunities
for doctors and patients to explore the meaning of any discomfort. Being
gender non-conforming, or wishing to opt out of gender altogether, is
not only *not* indicative of mental disorder -- it is, in many ways, an
entirely rational response to present capitalist reliance on rigid
gender norms and roles. However, when multiple medical interventions are
required on an otherwise healthy body or doctors are expected to deny
the concept of sex or the sexed body, the situation becomes less
coherent. The notion of conversion therapy for those seeing themselves
as transgender relies on another binary -- that of 'cisgender' and
'transgender' -- being set, closed, biologically anchored categories
without overlap, rather than a more plausible hypothesis that one\'s
gender identity is flexible, informed by one\'s culture, personality,
personal preferences and social milieu.

The push for early bodily modification and hormones by some transgender
patients is a cause for concern. New services, modelled on commissioning
guidance from NHS England for adults of 17 years and above, will allow
for self-referral, preclude psychological formulation or therapeutic
intervention as standard practice, and recommend hormonal intervention
after two appointments.^58^ This will further scale up hormonal and
surgical interventions in young patients, who will miss out on pubertal
development and necessary mental health treatment in their quest for
interventions that may harm and that they may later regret.

In the rapidly moving and politicised debate, psychiatrists look to the
RCPsych for guidance. Those providing and interpreting the scanty
evidence from published research need to be independent and impartial,
using best-quality measures rather than ideology. It is confusing to
liken open-minded working with young patients as they figure out who
they are to conversion therapy. Holding an empathic neutral middle
ground, which might or might not include medical transition, should not
be equated with this. Psychiatrists need to feel empowered to explore
the meaning of identity with their patients, treat coexisting mental
illness and employ a trauma-informed model of care when appropriate.

The General Medical Council\'s Good Medical Practice demands of
clinicians compassion, shared decision-making and safeguarding of young
people\'s open futures.^59^ The counterargument to unquestioning gender
affirmation is that the process of medical transition may itself prove
to be another form of conversion therapy, creating a new cohort of
life-long patients dependent on medical services and turning at least
some lesbian and gay young people into simulacra of straight members of
the opposite sex. Psychiatry sits on this knife-edge: running the risk
of being accused of transphobia or, alternatively, remaining silent
throughout this uncontrolled experiment. Respectful debate, careful
research and measurement of outcomes are always required.

We consulted a trans woman and a detransitioner for this article. We
thank them for their input.

**Lucy Griffin**, MBBS, BSc, MRCPsych, is a consultant psychiatrist at
The Priory Hospital Bristol, UK. **Katie Clyde**, MBChB, MRCPsych, DGM,
is a consultant psychiatrist with Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust,
Hampshire, UK. **Richard Byng**, MB BChir, MRCGP, MPH, PhD, is a general
practitioner and Professor of Primary Care Research at the University of
Plymouth, UK. **Susan Bewley**, MD, FRCOG, MA, is Professor (Emeritus)
of Obstetrics and Women\'s Health, Department of Women & Children\'s
Health, King\'s College London, UK.

L.G.: undertook a search and analysis of the literature, and conceived
and wrote the paper. K.C.: undertook a search and analysis of the
literature, and contributed to the drafting of the paper. R.B.:
participated in the conception and evolution of the analysis, critically
reviewing the paper and suggesting amendments incorporated into the
final paper. S.B.: participated in the conception and evolution of the
analysis, critically reviewing the paper and suggesting amendments
incorporated into the final paper.

# Declaration of interest {#nts3}

None.

## Supplementary material {#sec10}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.73.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::
