==============
Authors' reply
==============



Lucy Griffin
Katie Clyde
Richard Byng
Susan Bewley

:date: 2021-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Thank you for publishing our article\ :sup:`1` and facilitating academic
debate in this rapidly evolving area of healthcare. It is unsurprising
to find disagreement over the interpretation of existing research, and
we welcome this opportunity to respond to Ashley and review the many
references supplied, including data published after our article was
accepted. We happily address Ashley's points and respond to all
individual references in Table 1
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.13626380.v3.

We stated that the College sees the placement of barriers to seeking
transition as a form of conversion therapy, and we shortened – but did
not substantively change – the position statement quote.\ :sup:`2` We
believe it accurately represents the meaning, and indeed the same
abbreviation was used within the body of the position statement itself.
If we are wrong about the College's stance, and we agree there is a lack
of specificity about barriers, others too may be confused. Given moves
to criminalise conversion therapies,\ :sup:`3` the College should
clarify what constitutes unacceptable practice\ :sup:`4` and be clear
that provision of psychological interventions to address existing mental
health needs before referral for cross-sex hormones, or surgery, would
not constitute a barrier or conversion therapy. This is of particular
importance since the recent UK judicial review, which found that young
people are unlikely to be able to provide informed consent for early
medical intervention.

We agree we used some non-peer-reviewed literature. It is well
established that dissenting voices can go unheard by invested clinicians
and reports of harm take much longer to recognise.\ :sup:`5` In a
word-constrained, broad-based discussion, we could not analyse all the
existing literature about natural history, persistence of gender
incongruence in youth, rising referrals, or the age and sex switches,
though these have been covered elsewhere.\ :sup:`6` Similarly, other
authors have noted that gender dysphoria is a common step in the
developmental pathway of same-sex attraction.\ :sup:`7`

Proponents of affirmative care often claim that medical transition is
well studied, with academic consensus on effectiveness. In reality, the
literature is fraught with study design problems, including convenience
sampling, lack of controls, small sample sizes, short study lengths and
high drop-out rates among participants. Most of the studies cited in
Ashley's letter were of cross-sectional observational design (Table 1)
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.13626380.v3. These low quality
studies are unable to demonstrate causality and are susceptible to
confounders. An important example of the shortcomings of such
convenience sampling is the 2020 paper by Turban et al, which claims to
demonstrate lower suicidal ideation in adults who had been prescribed
GnRHa in adolescence.\ :sup:`8` There are a number of methodological
shortcomings associated with this biased sampling,\ :sup:`9` the most
worrying being the authors’ failure to recognise that this single
positive finding is inevitable as prescribers would only have offered
puberty blockers to adolescents with stable mental health. Those
adolescents with severe psychological problems would not have been
eligible. Suicidal ideation is almost certainly related to poor mental
health (both past and present) in this group rather than any lack of
puberty blockade. This same fact also renders any retrospective desire
for treatment invalid. The authors’ recommendation that ‘this treatment
[should] be made available to transgender adolescents who want it’ is
unsupportable.

Before-and-after studies and case-note reviews are similarly unreliable.
Like first-hand accounts, they are mainly useful for raising, not
answering, quantitative questions. Benefits will be bolstered by mutual
belief systems, clinician charisma, powerful mood-altering drugs and
body modifications, as well as the placebo effect. By their nature,
these kinds of evidence are unconvincing to an ethical medical
profession with a long history of causing harm.\ :sup:`5`

The problem of missing data distorts routinely quoted high levels of
satisfaction and low regret rates in transgender healthcare. It is
unknown whether large losses to follow-up in gender dysphoria research,
often over 30%,\ :sup:`10` mask adverse effects, including death by
suicide, cardiovascular disease or general morbidity associated with
deteriorating mental and physical health. Thus, long-term cohort data,
as well as appropriate randomised trials, are essential.\ :sup:`11`

Publication bias in this area can be demonstrated by a key ‘positive’
published study\ :sup:`12` which was widely reported by media outlets.
This population-based study initially reported a ‘longitudinal
association between gender-affirming surgery and reduced likelihood of
mental health treatment’ and declared that these findings ‘lend support
to the decision to provide gender-affirming surgeries to transgender
individuals who seek them’. However, when the authors were asked to
address significant methodological limitations and reanalyse including a
comparator group, any purported benefit disappeared.\ :sup:`13` The
journal editor stated that the original conclusion of the benefits of
surgeries ‘was too strong’, and that the data ‘demonstrated no advantage
of surgery in relation to subsequent mood or anxiety disorder-related
health care visits or prescriptions or hospitalizations following
suicide attempts’.\ :sup:`14` The published correction garnered much
less media interest than the initial flawed research.

We agree with Ashley that scientific literature must meet the highest
standard for publication and that competent care depends on the
integrity of the scientific process. We would add that gender healthcare
deserves the same rigorous scientific underpinning as all other areas of
medicine. However, in the absence of double-blind randomised controlled
trials, there can be no analysis of metadata. The often cited ‘What we
Know’ project does not meet even the minimum standard of a systematic
review.\ :sup:`15` Poor-quality publications are then recycled as
‘evidence’ and can form the basis of poor-quality guidelines,\ :sup:`16`
which in turn are cited as further evidence that this ‘treatment’ works.

Ashley calls for love, but this quality resides outside the consultation
room and is not a medical intervention. We support the highest-quality
compassionate and evidence-based care for all individuals, based on
their own values and circumstances, and are only opposed to bad
science\ :sup:`17,18` which supports, promotes or sells medical
interventions without reliably quantifying the outcomes. Present and
future patients deserve better, unbiased, sound evidence. Higher-quality
collaborative research and independent adjudication of the
evidence\ :sup:`19` are required to find out exactly what works, for
whom, when and for how long.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None
