============================================================================================
Soaring seas, forest fires and deadly drought: climate change conspiracies and mental health
============================================================================================

Alexander Jack
Reena PanchalCorrespondence to Alexander Jack (a.jack@wlv.ac.uk)
:Date: 2021-08

:Abstract:
   There is scientific consensus that anthropogenic climate change is
   real and that it provides an existential threat to humanity and the
   planet. In this article, we focus on climate change conspiracy
   theories and the impact of such beliefs on mental health. We discuss
   the psychiatric disorders that might be relevant to conspiracy belief
   endorsement and we present the underlying psychological mechanisms.
   We note that there is little to no literature to associate beliefs
   about climate change with serious mental health conditions. However,
   we anticipate that such beliefs may manifest pathologically in
   psychiatric presentations as climate change becomes increasingly at
   the forefront of the global agenda.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
There is a consensus among climate scientists that anthropogenic climate
change is real, harmful to the environment and a threat to our
futures.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Despite this, climate change denial and
scepticism are prominent in social and political discourse, with support
from influential public figures.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Conspiracy theories are
bedfellows of climate denialism and scepticism and have been defined as
‘attempts to explain the ultimate causes of significant social and
political events and circumstances with claims of secret plots by two or
more powerful actors’.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Climate change conspiracy
theories are popular, with endorsement between 20%\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` and
40%\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` in the USA. In other Western countries, denial is
less prevalent, though still present.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

Douglas & Sutton\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` noted climate change conspiracy
theories to follow four main themes: scientists are faking climate
change (a) for political reasons or (b) to secure research funding, or
climate change is a hoax to (c) enable the ‘green agenda’ and (d)
promote nuclear power. Notably, each theme implicates ‘scientists’ in
perverse and deceptive actions. It would appear that this is required to
undermine the consensus position among experts.

.. _sec1:

Why do people believe climate change conspiracy theories?
=========================================================

Douglas et al\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` suggested that epistemic, existential and
social motivations underpin conspiracy beliefs. Epistemic motivations
relate to the extent to which individuals or groups hold knowledge of
phenomena that affect their lives. Conspiracy beliefs are strengthened
when events are significant and/or wide-reaching\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` and
mainstream explanations are simplistic or lacking emotional
charge.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` Conspiracy beliefs can provide a sense of
understanding in the face of contradiction and uncertainty, and may
offer closure when mainstream narratives do not provide satisfactory
explanations.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` Existential motivations relate to the
experience of anxiety, threat or a perception of powerlessness in the
face of danger. In such instances, conspiracy theories may provide
safety.\ :sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.l)` Finally, social motivations concern
issues of power and hierarchy, with conspiracy theories more likely to
emerge in those who have experienced oppression, victimisation or
persecution.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` In such circumstances, groups can become
insular and develop an ‘us versus them’ narrative.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)`
Safety is achieved through a narcissistic defence, whereby power is
transferred from perceived ‘elites’ to the conspiracy belief
holders.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` Of note, such groups are predominantly single
and isolated ethnic-minority males with lower socioeconomic status and
educational achievement.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)`

Holding one conspiracy belief increases the likelihood of believing
another\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` and individuals predisposed to general
conspiracy thinking are more likely to deny climate
change.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` An underlying tendency to prioritise
counter-narrative explanations and to distrust institutions may be
apparent. The notion of political socialisation is important
(e.g.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`); climate change denial is part of the
conservative rhetoric and conspiracy talk that is common among world
leaders such as Trump\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` and Bolsonaro.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)`
Political polarisation of climate attitudes has been well-evidenced in
the USA\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` and Europe,\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` among other regions.
Climate change conspiracy theories might suggest allegiance to a
particular conservative world view and be phenomenologically different
from more emotionally charged beliefs such as the QAnon and COVID-19
conspiracy theories.

.. _sec2:

Conspiracy theories, overvalued beliefs and delusions: challenges with definitions
==================================================================================

Psychiatrists work with symptoms and diagnoses that are based on
criteria set out by manuals such as DSM-5 and ICD-10. When criteria are
met, a diagnosis can be made and a treatment plan devised. When thinking
about conspiracy theories, the psychiatric terms ‘overvalued ideas’ and
‘delusions’ are challenged. Psychiatry defines ‘overvalued ideas’ as an
erroneous response to an idea –‘an acceptable, comprehensible idea
pursued by the patient beyond the bounds of reason. It is usually
associated with abnormal personality’.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` The overvalued
idea may be based on true evidence. The term was coined by Wernicke in
1906 and has further been explored by Jaspers and Fish, who made various
suggestions of how to distinguish overvalued ideas from
delusions.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` A delusion is defined as a ‘false,
unshakeable idea or belief that is out of keeping with the patient's
background; it is held with extraordinary conviction and subjective
certainty’.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` Consequently, there can be a diagnostic
dilemma as to which category climate change conspiracies – or any
conspiracy theory beliefs – best align.

.. _sec3:

The evidence supporting climate change conspiracy theories
==========================================================

Conspiracy theory beliefs are widespread
(e.g.\ :sup:`(n.d.x),(n.d.y),(n.d.z)`). The internet is rife with ‘fake
news’ and ‘misinformation’. Social media platforms, blogs and a whole
range of other websites are dedicated to the mass propagation of
‘evidence-base-less’ theories that directly refute scientific
findings.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa),(n.d.ab)` Bye Bye Blue Sky is one of many
groups that promote and raise awareness of climate change conspiracy
theories. For example, their mission statement describes ‘chemtrails’
and a government conspiracy to control the weather as ‘the toxic
spraying of nano particulate metals which are further amplified by
ionospheric heaters to steer, direct and control our weather for
military purposes … we seek to apply the wealth of our knowledge,
passion and talents to end the illegal spraying of our planet’
(`byebyebluesky.com/ <https://byebyebluesky.com/>`__). Alarmingly, the
internet content and group demonstrations can be very convincing.
Furthermore, some theorists have mastered the ability to navigate
through such forums and use them to their advantage to disseminate their
views to a large population.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)`

An interesting quality of conspiracy theories is that the
counter-evidence is shunned by theorists who claim that the refutation
of their ideas by powerful figures is further evidence of truth
suppression. This introduces an ‘us versus them’
dynamic.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` It may also have a directly proportionate
effect – the stronger the evidence against the conspiracy theory, the
more vehemently the counter-narrative is held.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` This is
further reinforced by computer algorithms that provide a feed of
confirmatory evidence and omit counter-narratives from
view.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` Curiously, it is evident that the scientific
community's message on climate change does not have the same footing or
far-reaching sustenance as the competing conspiracy theories.

Referring back to the traditional definitions of overvalued ideas and
delusions, it seems that conspiracy theories about climate change could
be categorised as either or neither. A diagnostic challenge is
introduced when groups or ‘masses’ of believers share the same
conspiracy theory and it almost has the constructs of a culture.
Studies\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.e)` have found the existence of large
populations that believe conspiracy theories, supporting the idea that
such beliefs extend beyond the individual. This directly causes conflict
with the definition of delusions. It emphasises the need for clinicians
to consider the presence of additional psychopathology and/or functional
impairment in order to make a diagnosis in an individual who is
preoccupied with conspiracy beliefs. It could be postulated that this
may divide psychiatrists. Some may consider that this group hold
pathological beliefs, whereas others may frame the beliefs as in keeping
with a ‘subculture’ and therefore not indicative of psychopathology.

.. _sec4:

Climate change conspiracies and mental disorders
================================================

Although there is an abundance of literature on climate change
conspiracy theories in terms of their nature and spread, there appears
to be very little on how such theories have had a clinical effect on
mental health. In this section, the link between climate change
conspiracy theories and mental disorders is discussed.

.. _sec4-1:

Personality disorders
---------------------

Individuals with certain personality disorder diagnoses are likely to be
more susceptible to preferring narratives engineered by conspiracy
beliefs due to the nature of the definition in diagnostic manuals such
as ICD-10. In particular, the cluster A personality disorders have the
fitting profile. The description of paranoid personality disorder
specifically makes reference to a ‘preoccupation with unsubstantiated
conspiratorial explanations of events both immediate to the patient and
in the world at large’. Additional traits include recurrent suspicions
without justification, general suspiciousness and a pervasive tendency
to distort experience by misinterpreting neutral actions of others as
hostile or malicious. Persons with a diagnosis of paranoid personality
disorder may also have a rather rigid world view and an assertive sense
of personal rights, which may not be proportionate to actual
situations.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` It is apparent how this profile might cross
over with characteristics identified in those who endorse conspiracy
theories (e.g.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`).

The ideas characteristic of paranoid personality disorder are typically
persecutory and self-referential. Individuals diagnosed with this
disorder are likely to be socially withdrawn and perceive that they are
unduly victimised.\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` Imhoff & Lamberty\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)`
noted similar characteristics in relation to subclinical paranoia.
However, instant access to widespread networks, facilitated by the
internet, allows the formation of clusters of like-minded individuals
who also hold similar persecutory, self-referential ideas. There is now
a mechanism by which such individuals can indulge pathologically in
misinformation to bolster their false beliefs together and ‘connect’.
Therefore, in this scenario, self-referential ideas become a collective
experience.\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)` This could further add opposition to the
mainstream narrative and have an impact on individual presentation.

The criteria for schizoid personality disorder include traits such as an
‘invariable preference for solitary activities’, ‘a lack of close
friends or confiding relationships’, ‘poor acknowledgement of social
norms and conventions’ and, importantly, ‘excessive preoccupation with
fantasy and introspection’.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` A combination of such
traits could underpin a tendency to believe conspiracy theories.

Schizotypy is also implicated in the conspiracy theory
literature.\ :sup:`(n.d.aj)` Schizotypy is captured in DSM-5 as a
personality disorder and categorised with schizophrenia in ICD-10. March
& Springer\ :sup:`(n.d.ak)` explored whether the ‘odd beliefs’ and
‘magical thinking’ seen in schizotypy predicted belief in conspiracy
theories and found a significant association between the two. The
authors commented that the results indicated that individuals with
‘unusual patterns of thinking and cognitions’ and ‘interpersonal and
affective’ deficits were more likely to hold conspiracy beliefs. There
are indications that particular personality traits are risk factors for
psychosis in an attenuated form.\ :sup:`(n.d.al),(n.d.am)`

.. _sec4-2:

Nihilistic and apocalyptic delusions in psychotic depression
------------------------------------------------------------

Severe depressive disorders may have a psychotic component in which
mood-congruent delusions are a feature. Nihilistic delusions, where the
patient has abnormal conviction that they are dead, their organs are
rotting or the world is dead around them, are not
uncommon.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)` There is a possibility that this belief could
extend to an individual believing that they are personally responsible
for climate change or – in extreme cases – the destruction of the world.

Another type of delusion referred to in the literature is ‘apocalyptic
delusions’ or ‘end-of-the-world delusions’. The content of such
delusions is thought to be influenced by contemporary culture and
societal changes. Early content of such delusions included fears of the
plague, famine and asteroids hitting the earth.\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)`
Although these persist, the content has evolved in the present day, as
would be expected, and includes despair over climate change. ‘Climate
apocalypse’ and ‘climate dystopia’ְ are terms that encompass the idea
that an apocalypse will occur as a result of climate change – severe
weather changes, forest fires and a depletion of natural resources will
render the earth uninhabitable and therefore bring about the inevitable
impossibility of the survival of human life.\ :sup:`(n.d.ap)`

There is a single published case study to describe this phenomenon. Wolf
& Salo\ :sup:`(n.d.aq)` described a 17-year-old boy diagnosed with a
depressive disorder, who developed a delusion that his consumption of
water would lead to the deaths of millions of people, as water supplies
would be depleted. This was associated with ‘visions’ of an apocalypse.

Overall, there is a lack of recorded clinical cases of severe depression
related to climate change or climate change conspiracy theories.
However, with heightened attention on and uncertainty about climate
change in modern society, there may be an increase in manifestations of
this in depressive disorders through the modes suggested.

.. _sec4-3:

Psychotic disorders
-------------------

There are controversial terms such as ‘mass delusion’, ‘climate
alarmists’ and ‘greenhouse sceptics’, which refer to various groups of
people who hold certain beliefs about climate change.\ :sup:`(n.d.ar)`
There are conspiracy beliefs propagated by some ‘climate deniers’ to
state that climate change is a hoax.\ :sup:`(n.d.as)` Counter-conspiracy
beliefs also exist, which propose that the impact of climate change is
understated, data are suppressed and governments are purposefully
minimising the accelerating impact on the earth to fit with their
political agendas.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` In terms of psychiatric diagnosis
there is no evidence to suggest that such beliefs have a delusional
quality. The terms ‘mass delusion’ and ‘climate deniers’ do not have
clinical connotations. Nonetheless, there is likely to be a minority
with associated risk factors for psychiatric disorders within the groups
who are prone to holding these beliefs with absolute conviction despite
contrary scientific evidence. Such delusions may be considered part of
an evolving clinical picture of a delusional disorder, or a psychotic
disorder such as schizophrenia. Considering the nature of these
disorders, if climate change delusions were present, they would be
expected to have a bizarre quality; and it would not be unusual for
extreme conspiracy theories to be the themes.

There is a small literature base – and accompanying anecdotal evidence –
concerning the interplay between sociocultural events and delusional
content. For example, Cannon & Kramer\ :sup:`(n.d.at)` have noted that
delusional content in the USA related to syphilis in the early 20th
century, Nazis during Second World War, communists during the Cold War
and technology in more recent years. The internet has become
increasingly relevant to delusional content
(e.g.\ :sup:`(n.d.au),(n.d.av),(n.d.aw)`). Curious case studies also
exist. For example, Caseiro & Queiros\ :sup:`(n.d.ax)` reported a case
in which football was thematic, in the context of Portugal winning Euro
2016. Notably, psychosis is often triggered by real-world events and the
nature of delusional content can reflect genuine concerns about the
world, anxiety and existential threat.\ :sup:`(n.d.ay)`

It is possible that concerns about climate change could exacerbate
existing delusional beliefs, or extreme views could escalate above a
delusional threshold. Consequently, such beliefs could become
‘diagnosable’ and meet criteria for a psychotic disorder.

.. _sec5:

A psychological adjunct
=======================

There is an association between the cognitive and affective processes
that underpin conspiracy beliefs and those evidenced in delusional
thinking. For example, the jumping-to-conclusions bias has been observed
in psychotic-like thinking.\ :sup:`(n.d.az)` This bias is associated
with the overly rapid appraisal of stimuli to form a conclusion and has
recently been evidenced in a sample of conspiracy theory
believers.\ :sup:`(n.d.ba)` Poorer analytical thinking is also
implicated,\ :sup:`(n.d.bb)` and cognitive distortions noted in
depression could also be relevant.\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)` Similarly,
historical victimisation and a schematic view of the world as dangerous
are risk factors for psychosis\ :sup:`(n.d.bc)` and can provide a
framework through which anomalous information is perceived. Individuals
with schizotypal and paranoid personality disorder diagnoses are also
likely to have experienced danger in their early
lives\ :sup:`(n.d.bd),(n.d.be)` and such threatening experiences are
also precipitants to conspiracy beliefs.\ :sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.m)`
Distortions in human information processing are commonplace, adaptive
and dimensional, with evidence to suggest that some individuals perceive
‘true’ information, whereas others omit, deny or delude as their
environmental niche requires.\ :sup:`(n.d.bf)` Events that elicit threat
responses are particularly relevant. Additionally, the demographic
profiles of those who endorse conspiracies\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` are similar
to those found within psychosis cohorts.\ :sup:`(n.d.bg)`

Many theorists and clinicians support the concept of dimensional
psychosis with phenomenological continuity.\ :sup:`(n.d.bh),(n.d.bi)`
Subclinical delusional thinking has been associated with conspiracy
beliefs,\ :sup:`(n.d.bj)` as has paranoia.\ :sup:`(n.d.ah),(n.d.bk)`
Conspiracy theorists may not be delusional or paranoid. However, it is
plausible that they exhibit similar genetic, psychological and/or social
characteristics to those who are vulnerable to psychosis. The
proneness–persistence–impairment model\ :sup:`(n.d.bi)` and extended
psychosis phenotype\ :sup:`(n.d.bl)` are helpful frameworks for
exploring the relationship. For many, a belief in climate change
conspiracies could simply concern loyalty to conservative
values.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` However, some may have an underlying
predisposition to psychosis, with a tendency towards conspiracy
thinking. Potential migration towards clinical thresholds could occur in
response to greater perceived threat from significant events and
exposure to, and preoccupation with, conspiracies. Individuals with
diagnoses of paranoid or schizotypal personality disorder may fall into
this position. The notion of the extended phenotype could explain why
individuals who hold one conspiracy belief are more prone to believing
others (e.g.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`); this has also been called ‘conspiracist
ideation’.\ :sup:`(n.d.bm),(n.d.bn)`

.. _sec6:

Forecast
========

There is evidence to suggest that historical events have informed
delusional content\ :sup:`(n.d.at),(n.d.aw)` and there are some
indications that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a recent
effect.\ :sup:`(n.d.bo)` Delusions can be triggered by real-world events
and the content can reflect genuine concerns about the world, anxiety
and existential threat.\ :sup:`(n.d.ay)` Notably, the conditions in
respect to the above phenomena were opportune for the development of
conspiracy theories. That is, these events generated real threat to
individuals and communities (e.g.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`).

It can be hypothesised that the global reluctance/opposition to
impactful climate policy change is actually protective with regard to
the pervasive development of conspiracy belief psychopathology. That is,
conspiracy theories emerge when a way of life is threatened. At present,
climate policy has not had a tangible impact on freedoms, rights or
lifestyle. Nonetheless, we forecast that this will likely change in the
coming decades (e.g. as governments fall in line with the Paris
Agreement). To our knowledge, there is only a single case
study\ :sup:`(n.d.aq)` to describe the interplay between climate change
conspiracy beliefs and severe psychopathology. It is hypothesised that
climate change has not yet become a common feature of delusional
beliefs.

For those who have a predisposition to psychopathology, such changes may
trigger migration towards clinical disorder. It is possible that climate
change and associated conspiracy beliefs may affect mental health in the
following ways: (a) dramatic societal changes (e.g. energy conservation
policies, restrictions on existing freedoms) might precipitate an
increase in climate change conspiracy theories, and individuals
predisposed to conspiracy thinking (including those with underlying
paranoid, schizoid and schizotypal traits) might migrate to delusion;
(b) the increasing presence of climate change discourse in public
conversations could lead to such content appearing in the content of
pre-existing delusional belief systems; and (c) concerns and guilt about
climate change could lead to presentations of depressive psychosis with
nihilistic and/or climate-related apocalyptic delusions.

.. _sec7:

Concluding remarks
==================

As climate change becomes more present in public consciousness,
conspiracy theories are likely to become increasingly prominent and to
manifest in the presentation of several mental disorders. This article
has hypothesised that there may be a potential commonality between
pervasive conspiracy thinking and mental disorders, particularly
psychosis and certain personality disorders. However, it is proposed
that clinicians approach individuals who hold conspiracy beliefs with
diagnostic caution, given that conspiracy beliefs are widely held within
the general population. Careful assessment is needed to identify those
who are psychologically vulnerable to developing mental health
complications due to exposure to conspiracy beliefs.

Further research is recommended to investigate whether a proportion of
climate change conspiracy theory advocates do have underlying
psychological risk factors for the development of concerning
psychopathology; and also how such theories have featured in mental
disorders, particularly as symptoms of psychosis or personality
disorder.

A.J. thanks Dr Stephanie Wilson for her thoughts and advice on versions
of this paper. R.P. thanks James Baker for his comments on several
drafts of the manuscript.

**Alexander Jack** is a senior forensic psychologist in the Department
of Psychology, Reaside Clinic, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK. **Reena Panchal** is a Year 5
Specialty Trainee (ST5) in forensic psychiatry in the Department of
Psychiatry, Reaside Clinic, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.

Both authors contributed equally to the conceptualisation and writing of
this paper.

This project received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref37

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref39

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref40

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref41

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref42

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref43

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref44

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref45

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref46

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref47

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref48

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref49

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref50

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref51

      n.d.ay.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref52

      n.d.az.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref53

      n.d.ba.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref54

      n.d.bb.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref55

      n.d.bc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref56

      n.d.bd.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref57

      n.d.be.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref58

      n.d.bf.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref59

      n.d.bg.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref60

      n.d.bh.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref61

      n.d.bi.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref62

      n.d.bj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref63

      n.d.bk.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref64

      n.d.bl.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref65

      n.d.bm.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref66

      n.d.bn.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref67

      n.d.bo.
