=================================
The psychology of climate anxiety
=================================

Joseph Dodds [1]_Correspondence to Dr Joseph Dodds
(jdodds@faculty.unyp.cz)
:Date: 2021-08

:Abstract:
   This paper focuses on climate anxiety and its role in the psychology
   of climate change, compared with responses to the COVID-19 global
   pandemic. Four psychological hypotheses for why we do not act on
   climate change will be reviewed, and the role of anxiety for each, as
   well as potential solutions. Different types of climate anxiety both
   inside and outside the clinic will be explored, along with associated
   defence mechanisms and treatment.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _sec1:

Climate psychology and climate anxiety
======================================

The past decade has seen the important development of climate
psychology.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)–(n.d.b)` Ursano and
colleagues\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` describe climate change as one of the top
threats to global health in the 21st century, and psychology has begun
to respond. The American Psychological Association's 2010 report into
climate change\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` identified six key areas for psychology,
including risk perception, psychological and behavioural causes of
climate change, psychosocial impacts of climate change, adaptation and
coping strategies, psychosocial barriers to action and the role of
psychologists. At the same time, psychotherapists and clinical
psychologists are coming to terms with ecological loss, anxiety and
guilt in their patients, and also among themselves, as they come to
grips with the faltering biosphere.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.e)`

This article focuses on climate anxiety and its role in climate
psychology, while recognising that anxiety interacts with a range of
other emotions such as grief and rage. The American Psychological
Association\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` refers to ecoanxiety as ‘a chronic fear of
environmental doom’, ranging from mild stress to clinical disorders like
depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder and
suicide,\ :sup:`(n.d.g)–(n.d.h)` and maladaptive coping strategies such
as intimate partner violence\ :sup:`(n.d.i),(n.d.j)` and substance
misuse.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)–(n.d.l)` Cianconi et al\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` found
complex types of climate anxiety and trauma, including intergenerational
effects, especially where environmental damage involves loss of a way of
life or culture.

It is essential to differentiate between pathological and adaptive
forms.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` *The Handbook of Climate
Psychology*\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` defines climate anxiety as a ‘heightened
emotional, mental or somatic distress in response to dangerous changes
in the climate system’, but suggests that ‘paying heed to what is
happening…is a healthier response than turning away in denial or
disavowal’. Climate anxiety can lead to symptoms such as panic attacks,
loss of appetite, irritability, weakness and
sleeplessness,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` yet given the increasing evidence about
the impact of climate change on health, psychological professionals
might ask if their patients feel too much anxiety, or whether they
themselves feel too little. Climate anxiety is being felt much more
powerfully among the young,\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.q)` by first responders
to climate-related natural disasters\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.s)` and climate
scientists and activists, who are exposed to information about the
threat more than most and therefore may need psychological support.

When considering the effects of climate anxiety, it is necessary to
focus on at-risk populations, including children, the elderly, the
chronically ill, those with mental illnesses and those with mobility
impairments.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Those from lower socioeconomic groups are
disproportionately affected by climate change because of disparities in
infrastructure and health resources. Severe weather events can also
damage social support systems and mental health infrastructure, further
isolating the most vulnerable.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)–(n.d.u)`
Clayon\ :sup:`(n.d.v),(n.d.w)` reports that anxiety, fatalism,
hopelessness and fear have been increasing globally, and offers a
clinical approach to understanding, measuring and treating climate
anxiety, while emphasising the distinction between adaptive and
maladaptive types, and the need to keep the society-level response
required to combat climate change in mind.

Given our need to effectively mobilise in response to climate change,
the Climate Psychology Alliance\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` suggests that
psychologists and psychotherapists should not aim to get rid of climate
anxiety, but instead ‘support individuals and communities to build
strong containers that allow the expression and exploration of their
emotions without collapsing under it or turning away’. Climate change is
a psychological problem but that does not mean that it should be
individualised or medicalised. As Lawton writes,\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` if
ecoanxiety is treated as pathology, ‘the forces of denial will have
won…what we are witnessing isn't a tsunami of mental illness, but a
long-overdue outbreak of sanity’.

.. _sec2:

Why do we not act? Four psychological hypotheses
================================================

Climate anxiety is heightened in those that are aware of and *feel* the
existential threat of climate change, by the fact that most of us, most
of the time, act as if it does not exist. The poverty of collective
responses to climate change is in stark contrast to its threat. Why do
we not act? This section explores four psychological hypotheses, the
role of anxiety for each, and comparisons with psychosocial responses to
COVID-19.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)`

.. _sec2-1:

Faulty alarm hypothesis: cognitive bias in our evolved risk detection system
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This explanation suggests humans have evolved the ability to respond to
certain types of threats optimally, especially those that are immediate,
visible, fast (something happens so slowly that it slips our notice),
with historical precedent, simple causality, clear and direct personal
impacts or caused by an ‘enemy’ tribe or
group.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.z),(n.d.aa)` From this perspective, the
problem with climate change is that we do not feel enough anxiety as it
slips our notice by missing all of the characteristics above. The answer
is to help us feel the anxiety, to motivate us to act, turning up the
volume on the threat and our response. The lack of effective risk
perception leads to behaviours that worsen climate
change.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` According to the 2018 American Psychological
Association report, ‘the perception of risk regarding climate change,
belief in the ability to effect change, and the etiology attributed to
extreme weather events are important factors impacting the decisions
people make regarding climate change related behaviors’.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

.. _sec2-1-1:

Comparison with COVID-19
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Both climate change and COVID-19 are environmental crises where human
behaviour and psychology are important factors, yet the latter happens
much faster, with clearer links between behaviour and consequence,
leading to much more dramatic responses. International efforts to
respond to COVID-19 may have the unintended benefit of shaking people
out of climate lethargy, by showing that the global mobilisation
required to confront climate change is possible, and allowing the public
to see (and feel) that invisible environmental dangers are very
real.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` However, as with climate change, with the COVID-19
pandemic we also see huge levels of denial, anger and despair.

.. _sec2-2:

Social dilemma: bystander effect
--------------------------------

Social dilemmas (or commons dilemmas) involve conflict between
individual and collective self-interest.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)` For example,
it is in every fisherman's interest for other fishermen to adopt quotas
on how much fish can be caught every year to ensure fish stocks recover,
but simultaneously, each would like to take what they can. Climate
change is the ultimate commons dilemma.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` How do we
escape from this ‘rational-disaster’ model of human extinction? Games
theory\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` studies such conflicts, most famously with the
prisoners’ dilemma. Anxiety here refers to not only the ‘costs’ of the
game when played badly, but of predicting the behaviour of others. How
can I trust that you will do the right thing? And how can I trust that
you trust that I will do the right thing? Research in human and animal
behaviour\ :sup:`(n.d.af),(n.d.ag)` shows cooperative strategies can
flourish in a wide range of contexts. The key is to focus on the
structure of the game, to allow cooperative behaviour to flourish.

.. _sec2-2-1:

Comparison with COVID-19
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Responses to both involve social dilemmas. When reviewing how successful
different countries were/are in tackling the viral pandemic, it seems
that a crucial factor was not the wealth of the nation, but its social
cohesion and a collectivist versus individualistic
orientation.\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)–(n.d.ai)` To the extent that the measures
were clearly enunciated, seemed fair and received widespread social
support, systems of trust were established and each could play their
part in the collective effort. Climate change is another order of
complexity beyond COVID-19, but important lessons can be learned.

.. _sec2-3:

Ecopsychology: the problem of disconnection from nature
-------------------------------------------------------

Since the 1990s, ecopsychology has emerged as a particular response
within psychology to environmental problems, emphasising a holistic
approach,\ :sup:`(n.d.aj)–(n.d.ak)` suggesting that our modern lives are
so disconnected from nature that we do not care enough to want to
protect it, and fail to realise that we are threatened by damage to the
natural world. Ecopsychology views disconnection from nature as also
central to the current mental health epidemic.\ :sup:`(n.d.al),(n.d.am)`
Reconnecting to nature is seen as a requirement for mental health that
also provides the emotional link that will drive us to act (out of love,
not just fear). Ecopsychologists emphasise that the anxiety, guilt,
grief and anger we feel concerning collapsing ecosystems, our ‘pain for
the World’, are appropriate and, although difficult, provides the
starting point for action and a renewed relation to
Earth.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)`

.. _sec2-3-1:

Comparison with COVID-19
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

COVID-19 forces us to recognise that the ‘split’ between ourselves and
nature is not real, and shows that our social systems are all too
fragile in the face of environmental danger. On the other hand,
ecopsychology tends to downplay that nature does at times try to kill
us, and is not only a beneficial force that nurtures. For some, COVID-19
is a natural response of Earth to human degradation, as Gaia retaliates
against a human civilisation getting too close to remaining wild spaces.
In a sense, it has partially worked. COVID-19 has arguably done more
than any climate treaty to reduce carbon emissions,\ :sup:`(n.d.y)`
perhaps buying us a little more time. Some hope this is a moment for
‘waking up’, to take stock and give us a chance to change our futures.

.. _sec2-4:

Psychoanalysis: climate denial and apathy as a defence against anxiety
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The psychoanalytic model of environmental
problems\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)–(n.d.b),(n.d.ap),(n.d.aq)` focuses on the
complex way humans deal with anxiety (see also terror management
theory\ :sup:`(n.d.ar)` ). In contrast to the faulty alarm hypothesis,
the anxiety of climate change is seen as not too little, but too much,
defended against through individual and socially structured
defences.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.as)` Defence mechanisms are strategies the
ego uses to defend against anxiety, conflict and threats to self-esteem.
From this perspective, as with the Faulty Alarm hypothesis , we need to
be able to feel the anxiety (and other feelings) produced by climate
change. However, merely amplifying messages of fear and guilt can
backfire, by strengthening and rigidifying defences. Climate anxiety is
therefore, in part, a realistic but painful response to our situation,
and difficult to hold onto, especially in a social context of
generalised denial.

.. _sec2-4-1:

Comparison with COVID-19
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The psychoanalytic perspective helps explain certain factors the faulty
alarm theory cannot account for, in particular, why responses to climate
change include a substantial amount of anger and hostility. Climate
scientists have been the recipients of death threats and abuse, and
negative reactions in the context of COVID-19 are even more pronounced.

.. _sec3:

Types of climate anxiety and defence
====================================

Melanie Klein\ :sup:`(n.d.at)` identified two groups of anxieties.
Paranoid–schizoid anxiety involves feelings of persecution and fears of
annihilation and fragmentation, and is defended against by psychotic
defences (denial of reality), projective identification and splitting.
Depressive anxieties relate more to loss, guilt and fears of dependency,
dealt with by neurotic defences. We can relate these to the findings of
affective neuroscience,\ :sup:`(n.d.au)` which differentiates the FEAR
system (involving the amygdala, medial and anterior hypothalamus, and
the periaqueductal gray), which generates anxiety in response to
external threats; and the PANIC system (centred on the anterior
cingulate gyrus, with connections to thalamic, hypothalamic and other
nuclei, such as ventral tegmental areas), which generates anxiety in
response to the loss of attachment figures.

The psychoanalytic model suggests that the threat of climate change
leads to two types of climate anxiety: first, the ‘apocalyptic’ fears
(fears of death, annihilation and extinction); and second, complex
feelings around loss, grief, dependency and
guilt\ :sup:`(n.d.aq),(n.d.av)` for losses that have already occurred
and those that are to come (‘pre-traumatic stress’, ‘anticipatory
mourning’, ‘solastalgia’\ :sup:`(n.d.aw),(n.d.ax)` ). Responses to
climate anxiety include proximal defences (pseudo-rational,
threat-focused and more conscious), distal defences (functioning
unconsciously and taking a symbolic form) and facing difficult feelings
and generating adaptive responses.\ :sup:`(n.d.ay)` Anxiety, guilt and
loss become more manageable as they become more shared,\ :sup:`(n.d.az)`
and can be reflected upon in a safe space where realistic possibilities
for action open up. All major defence mechanisms\ :sup:`(n.d.ba)` are
clearly visible in relation to climate change, focused on the two
emotional threats: denying the reality of climate change (it does not
exist, it is a conspiracy), or denying our losses, dependency or
responsibility (nature might die but we will be fine; it is caused by
other humans or natural causes, the Chinese or the sun, not me).

There are many shades of variation: not only outright denial, but
minimising the threat (it will not be that bad, it will happen in the
future, or to other species or countries), by finding scapegoats through
projection; intellectualisation (taking courses on climate change
without allowing emotional responses or behavioural change); idealising
charismatic leaders that support denial, repressing and suppressing
awareness; reaction formation (denying the reality or the impulse while
simultaneously giving expression to its opposite, e.g. those who ‘burn a
tire for Earth day’ or participate in ‘coal-rolling’, becoming
environmentally destructive to prove to themselves they either do not
believe in climate change or do not care, as an attack against perceived
group enemies, and a means of evacuating bad internal states);
hopelessness (it is too late anyway); apocalypticism (the end of the
world is exciting and allows for fantasies of the ‘bad’ being punished
for their behaviours, and we can start again and better\ :sup:`(n.d.bb)`
); or manic defence behaviours, such as seeking distraction through
increasing addictive behaviours and
consumption,\ :sup:`(n.d.al),(n.d.bc)` to avoid thinking about the
problem. A certain amount of climate activism is also of a manic
reparation type, which can quickly lead to disillusion and burnout if
the movement's goals are not quickly met. These are just a few of the
responses/defences that climate change evokes, with many reactions
comparable with the COVID-19 pandemic.

.. _sec4:

Working with climate anxiety
============================

Adams\ :sup:`(n.d.bd)` asserts that treating climate anxiety needs to
address the underlying dangers. and therefore requires meaningful
collective responses, including ‘acknowledging loss collectively and
publicly’ as ‘an important step in facing up to the reality of the
Anthropocene and the impossibility of carrying on “as normal”’.
Randall\ :sup:`(n.d.av),(n.d.ax)` has emphasised the importance of
experiencing and articulating difficult emotions, such as loss, grief
and fear, in a shared context as a way of developing forms of mutual
support. In addition to dealing with anxiety in their clinical practice,
therapists can help support the development of social containers to
express, contain and mobilise climate anxiety into positive social
change.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` Ultimately, the results need to be measured in
reduced carbon dioxide emissions rather than necessarily reduced
expressions of fear.

By allowing feelings and thoughts we usually avoid to be brought into
awareness, we can avoid more pathological unconscious acting-out.
Bednarek\ :sup:`(n.d.be)` agrees that climate anxiety should not be seen
‘as a problem to be solved or a condition to be medicated’, but rather
‘an important encounter with our awareness of our impact on the world’.
All of us need to wake up to climate anxiety, including mental health
professionals. Those who are most informed about the current danger,
such as scientists, journalists, students or activists, often express
the most intense fears – an anxiety heightened by feeling isolated in a
culture in denial.\ :sup:`(n.d.bf),(n.d.bg)` Instead of pathologizing
their anxiety, which only worsens mental health, we can ask ‘what
support do we collectively need in order not to freeze and anaesthetise
ourselves against this context of so much loss?’\ :sup:`(n.d.be)`

The answer lies not only from work in individual psychotherapy, but in
developing strong social networks of supportive relationships, and a
living relationship with the natural world.\ :sup:`(n.d.bh)` Community
is crucial for collective resilience, as we are seeing in the COVID-19
pandemic. Nature itself can function as one of these containing
spaces.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.bi),(n.d.bj)` To conclude, the symptoms of
climate anxiety are not necessarily feelings to be got rid of, but
lessons to be learned, although only if they can be felt in a safe way,
through developing meaningful action and positive social, psychological
and ecological change.

**Joseph Dodds** (PhD) is a psychoanalyst (IPA) in private practice with
the Czech Psychoanalytical Society, a psychotherapist (UKCP), Chartered
Psychologist (BPS) and psychology lecturer with the University of New
York in Prague, and the Anglo-American University..

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.bc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref37

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref39

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref40

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref41

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref42

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref44

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref45

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref46

      n.d.bi.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref48

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref49

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref50

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref51

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref52

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref53

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref54

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref55

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref56

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref57

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref58

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref59

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref60

      n.d.ay.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref61

      n.d.az.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref62

      n.d.ba.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref63

      n.d.bb.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref64

      n.d.bd.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref65

      n.d.be.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref66

      n.d.bf.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref67

      n.d.bg.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref68

      n.d.bh.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref69

      n.d.bj.

.. [1]
   This article was originally published with a second, incorrect
   affiliation for Joseph Dodds. This has now been corrected and an
   erratum published at https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.58
