==========================================
W. Alwyn Lishman, MD, FRCP, FRCPsych (Hon)
==========================================



Maria RonEmail: m.ron@ucl.ac.uk

:date: 2021-08


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
**Emeritus Professor of Neuropsychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College, London, UK**

Alwyn Lishman, who died on 24 January 2021, aged 89, was the first
Professor of Neuropsychiatry to be appointed in the UK. He was the
co-founder and Honorary Life President of the British Neuropsychiatry
Association (BNPA). In 2016, when addressing the BNPA, Alwyn said that
he wanted to be remembered for what he did, in terms ‘expressed
concisely’, thus setting a challenge for those of us who now wish to
celebrate his exceptional contribution to psychiatry. His famous book
*Organic Psychiatry: The Psychological Consequences of Cerebral
Disorder*,\ :sup:`1` first published in 1978, set an example of
conciseness and clarity in medical writing while at the same time
single-handedly defining the discipline of neuropsychiatry. Alwyn
considered this book to be his most important legacy; two further single
author editions followed in 1987 and 1997. At the time this book was
published, neuropsychiatry was a small specialist interest. Now, thanks
considerably to his influence, it is a major component of psychiatric
research and practice.

Alwyn saw neuropsychiatry as much more than an admixture of neurology
and psychiatry, as involving the understanding of brain mechanisms in
relation to mental disorder, and benefiting from advances in
neuropsychology, biochemistry, genetics, imaging and many other
disciplines. For him, neuropsychiatry could equally apply to the study
of schizophrenia, affective disorders or traumatic brain injury, in fact
to the whole of psychiatry. By defining neuropsychiatry in this way, he
was redressing the balance between brain and mind that had been
polarised by the influence of psychoanalytic theory.\ :sup:`2`

His research was wide-ranging. Memory was one of his early interests. In
what he called ‘a crude approximation to testing Freud's theory of
repression’, he explored the effect of the hedonic tone of the material
to be remembered, finding that, while normal people recalled pleasant
material better, the pattern was reversed in depressed patients. Later
his emphasis was to exploit brain imaging in relation to psychiatry, and
studies of brain damage in alcoholism and psychosis of epilepsy
followed.

Alwyn Lishman was born in Houghton-le-Spring, County Durham, on the 16
May 1931. His father, George Lishman, had been a prisoner during the
First World War and, when his poor health prevented him from becoming a
doctor, he ran the family business, a tallow chandlery that supplied
candles for mining and shipbuilding. His mother Madge (née Young) was a
teacher, described by Lishman as something of a dragon who locked him up
with his sister Valerie until they finished their homework without any
mistakes. Alwyn's innate perseverance and attention to detail must have
been greatly enhanced by this strict upbringing.

For somebody who was a master of words it is perhaps surprising to know
that he could read music before he could read words. He assiduously
played the piano from the age of 5 and wanted to be a musician but
pressure from his father finally persuaded him to go to Birmingham
University to study medicine. His interest in the relationship between
brain and behaviour was sparked by his time working with Solly Zuckerman
while doing an intercalated degree in Anatomy and Physiology. He
qualified in 1956.

After his house jobs, he spent his National Service practising
neurology. He was posted to the Army head injury hospital outside
Oxford, where he was mentored by Ritchie Russell. Neurology attracted
Lishman for its clinical precision, but the lack of effective treatments
and his wish to help his patients made him consider other options and he
followed Bob Cawley, his great friend from medical school, to the
Maudsley Hospital in London in 1960. He said that it took a certain
degree of unworldliness to make the move to a much less prestigious
discipline.

He described the Maudsley in the 1960s as extremely social and great fun
and he built lifelong friendships there. Jim Birley, Griffith Edwards
and Mike Rutter were contemporaries. He thrived under the abrasive but
kind influence of Aubrey Lewis and his doubts about psychiatry quickly
evaporated when he realised that thinking at the Maudsley was as
rigorous as any. He wrote his doctoral thesis on ‘Psychiatric disability
in soldiers with penetrating head injuries’, using the Oxford register
set up by Ritchie Russell. At a time when there was little interest in
brain injury, Lishman's insights into the behavioural and psychiatric
consequences of frontal and left temporal injuries were stunning.

He was appointed to his first consultant job at the National Hospital
(Queen Square) in London in 1966. His clinical work there fuelled his
interest in neuropsychiatry, and he cherished his interactions with
neuropsychologists such as Oliver Zangwill and Elizabeth Warrington, but
the dismissive attitude of some neurologists towards psychiatry prompted
him to return to the Maudsley in 1967 as consultant psychiatrist. In
1979 he was appointed to the first Chair of Neuropsychiatry in the UK,
at the Institute of Psychiatry. In 1987, with Jonathan Bird, he
co-founded the BNPA, the first, but not the last, neuropsychiatric
association in the world and still a thriving forum that welcomes people
from different disciplines. He was made an Honorary Fellow of the Royal
College of Psychiatrists in 1999.

Alwyn was an exceptional mentor, and he was proud that several of his
trainees went on to hold chairs of neuropsychiatry. For me, the debt of
gratitude is immense. When I arrived at the Maudsley in 1971 we were
assigned a ‘moral tutor’ and Alwyn Lishman was mine. This led to
fruitful years of research and, more importantly, we became close
friends and I became part of his family. Alwyn, an accomplished
musician, was generous enough to be my accompanist when I, a tone-deaf
late starter, misguidedly attempted to take my clarinet grades. To my
surprise he was even more nervous than I was. We tacitly agreed not to
repeat the experience.

In 1966 he married Marjorie Loud, a psychiatric social worker he met
while training at the Maudsley, and they had two children, Victoria and
William. He continued to play the piano and the organ and built his own
harpsichord. He retired early in 1993 to look after Marjorie, who had
developed a brain tumour. Marjorie died in 2000. Alwyn's last few years
were marred by the ravages of dementia. He is survived by his two
children and two grandchildren.
