==============================================================================================
Involving service users to identify research priorities in a UK forensic mental health service
==============================================================================================



Anne Aboaja
Bunny Forsyth
Helen Bates
Robert Wood
:Correspondence: Dr Anne Aboaja (anne.aboaja@york.ac.uk)

:date: 2021-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Patient and public involvement (PPI) is a priority for health
   research. PPI improves the relevance and quality of research. The
   study aimed to involve service users in identifying research
   priorities for the service. A two-phase adapted Delphi technique was
   used to generate a list of research topics from service users in
   secure in-patient mental health settings and on specialist mental
   health prison wings. Topic content analysis was undertaken. Service
   users were further consulted, and research themes were ranked in
   order of priority.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Of the eight research themes identified, the three given the highest
   priority by service users were, in descending order, physical health,
   future plans and moving on, and causes of illness and crime.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Service users are willing to be involved in setting research
   priorities for mental health services. Through non-tokenistic PPI,
   service users can uniquely shape the research agenda of mental health
   services.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Patient and public involvement (PPI) is a strategic priority for the
National Institute of Health Research,\ :sup:`1` enabling stakeholders
to have roles other than as research participants throughout the
research process.\ :sup:`2` Despite the barriers,\ :sup:`3` challenges
of time and methodological conflict, PPI can bring benefits to
research.\ :sup:`4` It improves the relevance and quality of
research,\ :sup:`1` and increases recruitment success.\ :sup:`5`
Researchers in this field have evidenced the value that the PPI
perspective can bring to research,\ :sup:`6` but caution using
tokenistic approaches. Utilising a devolved model of working with
user-led organisations or groups can support effective
involvement,\ :sup:`7` as long as all parties clearly understand the
underpinning philosophy. A related approach of using a reference group
specifically established to guide and assist with the conduct of a
research project is also recognised as valuable.\ :sup:`8`

The Tees Esk & Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust's forensic directorate
aims to significantly increase research activity. Although forensic
mental health priorities have been previously proposed, they have arisen
from studies that did not include service users,\ :sup:`9,10` focused on
specialist areas outside of in-patient\ :sup:`11` or prison
settings,\ :sup:`12` and sought consensus between service users and
professionals.\ :sup:`11` This paper describes how non-tokenistic PPI
through adapted Delphi methodology can be applied in a forensic service,
to identify service user priorities for research.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Setting
-------

The forensic service has 18 in-patient clinical areas, offering 224
medium-secure, low-secure and locked rehabilitation beds to adult males
and females with a range of mental disorders, intellectual disabilities
(also known as learning disabilities in UK health services) and autism
spectrum disorders. The service also provides mental healthcare to 11
prisons in the north of England and to patients in the community. Within
the prison system, there are 29 beds across two specialist mental health
wings (clinical areas). Each of the 20 clinical areas holds a regular
service user-led community meeting with staff support. The meeting is
used to share information, elicit views that may be passed on to service
managers and discuss items of interest to the in-patient experience.
Attendance and participation at these meetings is voluntary. There is
also a community service that does not have equivalent service user
community meetings.

.. _sec1-2:

Ethical approval and service user involvement
---------------------------------------------

No identifiable participant data were collated, and all data were
collected through existing service user meetings. Ethical approval was
not required for this study, which was accountable throughout to the
Forensic Speciality Development Group in Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS
Foundation Trust. The project proposal was approved by the hospital-wide
service user group, whose suggestions shaped study design.

.. _sec1-3:

Design
------

The Delphi technique is an established methodology that has been used
widely in psychiatry to consult with and build consensus among experts
in the field.\ :sup:`13` A two-phase modified Delphi exercise was
undertaken in which service users were consulted as experts by
experience of the forensic service. An iterative process was followed to
obtain consensus on the most important research themes.

.. _sec1-3-1:

Participants
~~~~~~~~~~~~

All users of services who were available and willing to attend an
established community meeting in one of the clinical areas were eligible
to participate in the exercise. Service users in prison who were not on
a specialist mental health wing and users of forensic community mental
health services were therefore not eligible to participate.

.. _sec1-3-2:

Delphi process: phase 1 – obtaining the initial views of service users
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A consultation form was developed for use in community meetings. The
form comprised three sections. In the first section, a succinct
definition of research and examples of health research questions
unrelated to mental health were given; for example, ‘what causes heart
attacks?’, ‘what is the cure for cancer?’ and ‘which shampoo will make
your hair grow faster?’ The second section provided information about
the purpose of the exercise, rationale for consulting service users, the
constitution of the project team, anonymisation of responses given and
the extent to which the findings would be shared. In the final section,
three prompt questions were listed to elicit relevant responses about
research priorities: What questions should researchers in this service
try to answer?What discovery would you most like researchers to
make?What do you think we need to know more about in forensic services?

The consultation form was emailed to a senior nurse in each clinical
area, with a cover letter explaining the background to the project and
how to use the form to elicit and anonymously record service user views.
Instructions were given to record the numbers of patients on the ward,
at the meeting and contributing to the process. The importance of
service user voluntariness in participating in the exercise was
highlighted. The senior nurse was asked to present the form during a
community meeting and invite service users to answer the three
questions. Answers were written down on the form, which was returned the
project administrator.

.. _sec1-3-3:

Delphi process: phase 1 – analysing the initial views of service users
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Two consultant psychiatrists and an in-patient nurse from the project
team jointly undertook content analysis\ :sup:`14` of all responses, by
hand. Disagreements were resolved through consensus. An
inductive–deductive approach was used to move from a large number of
specific research questions and objectives provided by participants to a
smaller number of general research topics.\ :sup:`14` Each individual
response was read and grouped into one category with similar responses.
Each category was given a title that summarised the content of the
associated responses. Then, responses in each category were reviewed in
turn, to consider whether it would be more appropriate to place each
response in an alternative category. This step ensured that each
category accurately reflected the content of the respective responses.
Next, categories that were considered similar were combined. Category
titles were broadened to incorporate very small groups and single
responses that could not be grouped elsewhere. Principles for the
iterative analysis were to avoid single-response groups, to accurately
represent service users’ responses and to identify between approximately
five and ten themes. This target number of themes was chosen to ensure
the service user voice was not lost through excessive combining of
responses, resulting in a small number of themes. Similarly, the aim was
to avoid a very long list of themes, which would be less useful in
identifying the specific areas of research that should be prioritised.
The final categories represented an unranked list of research
priorities.

.. _sec1-3-4:

Delphi process: phase 2 – obtaining prioritised views of service users
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The results of the analysis were listed as themes on a follow-up
consultation form, which defined research, explained the purpose of the
project, described the first phase of the Delphi process and highlighted
the voluntariness of participation. To avoid responder bias associated
with the ordering of the themes, the themes were displayed in a circle
on the follow-up consultation form. The form and a cover letter were
sent to a qualified member of staff in each clinical area who had
responsibility for disseminating research information (the Research
Champion). The cover letter provided instructions on how to obtain
anonymised responses from service users during the community meeting.
Research Champions offered copies of the form to willing service users
present at the community meeting, who were invited to circle their top
three priority areas for research. The Research Champion returned
completed forms to the project administrator.

.. _sec1-3-5:

Delphi process: phase 2 – analysing the prioritised views of service users
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Two consultant psychiatrists, a ward-based staff nurse and a senior
nurse working in the prison service met to analyse the completed
follow-up consultation forms from phase 2. The themes identified in
phase 1 were listed on a whiteboard. Each response form was considered
in turn by the analysts, jointly. A mark was added alongside each theme
on the whiteboard every time that theme was circled as a priority theme
on a response form. After reviewing all responses, frequency counts were
calculated for each theme. The themes were then ranked according to the
number of service users who had considered each theme to be one of their
top three research priorities. The overall top three research priorities
were highlighted.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Participation in the Delphi process
-----------------------------------

Service users from 20 clinical areas (18 wards and two prison wings)
were eligible to participate in each phase of the Delphi process. Some
clinical areas did not provide details of the number of service users
who attended the community meeting or proposed priority research areas
in phase 1. Therefore, the overall response rate in phase 1 was
calculated with the number of participating clinical areas rather than
individual service users.

Of the 20 clinical areas invited to participate in phase 1, responses
were received from six clinical areas (five wards and one prison wing)
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). In phase 2, five clinical areas, including one
prison wing, returned completed follow-up consultation forms from 27
service users (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Based on the number of beds in the
service (*n* = 253), this is equivalent to 10.7% of the total number of
eligible service users. Table 1Participation of service user clinical
areas in phases of the Delphi processParticipation in phase
1Participation in phase 2Participation in both phasesParticipation in at
least one phaseNumber of clinical areas responding6 (30%)5 (25%)1 (5%)10
(50%)Number of clinical areas not responding14 (70%15 (75%)19 (95%)10
(50%)Number of clinical areas invited to participate20 (100%)20 (100%)20
(100%)20 (100%)

There was overlap of clinical areas participating in the two phases of
the Delphi process, with service users from one (5%) of the 20 clinical
areas participating in both consultation phases. Although most services
users were not involved in both phases, service users from half
(*n* = 10, 50%) of all clinical areas, including both prison wings,
participated in at least one of phases of the Delphi process (`Table
1 <#tab01>`__).

.. _sec2-2:

Profile of service users participating in the Delphi process
------------------------------------------------------------

Male and female service users from both prison and in-patients clinical
areas participated in the study (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). Input during at
least one of the Delphi process phases was received from service users
within hospital-based clinical areas of all three levels of security
provided by the forensic service. However, females in the locked
rehabilitation clinical area were not involved in the study. Services
users with a mental disorder, as well as those with an intellectual
disability or autism, participated in the Delphi process. Table
2Description of the clinical areas in which participating service users
residedClinical areas involved in the Delphi process of identifying
research prioritiesMaleFemalePrisonYesYesIn-patientMedium
securityYesYesLow securityYesYesLocked rehabilitationYesNoMental
disordersYesYesIntellectual disabilities and autismYesYes

.. _sec2-3:

Identification of research themes that are important to service users
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Service users offered 63 suggestions for research in the first phase of
the Delphi process (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__). The suggestions were written
in a combination of questions and statements. Eight research themes were
identified through thematic analysis (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__). The second
phase of the Delphi process revealed how 10.7% of all service users
across the forensic service prioritise these themes. The top three
priorities for research are, in descending order, physical health,
future plans and moving on, and causes of crime and illness. Other
themes of importance are treatment and cures, length of stay, trust and
attitudes, purpose of life and dealing with change. Table 3Research
priorities as ranked by service usersExamples of responses received in
Phase 1Themes identified in phase 2Ranking in descending order of
priorityBest way to lose weight?Physical health1The correlation between
medication and physical health well-beingMy metabolism has slowed, how
do I get it going again?Best way to lose weight off the stomach?How does
being in a forensic service affect your chances of getting a job?Future
plans and moving on2Anxiety about leaving [prison mental health
service]Will I always need medication?What causes offenders to
reoffend?Causes of crime and illness3We need to know more about
autismInformation on eating disordersIs there a cure [for]
self-harm?Treatment and cures4We should make treatment shorter (DBT
[dialectical behaviour therapy] is too long)Could we cure LD
[intellectual disability]?To have a tablet that cures everythingWe
should try to make people's stay in hospital shorter, not waiting for
treatmentLength of stay5Discover the length of time you are going to be
in hospitalAttitudes of staff in prisonTrust and attitudes6Trust issues
with officersAttitudes of healthcare staff…they make me nervousMore
about what you want from lifePurpose of life7What is the purpose of
life?Why are you born to die?Changes in staff is destabilisingDealing
with change8How to cope with changeThe impact of staff leaving [prison
mental health service]…it's difficult to have staff change so frequently

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

Research that is to have a meaningful impact on the care, experience and
recovery of those who use forensic mental health services must involve
service users from the start of the research cycle, at the point of
setting research priorities. First, this study showed that PPI research
methodology was effective in involving some, but not all, male and
female service users in both prison and hospital settings who have a
mental disorder, intellectual disability or autism. Second, through this
adapted Delphi approach, services users identified eight research
priorities for forensic mental health and intellectual disabilities.

It is notable that service users place a high value on health research
with a holistic conceptualisation of health, including physical, mental
and spiritual (existential/‘purpose of life’) domains. The list
indicates that service users with a history of mental disorder and
offending are interested not only in obvious aspects of forensic mental
health, such as mental illness, crime and treatment, but also in staff
relationships (‘trust and attitudes’) and the aetiology of their
difficulties.

.. _sec3-1:

Contextualisation of findings
-----------------------------

In the present study, physical health was ranked as the top priority,
with a focus on weight loss. Surprisingly, this theme did not feature in
the lists generated from earlier exercises to establish the research
priorities in forensic mental health.\ :sup:`9,11,12` The explanation
for this notable difference may lie in the recent incentivised drive by
commissioners of secure mental healthcare in England for providers to
take demonstrable steps to improve physical health, particularly through
achieving a healthy weight.\ :sup:`15,16`

There was overlap with the findings of a previous study showing that
service users, as well as professionals, prioritise epidemiological
research into factors associated with crime and recidivism, and research
oriented toward recovery topics such as the future use of mental health
services and employment.\ :sup:`11` Further consistency was found in the
high priority given by both clinicians and service users to research
about effective treatments and interventions.\ :sup:`10–12`

This finding of common interest is not surprising, given the partnership
nature of many treatments involving the professional, who delivers,
prescribes or administers the treatment, and the service user, who
accepts or refuses the treatment that may cause harm, benefit or no
effect. However, although previous studies mentioned treatment as a
research priority, service users in the present study clearly linked
treatment to cure. Current understanding among mental health clinicians
and academics about the nature of disorder, disease, disability and
concepts of recovery, diversity, social inclusion, person-centred care
and stigma may partly explain why research questions such as ‘could we
cure LD [intellectual disability]?’, which are important to some service
users, are less likely to be posed by professionals in a research
priority-setting exercise.\ :sup:`17`

The advancement of risk assessment in forensic mental health is
consistently reported as a research priority in studies based on
literature review, professionals-only groups or mixed professional and
service user groups.\ :sup:`9–11` Although it is not clear why risk
assessment did not feature as an important research area in the present
study, which involved only service users, it is proposed that this topic
might be of lesser importance to service users and greater interest to
professionals, whose roles involve assessing and managing risk.

It is also notable that in contrast to a larger international study of
research priorities for mental health and justice, the present study of
service users lawfully detained in either a prison or secure hospital
under the Mental Health Act 1983 did not recommend research into
legislation and policy.\ :sup:`11` Length of stay in hospital emerged as
one of the new research priority areas in the present study. Although it
may appear surprising that this was not a theme, given priority in
previous studies, it may be that addressing other themes widely
reported, such as treatment, may ultimately have an effect on overall
length of stay.\ :sup:`18`

.. _sec3-2:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

It might appear that the responses of service users point to areas that
have been extensively researched. For example, much is already known
about effective weight loss interventions in the general population.
Although such responses may reflect limitations of the phrasing of
questions used to elicit the initial views of service users, they may
also reveal a lack of evidence of context-specific effectiveness and
acceptability of interventions in forensic services.\ :sup:`15` This is
evident by the aforementioned current emphasis on finding effective ways
to achieve weight loss among service users in secure mental health
settings.

The use of existing consultation structures is recommended for
ascertaining the research priorities of service users within forensic
mental health services.\ :sup:`19` The community meeting was, therefore,
an appropriate forum in which to obtain the research opinions, because
service users were already accustomed to voluntarily making suggestions
to improve the service in this group setting. In contrast, a formal
panel meeting may have been less accessible to some in-patients and
prisoners.\ :sup:`19` Although the presence of staff and other service
users might have influenced responses provided, the wide range of
individual answers given, including criticism of staff attitudes,
suggests that group bias was not significant.\ :sup:`20`

There is little evidence to guide sampling approaches in PPI, although
convenience sampling is most commonly used.\ :sup:`21` The modest
response during both phases of the study is a significant limitation,
and may reveal lack of interest in or apathy toward research among the
service user group. It is possible that such explanations may relate to
psychopathology experienced by potential participants; for example,
anhedonia in a depressive episode, or apathy as a negative symptom of
schizophrenia. Alternatively, some service users may have limited
understanding of research and the value of service user involvement in
research. Unknown factors relating to the level of research interest
among staff responsible for presenting the study to service users at
community meetings may have contributed to the low response rate.
Although the final list of priorities generated from the views of a
small proportion of service users is valuable, it may not reflect the
views of those service users who did not respond.

A strength of the study is effectively reaching a wide range of service
users, with differing risk and health needs. The methodology of
involvement was successful in increasing research involvement access to
service users who, (because of reasons relating to health or risk) may
not have had the opportunity to leave the ward or wing to attend a
formal group meeting of service user volunteers, without limiting
involvement to a select sample of existing service user
representatives.\ :sup:`21`

Consideration was given from the outset to the evidence-based approaches
to avoid tokenism and collaborate with user-led groups in a way that
clearly explained the philosophy of the project. However, a formal
reference research group of service users did not exist at the time of
the study, although the generic (non-research) service user group was
already established. Consultation with this service user group helped to
shape the study design; ongoing consultation with the group may have
been valuable in finding ways to increase the response,\ :sup:`5` and to
reduce sample bias.\ :sup:`20` Although the involvement of professionals
from in-patient and prison settings, as well as nursing and medical
disciplines, ensured a healthy range of perspectives during the thematic
analysis, service user involvement at this stage for collaborative data
analysis would have further strengthened the study.\ :sup:`22`

.. _sec3-3:

Implications and future directions
----------------------------------

To our knowledge, this is the first study to use PPI principles and the
Delphi technique to establish research priorities from the exclusive
perspective of service users within a forensic service for mental
health, intellectual disabilities and autism. The methods showed how a
mental health service can overcome barriers\ :sup:`3` and involve its
users to identify priority areas of research. By contributing to
research priority-setting exercises, service users demonstrated that
they wish to express their views on the greatest research needs for
forensic mental health services. It also revealed a willingness to be
involved at the earliest stage of the research process, and a desire to
influence the work of researchers in the field. Comparisons with similar
studies highlighted the importance of understanding the service user
perspective separately from that of professionals.

The eight research priorities were adopted immediately by the forensic
service, serving as a checklist against which all proposed research is
considered before service-level approval. Additional weight is given to
proposed research in an area falling within one of the top three themes.
Rarely should research be undertaken within the service that does not
link directly or indirectly to this list. Embedding the service user
perspective to this degree avoids tokenistic involvement,\ :sup:`6` and
allows service users, as experts by experience, to directly shape
research strategy and influence future research. Findings have been
shared with service users, senior managers and staff working across the
forensic service. Although the scope of this study was limited to the
service user perspective, further study is required to explore the
extent to which the research priorities of clinicians working in this
forensic service are aligned with those proposed by service users, and
to understand any differences.

There is a lack of evidence to guide the best method of achieving
engagement.\ :sup:`21` There is benefit in exploring the enablers and
barriers to PPI in research that involves service users in a forensic
service. Early conversations should commence with representatives from
community service users and carers/friends/families of service users, to
develop appropriate methodologies for obtaining the views on research
priorities from these two groups. The development of a carer research
reference group may be an effective approach to carer involvement with
this process.\ :sup:`8`

Further consultation with service users is required to develop a
strategy to support ongoing involvement, ensuring that future research
questions, methods and outcomes are acceptable and relevant to service
users. The exercise of setting research priorities from the service user
perspective could be repeated at 5-year intervals, to ensure that the
service continues to prioritise research that is relevant to those who
would benefit from the service. Given the expected benefits of PPI, the
challenge is to evaluate the impact of this early service user
involvement in setting research priorities, on subsequent phases of the
research process and future service user involvement in, and engagement
with, research.\ :sup:`23,24`

.. _sec4:

About the authors
=================

**Anne Aboaja** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist in the Forensic
Service at Roseberry Park Hospital, Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS
Foundation Trust, UK. **Bunny Forsyth** is a consultant intellectual
disabilities psychiatrist in the Forensic Service at Roseberry Park
Hospital, Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Helen
Bates** is an advanced nurse practitioner in the Forensic Service at
Roseberry Park Hospital, Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation
Trust, UK. **Robert Wood** is a registered mental health nurse in the
Forensic Service at Roseberry Park Hospital, Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys
NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

The authors acknowledge contributions to the design of this study by
Jade Warner, Dominic Johnson, Steve Barlow and Ahmad Khouja.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.131.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, A.A., upon reasonable request.

A.A. conceived the idea. B.F., H.B. and R.W. were involved in data
acquisition. A.A., B.F., H.B. and R.W. contributed to the design,
analysis and interpretation of the work, and were involved in producing
the manuscript and approving the final version.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

ICMJE forms are in the supplementary material, available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.131.
