====================================================================
Analysing *Joker*: an attempt to establish diagnosis for a film icon
====================================================================

Valentin Yurievich SkryabinCorrespondence to Valentin Yurievich Skryabin
(sardonios@yandex.ru)
:Date: 2021-12

:Abstract:
   Todd Phillips's film *Joker*, a 2019 psychological thriller, has
   stirred up strong reactions to the portrayal of the lead character's
   mental disorder, which is never specified. I used DSM-5 criteria to
   study whether Joker/Arthur Fleck showed signs of a real mental
   disorder. The psychopathology Arthur exhibits is unclear, preventing
   diagnosis of psychotic disorder or schizophrenia; the unusual
   combination of symptoms suggests a complex mix of features of certain
   personality traits, namely psychopathy and narcissism (he meets DSM-5
   criteria for narcissistic personality disorder). He also shows the
   symptoms of pseudobulbar affect due to traumatic brain injury. This
   apparent co-occurrence of both mental disorder and a neurological
   condition may be confusing for audiences trying to understand mental
   illness.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The Joker is considered one of the most recognisable and iconic
fictional characters in popular culture and one of the best comic
villains.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Since his debut, the Joker has appeared in
countless comics, TV shows and films. Like most enduringly popular
fictional creations, the Joker has repeatedly morphed his mannerisms,
appearance and raison d'être to meet the styles and trends of the
time.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` He has been adapted to serve as Batman's
antagonist in various incarnations, including the 1960s television
series *Batman* and 1966 film of the same name, in which he was played
by Cesar Romero, and in subsequent films played by Jack Nicholson
(*Batman*, 1989), Heath Ledger (*The Dark Knight*, 2008), Jared Leto
(*Suicide Squad*, 2016) and Joaquin Phoenix (*Joker*, 2019). Over his 80
years of existence, the Joker's character has gone through numerous
significant changes in interpretation, taking a ride between the forces
of goofy and evil.

Cesar Romero's slapstick Joker is far from his modern incarnation as an
intimidating mass murderer, but Joaquin Phoenix's version has almost the
same aesthetic, clearly a deliberate homage to Romero.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`
Jack Nicholson's Joker shares a similar backstory to Phoenix's, both
being normal men with real names (Jack Napier and Arthur Fleck
respectively), who, after a formative traumatic incident, come to
inhabit the twisted clown persona. Nicholson's Joker was a criminal who
was physically and mentally altered after falling into a vat of
hazardous chemicals. Heath Ledger's iconic take reinvented the character
for a new age, permanently imbuing the clown with angst. Ledger
described his character as a ‘psychopathic, mass-murdering,
schizophrenic clown with zero empathy’, and Paul Levitz, president of DC
Comics in 2002–2009, said, ‘I keep coming back to the way he physically
incarnates madness’.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Ledger's incarnation seems to
inspire Phoenix's Joker, who is also a social outcast, building on that
concept to see the Joker inspire some kind of protest
movement.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Jared Leto's take marks the first time that
the Joker was almost universally derided, but despite controversial
aesthetic choices this incarnation embodies a quintessential component
of the Joker's psychology: his ‘super-sanity’ (as stated by Grant
Morrison, it refers to the particular state of mind amalgamating
elements of Carl Jung’s archetypal trickster figure from mythology, and
the corrupting hyper-intellectualism of the dark feminine figures in
tragedies (Lady Macbeth, etc.), into Joker’s possession of a higher
realm of brain function which we perceive as irrationality; sometimes
Joker is even aware that he is a fictional character). Anyway, the
differences between different actors and performances should not be
overemphasised. In all of his incarnations, the Joker has been a
trickster figure who thrives on thwarting expectations and hovering in
the uncomfortable, yet mesmerising zone beyond what description can
encapsulate.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`

.. _sec1:

Todd Phillips's *Joker*
=======================

Todd Phillips's *Joker*, a 2019 psychological thriller film starring
Joaquin Phoenix, is a far cry from the previous incarnations, which is
stirring up a fierce debate about the portrayal of the character's
mental disorder.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)–(n.d.e)` The director turned a comic
icon into a neuropsychological study drama that reflects on how society
views and treats the mental health problems of certain individuals.
According to some critics, *Joker* runs the risk of being perceived as a
glorification of what one angry and disturbed loner is able to
accomplish and raises debate over whether the film turns an archetype of
a violent man into a heroic figure (intentionally or
not).\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` Andrew A. Nierenberg concluded that ‘Sadly, the
movie will increase stigma for those with psychiatric disorders and make
people afraid. It will take great efforts to combat this setback in the
battle against stigma’.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Furthermore, doctors Annabel
Driscoll and Mina Husain wrote in an opinion piece for *The Guardian*
soon after the film's release, ‘Severe mental health conditions, such as
psychotic illnesses, remain shrouded in stigma and are consistently
misrepresented and misunderstood […] Portrayals of mental illness in
film can perpetuate unfounded stereotypes and spread
misinformation’.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Meanwhile, British neurocriminologist
Adrian Raine was impressed by how accurate the film's depiction of the
psychology of a murderer was. In an interview with *Vanity Fair*, he
described it as ‘a great educational tool’ and stated that he planned to
present film clips during his classes.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`

In general, *Joker* is closer to an art-house film than a typical comic
book film, since it shows less explosive action but more social
commentary. Unlike other interpretations, we discover a lonely, timid
and uncharismatic man. The plot of the film centres on Arthur Fleck, a
socially inept party clown and aspiring stand-up comedian living with
his ailing mother Penny in Gotham City. Gotham is struggling with crime,
unemployment and poverty. Arthur is a middle-aged, underweight and
pale-faced man suffering from a medical disorder that causes him to
laugh uncontrollably at inappropriate times and he depends on social
services for medication. His communication skills are generally poor; he
stares at people for too long, uses abnormal facial expressions and
misses important interpersonal cues, making others feel discomfort. In
the evenings Arthur and his mother watch a TV show with host Murray
Franklin, and Fleck imagines himself being on the show and getting
everyone's attention. Arthur experiences a romantic feeling towards his
neighbour Sophie, but later the film reveals that he was actually
imagining all of their dates. During the film, a series of events in
close succession ultimately tips him over the edge: Arthur guns down
three men on the subway train ride home after he was mocked; his therapy
sessions are terminated, he stops taking his medications and later he
reveals that Penny adopted him after he was found abandoned. Penny had a
mental disorder and her case history records at the mental health clinic
mention Arthur having a head injury after she abused him, tied him to a
radiator and beat him alongside her abusive boyfriend. Then the dream of
the character comes true: he becomes a guest on Murray Franklin's show
and asks the host to introduce him as Joker. While it initially seems
that Arthur intends to kill himself live on air, he shoots Franklin
instead. In the end, we find Joker in a therapy session at the mental
health clinic. He is then seen running, dancing and leaving bloodied
footprints in the hospital's corridors, implying the psychiatrist's
death.

.. _sec2:

Diagnosing Joker's mental conditions
====================================

Although Arthur's disease remains unspecified throughout the film, we
can make some conclusions if we take a look at Joker's symptoms and
mental condition throughout the film. During the therapy sessions,
Arthur describes his complaints as loneliness, isolation and ‘constant
negative thoughts’. An entry in his notebook states that ‘the worst part
of having a mental illness is that people expect you to behave as if you
don't’. We know that the character attends therapy sessions for a long
time and that he is prescribed several psychotropic medications. He even
had sufficient insight to say, ‘I need my medication to be increased’.
Unfortunately, we have very little information on his family history
since he was abandoned as a child. His foster mother has delusional
disorder and probably a personality disorder and she underwent
in-patient therapy. Arthur was brought up by a foster mother and did not
have a father figure. The foster mother herself describes him growing up
as a fun and kind boy, but later he was abused and beaten by his
adoptive parents and even had a severe head injury. Thus, we can find a
number of risk factors for mental disorders in our fictional patient's
case history.

.. _sec2-1:

Pseudobulbar affect
-------------------

In addition, we can assume that Arthur suffers from pseudobulbar affect,
or emotional incontinence, which is a disorder of regulation of
emotional expression, caused by neurological disease or injury affecting
the brain.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` Pseudobulbar affect is characterised by
sudden, uncontrollable episodes of crying, laughing or both. These
episodes are excessive, inconsistent with or disproportionate to
circumstances or the patient's underlying mood at the
time.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` In Joker's case, pseudobulbar affect probably
occurred secondary to severe traumatic brain injury (TBI). A number of
studies have established that TBI increases the risk of mood disorders,
personality changes and substance use disorders.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)–(n.d.m)`
A study by Tateno et al revealed that the prevalence of pathological
laughing and crying (PLC) during the first year after TBI was 10.9%, and
that compared with patients without PLC, patients with PLC had
significantly more depressive, anxious and aggressive behaviours and had
poorer social functioning.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` This conclusion is consistent
with a recently published article that considers neurological aspects of
Joker's disease and assumes that he suffers from neuropsychiatric
sequelae related to childhood TBI involving the frontotemporal regions
and, in particular, the lateral aspect of the left frontal
lobe.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`

.. _sec2-2:

Personality disorders
---------------------

In general, Arthur appears to have a complex mix of features of certain
personality traits, namely narcissism (since he craves attention by any
means) and psychopathy (since he demonstrates no empathy for his
victims). He also displays some traits of depression, but at the same
time, he demonstrates excellent self-control. We can see no evident
symptoms of thought disorder; Arthur is a highly motivated lucid
thinker, he never tells his therapist about any hallucinations or
delusions regarding the neighbour who is the subject of his affections,
so their romantic relations and dates may be just his conscious
imagination. Such diagnostic vagueness does not allow a diagnosis of
psychotic disorder or schizophrenia, although to the viewer's untrained
eye Joker may appear a hysterically laughing supervillain who is
stereotypically ‘insane’. We also have no evidence to establish a
diagnosis of major depressive disorder or bipolar disorder.

.. _sec2-2-1:

Narcissistic personality disorder
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

DSM-5 describes 301.81 Narcissistic Personality Disorder as ‘a pervasive
pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behavior), need for admiration,
and lack of empathy, beginning by early adulthood and present in a
variety of contexts’ characterised by at least five of nine
criteria.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)`

According to criterion 1, such patients routinely overestimate their
abilities and inflate their accomplishments, often appearing boastful
and pretentious. They may blithely assume that others attribute the same
value to their efforts and may be surprised when the praise they expect
and feel they deserve is not forthcoming. Really, Arthur Fleck's life is
dominated by his aspiring stand-up career, he craves public attention
and likes to imagine himself being on the TV show. Individuals with
narcissistic personality disorder are often preoccupied with fantasies
of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty or ideal love (criterion
2). Throughout the film, Arthur is infatuated with his neighbour, single
mother Sophie, and later we recognise that all of their dates were just
his fantasies. Individuals with this disorder generally require
excessive admiration (criterion 4). Their self-esteem is almost
invariably very fragile. They may be preoccupied with how well they are
doing and how favourably they are regarded by others. This often takes
the form of a need for constant attention and admiration. As we can see
throughout the film, Arthur meets this criterion. A sense of entitlement
is evident in such individuals' unreasonable expectation of especially
favourable treatment (criterion 5). They expect to be catered to and are
puzzled or furious when this does not happen. In his fantasies, Arthur
charms the audience of the TV show, but when he becomes a guest on the
show, he awkwardly tells Murray a joke that he finds funny for its dark
humour though nobody else does. After being confronted about this,
Arthur grows angrier, resulting in a murder. Finally, our character
meets criterion 7, which states that individuals with narcissistic
personality disorder generally have a lack of empathy and have
difficulty recognising the desires, subjective experiences and feelings
of others. Really, Arthur feels no empathy towards his victims. Thus, as
we can see, Arthur meets five of the nine criteria, which is enough to
establish a diagnosis of 301.81 Narcissistic Personality Disorder.

.. _sec2-2-2:

Antisocial personality disorder
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At the same time, as I have stated, Arthur has the symptoms of
psychopathy. Although psychopathy is not among the ten official
personality disorders listed in DSM-5, it is well recognised as a
variant of antisocial personality disorder (301.7, according to DSM-5).
Indeed, Joker meets a few of the criterion A group of symptoms: he fails
to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviour, as
indicated by repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for arrest; he
demonstrates irritability, aggressiveness and disregard for the safety
of others, as well as lack of remorse. For this diagnosis to be given,
the individual must be at least age 18 years (criterion B) and must have
had a history of some symptoms of conduct disorder before age 15 years
(criterion C). Arthur is definitely over 18 years of age, but he has no
history of symptoms before the age of 15 (or we do not have information
about that). For this reason, we cannot establish a diagnosis of 301.7
Antisocial Personality Disorder, according to DSM-5.

.. _sec3:

From flawed man to cartoon supervillain
=======================================

Although the film provides the audience with identifiable components of
real mental disorders, in general, the psychopathology that Arthur
exhibits is foggy and the combination of his symptoms is unusual. Such
diagnostic vagueness helps to create a more relatable character who
reflects the burden of any mental disorder; but for the mental health
professional it can be confusing and leave the impression that different
neurological and mental disorders have been mixed. Actually, the plot
moves from a portrait of an individual who is struggling with mental
disorder and striving to make a life for himself into pure supervillain
caricature. Joker as a character makes it incumbent on the film to drop
its pretence at serious character development to enter the comic book
mode. Arthur Fleck ceases to be a human being for whom we might feel
empathy and descends into a one-dimensional stereotype. The film uses
Arthur's childhood trauma as well as his struggle with mental disorder
as a means to earn sympathy from the audience, rather than disgust at
his actions. It is an age-old cinema psychology cliché: the character
hasn't had enough love. Thus, as a character, Arthur appeals deeply to
the human tendency towards self-pity. From this point of view, the
character's mental illness just happened to be one of the stressors that
are the true cause of Arthur becoming the Joker. His mental illness was
only important to the overall plot as a way of connecting all the other
stressors together. Therefore, to reduce all of Arthur's actions down to
his mental health problems is extremely simplistic.

In conclusion, it would be worthwhile to recall an episode from the
film. When Arthur's diatribe is booed on the Murray Franklin Show, he
tells the audience that ‘humour is subjective’. Likewise, any considered
response to divergent interpretations of Arthur Fleck's diagnosis forces
specialists to acknowledge their own subjectivity.

**Valentin Yurievich Skryabin**, MD, is chair of Department no. 2 at the
Moscow Research and Practical Centre for Narcology of the Moscow
Department of Public Health, Russia.

This work received no external funding.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.146.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.p.
