---
abstract: |
  Although the research base on mental health in intellectual
  disabilities is advancing, there are long-standing barriers that
  hinder successful completion of funded studies. A variety of
  stakeholders hold the key to mitigating the challenges and arriving at
  sustainable solutions that involve researchers, experts by experience,
  clinicians and many others in the research pathway. Lessons learned
  during the COVID-19 pandemic can also contribute to improvements in
  the conduct of research in the medium to long term. People with an
  intellectual disability and mental health conditions deserve high
  standards of evidence-based care.
author:
- Angela Hassiotis
- Peter Langdon
- Ken Courtenay
- Ian Hall
- Bryn Lloyd-Evans
- Renee Romeo
- Athanasia Kouroupa
- Vicky Crossey
- Laurence TaggartCorrespondence to Angela Hassiotis
  (<a.hassiotis@ucl.ac.uk>)
date: 2021-12
institute:
- 1University College London (UCL), UK
- 2University of Warwick, UK
- 3Chase Farm Hospital, London, UK
- 4East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 5University College London (UCL), UK
- 6King\'s College London, UK
- 7University College London (UCL), UK
- 8NHS Lothian, UK
- 9Ulster University, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
title: Expanding capacity in mental health research in intellectual
  disabilities
---

pmc

Research evidence is essential in supporting professional
decision-making for the benefit of patients across health and social
care. The benefits of participation in research include better outcomes
and more efficient use of resources, with harmful or unhelpful
treatments being phased out.

A major driver for funded applied health and social care research is the
increase in research capacity and the completion of high-quality studies
on priority topics that have been identified by stakeholders, including
scientists and the public. In the UK, the substantial annual investment
of more than £1 billion by the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) supports both projects spanning the range of methodologies and
the infrastructure to underpin the endeavour.

Recognising the challenges of investing and supporting research in
health and social care organisations, NHS England and the NIHR published
a joint report^1^ that included 12 actions that would help to relieve
the bottleneck many chief investigators encounter at the setting-up and
recruitment phases. Two major stumbling blocks at the time were setting
excess treatment costs with regard to treatment delivery, and research
governance; the latter ranges from ethical approval to assessment of
local capacity and capability in agreeing recruitment targets.

Although progress has been made, these issues, which are common in
research activity across many different health and social care domains,
have not completely resolved 3 years on. In this editorial we address a
variety of both barriers to research and facilitators of research, with
a specific focus on research in intellectual disability services. We
argue that such problems may be relevant in research in other
hard-to-reach populations who may or may not have cognitive impairment.

Since the launch of the NIHR in the UK in 2006, there has been an
increase in the number of funded studies investigating a variety of
research questions in intellectual disabilities, including developing,
adapting and testing interventions in randomised controlled trials
(RCTs). The majority of these are trials of psychosocial interventions.
However, the portfolio of studies remains small compared with other
fields of medicine, estimated at 1.4% of all NIHR-funded studies.^2^

People with intellectual disabilities (global developmental delay
evident in childhood that affects adaptive functioning) account for
approximately 2% of the population in the UK and are more likely to
suffer health-related multimorbidity, higher and earlier mortality and
face significant inequalities.^3^ Many lack capacity and therefore
decisions about their participation in research depend on families' and
paid carers' understanding and attitudes towards research projects and
research processes. This is because they may be called on to act as
consultees to enable participation of those most vulnerable. It is
therefore essential that people lacking capacity should also be able to
take part in and benefit from research specific to people with
intellectual disabilities, with appropriate safeguards as mandated in
the Mental Capacity Act 2005 or equivalent permissions internationally.

# Barriers {#sec1}

Despite the amount of research conducted over time, many challenges that
have been reported previously still remain and have an impact on the
completion of studies. Lennox et al^4^ described identification of
substantial numbers of participants, frequent need for substituted
decision-making, occasional limited literacy of both person and carer,
and organisational gate-keeping practices as significant barriers to
recruitment in an RCT of health checks in Australia. More recently, a
systematic review of 53 papers reporting RCTs in people with
intellectual disabilities published between 2000 and 2017^5^ identified
similar barriers in recruiting to target, participant treatment
preferences, engaging with stakeholders, obtaining consent and staff
turn-over. Optimistically the authors concluded, 'conducting RCTs with
people with cognitive disabilities can be challenging, however, with
reasonable adjustments, many of these barriers can be overcome'.

People with intellectual disabilities are excluded from research that
may be relevant to their health vulnerabilities,^2^ as well as being
sceptical about the impact of it on their lives. This is illustrated by
the Research Voices project,^6^ which revealed a number of serious
concerns that parents of people with profound and multiple disabilities
harbour about research, such as mistrust of health professionals seeking
participants for studies, the emotional and time burden of research
assessments, frustration with not knowing the findings or findings not
translating to real improvements in practice.

Research infrastructure brings its own multifaceted challenges. The role
of clinical research practitioners (CRPs) (who are National Health
Service (NHS) based and able to recruit from services directly) is not
fully understood by intellectual disability services and there is
significant variation among the operations of clinical research networks
across the different UK countries. Therefore, professionals in the
services may be asked to undertake recruitment in addition to an already
busy clinical role. Further, data guarantors are frequently local
authorities, who are providers of social care services not directly
connected to the NHS in England. Finally, intellectual disability
services that are located outside NHS structures have fewer
opportunities to be informed of ever-evolving research processes, thus
remaining unable to utilise available resources to assist them in
incorporating and supporting research in their day-to-day practice.

Clinician factors are also important in maintaining non-engagement in
research activities, including older age, being male and working in the
private sector.^7^ Oliver-Africano et al^8^ identified beliefs about
drug efficacy, potential ethical conflicts in medication trials and
multidisciplinary team processes as having adversely affected
recruitment to a clinical trial of antipsychotics in adults with
intellectual disabilities. Delays associated with any of these factors
inevitably matter in completing studies that depend on time-sensitive
research contracts and are likely to hamper the validity of the research
findings if there is underrecruiting.

Finally, clinicians and scientists in general may not make sufficient
effort to include participants from underrepresented groups in their
studies, thus perpetuating the limited access of people with
intellectual disabilities in research. This is particularly important
for diseases where it has been demonstrated that there is excess
morbidity and/or mortality in this population.^9^

# Facilitators {#sec2}

Prioritisation of research is likely to confer benefits to both health
and care organisations, as shown by views reported in a review of
engagement in research:^10^ "'The wider review demonstrated \[...\] how
collaborative and action research can encourage some progress along the
pathway from research engagement towards improved health-care
performance. There is also evidence that organisations in which the
research function is fully integrated into the organisational structure,
out-perform other organisations that pay less formal heed to research
and its outputs.'"These lessons, although not specific to intellectual
disabilities, are relevant in this context as presenting a justification
for embracing research by the multitude of service configurations
delivering care to this population.

In other changes to research governance, the new Health Research
Authority has halved the time needed to obtain regulatory approvals,^11^
although other milestones along the research pathway remain areas of
concern.

Although the funding for research in intellectual disabilities may be
lower than what is essential for investigating the increased morbidity,
mortality and the health inequalities seen in this population group,
there is an emerging cohort of completed high-quality studies. There are
also many committed researchers, healthcare service professionals and
other staff whose enthusiasm and problem-solving capacity signal their
willingness to engage with the process. These may further promote
interest in research by influencing national clinical practice and
through targeted dissemination, including to people with intellectual
disabilities and their carers. Clinician familiarity with academic work,
peer support and support from management are also likely to increase
positive attitudes towards research. Research that is seen as arising
out of patient concerns and that could lead to tangible benefits in
interventions and care improvements is also likely to be supported.^6^

Recently the NIHR Dissemination Centre published a themed review on
intellectual disability research.^12^ More than showcasing the funded
projects, it highlighted the meaning of the findings for the care that
people with intellectual disabilities and their family carers receive.
In addition, the collection of studies included in the review
demonstrate that funded research can be conducted successfully in the
field of intellectual disabilities but that all the studies have had
significant involvement of people with intellectual disabilities and
their family carers throughout. These studies are examples of good
practice that can be shared between researchers, people with
intellectual disabilities, their carers and charities supporting them.

# Solutions {#sec3}

A primary area for mitigation lies in health and social care
professionals' and people with intellectual disabilities' conviction of
the importance of research and its wider contribution to lives and
well-being. A recent course^13^ devised to train people with
intellectual disabilities in research methods suggests that learning
about conducting research and driving the research process is feasible.
Such courses could increase the number of suitably trained people with
intellectual disabilities who could be recruited to work as researchers
in various projects.

Incentives for encouraging donation of time to research activities by
family and paid carers may improve uptake and retention, alongside other
strategies. Increasingly, experts by experience are being asked to
interpret and comment on research findings and this is a way of
increasing familiarity with research processes, as well as consumer
feedback.

The well-intended efforts of paid carers to protect vulnerable adults if
they lack capacity, including the personal data protection regulations,
often stifle participant recruitment. In England and Wales, this could
be addressed by a revision of the Mental Capacity Act 2005. Heywood et
al^14^ outlined how the Act is predominantly focuses on treatment and
decision-making within a 'best interests' framework, rather than on
research where decisions are not made using that framework. The sections
of the Act governing research do not effectively balance protection and
empowerment, and researchers may be reluctant to include participants
who lack capacity in research projects.

The research community may also need to take some responsibility in
providing solutions to the present challenges. Being clear about what
the findings mean to the wider group of people with intellectual
disabilities, proactive dissemination strategies and other activities in
engaging the public with research are paramount in moving forward.
Research aims to shape service delivery and to translate advances in
science into measurable benefits for the population at large. It is
questionable whether consumers consider research findings relevant to
their health and whether those who commission services apply research
findings to enhance clinical effectiveness and value for money.

An example of fostering closer links between clinicians, academics and
people with lived experience of intellectual disability is the newly
formed RADiANT consortium, a platform that works to increase health and
social care staff\'s awareness of research and develop research skills
and capacity. The consortium is focused on mental health and behavioural
problems in intellectual disabilities, autism and other
neurodevelopmental conditions (see [radiant.nhs.uk](radiant.nhs.uk) for
more information). So far it has produced guidance on how to manage the
COVID-19 pandemic in different mental health settings and has delivered
several educational activities. Its wider impact remains to be
established.

Professional bodies across all professions must also promote
research-related objectives in training curricula and on public-facing
forums such as websites and newsletters.

Strengthening health and social care links is an area for further
development, especially as social care is identified by NIHR as a domain
for research investment. This means extension of the research
infrastructure to reach the neglected care sector, which is central to
accessing individuals to take part in research activities as proxy
informants.

The coronavirus pandemic has shown that, while continuing to endorse
ethically conducted research, it is possible to do so at pace.^15^ It
will be important to remember those lessons as we are coming out of the
pandemic and in the event of future public health emergencies. In
particular, they can inform how to carry out remote research assessments
and interviews with participants with intellectual disabilities and
ensure that the voice of experts by experience remains central to
research activity. During the pandemic, people with intellectual
disabilities have been disproportionately affected in both their health
and social care needs and require high standards of support in both. We
must be able to reassure them and their families that being partners in
research pays off in achieving those standards.

**Angela Hassiotis**, FRCPsych, PhD, is Professor of Psychiatry of
Intellectual Disabilities in the Division of Psychiatry at University
College London (UCL), and a consultant psychiatrist with Camden and
Islington NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. **Peter Langdon**, PhD, is a
professor in the Centre for Educational Development, Appraisal and
Research at the University of Warwick, and an honorary consultant
clinical and forensic psychologist and approved clinician with Coventry
and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust, UK. **Ken Courtenay**, FRCPsych,
is a consultant psychiatrist at Chase Farm Hospital, London. **Ian
Hall**, FRCPsych, MPhil, is a consultant psychiatrist with East London
NHS Foundation Trust. **Bryn Lloyd-Evans**, PhD, is an assistant
professor in the Division of Psychiatry at UCL. **Renee Romeo**, PhD, is
a senior lecturer in health economics at the Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology and Neuroscience, King\'s College London. **Athanasia
Kouroupa**, MSc, is Study Manager in the Division of Psychiatry at UCL.
**Vicky Crossey**, MRCPsych, is a consultant psychiatrist with NHS
Lothian, Edinburgh, UK. **Laurence Taggart**, PhD, is an assistant
professor in the School of Nursing at Ulster University, UK.

All named authors have equally contributed to the preparation and
content of the manuscript. A.H. drafted the manuscript and led the
submission process. P.L., K.C., V.C,. A.K., R.R., B.L.-E., A.K. and I.H.
contributed to the intellectual content via successive iterations of the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final version.

This work is funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)
(Health Services and Delivery Research Programme reference 16/01/24).
The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.

# Declaration of interest {#nts4}

None.
