======================================================================================================================
The texture of narrative dilemmas: qualitative study in front-line professionals working with asylum seekers in the UK
======================================================================================================================



Paaras Abbas
Martha von Werthern
Cornelius Katona
Francesca Brady
Yeree WooCorrespondence to Paaras Abbas (p.abbas@gold.ac.uk)
:Date: 2021-02

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Asylum seekers are required to narrate past experiences to the UK
   Home Office, doctors, lawyers and psychologists as part of their
   claims for international protection. The Home Office often cites
   perceived inconsistencies in asylum interviews as grounds for refusal
   of their claims. A number of processes affect asylum seekers'
   abilities to narrate past experiences fully to the professionals
   interviewing them. The dilemmas around disclosure that asylum seekers
   face have received little attention to date. This work aims to
   explore the perspectives of UK-based medico-legal report-writing
   doctors, lawyers and psychologists whose work involves eliciting
   narratives from asylum seekers on the processes that affect asylum
   seekers' abilities to disclose sensitive personal information in
   interview settings. Eighteen professionals participated in
   semi-structured interviews in individual or focus group settings to
   discuss, from their perspectives of extensive collective professional
   experience, the narrative dilemmas experienced by asylum seekers with
   whom they have worked.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Professionals identified a number of processes that made disclosure
   of personal information difficult for asylum seekers. These included
   asylum seekers' lack of trust towards the professionals conducting
   the interview, unclear ideas around pertinence of information for
   interviewers, feelings of fear, shame and guilt related to suspicions
   around collusions between UK and their country-of-origin's
   authorities, sexual trauma and, occasionally, their own involvement
   or collusion in crimes against others.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Recommendations are made on how to improve the interview environment
   to encourage disclosure. These have important implications for future
   research and policy initiatives.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The UK, as a signatory to the 1951 United Nations Convention and
Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, has an obligation to
consider applications from individuals fleeing persecution in their
countries of origin.\ :sup:`1` The UK Home Office assesses applications
through initial and substantive interviews with asylum seekers, who are
expected to narrate their past experiences to demonstrate their reasons
for seeking asylum. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
defines an asylum seeker as ‘someone whose request for sanctuary has yet
to be processed’.\ :sup:`2` A refugee is defined as ‘someone who is
unable or unwilling to return to their country of origin owing to a
well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group or political
opinion’ according to the 1951 Refugee Convention.\ :sup:`1` In the year
ending June 2018, the UK Home Office received 27 044 applications for
international protection and granted 14 308 of them.\ :sup:`3` The Home
Office sometimes rejects asylum claims based on perceived
inconsistencies in asylum seekers' accounts of their past
experiences.\ :sup:`4` Asylum seekers may have to narrate these
experiences to other professionals, including asylum tribunal judges
(when rejected asylum claims are subject to appeal), medico-legal
report-writing doctors and psychologists (for forensic reports to
provide medical evidence in regards to the person's asylum claim), legal
professionals (for witness statements), and psychologists and other
therapists (for the treatment of mental health problems).

Asylum seekers' abilities to disclose information about their past
experiences may be affected by various psychological and cultural
factors, particularly where there is a history of trauma. Studies on
resettled refugees indicate that asylum seekers who have sustained
multiple traumas in the past often report high levels of post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and depression.\ :sup:`5,6` It is well documented
that asylum seekers who have had many traumatic experiences will avoid
disclosing such memories.\ :sup:`7` Research suggests that external
factors such as the interview room setting and the behaviour of Home
Office officials can serve as triggers for traumatic memories.\ :sup:`8`
Currently, little is known about the range of dilemmas faced by asylum
seekers when making decisions about the content of their narrated
accounts, such as omitting or altering information, sometimes on the
instructions of or under the influence of other people.\ :sup:`9`
Professionals working with asylum seekers offer a unique vantage point
to guide an exploratory study of these dilemmas, as they are able refer
to their extensive professional experience with a variety of asylum
seekers. A small sample of individuals with refugee status were
interviewed separately about dilemmas they experienced when narrating
their past experiences to professionals. This constitutes a
complementary study which is currently being prepared for submission.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Participants
------------

Eighteen professionals were recruited from fourteen different
organisations that provide clinical and legal support to asylum seekers
in England. The research study was advertised through direct email
outreach requesting interviews with individuals whose work involves
eliciting accounts from asylum seekers. Organisations were identified
using chain sampling based on existing professional connections. Current
and former Home Office decision makers were also invited to participate,
but no individuals accepted the opportunity to do so.

Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. All
procedures contributing to this work comply with the ethical standards
of the relevant national and institutional committees on human
experimentation and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in
2008. All procedures were approved by the University College London
ethics committee (reference 8133/003).

.. _sec1-2:

Data collection
---------------

Data were collected between July and December 2017 through face-to-face
interviews, conducted either individually or as focus group interviews.
Three professionally homogenous groups of doctors or lawyers were
interviewed using a focus group discussion format. `Table 1 <#tab01>`__
shows the distribution of professionals. Focus group discussions were
chosen as an appropriate method of data collection for a feasibility
study because of their inherent ‘dynamic quality of group
interaction’.\ :sup:`10` Three therapists were interviewed individually
owing to practical constraints. Table 1Characteristics of study
participantsParticipantResearch groupOccupationGenderYears in
professionP1TherapistPsychotherapeutic workerMale10P2MLR focus group
1Psychiatrist – MLR writer for NGOMale37P3MLR focus group 1Medical
doctor – MLR writer for two NGOsMale22P4MLR focus group 1Medical doctor
- MLR writer for two NGOsFemale57P5MLR focus group 1General practitioner
and MLR writerFemale20P6TherapistPsychologist at an NHS service and MLR
writing volunteer for an NGOFemale5P7Lawyer focus groupLegal officer for
NGOMale30P8Lawyer focus groupImmigration solicitor at law
firmMale13.5P9Lawyer focus groupImmigration solicitor at law
firmFemale11P10Lawyer focus groupLegal officer for international
NGOMaleUndisclosedP11Lawyer focus groupImmigration caseworker for law
firmMale10P12Lawyer focus groupImmigration caseworker for law
firmFemale4+P13MLR focus group 2Former general practitioner and MLR
writerFemale27P14MLR focus group 2Clinical psychologistFemale13P15MLR
focus group 2Director of NGO and clinical psychologistFemale32P16MLR
focus group 2Former general practitioner, independent forensic
physicianFemale30P17MLR focus group 2Clinical
psychologistFemale12P18TherapistPsychotherapist and director of
NGOMale25 [1]_

Semi-structured interviews involving open-ended questions were
conducted. The authors of this paper designed the interview schedule
collaboratively, with input from a small team of psychologists and
lawyers with critical insights into the effects of credibility concerns
inherent to the UK's asylum adjudication on asylum narratives. The
interviews were structured to encourage professionals to reflect on how
asylum seekers they worked with experienced the process of narrating
past experiences.

Questions included the following. (a)Have you experienced situations
where your clients' narratives evolved or changed over time?(b)In what
ways have these narratives changed?(c)What do you think is the impact of
the location in which asylum seekers are talking to professionals such
as yourselves, and/or the presence of an interpreter, on the type of
narrative that they are able to share?(d)Are there any causes that you
might be able to attribute to late disclosure of additional or changed
information, based on your experiences?(e)Do you think it's difficult
for all asylum seekers to talk about what's happened to them in their
past, or more for certain asylum seekers compared to others?

.. _sec1-3:

Data analysis
-------------

Interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim. A thematic analysis
approach was used to identify patterns of experiences of different
professionals and across the interviews.\ :sup:`11` The data-set was
double-coded by one author (P.A.) who collected the data and another
(M.V.W.) who was not familiar with the content of the interviews prior
to coding. The entire data-set was coded descriptively, and key themes
were identified that were evident across the data-set. Two research
questions drove decisions about the ‘keyness’ of a theme.\ :sup:`11`

The authors collaboratively interpreted codes and themes in the data. A
third author (Y.W.) input the data into NVivo version 10. The research
team were cognisant of the theoretical framing that drove the interview
schedules and their own analytical skillset that informed the coding.
Following Braun and Clarke's reflexive thematic analysis approach, the
research team focused on ‘reflexive and thoughtful engagement with their
data’.\ :sup:`12` (a)What are the dilemmas faced by asylum seekers when
narrating their past experiences to different professionals, as
understood by professionals who work with them?(b)What factors may
inhibit an open discussion of the past experiences that asylum seekers
are required to narrate in their claim?

The richness of the data is demonstrated in the Results section through
the use of quotes from the data-set that illustrate the key themes in
the data.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

The four main themes of processes influencing asylum seekers' narratives
that emerged from the interviews are reported here. These are:
(a)omission of information as a narrative dilemma;(b)alteration of
information as a narrative dilemma;(c)embellishment of information as a
narrative dilemma;(d)influence of trauma on disclosure.

The term ‘narrative dilemmas’ refers to the dilemmas experienced by
asylum seekers when narrating their past experiences to professionals
interviewed for this research. Other issues that emerged from the data
included the effects of individual identity and interview environment on
disclosure. These are addressed in the Discussion section.

.. _sec2-1:

Omission of information as a narrative dilemma
----------------------------------------------

The majority of participants revealed that they had worked with asylum
seekers who had omitted a piece of information at least once during
their claim for asylum. A medico-legal report-writing doctor presented
the example of an asylum seeker who had been imprisoned in a police
station and jail, and refused to divulge details of her experiences in
the police station. In his opinion: “‘This wasn't that she didn't
remember. She clearly did. It was much more of a conscious choice of
choosing not to re-engage with something that she knew she would find
distressing. And there was a sort of moral component to it that she felt
she didn't want to be defined by what had happened’ (P2, psychiatrist,
male).”

Participants described situations in which asylum seekers they worked
with did not volunteer information. These included when the information
was of a sensitive nature such as sexual trauma, if they were unclear
about the pertinence of a piece of information for the interviewer, or
when they were asked a direct question in one interview but not in
another.

Participants expressed the collective view that asylum seekers who had
perpetrated acts of betrayal or violence often did not disclose these
experiences in the first interview or meeting with a professional. This
was also the case for experiences of sexual violence (particularly for
men). Participants attributed this to feelings of guilt, shame and
stigma, as well as lack of trust in the professional. Participants
reflected that that asylum seekers sometimes omitted information owing
to fear of repercussions from people who exercised control over them,
such as human traffickers or state authorities in their countries of
origin whom they sometimes suspected of colluding with UK state
authorities. According to participants, asylum seekers they worked with
may doubt the confidential nature of interviews with UK professionals
and as a result omit information.

.. _sec2-2:

Alteration of information as a narrative dilemma
------------------------------------------------

Participants shared a common experience that the asylum narratives they
heard from their clients were altered over time. This often included
delayed disclosure of some aspects of asylum seekers' past experiences.
Information disclosed later would replace information that had been
omitted as mentioned above or fabricated for reasons discussed below.
Participants were of the opinion that asylum seekers sometimes disclosed
more new information in the setting of an increasingly trusting
relationship with the interviewer over time, on advice of a friend or
family member, in response to changing levels of stigma in the community
or in situations of external pressure such as being under oath in court.

Participants shared a variety of changed narratives that they had
observed in their professional experience, from minor details such as
changes of dates to the disclosure of new significant traumatic events
such as rape. Examples reported included asylum seekers who said they
escaped their country of origin in a specific month and then later
changed it to another because they could recall the season but not the
dates. In addition, they recounted incidents where some asylum seekers
claimed that they entered the country later than they had, based on
advice from friends to conceal the number of years spent undocumented
before claiming asylum for fear that their claims would be refused on
that basis.

A doctor interviewed an asylum seeker who, according to previous
interview records, had allegedly been trafficked directly to the UK.
However, she later disclosed that she had, in fact, been trafficked to a
different country and had subsequently escaped and paid a smuggler to
enter the UK. She had fabricated that part of her claim based on the
advice of a friend.

A lawyer reported that he had seen many asylum seekers who had
downplayed their membership of anti-government groups, based on
unfounded warnings from others that asylum claims from members of such
proscribed organisations were likely to be refused.

A male asylum seeker who had divulged information about a rape to the
doctor preparing his medico-legal report called the doctor years later
to have his account of this significant event redacted. He denied having
ever mentioned it and wanted his statement altered, despite the doctor's
records clearly documenting his previous account of the rape. The doctor
attributed this to a wish to take control of the recollection of a past
experience in which control had been taken away from him.

It was the common experience of participants that survivors of human
trafficking had been given information by their traffickers, such as
names of locations they had crossed in order to reach the UK, and that
they had believed this information and repeated it in their interviews.
Some survivors of trafficking had been specifically instructed to tell a
fabricated story and complied because of threats, or owing to the power
they perceived their trafficker to have over them. For example, several
participants gave examples of traffickers who subjected individuals to
‘juju’ rituals exploiting their spiritual beliefs,\ :sup:`13` in order
that the individual would feel ‘bound’ to the trafficker and compelled
to comply with their demands for fear of (often life-threatening)
reprisals against themselves or loved ones. “‘I certainly have seen a
number of victims of trafficking who are told that if they don't
cooperate – for example, if they don't cooperate with the full story,
which the trafficker has given them – then the trafficker will do the
same thing to their younger sister as they did to them’ (P2,
psychiatrist, male).”

A medico-legal report-writing doctor had worked with an asylum seeker
who drastically changed her narratives. He thought this was because the
asylum seeker's abuser was present at the first interview, had acted as
an interpreter for her and had controlled what was told to the doctor.

A further medico-legal report-writing doctor who visited asylum seekers
in detention recalled receiving a phone call from an asylum seeker the
day after the examination. The doctor reported that this asylum seeker
had shared her decision to disclose new information that she had
previously withheld about the sexual violence she had endured, after
seeking the advice of a friend. Participant 6 explained: “‘With the
minor details or changes in dates, and things, I would say that's
memory. With more significant, kind of, omissions, I guess, I would say
it's normally trust.’ (P6, psychologist, female)”Participants were of
the opinion that sometimes the asylum seekers they worked with lied to
protect the lives of others. Others who identified with their abusers
may have wanted to protect the abusers and change their narratives
accordingly.

.. _sec2-3:

Embellishment of information as a narrative dilemma
---------------------------------------------------

A medico-legal report-writing doctor had seen a survivor of a ‘blood
feud’ who had embellished his past experiences by fabricating that he
was an only child. Whereas in the survivor's view this ‘would make my
story stronger’, according to the doctor, it had the opposite effect
when it was uncovered. Similarly, a lawyer shared his experience of what
he viewed to be a recent trend: “‘We see a lot of these [nationality
redacted] boys, they come from a background of very limited education,
shepherds, and then have an experience of living in a conflict zone,
domestic violence, their father's been murdered in front of them, and
then maybe they've decided to add on a torture story because somebody's
told them that won't get you asylum and you need to have been tortured
[to get asylum]. Maybe they have been and maybe they haven't, but a
whole lot of other bad stuff has happened to them.’ (P7, lawyer, male)”

Psychologist participants explained that often when asylum seekers
embellished their symptoms, there were likely clinical explanations for
their behaviour, for example, the individual attempting to get help for
their unmet needs. “‘The things she was presenting with were not
consistent with any formal diagnosis … however, she desperately wanted
to get her needs met but it was almost as though she'd heard other
people had done it so therefore she put that into the pot to be sure
that I would recognize that she needed help. That's how I interpreted
it, actually’ (P13, doctor, female).”

.. _sec2-4:

Influence of trauma on disclosure
---------------------------------

Participants reported that in some situations they interpreted the
silence of an asylum seeker as indicative of the most severe parts of
their traumatic history. Participants thought this inability to
verbalise such experiences highlighted the effects of sustained periods
of intimidation and subordination on survivors of trafficking and/or
servitude and torture, such as the inability to develop an identity or
narrative of their own. Sexual trauma, linked to feelings of
embarrassment, shame and humiliation, was cited as one of the most
difficult experiences for asylum seekers to disclose. Participants
attributed this to fears of social stigma and resultant social
exclusion. Participants reflected on their interactions with asylum
seekers who they thought did not self-identify as victims of abuse, and
expressed the opinion that the skewed self-perception of some asylum
seekers affected how they presented certain experiences to their
interviewers. This was particularly the case with victims of childhood
abuse, according to participants, who may not have understood their
experiences as constituting abuse and had fragmented memories of their
past. Childhood trauma was explained as having particularly prolonged
and longstanding effects on individuals, influencing their ability to
disclose such events, and seen as potentially leading to intensified
symptoms of PTSD. Re-experiencing phenomena and avoidant behaviours are
core symptoms of PTSD.\ :sup:`14` All participants spoke about the
‘fragmentation’ of memories that can occur in PTSD, which can lead to
‘gaps’ in the individual's narrated history, which in turn can lead to
‘inconsistent’ accounts.\ :sup:`15`

Participants across all interviews also spoke about their assessments of
the effects of dissociation on the asylum seekers' ability to disclose a
full and complete history. Some shared experiences where individuals had
appeared to them to lose awareness of their surroundings and their sense
of self, inevitably resulting in a lack of clarity or coherence in the
narrative. Participants also analysed individuals' desire to avoid
thinking about the traumatic memories as manifesting itself by avoiding
talking about the traumatic event, and avoiding external reminders of
the traumatic event, which complicated disclosure. For example, a
participant shared her experience that clients often use vague
expressions and euphemisms when talking about traumatic experiences
instead of clearly disclosing a description of the sexual experiences.
“‘People use vague terms as part of their PTSD defence and avoidance,
about “them” or “that man”, “those people” or “the work”’ (P15,
psychologist, female).”

All professionals detailed a myriad of body language indicators of
distress, including restlessness, reddening eyes, crying, movement of
jaw muscles, hyperventilation and body clutching, as well as other PTSD
symptoms described above. Participants continually underlined the
importance of non-verbal cues in their professional roles in order to
provide corroborating evidence for any clinical conclusions and noted
that non-audible features of clients' accounts were mostly absent from
transcripts of Home Office interviews.

The focus group discussions produced consensus over the majority of
issues reported this section. There was a minor point of contention in
the second focus group discussion with medico-legal report writing
doctors regarding the balance between their roles as impartial witnesses
and their urge to express their sympathy for the asylum seekers they
work with.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

This exploratory research investigated the processes involved in asylum
narratives that changed over time from the perspectives of professionals
who work with them. This study revealed the unique vantage points of
doctors, lawyers and psychologists with years of collective experience
working with asylum seekers from different countries with different
types of asylum claims, in professional relationships ranging from
singular interviews to long-term therapeutic work.

One of the key findings of this research is that, according to
participants in this study, asylum seekers may sometimes select what
information to disclose based on their perceptions of its pertinence to
the particular interview or interviewer. This is particularly
significant given that asylum seekers are interviewed by a range of
different professionals and suggests that they make decisions about what
information to share with each professional. Most participants conveyed
that the time available to build a rapport with the asylum seekers they
interviewed was directly related to the level of disclosure they
subsequently received from the asylum seekers, owing to the development
of a trusting relationship. The different professional standpoints and
the difference in time available to participants, such as the length of
the interview, the number of appointments, and the duration of the
professional relationship, affected the type of information disclosed to
them. The findings suggest that any expectation that asylum seekers make
full disclosures of their past experiences is unrealistic because
disclosure is a prolonged process which often cannot be achieved in a
singular interview. Similarly, expectations around the accuracy of
detail in a narrative, or consistency over time, are incompatible with
the processes of human memory, particularly in individuals suffering
from PTSD. Participants mentioned additional factors that contributed to
narrative dilemmas experienced by the asylum seekers they worked with,
which were in line with previous studies on the influence of the
interview environment, including physical features of the room, the
gender of the interviewer and the role of interpreters, as well as
interviewer expectations of emotional congruence from asylum
seekers.\ :sup:`9,16–21` However, as our study focused on professionals'
perceptions of the decision-making processes that drove some asylum
seekers' disclosures, we chose to focus on types of dilemmas and their
relationship with asylum seekers' traumatic past experiences.

This is a small sample study, whose results cannot be generalised.
Furthermore, interviews did not follow an identical format, owing to
adjustments made to accommodate individual participants' time
constraints, which may have affected the content of the interviews. As
this study adopted Braun and Clarke's reflexive thematic analysis
method,\ :sup:`12` a collaborative approach was taken that focused away
from coding consistency and towards a nuanced reading of interview data.

A limitation of this study was that majority of the participants were
white British; future research in this area should endeavour to recruit
a more diverse sample, which would additionally allow another layer of
analysis, i.e. of the relationship between professionals' ethnicity and
asylum seekers' disclosures.

Overall, our findings demonstrate that it is potentially unrealistic to
expect that asylum seekers will be able to disclose their past
experiences in a complete manner to professionals, particularly in a
single interview. It also highlights that there are a number of dilemmas
that can affect asylum seekers' decisions around disclosure to
professionals interviewing them, which are closely connected to their
past traumatic experiences, present strong emotions about stigma and
repercussions, and ongoing difficulties navigating the asylum process in
the UK.

The scarcity of clear and accessible information about the procedures of
asylum adjudication in the UK\ :sup:`11` renders asylum seekers
susceptible to unhelpful advice from well-meaning friends or
instructions from controllers, as conveyed by participants who reported
incidents where asylum seekers had altered or fabricated elements of
their narratives as a result of advice from friends or instructions from
controllers. This demonstrates the need to interrogate what appears to
be a ‘choice’ on the part of the asylum seeker to disclose or not
disclose information, when in fact this may be a distressing dilemma
arising out of trauma, fear and the control exercised by others such as
traffickers, or due to misinformation or misunderstanding about what is
‘best’ for their asylum case.

Participants considered that the experiences of asylum seekers who had
been survivors of trafficking or modern slavery, sexual trauma,
captivity in detention or prison, torture, and childhood traumas
negatively affected their ability to discuss their past experiences
openly. Such experiences were thought to render such individuals
intimidated, devoid of power, mistrustful and suspicious. Our findings
also suggest that details of traumatic events were sometimes not
revealed to participants, and that on occasion traumatic events were
revealed gradually over the course of a trusting professional
relationship or following the perceived safety of successfully being
granted leave to remain in the UK. These changes were seen by the
professionals as a means by which asylum seekers exercised control over
which aspects of their narrative they would share, and by doing so tried
to regain some of the control that had been taken away from them when
they had been subjected to abuse and torture in the past. Psychologists,
psychiatrists and psychotherapeutic workers who had a professional
understanding of the psychological needs of asylum seekers conveyed the
importance of paying attention to the coherence between symptoms and the
content of narratives to identify whether presentation of symptoms was a
result of traumatic experiences or a misguided way of eliciting the help
the individual felt they needed.

It is important to note that all participants spoke about the effects of
fragmented trauma memories, which were said to lead to gaps in oral
histories, leading to dislocated narratives and inconsistent accounts.
These inconsistencies are sometimes cited as a reason for refusal in
letters from the Home Office.\ :sup:`4` Notably, a hostile asylum system
and its ‘culture of disbelief’ was cited as a further source of trauma
for some asylum seekers, who experienced anxieties as they anticipated
being disbelieved or discredited; this supports recent literature on the
effects of immigration detention.\ :sup:`22,23`

Our findings have a number of practical implications for professionals
who interview asylum seekers, and for policy makers and researchers.
(a)The participants involved in this study conveyed that professionals
conducting interviews can take measures to understand the process of
disclosure in its complexity with the aim of making the interview
environment conducive to gaining asylum seekers' trust and making them
feel relaxed enough to disclose their full history. Participants
recounted that certain individuals looked upon the notion of
confidentiality with suspicion, or found it difficult to disclose
sensitive personal information in front of professionals or interpreters
from their own country and preferred instead to speak with foreign
professionals. These are important factors to be considered when setting
up an interview that requires disclosure of sensitive personal
information. Participants' recommendations include considering in
advance and where possible adjusting features of the interview setting
to suit the specific needs of clients, such as lighting and noise
levels, as well as the gender of the interviewer or interpreter;
increasing interviewer awareness of PTSD symptomatology; and
incorporating non-verbal information shared by the client, such as signs
of distress or symptoms of PTSD, into interview notes.(b)Participants
conveyed that professionals working with asylum seekers should treat
them as individuals rather than a category of people and engage with
their individual needs and dilemmas in a non-judgemental manner.
Participants in our study explained that they perceived it as their task
to understand and clarify the content of narratives and the reasons for
any inconsistencies, in order to place the narratives in the context of
the individual's asylum claim. This is indicative of a broader
structural issue relating to the asylum interview, which, by requiring
an individual to produce a narrative that is continuously consistent,
places more emphasis on synthesising often traumatic histories into a
coherent format, rather than addressing the health and welfare needs
relating to these traumas.(c)We also recommend that future research
focuses specifically on the experiences and opinions of asylum seekers
and seeks their perspective on the issues that influenced any changes in
their accounts over time.

We thank the individuals who agreed to share their experiences with us.
We also thank Dr Stuart Turner, Professor Jonathan Smith and Dr Nick
Midgely for their guidance.

**Paaras Abbas** is a Research Administrator at the Department of
Anthropology, Goldsmiths University of London and formerly a researcher
at the Helen Bamber Foundation, London, UK. **Martha von Werthern** is a
trainee clinical psychologist at the Department of Psychology,
University College London and formerly a research coordinator at the
Helen Bamber Foundation, London, UK. **Cornelius Katona** is Medical
Director of the Helen Bamber Foundation, London and Honorary Professor
of Psychiatry in the Division of Psychiatry, University College London,
UK. **Francesca Brady** is a clinical psychologist at the Helen Bamber
Foundation, London and at the Woodfield Trauma Service, Central and
North West London NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Yeree Woo** is a
researcher at the Helen Bamber Foundation, London, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

All authors had access to the study data (i.e. recordings and
transcripts) for the purpose of analysis and interpretation. Access is
ongoing until publication is completed. Anonymised data can be made
available upon request from authors.

P.A. was responsible for the study and interview material design,
recruitment of participants, data collection by conducting interviews,
data analysis, drafting manuscript, reviewing multiple manuscripts and
approval of final version for submission. M.v.W. was responsible for
data analysis and interpretation, drafting manuscript, reviewing
multiple manuscripts and approval of final version for submission. C.K.
was responsible for initial development of the study concept,
supervision of study including design of interview and data analysis,
review of multiple manuscript drafts and approval of final version for
submission. F.B. was responsible for supervision of study including
design of interview and data analysis, review of multiple manuscript
drafts and approval of final version for submission. Y.W. was
responsible for data analysis, drafting manuscript, and final approval
for publication. All authors agree to be accountable for all aspects of
the work.

This work was supported by a research grant to the Helen Bamber
Foundation from the Oak Foundation (grant number: OCAY-15-286).

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

P.A., M.v.W., C.K., and F.B. received grants from Oak Foundation during
the study. C.K. is the Royal College of Psychiatrists Lead on Refugee
and Asylum Mental Health.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.33.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. [1]
   MLR, medico-legal report; NGO, non-governmental organisation; NHS,
   National Health Service.
