==================================================================================================================
Mental health services for children in care: investigation to elicit outcomes of direct and indirect interventions
==================================================================================================================



Samuel Deuchar
Pallab Majumder
:Correspondence: Pallab Majumder
(pallab.majumder@nottshc.nhs.uk)

:date: 2021-10

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy of direct therapy
   and indirect consultation for treating mental health difficulties
   among looked after children (LAC), and also to identify any
   demographic or clinical predictor variables for outcomes in this
   cohort. A retrospective evaluation of mental health outcomes for 104
   LAC was conducted. All children received network consultation in
   combination with or without direct therapeutic work. Outcomes were
   compared between the groups with and without direct therapeutic
   intervention.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Those receiving both treatments displayed significantly greater
   Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ)-rated improvements
   than those receiving just consultation. Nonetheless, improvements in
   scores for the latter group were significant relative to baseline.
   Treatment duration, younger age at referral and start SDQ were all
   correlated with positive outcomes, while number of address changes
   predicted higher start SDQ scores.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Despite the retrospective design of this study, its results can be
   considered as preliminary findings to guide treatment decisions in
   LAC.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _sec1-1:

Looked after children (LAC) and mental health
=============================================

Irrespective of circumstances, LAC appear to be disproportionately
burdened by an array of adversity, disrupted development and problematic
relationships. These challenges commonly manifest as attachment-related
disorders, emotional difficulties and maladaptive behaviours. Given the
particular vulnerability of this population and the urgency required
when dealing with insecure attachment, any research involving an
untreated control group would be inherently unethical. Quantitative
research in this field has therefore remained sparse, with the vast
majority of the literature instead opting to assess case studies and
qualitative data. The retrospective nature of the present study means it
is able to contribute treatment-related outcome data from a relatively
large sample of LAC. Although this naturalistic design is limited in
terms of fully controlling confounding variables, it avoids the risk of
bias from insufficient blinding and ensures that no child misses out on
potentially beneficial treatment.

A comprehensive meta-analysis conducted by Vasileva and
Petermann\ :sup:`1` accumulated data from 22 samples of abused and
neglected LAC under 7 years old. Across 11 studies, 38.5% of the 3211
eligible child participants were found to have either motor or cognitive
developmental delays; these were consistently more prevalent in children
fostered by strangers than in those looked after by kin. Similarly, 39%
displayed clinically significant internalising or externalising
problems, and only 35% of LAC met criteria for secure attachment. The
findings of Tarren-Sweeney\ :sup:`2` indicate that when mental illness
goes untreated during these early years, a child's social and emotional
development may be jeopardised, and the possibility of a secure
attachment appears to reduce with each placement breakdown. Children
that entered care at a later age and were exposed to maltreatment were
found to score significantly higher on both the Child Behaviour
Checklist and the Assessment Checklist for Children, whereas having a
permanent placement was highlighted as an important protective factor.
Given the cross-sectional design, however, it was difficult to infer
causation, and it is equally possible that children with better mental
health are more manageable and thus less at risk of having placements
break down.

Attachment security appears to be a crucial factor mediating the mental
health outcomes of children placed in foster care. Both internalising
problems and frequency of mental illness diagnoses diminished
significantly for girls removed from institutional care into foster
care, but not for boys, in a sample of Romanian children aged 3 and
below.\ :sup:`3` Subsequent analysis using the strange situation
test\ :sup:`4` revealed that the demonstrated improvements in mental
health for fostered girls was fully mediated by the formation of secure
attachment. Guyon-Harris et al\ :sup:`5` examined the longitudinal
trajectories of reactive attachment disorder (RAD) based on
semi-structured interviews with caregivers. In line with and extending
previous conclusions, the sharpest declines in symptoms of RAD were
found for children placed in foster care, which was sustained long-term
at 8- and 12-year follow-up (73% retention). The vast majority of
children with rapidly decreasing symptoms of RAD had been relatively
younger when placed in foster care, whereas children entering at an
older age displayed persistent and elevated symptoms. Almost all of the
original group left in residential care displayed persistent symptoms.

.. _sec1-2:

Direct interventions for mental health difficulties in LAC
==========================================================

The MTFC-P, a direct intervention facilitating healthy, securely
attached foster parent–child relationships, included 12 hours of
training, daily telephone contact with a consultant and a weekly support
group for foster carers, while the child attended weekly therapeutic
play group sessions.\ :sup:`6` Secure and avoidant attachment behaviours
were assessed at five time points with 3-month intervals. Pre-schoolers
in the MTFC-P condition exhibited significantly more secure and less
avoidant behaviours than those in regular foster care. Furthermore, the
frequency of secure attachment behaviours increased over time for those
receiving the MTFC-P intervention but decreased for the comparison
group.

Study on Theraplay have shown statistically significant improvements in
communication, interpersonal relationships and behaviour as rated by
adoptive mothers, but problem-solving, emotional awareness and general
functioning were not found to change.\ :sup:`7` In a related study, on
the other hand, weekly Theraplay sessions delivered to 20 LAC over a
period of up to 8 months resulted in no significant change on any of the
subscales of the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
(SDQ).\ :sup:`8` Follow-up subgroup analysis indicated that girls showed
significantly more teacher-rated improvements than boys in terms of
hyperactivity, conduct and prosocial behaviour. Taken together with the
findings of McLaughlin and colleagues,\ :sup:`3` this suggests that
girls may perhaps be more able to securely attach to a foster family and
so may benefit more substantially from direct intervention.

Dyadic developmental psychotherapy (DDP) is described as a direct,
attachment-based intervention involving the delivery of traditional
psychotherapy to both the child and their carer.\ :sup:`9` Wingfield and
Gurney-Smith reported that 12 adoptive parents receiving DDP gained
increased curiosity, understanding and empathy for their children, while
the children reported fewer behavioural problems, improved control over
emotions, better relationships with peers and improved sleep.\ :sup:`10`
On the other hand, in spite of progress, a number of parents described
the sessions as emotionally exhausting, uncomfortable and upsetting.
Feedback from therapists delivering DDP has, however, been very
positive. Turner-Halliday and colleagues\ :sup:`11` reached out to child
and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) in the UK delivering the
treatment. DDP was seen as an effective tool for directly tackling
complex profiles of mental illness alongside the root causes of both
internalising and externalising problems. The inclusion of parents and
carers on such an emotionally stimulating journey was seen to indirectly
facilitate secure attachment through an improved mutual understanding.

.. _sec1-3:

Multiagency cosultation for LAC mental health
=============================================

In an attempt to better combat the wide range of complex and overlapping
symptoms of behavioural, mental, social and cognitive disorders
presented by LAC, a small body of research has explored the utility of
multi-agency consultation. Upon recounting a number of particularly
challenging cases where successful outcomes only emerged in the wake of
a concerted effort from all available support, Sprince\ :sup:`12`
concludes that child therapists have an obligation to appropriately
tailor treatments and advice to the specific network of individuals and
organisations responsible for the child's care. The consultation model
differs from regular therapeutic interventions in that rather than
directly treating the child, their network of carers, teachers, social
workers and therapists collaborate to tailor solutions to the child's
specific needs, difficulties, history and environment.

Swann and York\ :sup:`13` refer to this multi-agency intervention as
‘THINKSPACE’, succinctly illustrating the creation of a space where
clinicians, service providers and stakeholders can come together to
share their diverse perspectives, knowledge and skills to conjure up a
holistic picture and systemic solution. Consultation sessions dedicate
around an hour and a half to each child, beginning with the construction
of a narrative outlining their development, diagnoses and family
history. Attendees then contribute their unique perspectives,
theoretical knowledge and practical experience to generate realistic and
appropriate solutions. Swann and York emphasise the importance of using
everyday language, having only one key interviewer and avoiding giving
the primary carer direct instructions.

Qualitative data for evaluation of the consultation model have been
collected from social workers and clinicians by Dimaro, Moghaddam and
Kyte.\ :sup:`14` Feedback from 138 social workers indicated that a vast
majority felt that their goals had been suitably addressed by the
collaborative consultation sessions, particularly with regard to
assessing concerns, understanding behaviours, understanding
relationships and planning next steps. However, 37% of those hoping for
effective parenting techniques and 41% of those hoping to work more
effectively with staff, agencies and local services felt their goal had
not been properly addressed. Subsequent focus groups with 12 of the
clinicians illuminated a number of key themes. Primarily, they uniformly
felt that the sessions allowed them to provide useful, diverse and
practical support. They highlighted the utility of clearly defining
roles and objectives and spoke positively about the wider systemic
effects their input could achieve.

The sole quantitative trial evaluating the effects of consultation on
the mental health of LAC was described by Callaghan et al.\ :sup:`15`
Psychiatrists, psychologists and therapists from all three tiers of a UK
CAMHS came together to collect collaborative feedback from carers of 45
LAC aged between 4 and 17 years. Outcomes were assessed based on scores
on the Health of the Nation Outcome Scales for Children and Adolescents
and the SDQ, completed at baseline and 5-month follow-up. Although
improvements in total SDQ scores did not quite reach significance,
scores on an emotional problems subscale did. This data does rationalise
further, more rigorous evaluation of the model but is limited in that it
did not include an adequate comparison group, and thus the authors
responsible for collecting data were not blinded to experimental
procedures. Furthermore, of the 39 carers that completed service
satisfaction feedback forms, only 51% felt the intervention offered had
been efficacious, and 28% felt their young person had not shown any
improvement.

A number of key themes have emerged from the literature exploring mental
health presentation and interventions among LAC. Primarily, the
formation of secure attachment has consistently been highlighted as a
crucial factor mediating mental well-being among this population of
particularly vulnerable children. This conclusion emerges from the
research contrasting foster care with residential care,\ :sup:`3,5` the
success of treatments targeting child–carer interactions,\ :sup:`7` and
the discrepancy between outcomes for boys and girls,\ :sup:`3,7` and it
is aligned with the apparent predictive power of placement stability and
age at entry into care.\ :sup:`2`

Ethical considerations present a major barrier to quantitative research
in that withholding potentially efficacious treatment from a vulnerable
child can never be justified. However, uncontrolled quantitative data
have pointed towards the efficacy of direct work,\ :sup:`6,7` as has the
more abundant qualitative research.\ :sup:`10,11` The viability of
indirect interventions, on the other hand, is far less well evidenced,
with the sole quantitative data-set revealing no significant change in
SDQ scores\ :sup:`15` despite promising conclusions drawn from
qualitative data.\ :sup:`14`

Therefore, in this study, we aim to test the following key hypotheses.
Consultation with direct intervention is more efficacious than
consultation on its own (H1).Consultation on its own is associated with
significant SDQ-rated improvements relative to baseline (H2).A lower
total number of address changes and longer time in current placement
(H3), younger age at point of referral (H4) and female gender (H5)
predict more positive outcomes.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

.. _sec2-1:

Procedure
---------

In collaboration with a Nottinghamshire-based CAMHS, demographic and
treatment-related data for LAC that had accessed the service were
collected and analysed (*n* = 437). In pursuit of a suitable outcome
measure, only those with both start and end social-worker-rated SDQ
scores were included in a subsequent outcome analysis (*n* = 104).
Characteristics of the full sample were compared with those of the
included sample to determine whether or not it was representative.
Permission was then requested and granted to access information
regarding presenting problems, diagnoses, address changes and family
factors stored on the service's Liquid Logic database for the LAC
included in the outcome analysis. Information regarding the nature of
treatment for each of these closed cases was also collected, allowing
the included sample to be divided into a group receiving just
consultation (*n* = 69) and a group receiving both consultation and
direct work (*n* = 28).

.. _sec2-2:

Sample
------

Between May 2002 and June 2019, data were available for a total of 443
referrals at the time of collection. Of these, 437 had sufficient data
to be included in a preliminary analysis describing the sample,
comprising 247 boys (56.5%) and 189 girls (43.2%), with one missing data
point. Out of the full sample of 437 LAC, a total of 104 children
(23.8%) had both a start and end SDQ score, thus meeting the inclusion
criteria for the treatment outcome analysis. Of the 333 LAC not
included, 196 (58.9%) were still undergoing treatment, and the remaining
137 (41.1%) were missing either a start SDQ score, end SDQ score or
both. Of the 59 boys (56.7%) and 45 girls (43.3%) included in the
follow-up outcome analysis (*n* = 104), 69 received cross-domain
consultation on its own (66.3%) and 28 received direct work in addition
to their consultation (26.9%); intervention details were not available
for the remaining seven LAC (6.7%).

.. _sec2-3:

Measures
--------

The primary outcome measure was scores on the SDQ, a brief and popular
tool used for assessing child psychopathology. It is composed of four
subscales evaluating difficulties and one accommodating strengths:
emotional symptoms, hyperactivity-inattention, conduct problems, peer
problems and prosocial behaviours.\ :sup:`16` Acceptable internal
consistency and test–retest stability have been repeatedly
demonstrated,\ :sup:`17` and scores have been found to correlate
meaningfully with those of other prominent diagnostic tools.\ :sup:`18`
Change in SDQ score was calculated as the score reported before
treatment commenced subtracted by the score following the treatment's
conclusion; positive values therefore reflect improvements in SDQ
scores.

Regarding categorical predictors, the included LAC were grouped
according to ethnicity, gender, disability and adverse experience.
Continuous measures included ‘waiting time’, calculated as the number of
days between initial referral and the date the child was assigned to a
treatment programme, and ‘treatment duration’, operationalised as the
number of days between the initial referral and the case closure date.
‘Time in current placement’ was another continuous measure, calculated
as the number of days between the most recent address change and the
date that data analysis commenced (1 June 2019). ‘Total number of
address changes’ included short-term placements and returns to previous
addresses, in an attempt to best represent placement stability. Start
SDQ score and age at point of referral were two additional and more
self-explanatory continuous variables also included as potential
predictors.

.. _sec2-4:

Data analysis
-------------

Descriptive and frequency statistics were analysed for both the full
cross-sectional data-set and the sample included in the outcome
analysis. This was followed by a series of one-way analyses of variance
(ANOVAs) and independent-samples *t*-tests in order to identify any
significant between-group differences. A parallel analysis contrasted
the characteristics of the group receiving just consultation with the
group receiving both consultation and direct work. This was followed by
an independent-samples *t*-test to determine whether the two treatment
groups differed from one another in terms of SDQ score changes. A
subsequent single-sample *t-*\ test was used to determine whether SDQ
scores within the consultation group improved significantly relative to
a baseline of zero. Finally, a predictor analysis considered the full
sample of included LAC, commencing with a series of one-way ANOVAs to
identify any categorical protective and risk factors. Pearson's R
correlation coefficients were then calculated for the relevant
continuous measures, with particular attention paid to the factors
associated with changes in SDQ score.

.. _sec2-5:

Statement of ethical approval
-----------------------------

Ethical approval to conduct this study was not required as the project
only involved analysis of existing anonymised data. It was registered in
and approved by the Research and Development department of
Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Demographic and clinical findings
---------------------------------

In the full sample (*n* = 437), children waited for a mean of 27.7 days
(s.d. = 18.4 days, *n* = 317); they had a mean age at point of referral
of 11.3 years (s.d. = 4.2 years, *n* = 436) and mean start SDQ score of
17.2 (s.d. = 8.0, *n* = 368). Start SDQ score did not differ
significantly between boys and girls (*t* = −0.39, d.f. = 366,
*P* = 0.70). A set of one-way ANOVAs contrasted the group
characteristics of those included in the follow-up treatment outcome
analysis (*n* = 104) with those that had missing SDQ data or were still
open cases (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). No significant between-group
difference was found for start SDQ score (*F* = 0.512, d.f. = 1, 366,
*P* = 0.475), but significant differences were identified for age at
referral (*F* = 5.175, d.f. = 1, 434, *P* = 0.023) and waiting time
(*F* = 8.366, d.f. = 1, 315, *P* = 0.004). Subsequent
independent-samples *t*-tests revealed that with a mean of 12.1 years
(s.d. = 4.0) in comparison to 11.0 years (s.d. = 4.2), children with
paired outcome data were significantly older at point of referral than
those who were excluded (*t* = 2.28, d.f. = 434, *P* = 0.023). With a
mean of 21.7 days (s.d. = 11.3) in comparison with 29.1 (s.d. = 19.5),
LAC that met the inclusion criteria were also found to have waited
significantly less time between referral and choice than excluded
participants (*t* = 2.89, d.f. = 315, *P* = 0.004). Table 1Descriptive
statistics contrasting the included with the excluded sampleIncluded
(*n* = 104)Excluded
(*n* = 333)Means.d.Range\ *n*\ Means.d.Range\ *n*\ Age at referral
(years)12.1*4.02–1710411.0*4.20–17332Waiting time
(days)21.7*11.30–486229.1*19.50–104255Start
SDQ17.78.31–3610417.07.80–34264 [1]_

Fifty-nine boys (56.7%) and 45 girls (43.3%) met the inclusion criteria.
For the 100 LAC with data available on the Liquid Logic system,
presenting disabilities and adverse experiences are displayed
graphically in `Figs. 1 <#fig01>`__ and `2 <#fig02>`__. The included
sample (*n* = 104) presented with a mean start SDQ score of 17.7
(s.d. = 8.3) and a mean end SDQ score of 14.5 (s.d. = 7.4), equating to
a mean improvement of 3.1 points (s.d. = 6.6). The mean age at referral
was 12.1 years (s.d. = 4.0), the treatment duration was 248.1 days
(s.d. = 259.0), time in current placement was 729.7 days (s.d. = 916.8),
the total number of address changes was 8.2 (s.d. = 5.9) and, for the 63
LAC with a recorded choice date, the mean waiting time was 21.7 days
(s.d. = 11.2) following referral. Sixty-nine of the included
participants received cross-domain consultation on its own (66.3%), 28
received direct work in addition to their consultation (26.9%), and
intervention details were not available for the remaining seven (6.7%).
Fourteen of the participants receiving direct work completed individual
therapy (50.0%), five received DDP (17.9%), four were assigned creative
therapy (14.3%), two were assigned Theraplay (7.1%) and one was assigned
to each of DBT (Dialectical Behaviour Therapy), EMDR (Eye Movement
Desensitisation and Reprocessing) and medical review (3.6% each). The
distribution of direct treatment interventions is presented graphically
in `Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__. Fig. 1Pie chart graphically illustrating the
distribution of presenting disabilities for the included sample of LAC.
ASD, autism spectrum disorder. Fig. 2Pie chart graphically illustrating
the distribution of adversities experienced by the included sample of
LAC at the hands of their birth families. Fig. 3Pie chart graphically
illustrating the distribution of direct treatments allocated to the
subgroup of included LAC receiving both interventions.

.. _sec3-2:

Combined and consultation-only treatment (H1 and H2)
----------------------------------------------------

The group of LAC receiving only consultation work (*n* = 69) was
composed of 38 males (55.1%) and 31 females (44.9%). They had a mean age
of 12.2 years (s.d. = 4.2) at point of referral and a waiting time of
23.3 days (s.d. = 12.2), and their treatment lasted for an average of
177 days (s.d. = 216.2) They had changed address a mean of 7.9 times
(s.d. = 6.7) and had been in their current placement for 789.1 days
(s.d. = 1032.6). The group receiving both consultation and direct work,
on the other hand, was composed of 17 males (60.7%) and 11 females
(39.3%). They had a mean age of 11.9 years (s.d. = 3.1), a waiting time
of 17.7 days (s.d. = 8.5) and a treatment duration of 401.4 days
(s.d. = 305.2). They had changed address a mean of 8.4 times
(s.d. = 4.0) and had been in their current placement for 629.9 days
(s.d. = 653.1). Those receiving both direct work and consultation were
found to have significantly longer treatment duration (*t* = 4.01,
d.f. = 91, *P* < 0.001) and a higher start SDQ score (*t* = 2.26,
d.f. = 95, *P* = 0.03) than those receiving just consultation (`Table
2 <#tab02>`__). Table 2Descriptive statistics for the two treatment
groupsConsultation (*n* = 69)Consultation and direct work
(*n* = 28)Means.d.Range\ *n*\ Means.d.Range\ *n*\ Age at referral
(years)12.34.22–176911.93.15–1628Time in current placement
(days)789.11032.60–474866629.9653.10–307328Waiting time
(days)23.312.21–484317.78.50–3428Start
SDQ16.4*8.41–366920.6*8.26–3415Treatment duration
(days)177.1**216.20–85066401.4**305.20–120528End
SDQ14.37.52–316915.37.71–2927Change in SDQ2.1*6.3−15 to 18695.4*7.0−10
to 1828 [2]_

With a mean change of 5.4 points (s.d. = 7.0) on the SDQ in comparison
with 2.1 points (s.d. = 6.3), those receiving both direct and indirect
treatment interventions improved significantly more than those receiving
just consultation (*t* = 2.26, d.f. = 95, *P* = 0.026). A single-sample
*t*-test indicated that those receiving just consultation nonetheless
displayed significant SDQ-score improvements (*t* = 2.75, d.f. = 68,
*P* = 0.008). These findings are displayed graphically in `Fig.
4 <#fig04>`__. A one-way ANOVA found no significant difference in
outcomes for the different direct interventions (*F* = 0.65, d.f. = 6,
21, *P* = 0.690). Parallel one-way ANOVAs identified no significant
differences when the included sample was grouped by ethnicity
(*F* = 0.38, d.f. = 6, 97, *P* = 0.890), disability (*F* = 0.70,
d.f. = 4, 95, *P* = 0.593) or adverse experience (*F* = 0.65, d.f. = 5,
94, *P* = 0.662). Across the paired data, mean change in SDQ score did
not differ significantly between boys and girls (*t* = 0.41, d.f. = 102,
*P* = 0.968). Fig. 4Bar chart graphically illustrating the mean
SDQ-rated improvements for both treatment groups, with error bars
representing standard deviations.

.. _sec3-3:

Predictor variables of outcome (H3 and H4)
------------------------------------------

Correlational analysis for the full sample identified a number of
factors predicting SDQ-related improvements, as displayed in `Table
3 <#tab03>`__. These were: age at point of referral (*R* = −0.22,
*P* = 0.027), treatment duration (*R* = 0.20, *P* = 0.049) and start SDQ
score (*R* = 0.53, *P* < 0.001). Start SDQ score was also correlated
strongly and positively with total number of address changes
(*R* = 0.23, *P* = 0.021) and treatment duration (*R* = 0.28,
*P* = 0.005). Finally, a negative correlation was found between number
of days waiting and total number of address changes (*R* = −0.31,
*P* = 0.014). Table 3Pearson's correlation coefficients for all
continuous variables for the included LACAge at ReferralAddress
changesTime in current placementWaiting timeStart SDQTreatment
durationChange in SDQAge at referral (years)0.27 (*P* = 0.006)*−0.23
(*P* = 0.021)*−0.10 (*P* = 0.417)−0.09 (*P* = 0.350)−0.06
(*P* = 0.668)−0.22 (*P* = 0.027)*Address changes0.27 (*P* = 0.006)*−0.37
(*P* < 0.001)**−0.31 (*P* = 0.014)*0.23 (*P* = 0.021)*−0.12
(*P* = 0.253)0.05 (*P* = 0.655)Time in current placement (days)−0.23
(*P* = 0.021)−0.37 (*P* < 0.001)**0.21 (*P* = 0.098)−0.10
(*P* = 0.345)0.12 (*P* = 0.256)0.023 (*P* = 0.822)Waiting time
(days)−0.10 (*P* = 0.417)−0.31 (*P* = 0.014)*0.21 (*P* = 0.098)−0.02
(*P* = 0.885)−0.06 (*P* = 0.668)0.08 (*P* = 0.512)Start SDQ−0.09
(*P* = 0.350)0.23 (*P* = 0.021)*−0.10 (*P* = 0.345)−0.02
(*P* = 0.885)0.28 (*P* = 0.005)*0.53 (*P* < 0.001)**Treatment duration
(days)−0.06 (*P* = 0.668)−0.12 (*P* = 0.253)0.12 (*P* = 0.256)−0.06
(*P* = 0.668)0.28 (*P* = 0.005)*0.20 (*P* = 0.049)*Change in SDQ−0.22
(*P* = 0.027)*0.05 (*P* = 0.655)0.023 (*P* = 0.822)0.08
(*P* = 0.512)0.53 (*P* < 0.001)**0.20 (*P* = 0.049)\* [3]_

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

In summary, the LAC with paired outcome data (*n* = 104) differed
significantly from the rest of the sample (*n* = 333) in that they were
older at the point of referral (12.1 years *v.* 11.0 years) and waited
for less time between referral and appointment to a treatment programme
(27.1 days *v.* 29.1 days). It is unclear why children referred to the
CAMHS at an older age were more likely to have completed treatment and
received both start and end SDQ scores. For the latter discrepancy, on
the other hand, it is plausible that shorter waiting times may result in
faster recovery, meaning treatment is more likely to be concluded for
those that received it quickly.

The children allocated both consultation and direct work (*n* = 28)
differed significantly from those receiving just consultation (*n* = 69)
in that their treatment lasted longer and they commenced with a higher
start SDQ score (20.6 *v.* 16.4). Given that the former group were
receiving two forms of treatment as opposed to one, it is understandable
that the overall duration would be longer. As for the higher start SDQ
score, this discrepancy is likely to reflect the unrandomised group
allocation. Treatments were instead allocated based on the needs of the
LAC; those with more severe presentations and exposed to more adversity
were more likely to receive both forms of treatment. One important
strength of the present analysis is that outcomes were assessed and
scored by the child's social worker, a third party with no conceivable
bias towards observing an improvement.

Despite more severe presentations, the group receiving both treatments
displayed significantly greater improvements in SDQ scores than the
group receiving just indirect work (5.4 *v.* 2.1), thus confirming the
primary hypothesis (H1). As outcomes for the various direct
interventions did not differ significantly from one another, this
finding can be interpreted as qualitative support for all the included
direct treatment programmes. In particular, it extends the findings of
Weir et al\ :sup:`7` in their endorsement of the efficacy of Theraplay,
but it contradicts Francis, Bennion and Humrich,\ :sup:`8` who did not
find a significant change in SDQ score. It also provides concrete
quantitative data to validate the qualitative findings of DDP
research.\ :sup:`10,11` Furthermore, it forms a preliminary benchmark
for future research evaluating the utility of both individual and
creative therapy, which is yet to be evidenced in a population of LAC.
Conclusions regarding the other three direct interventions are more
tentative given that only one child received each of DBT, EMDR and
medical review, but the outcomes are nonetheless promising.

Consultation was found to be independently efficacious at moderating SDQ
scores relative to a baseline of zero, thus confirming the secondary
hypothesis (H2). This finding opposes that of Callaghan and
colleagues,\ :sup:`15` who did not find any significant change in SDQ
score following consultation, perhaps owing to their smaller sample size
or the shorter treatment duration. On the other hand, it aligns more
readily with the qualitative data reported by Dimaro, Moghaddam and
Kyte.\ :sup:`14` This finding for the consultation-only group, however,
should be viewed with some caution. Clinicians appear to have made a
judgement that these children did not merit a direct intervention, most
likely owing to less severe presentation. Consequently, the finding that
CAMHS consultation was of benefit is promising. However, the other
finding that this group showed less significant change than the group
receiving both treatments may imply that these children required
additional therapeutic intervention, which was not necessarily within
the specialist CAMHS remit. The findings, therefore, may rekindle the
debate on the needs and resource implications of therapeutic services,
often offered by other agencies such as social care and the third
sector, that have been substantially lost in recent years in the UK.

The ingredients of the consultation model used in the study sample
consisted of collaboration and cooperation among a specific network of
carers, professionals and organisations to create a thinking space where
the complex needs of the LAC could be assessed, understood and managed
by mutual support, clarification of roles, common understanding and
practical steps. This is compatible with previous work that endeavoured
to illustrate the consultation model.\ :sup:`12,13` Unfortunately, there
are no data available on the rationale or indication for offering
indirect intervention. Future service-based clinical studies may
consider looking into the rationale for choosing consultation as a
treatment, for example, data on goal setting and management plans
following initial evaluation. Quantifying gradual systemic improvement
in general functioning and long-term life trajectories of LAC as a
result of indirect intervention remains a challenge to achieve through
retrospective or short-term quantitative research.

Contrary to expectations, hypothesis three (H3) was not supported by the
present data-set in that greater length of time in current placement did
not predict more substantial SDQ-score improvements, nor was number of
address changes found to moderate these improvements. However, in line
with the findings of Tarren-Sweeney,\ :sup:`2` the present analysis did
reveal start SDQ score to be positively correlated with number of
address changes. The causal directionality of this well-evidenced
correlation between mental health presentation severity and frequency of
placement breakdown is still unclear.

Hypothesis four (H4) was supported by the present analysis, with age at
point of referral negatively correlated with change in SDQ score. This
demonstrates the benefits of intervention at a younger age and somewhat
aligns with the findings of Tarren-Sweeney\ :sup:`2` and Guyon-Harris et
al,\ :sup:`5` both of whom endorse younger age at entry into care as an
important protective factor. Probably also driven by an increased
propensity to develop secure attachment,\ :sup:`3,5` it is apparent that
parallel to younger age at entry into care, early intervention from
CAMHS similarly predicts more substantial improvements. In contrast to
previous literature endorsing a gender discrepancy,\ :sup:`3,8` the
present data-set displayed no significant difference in start SDQ score
across the full sample, nor did boys and girls included in the outcome
analysis differ significantly. This lack of support for hypothesis five
(H5) speaks positively towards the efficacy and reliability of both
consultation and direct intervention. Similarly, treatment outcomes were
equivalent across ethnicity, disability and adverse experience, further
endorsing the cross-contextual efficacy of both consultation and direct
work.

.. _sec4-1:

Limitations
-----------

Although the present data-set does provide convincing support for both
treatment programmes, conclusions cannot be made regarding their
relative efficacy as both groups received consultation. Future
experimental research should deliver indirect interventions and direct
interventions on their own, to two separate groups. Where in the past
the risk of one or both treatments being ineffective may have deemed an
investigation of this kind unethical, it can be rationalised by the
improvements displayed by both groups in the present study. It is
possible for the inclusion criteria to be biased towards including
individuals that have responded positively to treatment, who are more
likely to have had their case closed and to have completed an end SDQ.
However, a noteworthy proportion of the included sample appear to have
concluded treatment on turning 18 years of age. This would also explain
why the included sample had a mean older age. Although previous research
does support the inference that treatment-related improvements are
attributable to the facilitation of secure attachment, attachment
security was not included as an outcome measure in this study. Given
widespread evidence for attachment as a crucial mediating
factor,\ :sup:`5,6` it would be advisable for future research to include
attachment security as an outcome measure. This may include considering
incorporating the strange situation test\ :sup:`4` to characterise the
attachment between a child and their carer as either secure, avoidant or
resistant.

.. _sec4-2:

Implications
------------

The literature review that commenced this report isolated the formation
of secure attachment as a crucial mediating factor in determining the
mental well-being of LAC. It also outlined support for direct work in
the promotion of mental health in this population and identified a gap
in the LAC literature, with indirect consultation yet to be suitably and
quantitatively assessed. This report is the first of its kind to
contrast direct and indirect treatment-related outcomes for LAC, and it
endorses the efficacy of both. Younger age at entry into care and early
treatment are further solidified as key protective factors for mental
health of LAC, whereas the previously reported effect of gender is
undermined. Despite a number of limitations, these findings provide an
important quantitative benchmark to guide treatment decisions and future
research exploring the efficacy of interventions for this particularly
vulnerable population of children.

We thank the management of the looked after CAMHS service, the IT
department and the trust research and development department for
providing access and support. We also thank the professionals in CAMHS
and children's social care who provided space to conduct the study and
helped by reflecting on the clinical implications of the findings.

**Samuel Deuchar**, MSc, is a postgraduate researcher at the School of
Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK; **Pallab Majumder**, MBBS,
MRCPsych, MD, PhD, is an Honorary (Consultant) Assistant Professor at
the University of Nottingham, and Consultant Child and Adolescent
Psychiatrist at Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the
public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, P.M., upon reasonable request.

P.M. conceptualised the study and developed it with S.D. S.D. collected
and analysed data and drafted the manuscript. P.M. edited and developed
the final manuscript.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.147.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. [1]
   \*\ \ *P* < 0.05, \*\*\ \ *P* < 0.001.

.. [2]
   \*\ \ *P* < 0.05, \*\*\ \ *P* < 0.001.

.. [3]
   \*\ \ *P* < 0.05, \*\*\ \ *P* < 0.001.
