---
abstract: |
  Summer schools are traditionally used to encourage sixth form students
  to consider a career in medicine. Is it worth attracting students
  earlier in their school career, concentrating on psychiatry? Wyke et
  al describe an innovative project attempting to do just that.
author:
- Aileen O\'BrienCorrespondence to Aileen O\'Brien
  (<aobrien@sgul.ac.uk>)
date: 2021-04
institute:
- 1St. George\'s University of London, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
title: Are summer schools a way to improve recruitment in psychiatry?
---

Summer schools -- where prospective students are invited to a university
or other setting during the holidays -- are a well-established way of
encouraging students to consider applying for a particular course. They
are usually a week long and are aimed at particular groups of students,
for example, international students or those from more deprived
backgrounds. Although they are traditionally held on campus, there would
be scope in the future to run them remotely, depending on the COVID-19
situation.

Medicine has traditionally been and remains a competitive course, but
medical schools are also in competition with each other to attract
students. The most prized students for financial reasons are
international students, as they pay higher fees (one of the reasons
COVID-19 presents a financial risk to many universities).

The widening participation agenda -- attracting students from more
deprived backgrounds -- is another financial inducement for
universities. Unless universities can prove their commitment to this,
which is surprisingly hard to measure and evidence, they are not allowed
to charge high-rate tuition fees. Students from such backgrounds are a
group often targeted for invitation to summer schools by universities.

The \#ChoosePsychiatry campaign has tried to encourage doctors to choose
the specialty -- and to an admirable extent has succeeded, with rates of
juniors going into psychiatry increasing.^1^ The campaign to choose
psychiatry includes a target audience of sixth formers who have already
chosen to study medicine. As the conversation about mental health,
especially post COVID-19, becomes part of the national *zeitgeist*, are
we missing a trick in not trying to interest psychologically minded
students into medicine earlier than sixth form? Wyke et al describe an
innovative 1 week summer school for GCSE students, not all of whom had
decided on medicine as a potential career.^2^ The week included talks
from psychiatrists at different levels of training, groups and debates,
and the students met patients and medical students. At the end of the
week, students were more likely than before to choose psychiatry as a
career, had changed their views regarding social restriction in mental
health and had uniformly positive attitudes towards the course.

Some of these students will presumably have gone to the summer school in
order to build their CV, having already decided to apply for medicine,
but who knows whether a psychiatry spark has been lit in a budding
doctor who wouldn\'t have considered the specialty otherwise?

It may be well be that the resources and expense required for the
project, which were not evaluated in Wykes\'s paper, are not worth the
long-term results. It will be very interesting to see how many of these
teenagers do study medicine and choose psychiatry. We know that many
students interested in psychiatry at the start of medical school are put
off by the 'badmouthing' of the specialty by their educators and
peers,^3^ so hopefully those enthusiastic students will not have their
initial enthusiasm knocked out of them along the way. Others may
ultimately decide not to study medicine, or to study medicine but not
choose psychiatry; if so, at least a group of bright adolescents have
had their eyes opened to the subject and had stigmatising clichés about
psychiatry challenged.

**Aileen O\'Brien** is a Reader in Psychiatry and Education at St.
George\'s University of London, UK.

None.

# Supplementary material {#sec1}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.77.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::
