============
Derek Bolton
============



Abdi Sanati [1]_

:date: 2021-04


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Derek Bolton is Professor of Philosophy and Psychopathology at King's
College London, UK. He is one of the pioneers of the discipline of
philosophy of psychiatry. He founded the MSc programme in Philosophy of
Mental Disorders at King's, which was one of the few in the world. It
was while taking that course that I first met him. He has remained a
great teacher and mentor for me and many other colleagues throughout the
years. His publications on the concept of mental disorder and the
biopsychosocial model are great works of practical philosophy. We
managed to catch up in the midst of the COVID-19 crisis and thankfully
the technology didn't let us down!

**Professor Bolton, you wrote your book on the concept of mental
disorder\ 1 in 2008. What is your view of the development of the
knowledge in that field?**

When I wrote the book, it was prepared over several years of the MSC
course that you attended and which started in the 1990s. At that time,
the main contender in the philosophical and conceptual field about the
concept of mental disorder was Jerome Wakefield's ‘harmful dysfunction’
account.\ :sup:`2` He proposed a naturalistic view according to which,
apart from any value that concerned human goods and harm, the concept of
mental disorder also presupposed a natural fact, a dysfunction, which in
his version was elucidated in evolutionary theoretical terms.
Wakefield's account was a response to the challenges of 1960s and 1970s,
which questioned whether mental disorders were ‘natural kinds’ as
opposed to social constructs. My main task was to interrogate the
assumptions of Wakefield's account. As it turned out, I was unable to
make it work and came to the conclusion that mental disorder could not
be pinned down by ‘natural facts’ as opposed to ‘social facts’ and the
best way to capture it was in terms of impairment and distress, as in
the DSM and ICD, which are as much personal and social as they are
natural. What has changed since then (and I do not claim it is because
of my book, which was at best an expression of shifting sands) is that
attempts to disentangle natural facts about mental disorders have become
less attractive, and what remains, the personal and social involvement
of mental disorder – what might be called the psychological and social
phenomenology – is more accepted. This leaves us with both challenges
and opportunities.

**What are these challenges and opportunities?**

For opportunity, I think the person and the social context emerge as
more central. The focus shifts from a disordered brain, or a disordered
set of beliefs/behaviour, to the person in a social context with
impairment/distress. The social context includes that it is not only (or
not even) the patient who is distressed, but the family and extended
society. The challenge is that the boundaries between illness and
health, between what is and what is not the proper domain of healthcare,
are more blurred, more socio-politically contentious. This of course has
been recognised as an issue for psychiatry, but increasingly now in
discourse about risks to physical health, evident for example in
controversies over how to best manage the current pandemic.

**Speaking of the boundaries between illness and health, that reminds me
of a fairly recent book called Vagueness in Psychiatry.**\ :sup:`3` **It
argues that there is an inherent vagueness in terms such as health and
disorder, which are semantic properties that cannot be corrected by
gathering more facts and there always will be borderline cases. The
existence of vagueness would not devalue the concept on its own. Do you
agree?**

It is true. I was brought up in the later Wittgenstein's philosophy
school and my PhD was on works of Wittgenstein. In Wittgenstein's early
work (the *Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus*) – like in the philosophy of
logician and philosopher Gottlob Frege – it was assumed that concepts of
course had clear boundaries. In what are called his later works
(*Philosophical Investigations* is the major one), Wittgenstein
dismantled the idea of clear boundaries. He likened language to a
toolbox with lots of different tools for different purposes. If you look
at language like that you lose the idea that concepts must have or ought
to have sharp boundaries.

**With reference to definitions, in some schools of philosophy
definition is identifying necessary and sufficient conditions. Could
this be part of the problem, where we try to find necessary and
sufficient conditions for mental disorder – could moving towards a
descriptive way be helpful?**

It is an interesting question. If we think of philosophy as a canon and
choose the great philosophers of the past few hundred years we see that
the use of necessary and sufficient conditions does not feature or
hardly features in their work. Philosophers such as Wittgenstein,
Heidegger and Russell are example of this. Generally, I don't think
concepts are usefully explained in terms of necessary and sufficient
conditions. So, in the present context, when Robert Spitzer worked on
the concept of mental disorder for DSM-III he was apparently not trying
to identify necessary and sufficient conditions, but to identify
criteria for its use (I believe he may have used the term
‘conceptualisation’ rather than ‘definition’).\ :sup:`4` When we talk of
definition of mental disorder, I think we are typically trying to
conceptualise it and identify how it relates to other areas of interest,
including personal distress and social impairments, as well as the
various life and human sciences. Looked at like this, it is clear that
mental disorder is not a fixed thing: the conceptual geography changes
with changes in science and culture.

**The discussion of social context brings me to your work on the
biopsychosocial model. You recently co-authored a book with Grant
Gillett titled The Biopsychosocial Model of Health and
Disease.**\ :sup:`5` **What made you interested in it?**

In 2010, there was a book published with the title *The Rise and Fall of
Biopsychosocial Model* by Nassir Ghaemi, whom I know.\ :sup:`6` He
argued that the biopsychosocial model was empty and without much use.
That did puzzle me, as most people I know and whose work I had read
seemed to suppose that the biopsychosocial model meant something and was
the correct model for science and for practice. Nassir's book was a
challenge to what the biopsychosocial model actually meant. He also
added that it was a cover for loose thinking.

**I remember attending a lecture of his where he argued that the
biopsychosocial model was eclectic. If I remember correctly, it followed
that the model was to some degree vacuous.**

The historical context given in Nassir's book focused on the model
mainly in the USA. He saw it as a framework within which competing
models of psychoanalysis, social psychiatry and biological psychiatry
could coexist and all be true.

**In your book with Grant Gillett,**\ :sup:`5` **you explored causation
at different levels. I was interested in how you separated causation at
the biological level from causation at the level of physics and
chemistry.**

The idea was worked out while writing the book. In his original paper,
Engel identified reductionism as a problem for biomedicine, specifically
reducing biology to physics and chemistry.\ :sup:`7` That would exclude
a distinctive biological causation and especially would exclude
psychological and social causes. The core idea of the book was that
there was a causation at the biological level that was above physics and
chemistry. For the past 50 years or so biomedicine has developed as an
exquisite combination of physics and chemistry but plus a whole new
science of regulatory control, bringing in concepts such as functions,
ends, positive and negative feedback systems and information flow.
Importantly for the biopsychosocial model, these same causal explanatory
frameworks also apply in the psychological and social domains. This is a
way out of reductionism that can make sense of biopsychosocial causal
interactions and the accumulating evidence of them in epidemiology and
clinical therapeutics.

**I was interested that you found the core of psychological causation in
agency. How did you come up with that?**

We didn't think about it at first. The primary task was to clarify
causation and theoretical concepts of the various associated systems at
the biological level. Once it became clearer as above, the psychological
had to be understood as a system for regulating (causing) behaviour in
the ‘outside world’. ‘Agency’ is a shorthand for this. Also, various
pieces of the contemporary scientific jigsaw puzzle fell into place,
such as that neuroscience and psychology merge into one another, and
that cognition is embodied. As to health problems and biopsychosocial
medicine, this approach highlights emerging findings that many physical
health problems, and especially the extent of experienced pain and
associated impairment, key drivers of service use in long-term
conditions, involve psychosocial as well as biological factors,
implicating central involvement as well as biological systems below the
neck.

**In the book,**\ :sup:`5` **you mentioned that we do not need to have
an explicit theory of causation to accept causes in psychological and
social levels. What do you think of psychiatry's engagement with the
philosophy of causation?**

All medicine purports to make a difference in the lives of patients and
in this sense at least it needs some causal assumptions. It is true that
we do not know how some treatments work, but when we intervene in
different ways, we are supposing that it makes a difference and that is
why we do it. The causal assumption is essential in these kinds of
applied sciences. It is not unusual to not know how a treatment works
but we should not lose confidence if we have evidence from, for example,
randomised controlled trials that it is effective.

**That reminds me of an anecdote on vaccination. It took several decades
to know how the smallpox vaccine worked. If we wanted to wait to know
the exact mechanism, millions would have died.**

True. And if we contrast it with the present state that different
vaccines are proposed for COVID-19, based on detailed models of cellular
mechanisms of disease progression and how to interfere with them, it
shows how much this field has progressed.

**Going back to the reductionism, I found it interesting that you used
emergentism as a way to challenge reductionism.**

That was interesting. I didn't try to defend emergentism, which is a
slippery idea with a complex history. I understood the position simply
in terms of evolution, in which increasingly complex forms of life
appear, each with characteristic phenotypic traits and associated causal
powers.

**I think your formulation of the biopsychosocial model is very useful.
It could be very informative with concepts such as trauma.**

Trauma is of course an important and interesting topic, with a long
history in psychiatry and psychology. In terms of the biopsychosocial
model we propose, trauma is an environmental stressor that has a direct
negative impact on agency. In defining trauma in the context of PTSD,
DSM and ICD regard ‘helplessness’ as a key feature. The position is that
the most salient and important outcome in the situation (the person's
own survival) is out of their control. This occurs in acute situations
like trauma but also in chronic exposure to severe stressors, implicated
in upregulation of psychobiological stress mechanisms and raising risk
of many kinds of both mental and physical health problems.

**Thank you very much for your time.**

.. [1]
   **Abdi Sanati meets Derek Bolton**, Professor of Philosophy and
   Psychopathology at King's College London.
