---
author:
- Robin Jacoby
- Robert Howard
date: 2021-08
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
title: Klaus Bergmann, MD, FRCPsych
---

pmc

Formerly Consultant Old Age Psychiatrist at the Bethlem Royal and
Maudsley Joint Hospital, London, UK

Klaus Bergmann, who died following a stroke on 5 December 2020, was one
of the towering figures in British old age psychiatry in its early
years, playing a major role in bringing the specialty to maturity. In
the 1960s and 1970s, he was based in the Department of Psychiatry at
Newcastle University, headed by Martin Roth. Mentored by David Kay and
in collaboration with Gary Blessed and Bernard Tomlinson, Klaus was
deeply involved in one of the first community cohort studies of the
prevalence and outcomes of old age mental disorders outside hospitals.
The important findings of these studies have dictated policy ever
since.^1,2^

Although involved in research, Klaus was a superb clinician who cared
more about his patients than he did about anything else at his work. His
acumen in diagnosis and treatment was second to none. He was the reason
many of his trainees went into old age psychiatry, some of those now
occupying the highest levels in the profession.

He was born in 1930 in Dresden, younger brother to two older sisters, to
Fritz and Alice Bergmann. Fritz owned a millinery firm that he was able
to re-establish in Luton after emigration from Germany. In 1937, before
the Second World War, his Jewish family moved via Palestine to England.
He would often recount his childhood disappointment that he had not been
allowed to wear the uniform and carry the dagger of the Hitler Youth,
which he coveted.

Klaus was educated first at St George\'s School, Harpenden, following
which he studied medicine at Sheffield University, where he met his wife
Marie, a fellow student reading German. After National Service, he
returned to Sheffield for psychiatric training under Erwin Stengel, also
a refugee from the Nazis. This gave him a broad outlook based both on
rigorous history-taking and mental state examination, but with
psychoanalytic insights. He always maintained an affectionate respect
for Stengel but, as was the case with others among his senior
colleagues, he could never resist telling humorous stories about them.
This characteristic betrayed both immense respect for those Klaus deemed
worthy, combined with a refusal to adopt blinkered hero worship.

In 1964, Klaus moved from Sheffield to Newcastle, where the Department
of Psychiatry was headed by Martin Roth, and it was here that he entered
old age psychiatry. Klaus often said that he regarded Roth as the
Kraepelin of old age psychiatry, i.e. a founding father in terms of
classification and phenomenology. Once again, Klaus enjoyed poking fun
at him without ever losing respect for his important contributions to
the specialty. In 1966, Klaus took up a consultant post at St Francis
Hospital, Haywards Heath, Sussex, where he was overworked and grossly
under-resourced. So, in 1969, he returned to Newcastle, continuing to
carry out research in the community.

At heart, Klaus was a clinician and a teacher and, in 1979, at the
invitation of Raymond Levy, he moved down to London to the Bethlem Royal
and Maudsley Hospital as a consultant old age psychiatrist, replacing
Felix Post, who had retired. With typically wry humour he asked Raymond:
'Do you think they\'ll mind that I\'m not a gentleman?'. As a matter of
fact, they did not mind, and he settled in there very well. At the
Maudsley he worked alongside Raymond Levy, who became Professor of Old
Age Psychiatry. Later, they were joined by Robin Jacoby and Marisa
Silverman (now Parrish).

Klaus inspired loyalty through his clinical skills and his courage. He
was not frightened to offend people in defence of his patients. For
example, if he saw something that he regarded as shocking, he would,
himself, shock the perpetrator. One day, he arrived at a care home to be
led into the day-room, where all the residents were sitting round the
walls except for one old lady who was on a commode in the middle of the
room, incompletely shielded by one or two movable screens. Klaus turned
to the care-home manager and said: 'Oh, do you sh\*\* in your
sitting-room?'.

He was often incredibly funny. Never completely shaking off his
adolescent schoolboy personality, he was a fount of good and very non-PC
jokes, designed on occasions to shock some of the more prudish people at
the Maudsley. His office was a chaotic mess, with journals and committee
papers all over the desk and the floor. His colleagues used to joke that
he would not be able to retire but would have to be removed as a hoarder
under a section of the Public Health Act. This delighted him, and he
often boasted about it. In the end, he retired without recourse to the
Public Health Act. Early on in his retirement he wrote reports for the
General Nursing Council in connection with disciplinary action. He was
rather fond of what he called his 'naughty nurses'.

Klaus enjoyed a long and happy marriage to Marie, who survives him with
their son George, their daughter Caroline, and three grandchildren.
Vicky, their elder daughter, died of cancer in 2014.
