==============
Authors' reply
==============



Lucy Griffin
Katie Clyde
Richard Byng
Susan Bewley

:date: 2021-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
We thank Dr MacFarlane for his response\ :sup:`1` and welcome his
comments about various providers and pharmaceutical agencies as well as
freedom of speech.

We did not review the neuroscience of brain sex differences but draw
interested readers’ attention to a recent review\ :sup:`2` and
accessible analyses of available research.\ :sup:`3,4` We agree that the
art of psychiatric diagnosis depends on the clinician accepting the
truth of the patient's own experience. In the absence of objective
diagnostic tests, believing and trusting the patient's own subjective
narrative is central to the doctor–patient relationship. However, this
starts to lose coherence when the doctor must readjust their own
understanding of material reality in order to accommodate another's
subjective belief. Declaring that ‘Despite having the body of a man, I
am in all other respects a woman’ supposes some inherent essence of
gender that many would reject. Reorganising psychiatry to give primacy
of gender identity over sex risks breaching the necessary boundaries
that exist to maintain the safety and dignity of individuals, groups of
people and society more generally.

Without a clear definition of conversion therapy, it is not possible to
know the extent of the practice in the UK. Proponents of affirmative
care have argued that conversion therapy is anything that might act as a
barrier to medical transition.\ :sup:`5,6` It would follow that attempts
to assess and treat coexistent mental illness, or even the process of
making an accurate initial diagnosis of gender dysphoria, could be
described as conversion therapy rather than the basic standard of
clinical care that would apply for any other presentation.\ :sup:`7`

The authors remain opposed to any treatment model designed to coercively
alter the sexual orientation of bisexuals, gay men or lesbians. It is
crucial to distinguish between sexual orientation and gender identity
when the latter comes with an expectation for complex, irreversible
medical interventions, described as ‘affirmative’. If sustained,
long-term benefits of medical and surgical transition could be clearly
and independently demonstrated, it would be appropriate to offer these
interventions early, but the evidence is not convincing.\ :sup:`8`
Therefore it is reasonable to exercise therapeutic caution, especially
in light of growing concerns about complications and regret,\ :sup:`9`
particularly in younger patients.

Given government moves to criminalise conversion therapy in medical
settings, the nature of ‘barriers to treatment’ must be clearly
described.\ :sup:`9` New laws will need detailed supplementary guidance
for the benefit of patients, doctors and the criminal justice system. We
propose that organisations representing clinicians should help
legislators make explicit that neutrally framed therapeutic or
exploratory work is not conversion therapy, irrespective of how an
individual ultimately feels about their own identity.

In the absence of evidence-based guidelines underpinned by solid
research, we cannot make recommendations about treatment pathways, and
do not advocate one particular model over any other. We draw readers’
attention to the unexplained increase in referral numbers, the higher
numbers of children and young people seeking interventions, and the
shift in sex ratio,\ :sup:`10` as such demographic changes are
significant and deserving of research and explanation. Doctors should
‘first do no harm’. The bar for informed consent to life-changing,
irreversible medical and surgical interventions is necessarily
high.\ :sup:`9` Enhanced service provision and new care pathways should
be informed by robust research in this patient group.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None
