==================================================
‘Mad agency’, reflections on Goya's ‘The Madhouse’
==================================================



Jennifer RaddenCorrespondence to Jennifer Radden
(jennifer.radden@umb.edu)
:Date: 2021-02

:Abstract:
   We must remain open to revising and expanding the important but
   incompletely understood philosophical categories of agency and
   responsibility in light of what can be learned from atypical states
   and behaviour. A reflection on images – here, Goya's great Madhouse
   scene, and photographs of Mad Pride events since the 1980s – is shown
   to provide assistance towards this end.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

“‘vast regions of agentive self-awareness lie unmapped, and much work
remains to be done before we have a clear idea of exactly what it is
like to be an agent’ (Bayne: pp. 182).\ :sup:`1`”

Agency, and its relationship to responsibility, are issues over which
philosophers have yet to find entire agreement. The above passage by
Timothy Bayne was written some time ago and preceded his own valuable
clarifications. Yet the subjective experience (or phenomenology\ *)* of
the personal action that philosophers call agency (the term is explained
more fully below) remains, as Bayne says, unmapped, as do related
value-based (or normative) questions about responsibility. Nowhere is
this more evident than at the juncture of agency, responsibility and
mental disorder. And it is in the spirit of sketching some corners of
Bayne's map that I offer a few remarks about agency and disorder,
shortened here, at risk of oversimplifying, to ‘mad agency’.

What follows is intended to complement recent research in which
psychiatrist-philosopher Mohammed Rashed examines the philosophical
concepts grounding mental health activism. The first analysis of its
kind, his is a respectful but stringent account of the recognition
sought by activists, locating their demands within contemporary
political philosophy, and providing guidance as to how those demands
might be met.\ :sup:`2` In the present essay, I suggest that some of the
ambiguity and complexity entailed in the categories of madness, agency
and responsibility can be approached and perhaps illuminated through a
reflection on images. I use a familiar painting by Goya, on the one
hand, and on the other, photographs of Mad Pride marches and public
events since the 1980s. The message from what follows is simple. Even
applied to normal states and behaviour, conceptions of agency and
responsibility may be incompletely understood. We must remain open to
revising and expanding them in light of what can be learned from
atypical states and behaviour. And for this purpose, images seem able to
offer powerful assistance.

Both agency, and responsibility in relation to it, are contested topics.
But few would dispute that personal responsibility can be appropriately
assigned only when there is some degree, or form, of (personal) agency.
The converse may not hold; arguably, there can be agency in the absence
of full responsibility. Philosophical accounts of agency and
responsibility differ, but as is indicated by legal exculpating factors
such as ignorance, compulsion and duress, ascriptions of responsibility
will sometimes be withheld, even from what appear to be voluntary
actions. In keeping with much discussion about agency and
responsibility, the two terms are sometimes merged; in other places, as
will become apparent, they need to be separated.

.. _sec1:

Some basic distinctions
=======================

A group of contrasts drawn from philosophical discussions of agency are
introduced here: actions and movements; the proprietary phenomenal
character of agency (how it feels subjectively) in contrast to
interpretations about, or judgements over it; self- and other-assigned
agency; mental and overt agency; agency emanating from more and less
proximal and distal intentions; and more and less deliberative and
absorbed agency.

.. _sec1-1:

Actions and movements
---------------------

The ‘sense’ of agency, as we seem to experience it, is sometimes used by
philosophers to mark the contrast between true actions (those we
voluntarily undertake ourselves) and mere movements. This is the
difference between lying down and unintentionally falling, for example.

.. _sec1-2:

Phenomenal character of agency
------------------------------

When agency is involved (in lying down), two distinct parts have been
recognised: the phenomenological feeling of doing it oneself (known as
its proprietary phenomenal character) and the interpretation or
judgement we make about that feeling (the awareness that, rather than
either falling, or having been pushed to the ground, one *lies down*).
Both phenomenal feelings of agency, and the interpretation or judgement
we – and others – make about our agency, enter into the following
discussion.

.. _sec1-3:

Self- and other-assigned agency
-------------------------------

Complicating questions about self-assigned agency and responsibility
arise when we speak of agency and responsibility, whether as felt agency
or as judgements about one's agency, and these are ostensibly magnified
when mental health is part of the mix. Self-assigned agency and
responsibility, whether as feelings or judgements, will not be entirely
reliable guides if they are distorted by disorder. Examples of that
distortion are the self-blaming depressive, who exaggerates their
personal responsibility (‘It's all my fault’), or the grandiosity of the
narcissistic personality's boast (‘All thanks to me’) illustrate.
Similarly, the proprietary phenomenal character of agency appears to be
absent in some psychotic experience, as suggested by what are known as
‘inserted thoughts’.

When agency (and responsibility) is judged to be present, by others or
by oneself, may thus depend on the opinion of psychiatric experts. And
asked whether those with psychiatric diagnoses possess agency, the
expert's answer will usually be, it depends – on the situation, the
nature of their disorder, the particularities of the thoughts and
actions in question, and so on – and thus on case-by-case clinical
observation and judgement.

.. _sec1-4:

Mental and overt agency
-----------------------

Discrepancies between felt agency (and responsibility) and agency (and
responsibility) with normative force imply that some judgements about
agency (and responsibility) may be inaccurate, or unreliable.
(Philosophers speak of ascriptions of agency and responsibility as
possessing normative force when they are *accurate* (as the moral
realist might put it) or *appropriate*). Yet such inaccuracy or
unreliability will arise from multiple factors. Mistaken or distorted
self-assigned agency and responsibility are also associated with varying
cognitive styles and socialised habits in normal populations; for
example, the widespread tendency to deflect blame onto others, or take
sole credit for achievements more accurately attributed to many. They
will then be culturally local: other times, places and cultures might
rely on different substantive norms. Not only disorder, and
non-disordered personality bias, but also any number of social and
cultural expectations can thus shape judgements of agency and
responsibility, self- and other-assigned. And given that disorder,
personality and culture are inextricably entwined in any given instance,
these distorting factors may not be separated easily or, in many
instances, helpfully.

With regard to judgements about agency, whether made by oneself or
another, it will be worth noting that there are mental as well as more
outward bodily, actions. When Thomas Jefferson spoke of the ‘illimitable
freedom of the human mind’, he referred to our immediate ability to
recall the past, envision the future, rehearse what might have been as
well as what was – indeed our ability to direct our thoughts at all, to
form intentions, revise and renounce earlier attitudes, to call up
memories and imaginings. This kind of agency, associated with the notion
of rational capacity, has sometimes been denied those with mental
disorder, even while it was said to be possessed by prisoners in chains,
and those trapped in ill and unresponsive bodies.

Ascriptions of responsibility also sometimes extend to these inner
efforts of mental agency. For some mental actions, we hold ourselves
responsible and are also held responsible by others (‘This is an
uncharitable thought, but …’ it might be said, or ‘You mustn't think
like that …’). That said, whether such responsibility is ever rightly
ascribed to one's own mental ‘actions’ is a contested matter, as is the
applicability of the term ‘agency’ to them. (I am grateful to David
Foreman for pointing out that ethical systems differ over this point.
Only some Christian theology acknowledges the sinfulness of ‘immoral
thoughts,ְ’ for example.) And the exactness of the parallels between
mental agency and the overt agency we exhibit to the world are similarly
debated. The structure of mental action has been seen by some to differ
in not involving intentions, or initiated by decisions, or reasons, for
example, whereas others insist that mental agency is the originating
source of all agency, outer as much as mental.\ :sup:`3,4`

The details of these additional differences need not detain us here, as
long as it is acknowledged that some of what we humans do involves our
inner as well as our outer lives, and that the coherence of mental
agency must be understood within the whole, including personal-level
intentions and more overarching goals, that may not manifest in any way
that is outwardly evident. Examples of such expansive goals over mental
health might include the aim to maintain psychic stability and avoid or
reduce personal suffering.

.. _sec1-5:

Proximal and distal agency
--------------------------

Another feature of agency, occurring with both mental and overt agency,
are the less and more direct and immediate forms it takes, for each of
which we are also, sometimes, held responsible, both by others and
perhaps ourselves. Examples of less direct and immediate agency include
Elster's ‘imperfect rationality’, when we outwit ourselves, anticipating
and engineering outcomes we are unable to produce directly and
immediately.\ :sup:`5` Often, we do so aware (or not unaware) of the
process as we manipulate our beliefs and feelings to achieve desired
ends. The way cognitive–behavioural therapy is widely supposed to work
employs this approach, both for mental agency, where the power a person
has to change beliefs and attitudes is used to bring about changed
feelings, as well as directing what is said and done. The effectiveness
of such imperfect rationality cannot be guaranteed, of course.
Cognitive–behavioural therapy has now quite self-consciously adopted its
classical ancestor in the imperfect rationality practises of those who
recommended care of the soul that aimed to expunge all negative and
unproductive feelings (debatably, all feelings of any kind), through a
programme of self-analysis and cognitive therapy. We are free to, can
and should adjust the beliefs on which our feelings rest, it is
supposed. (Even in their own time, and almost ever since, owing to the
influence of Aristotelianism, the excessive responsibility for
controlling thoughts and feelings accepted by the Stoics were derided as
unrealistic and undesirable.) Outcomes of agency that are more and less
immediate and direct have been described as emanating from intentions
that are ‘proximal’ and ‘distal’, respectively, with imperfect
rationality exhibiting the latter.\ :sup:`6,7`

.. _sec1-6:

Deliberative and absorbed agency
--------------------------------

As examples of more planful and less immediate (or proximal) agency
illustrate, particular instances of agency, whether mental or overt,
fall within complexes of goals, deliberations, purposes and plans – even
very long-term aims and dreams. This nesting of agency within its
broader setting has also been recognised to involve a consequence in
terms of phenomenology: although recognisable feelings may be associated
with agency, not all agency is immediately felt. Agency often occurs as
part of a seemingly effortless, automatic and non-conscious flow of
engagement with the world. In that case, it leaves little space for, and
bears little resemblance to, conscious deliberation, or the felt sense
of actively doing, rather than passively experiencing. Typically,
indeed, felt agency is ‘recessive’, in being confined to the margins of
attention.\ :sup:`1` Much of everyday life, and more than philosophers
always acknowledge, involves this kind of agency, as the case of
habitual action illustrates. With skills like driving, we usually
proceed with little or no conscious awareness of our complex responses.
When we engage in practical or creative endeavours with full,
undistracted absorption, we have been described as undertaking ‘skilled
coping’,\ :sup:`8` and awareness in the latter experience is said to be
immersed rather than detached.\ :sup:`9`

.. _sec2:

Images: ‘dark freedom’ in Goya's ‘The Madhouse’ and Mad Pride parades
=====================================================================

The above contrasts have been drawn from within disparate theories, and
only fuller accounts of each can determine their compatibility, and the
final plausibility of the theses put forward here. Nonetheless, felt
agency and ‘freedom’; self- and other-assigned agency (and
responsibility); the effects on agency and responsibility wrought by
personality style and cultural norms as well as by disorder; mental
agency and agency in the outside, shared world; and more and less
direct, and more and less ‘online’ or conscious, and deliberative, forms
of agency. all seem likely part of a rough sketch of the territory,
although each element still wants for a fuller analysis.

In what follows, I try to elucidate some of the features of mad agency
(and responsibility) with the help of images: a much-interpreted
painting, showing the inside of a madhouse at the beginning of the 19th
century; and photographs of Mad Pride parades. Why turn to images?
Arguably, imagery can communicate qualities of agency that are hard to
capture in language alone. And pictorial commentary, as we will see,
offers suggestive associations worth exploring. Moreover, in addition to
written descriptions, and long before the present-day use of images,
pictorial traditions shaped how mental health and ill health, disorder
and madness were apprehended and understood.\ :sup:`10` This ancient,
long-lived, visual record may have something more to teach us.

‘The Madhouse’, Goya's magnificent depiction of the madhouse in his
hometown of Zaragoza, was painted between 1812 and 1813. Unlike the more
positive images from the Reform era that followed, Goya's several
pictures of that institution have been judged to depict unutterable
suffering and awfulness, even depravity. In a typical description, the
painting's only light source is said to be:“‘a barred window high up on
the wall, clearly meant to repress the figures below. These figures are
distinct characters, all engaged in grotesque and pitiable behaviour -
one wears what seems to be a wild-feathered headdress, another is
fighting in a tricorne hat, another makes a gesture of blessing to the
viewer, whilst many of the others are naked …. this painting could be
meant as a denunciation of then-current practice in that area …Some of
the figures can also be interpreted allegorically, as a gallery of
parodies of powerful figures in society, such as the clergy or the army
(the man in the tricorne).’ (Gilman: pp. 129–30).\ :sup:`10`”

With its striking use of darkness and light, the picture shows ‘a world
of darkness opposed to the world of light’, in keeping with Goya's
‘emphasis on the soul as the dark hiding place of terror’, for
example.\ :sup:`10`

Echoing this negative interpretation, the actions of the inmates have
been described by Robert Hughes as ‘delusory gestures of
power’.\ :sup:`11` However free, responsible and agentic these
transgressive gestures appear to be, this ‘power’ (to use Hughes’ word)
will not guarantee that full, or perhaps any, responsibility could be
appropriately ascribed, by the inmates themselves or by observers. There
are bars on the window. The inmates’ agency in the outer world is
limited. Yet delusory or not, each seems to reflect a kind of inner,
mental agency (power, or freedom). In trying to fathom those ‘delusory’
gestures, it is worth noting that Goya's fascination with, and many
works depicting, madness, have been singled out for their humane and
sympathetic attitudes. Goya located madness among the common presences
of human life, it has been explained. He saw it a natural part of the
human condition, reflecting his creed that nothing human was alien to
him. (Hughes attributes to Goya a well-known medieval saying, attributed
to Terence, to this effect.) And few subsequent depictions of madness
behind bars are as sympathetic, at least until we reach 20th century
pictures such as Bellows’ ‘Dance in a Madhouse’ (1917) and other images
showing asylum entertainments.

Arguably, then, Goya's attitude toward his subject matter was expressive
of sympathy, not revulsion. Conforming to that positive conception is a
revealing passage from another 20th century commentator. Presenting mad
agency as a certain, transgressive ‘dark liberty’, Michel Foucault
observes of the madman in the hat in Goya's painting:“‘[the figure]
leaps out, by virtue of the silent language of his well-muscled form and
the wild, marvelous freedom of his youth, a free human presence who
affirms his birthright as though this were the beginning of new era.
“The Madhouse” speaks … [of] those new bodies, brought into the light in
all their vigour, and whose gestures, if they call up their dreams, sing
above all of their dark liberty.’ (Foucault: pp. 530–1).\ :sup:`12`”

What dark liberty is this? Where does the mad agency lauded by
interpretations like Foucault's fit among the forms of agency sketched
earlier? I propose that the ‘freedom’ expressed in the painting
anticipates something that we only entirely recognise now as a
consequence of political events: it is a demonstration of the powerfully
‘freeing’ and healing transgressiveness and ludic exhilaration
celebrated in today's Mad Pride activism, rhetoric and writing.

We are tempted to agree with Hughes that the gesture of power is merely
delusory – a mistaken parody of real agency – or even a feeling of
agency distorted by disorder-wrought cognitive error. Yet, in light of
writing by mad activists, we also perhaps begin to see a quality
inviting attitudes of hope and delight, rather than abject despair, in
the gestures of Goya's inmates. To cite just one example of such
writing:“ֹ‘Madness is the new rock “n” roll!… All of us who've
experienced “deep sea fishing” will know the sensation of heightened
awareness, of consciousness enhanced … of feelings of wonder and terror
that can't be verbalized …’ (Morris: pp. 207).\ :sup:`13`”

Generally, what we see in images is limited by what we expect to see,
and what we suppose the artist wanted us to see. We might guess that the
inmates in the asylum were performing for an audience, perhaps even
engaging in such display for monetary reward, as did the inmates at
English asylums during the same era.\ :sup:`10,14` (I am grateful to
David Foreman for drawing my attention to this possibility.) Were this
so, the actions depicted by Goya are replete with the features of
classic rational agency, and a pretence. But whether or not it is a
pretence, later events and subsequent understanding allow us to go
beyond the constraints imposed by what we would expect, and what,
intentionally or not, Goya may have conveyed. From today's perspective
and understanding, we can see it differently. To illustrate this
interpretive shift, we might turn to Bellows’ ‘Dance in a Madhouse’,
where movements have been dismissed as ‘wild and uncontrollable’, and
reflecting passive (‘melancholic’) postures.\ :sup:`10` Yet here, too,
and contrary to Gilman, the central female figure in Bellows’ picture
also reveals something joyous, triumphant, freeing, enlivening and,
perhaps, empowering.

Goya's madhouse has parallels and echoes in today's Mad Pride activism,
some of them quite evidently self-conscious. Here we find not only
resistance to the mental health system, and solidarity, but repeated
emphasis on ‘the celebration of difference’. ‘Celebration’ is a useful
encapsulation, suggesting exhilaration and joy. Its object is more than
mere difference, however. What is being celebrated? Minimally, the
‘creativity of mad people, pride in a unique way of looking at life, the
validity of such a distinct way of life …’ (Sen: pp. 5)\ :sup:`15` are
grounds for pride and reason for celebration. Enumerating elements of
the demand for recognition of mad identity, Rashed emphasises that Mad
Pride discourse includes a range of attitudes and interpretations. It
emphasises mad identity, creativity, spirituality, suffering and the
gifts that, although valuable, are dangerous.\ :sup:`2,16` Each of those
aspects (identity, creativity, spirituality, suffering and dangerous
gifts) offers grounds to applaud and celebrate.

Images of broadly ‘celebratory’ Mad Pride parades (in Canada, the USA,
the UK, Ireland, Belgium, France and Australia, for example), provide us
with readily recognisable descendants of our madhouse scene. Here are
flamboyant and excessive dress, gesture and performance; here are the
seeming freedoms and agency associated with the transgressive, the
parodic and ludic. Unlike the barred madhouse, the street now forms the
stage for performance. The demands for political recognition, I suggest,
provide examples of agentic forms identified earlier, and perhaps
anticipated by Goya.

By recognising that agency works in many ways, indirect as well as
direct, and through imperfect as well as perfect rationality, we may
regard the mad gestures in Goya's painting as not only exhilarating, and
felt, although ultimately delusional agency and freedom, but also as
healing, consoling, emboldening, strengthening and even, yes, freeing.
Like the antics of the marchers celebrating Mad Pride, these gestures
may convey the shoring up of what is depleted, diminished and
misunderstood by the surrounding culture, or concealed through
prejudicial expectations.

Viewed as a kind of self-help or self-care, the gestures depicted in
both Goya's and the later celebratory, Mad Pride images, can also be
likened to the indirect agency of imperfect rationality. Arts-based
healing rituals, healing effects and the mental health benefits of
expressive therapies have been acknowledged since ancient times, and are
well documented.\ :sup:`17–19` Their proponents speak of the way such
activities integrate mind and body in a unified, healing whole; the ‘act
of responding to what is given, imagining its possibilities and
reshaping it in accordance with what is emerging’, is described as akin
to that found in all imaginative play, and improvisation (Levine: pp.
71).\ :sup:`16`

The agent may not seek anything further through their exuberant gesture,
or even be alert to broader intentional or purposive context within
which it occurs. Their agency may reflect the obliviousness of intense
absorption. Moreover, it may not be agency with outer effects. In
contrast to the powerless inhabitants of the madhouse, today's activists
bring about real world, consequential political outcomes (changed
cultural attitudes, for example, and more enlightened mental health
policies). Yet even without doing so, the gestures of Goya's figures may
be seen to intimate certain forms of distal, immersed agency, as
Foucault's analysis may be taken to suggest.

Reviewing the discourse and tenets of Mad Pride activism, Rashed notes
four main elements, as we saw: demands around identity and culture,
creativity and spirituality, distress and disability, and finally,
madness as a ‘dangerous gift’.\ :sup:`2` Among the demands identified by
Rashed and these activists, I have tried to suggest that none quite
convey the healing and freeing power captured in the ludic, the parodic
and the transgressive that are so evident in today's Mad Pride parades
and celebrations and, in light of them, we are now able to recognise as
foreseen in the dark liberty of Goya's madhouse.

About the dangerous gifts of madness, it has been explained that ‘… we
are members of a group that has been misunderstood and persecuted
throughout history but has also been responsible for some of its most
brilliant creations’ (Du Bru: pp. 259).\ :sup:`20` Any incautious
ability to violate convention and social norms will be dangerous,
including such gifts, it must be conceded, and will likely bring its own
exhilarating phenomenology, as well as fateful and often self-defeating
consequences. The demands of mad activism can be met, perhaps, only with
the openness, imagination and negotiated agreement of the larger
culture.

Such negotiated agreement requires a preparedness to revise and expand
accepted ideas about social norms and concepts of mental health, as I
have pointed out elsewhere.\ :sup:`21` Among those social norms and
concepts of mental health, it has been proposed here, are ideas about
agency.

I am grateful for audience questions at the Royal College of
Psychiatrists’ Philosophy of Psychiatry Special Interest Group Biennial
Conference in September 2019, ‘Madness and Society: Pathways to
Reconciliation’. My greatest thanks go to Dr David Foreman for his
careful reading and insightful suggestions on an earlier draft of this
paper.

**Jennifer Radden** is a Professor Emerita at the Philosophy Department
of University of Massachusetts Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

.. _sec3:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.119.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
