============================================================================
Extreme ‘gender critical’ views will alienate many gender dysphoric patients
============================================================================

Neil David MacFarlane
:Date: 2021-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The authors provide a welcome update of evidence and reasoning for the
‘gender critical’ position, and the problems with the ‘gender affirming’
position that the Royal College of Psychiatrists adopted in 2018. Their
argument might have been even stronger if it had included an account of
recent complaints about pressures against free enquiry and expression in
this area.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Such pressures may partly account for the
paucity of published gender critical clinical and scientific research.
Neither did the authors mention the professional misconduct of a ‘gender
affirming’ consultant psychiatrist in a London teaching hospital, which
was brought to the public's attention in 2007 by the campaigning
journalist Julie Bindel.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Or, specifically, the influence
of the pharmaceutical industry, although that was implied in at least
one of the references they cited.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` However, some of their
reasoning appears to lean towards an extreme gender critical position,
which is inconsistent with mainstream psychiatric practice. They write
that ‘there is little to no convincing evidence to support fundamental
differences between the brains of females and males’. But a lack of
reliable neurobiological pathology is true of most psychiatric
disorders, for which psychiatrists routinely prescribe drugs and other
physical treatments, quite often coercively. Again, ‘As a pure
subjective experience, [gender identity] may be overwhelming and
powerful but is also unverifiable and unfalsifiable’. Psychiatric
disorders are mainly diagnosed on the basis of what patients report
about their ‘subjective experience’, so the requirement that transgender
patients must provide substantial additional ‘verification’ of their
experiences also suggests that the authors have adopted a double
standard. Do they propose that patients with depression or
post-traumatic stress disorder demonstrate that their problems are
‘falsifiable’ before they can receive treatment? The authors attempt to
distance themselves from ‘conversion therapy’, but many gender dysphoric
patients will not find their arguments convincing. They claim ‘there is
little evidence’ that transgender conversion therapy ‘is taking place in
the UK’, but the 2018 National LGBT Survey found that 13% of UK trans
respondents ‘had been offered’ conversion therapy, compared with 7% of
‘cisgender’ respondents.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` Conversion therapy for
homosexuality is closely associated with psychoanalysis.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`
The American Psychiatric Association removed homosexuality from its list
of disorders in 1973, with strong opposition from psychoanalysts. It
took nearly three decades for the London-based International
Psychoanalytical Association (IPA) to act similarly, in 2002. It seems
likely that the IPA continues to tolerate the view that homosexuality is
a disorder, treatable by psychoanalysis.\ :sup:`(n.d.f),(n.d.g)` The
authors allude to ‘complex intrapsychic conflicts’ but fail to explain
what they mean by this or provide a reference. This suggests an
undeclared allegiance to psychoanalysis. Some British psychoanalysts
appear to see transgender patients as a growth
opportunity.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` The gender critical views of the
ex-Tavistock London psychoanalyst Marcus Evans have been quoted by the
BBC\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` and the *BMJ*,\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` while journalists
have failed to scrutinise his implied claim that psychoanalysis can
provide valid clinical opinion. Such scrutiny is especially necessary
given the problematic relation of psychoanalysis to homosexuality and
its wider history of evading scrutiny of its claims to therapeutic
efficacy, validity\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` and safety.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`
Psychiatry should retain its gatekeeping role for transgender patients
seeking physical treatments or legal gender change, but extreme gender
critical views, which at present appear to include special pleading for
psychoanalysis, would undermine the consent necessary for that role to
be effective.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.
