======================
Publishing controversy
======================

Norman A. PooleCorrespondence to Dr Norman A. Poole
(bjpbulletin@rcpsych.ac.uk)
:Date: 2021-10

:Abstract:
   Two recent papers on a controversial topic in this journal attracted
   significant criticism from readers. This editorial addresses these
   criticisms and describes changes to be made to the journal's
   editorial and review procedures in light of the complaints received.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Psychiatry, like other branches of medicine, is no stranger to
controversy. Anthony Clare's *Psychiatry in Dissent*\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` ran
the gamut of contested areas – from the validity of psychiatric
diagnosis to electroconvulsive therapy and psychosurgery – which are, to
varying degrees, still with us. Some have argued that disputes over the
concept of mental disorder generally\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` and certain
specific categories\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` merely demonstrate that psychiatry
is a pseudoscience: psychiatric diagnosis, unlike the remainder of
medicine, is a matter of value judgements rather than ‘hard facts’. In
this view, psychiatrists are really just pathologising people who
transgress some sort of social norm.

Since the heyday of such arguments, it has been increasingly understood
that, yes, values are involved in diagnosis, but this is true also in
other medical specialties. In Peter Sedgwick's memorable phrase, ‘The
fracture of a septuagenarian's femur has, within the world of nature, no
more significance than the snapping of an autumn leaf from its
twig’.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` But we deprecate the first, so consider it
disordered. Yet psychiatry remains the more controversial specialty.
Bill Fulford draws an analogy between the different ways we use the word
‘good’ when thinking about a ‘good strawberry’ versus a ‘good
painting’.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` It turns out that there is greater agreement
about the former than the latter, hence less conflict and controversy.
And what constitutes a person's very nature and identity is a lot more
like paintings than strawberries.

The *BJPsych Bulletin*, representing views within and about psychiatry,
cannot evade controversial issues, but neither should we court them for
their own sake. At the heart of such controversies are real people with
real lives, often ostracised and denigrated. So, we have a duty to be
respectful and balanced when articles on controversial topics are
accepted for publication. We recently published two
papers\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` on gender incongruence that have attracted a
significant number of letters and complaints, particularly regarding
Marcus Evans’ opinion piece ‘Freedom to think: the need for thorough
assessment and treatment of gender dysphoric children’.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`
In light of the criticisms, we reviewed the article and have published a
corrigendum of clarifications and additional information that provides a
stronger evidence base for his arguments. Importantly, Evans has also
provided a declaration of interest statement addressing his involvement
in a judicial review of gender-affirming treatment for minors.

.. _sec1:

Changes to editorial procedures
===============================

Criticisms of the paper have been discussed by the editorial board. It
was never the intention for the board to review the evidence for and
against gender-affirming treatment. We appreciate that there are gaps in
the evidence base concerning psychological outcomes of gender-affirming
surgery,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` so see the journal's role as enabling
discussion. We seek to present the suffering caused by prejudice and
failings in care systems, address omissions in the evidence base, and
enable clinicians and patients to express concerns about ethical
practice. The journal's position is not to censor one or other argument
– albeit clarity and care are needed when discussing emotive issues and
the potential harms of psychiatric practice. The editorial board have
discussed how handling editors should deal with submissions about such
controversial topics, and agreed the following recommendations. The
Special Articles category currently combines both review and opinion
pieces. We will reintroduce Review and Opinion type papers to clarify
for readers the nature of the content.We have added to the instructions
for authors that Opinion pieces can include references from news items
and blogs.We will not accept an Opinion article with reviews solely by
the author's suggested reviewers. As a general rule, editors do avoid
this. However, it is now a firm policy for Opinion pieces to ensure that
an independent review is always sought, even though this may lead to
delays to the peer review process. We may call on editorial board
members as required to provide reviews.Reviewer invitation templates
will be revised to include a link to the COPE Ethical Guidelines for
Peer Reviewers and the Reviewer Support Hub on Cambridge Core (in
development). We will encourage reviewers and editors to use sites such
as https://mediabiasfactcheck.com/ to check the level of bias of
non-scholarly sites.If an article involves a controversial issue,
handling editors will seek to balance it, either in reviews or with a
counterbalancing article, commentary or eLetter, although we acknowledge
that this may not always be possible.

I appreciate that the published corrigendum and review of editorial
processes will, for some, not go far enough. Many of the complainants
sought retraction rather than correction and pointed to the distress
such papers can cause an already marginalised group of people. I am
deeply sorry for the hurt caused and have invited authors of the
complaint letters to submit counterbalancing articles and/or eLetters to
ensure that the spectrum of opinions is presented. Readers are welcome
to submit correspondence by clicking the e-letters tab when accessing
the article via the following link: https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.72.

COPE, the Committee on Publication Ethics, has
guidelines\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` for editors considering retraction of an
academic paper. Its criteria cover situations where there is clear
evidence of unreliability or falsification of data, plagiarism,
copyright infringement or manipulation of the peer review process. These
do not apply here. Failure to disclose a major conflict of interest can
also lead to retraction where non-disclosure has ‘unduly affected
interpretations of the work’ by editors and peer reviewers. However,
Evans has been candid about his opinions, which are of a piece with his
involvement in the judicial review.

Derek Bolton's *What is Mental Disorder?*\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` has long
struck me as a fine argument for the constructive value of disagreement.
Where concepts are contended, they are subject to competing pressures
from the various stakeholders, including patients, carers, doctors,
psychologists, social scientists, the general public and politicians. He
was referring to disputes about the boundary between order and disorder,
health and illness, but it applies to controversial issues within
psychiatry generally. In this spirit, the *BJPsych Bulletin* will always
strive for open, transparent and respectful dialogue.

**Norman A. Poole** is Editor of the *BJPsych Bulletin* and a consultant
neuropsychiatrist at St George's Hospital, South West London and St
George's Mental Health NHS Trust, UK.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

N.P. is Editor of the *BJPsych Bulletin*.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.
