======================================================================================
What mental health professionals and organisations should do to address climate change
======================================================================================

Adam Monsell
Jacob Krzanowski
Lisa Page
Sharon Cuthbert
Guy HarveyCorrespondence to Adam Monsell (Adam.monsell@nhs.net)
:Date: 2021-08

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The climate change emergency is also a mental healthcare emergency.
   We seek to provide a framework for what mental health professionals
   and organisations should do to make their practice more sustainable.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   There are ethical, legal and organisational imperatives to make
   mental healthcare more sustainable. Mental healthcare must be
   refocused with an emphasis on prevention, building social capital and
   community resilience. Patients must be empowered to manage their own
   mental health. Efficiencies should be found within the system.
   Low-carbon ways to deliver care must be found, measured and improved
   upon. Greater adaptability needs to be built into the system to
   mitigate the impact of climate change. Sustainability should be
   integrated into training programmes, and good examples of practice
   shared and celebrated.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Mental health organisations and individuals must act now to prevent
   and adapt for the climate and ecological emergency. Sustainable
   practice is also good practice.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Climate change will increase and alter the burden of poor mental health
worldwide. Direct effects, such as floods and droughts, have been shown
to worsen a variety of mental health disorders. Indirect effects, such
as displacement of populations, are likely to compound this
trend.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` There are ethical, legal and organisational
imperatives to make mental healthcare more sustainable. The climate
emergency is also a health emergency, and clinicians have a duty to act
as individuals and as part of organisations.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`
Sustainability is written into the constitution of the National Health
Service (NHS),\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` and the Climate Change Act of 2008
legislated for a reduction in NHS carbon emissions of 80% over 30
years.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` More recently, the NHS has made the formal
commitment to become carbon neutral by 2040.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`

Mental health services are estimated to emit 1.47 million tonnes of
carbon dioxide annually.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` We must act now to reshape
services, both to meet the ambitious targets set by the NHS, and to
avoid runaway consequences.

The COVID-19 pandemic has required us to think differently about how we
deliver mental healthcare, and provides an opportunity to enact changes
now consistent with sustainable future.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

.. _sec1:

What should people and organisations do?
========================================

The Consensus Statement on Sustainability in Mental Health establishes
four tenets of practicing mental healthcare sustainably (`Box
1 <#box1>`__).\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` These focus on reducing greenhouse gas
emissions and enabling organisational, social and cultural factors that
will help patients achieve better mental health in the future. A health
service that targets its resources and empowers patients to take
ownership of their health will become more efficient, resilient and less
carbon-intensive. Box 1Tenets of sustainable mental healthcare. Prevent
mental illness, build social capital and promote individual, social and
community reliance and mental well-being.Empower patients, staff and
carers to manage their mental health.Eliminate wasteful activity.Make
use of low-carbon alternatives.

.. _sec1-1:

Focus on prevention, build social capital
-----------------------------------------

Prevention protects resources, and hence saves carbon. Preventative
healthcare is more cost-effective than a reactive approach. This is true
in mental healthcare, where preventative programmes have shown to be
effective in a wide range of common mental health problems such as
depression, anxiety and first-episode psychosis.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`
Prevention of conduct disorders could save £150 000 per case in lifetime
costs.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` Early intervention programmes can delay or
prevent transition to psychosis among participants,\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` and
have significant cost-savings.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Some preventative
measures are outside the purview of psychiatric services. Adverse
childhood experiences increase the risk of depression by four times, and
suicide attempts by 30 times,\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` yet mental health services
are not involved at the advent of these life events. Greater joint
working between public service bodies would achieve better long-term
mental health outcomes.

Addressing the social determinants of poor mental health can also
achieve better outcomes. The Marmot Review established that ‘the lower
one's social and economic status, the poorer one's health is likely to
be’.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` Organisations should make targeted us of resources
in areas such as housing, social isolation and employment, to work to
improve social capital.

.. _sec1-1-1:

Housing
~~~~~~~

Homelessness and long-term mental illness are linked.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`
Models such as Housing First have been shown to help individuals engage
better with treatment programmes, doing this at around half the cost of
traditional models.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` The Critical Time Intervention
programme can also be effective in preventing homelessness on discharge
from in-patient care.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`

.. _sec1-1-2:

Isolation
~~~~~~~~~

People with mental ill-health are more likely to suffer adverse
consequences of social isolation.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` Recent lockdown
conditions have shown the impact of social isolation on previously
well-managed mental health conditions.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` Befriending
services can be effective in improving depression,\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` and
is highly valued by patients. Social prescribing can also help address
isolation, loneliness and inactivity.

.. _sec1-1-3:

Employment
~~~~~~~~~~

Unemployment is associated with poor mental health,\ :sup:`(n.d.u)`
whereas being in employment or volunteering promotes better mental
health.\ :sup:`(n.d.v),(n.d.w)` Individual Placement Support services
have demonstrated successes, when used, by integrating employment
specialists into community teams to support those with severe mental
health problems into work.

Addressing social determinants of mental health will enable populations
to become more resilient to the effects of climate change. Groups with
less social capital are both more likely to experience poor mental
health,\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` and more vulnerable to the effects of climate
change.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` Conversely, a better housed, stably employed,
socially connected population will require less mental healthcare as
circumstances change.

.. _sec1-2:

Empower patients to manage their own mental health
--------------------------------------------------

A variety of opportunities exist to enable patients to take a leading
role in the management of and recovery from their conditions (`Box
2 <#box2>`__). Box 2Sustainability within a management plan.Dr Alvarez,
has been reviewing John, a 57-year-old man with depression, who drinks
alcohol regularly. John has been calling the ambulance service and
police when intoxicated, resulting in frequent visits to his flat.
Emergency services suspect that he is doing this in part because he is
lonely and isolated. John has said he ‘doesn't do much’ in the day, and
his care coordinator confirms he goes to the shop twice a week but
nothing else. Dr Alvarez asks what John has enjoyed before – he says he
remembers helping his father in the garden but ‘of course, I don't have
a garden now’. John discussed him at the team meeting and hears from the
occupational therapist about ‘Men in Sheds’, a local gardening group
coordinated by peer-support workers. Dr Alvarez contacts John's general
practitioner to establish contact with a link worker from the local
social prescribing initiative, who meets with John to enable him to
attend. After 4 weeks of attending together, John feels ready to go
himself and says it is the highlight of his week. Dr Alvarez asks John
to monitor his symptoms via an online symptom tracker, and is able to
demonstrate to John that he his mood has improved, and alcohol
consumption reduced. He is no longer calling emergency services. Dr
Alvarez and John discuss a keeping well plan, getting John to identify
what has got him better. They agree to meet again in 3 months via video
conferencing to review his progress.

.. _sec1-2-1:

Co-production
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If done correctly, individual, jointly developed care planning forms an
opportunity identify what works for patients correctly first time, and
hence reduce wasted effort. This needs to be done in a non-tokenistic
way that does not marginalise patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` Co-production
must also form an integral part of any service
redevelopment.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)`

.. _sec1-2-2:

Self-monitoring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Technology can empower patients to manage their own symptoms. Tracking
their symptoms online or via smartphones has been shown to benefit a
variety of disorders, including anxiety, stress, alcohol and sleep
disorders, depression, suicidal behaviours and post-traumatic stress
disorder.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` Use of symptom monitoring is well developed
in Improving Access to Psychological Therapies, and could be expanded to
other services.

.. _sec1-2-3:

Peer support
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Peer support provides excellent opportunities for patients to take
ownership of their mental health. They can reduce in-patient admissions
across a variety of diagnoses,\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` and can also link
patients to a social support network.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)`

.. _sec1-2-4:

Social prescribing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Social prescribing is a key component of personalised
care,\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` and provides for an opportunity to tie together
many aspects of sustainable healthcare practice. It has potential to
lower the carbon footprint of healthcare by empowering people to pursue
their own non-pharmacological solutions to their social, practical and
emotional problems.

.. _sec1-2-5:

Green and blue space
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Access to green and blue space can promote mental health and improve
symptoms in a variety of mental and physical disorders.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)`
Green space and horticultural therapy projects should be part of any
hospital build or redesign, and Trusts should identify areas where they
could form part of their existing portfolios. Green walking
groups\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` and activities centred on blue space both have
benefits.\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` Importantly, those with poor mental or
physical health are least likely to have access to green and blue
space,\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)` and efforts will be needed to engage these
groups.

.. _sec1-3:

Eliminate wasteful activity
---------------------------

Wasteful activity is a significant contributor to both the carbon
footprint and financial cost of the NHS. A leaner, smarter service will
deliver higher-value, more sustainable healthcare.

.. _sec1-3-1:

Medicine optimisation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Although the carbon impact of psychiatric prescription is currently
poorly understood, some quick wins exist. Using long-acting injectable
medications at the longest evidenced-based interval rarely occurs, but
could reduce the cost of prescribing by £250 per patient per year, or a
total of 170 000 kg carbon dioxide equivalent.\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)`
Psychiatry also has considerable influence over prescribing in primary
care, and should routinely work with general practitioners to reduce
pharmaceutical waste, polypharmacy and overprescribing. There should be
greater use of structured medication reviews to work with patients to
optimise their medications.\ :sup:`(n.d.aj)` These form further
opportunities for shared decision-making over treatment.

.. _sec1-3-2:

Concordance and treatment effectiveness
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Half of all medicines dispensed are not taken as
directed.\ :sup:`(n.d.ak)` In mental healthcare, the figure is likely to
be even higher. Better understanding the reasons for non-adherence, such
as side-effects, personal beliefs or other barriers, may go some way to
reducing waste. There may also be opportunities for patients to pursue
treatment strategies that de-emphasise the role of medication, if
circumstances permit. The open dialogue approach has been successful
both in treating symptoms of psychosis and returning patients to work,
largely in the absence of medication;\ :sup:`(n.d.al)` its efficacy in
the UK is currently being evaluated. In some situations, it may be
possible to continue to support people with severe mental illness who
choose to not take medications at all; so called ‘managed
non-adherence’.

.. _sec1-3-3:

Reducing ‘did not attend’ rates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

‘Did not attend’ rates in mental healthcare are estimated to be between
15 and 20% higher than other specialties.\ :sup:`(n.d.am)` Patients who
miss appointments tend to be more unwell, and have a higher chance of
relapse and hospital admission.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)` A reduction in missed
appointments can be obtained by gaining a better understanding of their
cause, and adapting to this in ways relevant to
patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)`

.. _sec1-4:

Make use of low-carbon alternatives
-----------------------------------

Mental healthcare emissions are more evenly spread across a variety of
these direct and indirect sources than in other specialities (`Fig.
1 <#fig01>`__).\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` The lack of a quick fix reinforces the
need for collective action by individuals across mental health
organisational divisions. Fig. 1Mental healthcare carbon emissions
compared with other healthcare sectors. Relative carbon emissions of
healthcare sectors (kgCO2e).

.. _sec1-4-1:

Low-carbon treatment choices
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Clinicians need to be aware of the carbon impact of their treatment
choices, and offer low-carbon treatment choices when possible. There is
a need for a better understanding, and the NHS should work with
pharmaceutical companies to make this readily available for clinicians.
Meanwhile, evidence-based alternatives, such as electronic
cognitive–behavioural therapy and other web-based psychology programmes,
are available for disorders such as depression,\ :sup:`(n.d.ap)`
anxiety\ :sup:`(n.d.aq)` and insomnia.\ :sup:`(n.d.ar)` These have as
little as a fifth of the carbon emissions of face-to-face
cognitive–behavioural therapy (230 kg *v*. 1100 kg), and a quarter of
the carbon emissions of a course of antidepressant treatment with
psychiatrist follow-up (900 kg).\ :sup:`(n.d.as)`

.. _sec1-4-2:

Active transport and reduction in vehicle emissions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Staff and patient travel forms a significant component of mental
healthcare carbon emissions. Clean and zero emissions fleet vehicles,
cycling and other types of active travel are all part of the solution;
mental health organisations must take steps to procure and promote
these. The 2019 Royal College of Psychiatrists sustainability prize
winners from Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust ran a project to
reduce their transport emissions, using online meetings, cycling or
walking, and car sharing, saving 22 216 kg carbon dioxide equivalent
over a year.\ :sup:`(n.d.at)`

.. _sec1-4-3:

Energy use
~~~~~~~~~~

Mental health organisations should invest in smart energy systems, and
to procure their energy from the greenest possible sources. By
installing a piece of software that remotely shut down computers not in
use overnight, NHS Oldham was expected to save over 800 000 kg carbon
dioxide equivalent and £41 000 in the first year.\ :sup:`(n.d.au)`
Clinicians can identify energy-saving schemes in their workplaces. The
Centre for Sustainable Healthcare run the Green Ward competition,
offering guidance and support for sustainable schemes, including energy
use.

.. _sec1-4-4:

Waste and recycling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Although a relatively small component of the overall carbon impact of
the NHS, interventions involving waste often are the most definable and
easily engaged-with green programmes. The Royal Surrey Hospital's
recycling programme grew from a group of nurses carrying home recyclable
waste into a dedicated recycling centre for the Trust, and 60
‘sustainability champions’.\ :sup:`(n.d.av)`

.. _sec1-4-5:

Food and catering
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mental health organisations must work to offer their in-patients and
staff members sustainable and healthy food options. North Bristol NHS
Trust successfully worked with their wholesalers to source all of their
ingredients within a 50-mile radius.\ :sup:`(n.d.au)` Clinical staff can
do much via feedback to on-site catering options to include more
sustainable options, or taking steps to change their own diet at work.

.. _sec1-5:

Plan, measure and improve
-------------------------

Transitioning toward sustainable models of care requires unprecedented
coordination between and within mental health organisations and their
local partners. Success depends on a structured, coordinated strategy
and ways of measuring and improving changes.

.. _sec1-5-1:

Green Plans
~~~~~~~~~~~

All mental health Trusts are required to have a board-approved Green
Plan, but their importance to organisations currently varies.
Sustainability should be an integral part of mental health
organisations’ strategic approach and should have executive-level
buy-in. An effective Green Plan will be led by a Board member and have
wide representation. The Sustainable Development Unit and NHS England
have published guidance on how to develop a Green Plan.\ :sup:`(n.d.aw)`

.. _sec1-5-2:

Carbon footprint
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Sustainable Development Unit has tools for NHS Trusts to measure and
reduce their carbon footprint in procurement, and have forthcoming plans
for other divisions. An ‘ethical procurement’ tool is also available.
The Royal College of General Practitioners has produced a ‘Green Impact
for Health Toolkit’, enabling general practices to audit their practice
– a similar toolkit should exist for mental healthcare organisations.

.. _sec1-5-3:

Quality improvement
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Quality improvement is an effective framework to achieve sustainability
aims. One advantage of the quality improvement model is that it seeks to
understand local systems first, making it more effective at solving
local problems. It is also a ‘bottom-up’ approach, fostering a sense of
ownership and ambition among staff. The Centre for Sustainable
Healthcare have adapted the quality improvement model for
sustainability, which can be used in mental healthcare settings (`Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__). Fig. 2Applying sustainable clinical practice principles
in quality improvement. Published from the Centre for Sustainable
Healthcare under creative commons licence CC BY-SA 4.0.

.. _sec1-6:

Adapt the system
----------------

Climate change will bring about longer-term shifts in patterns of need,
mediated through changing populations, economic hardship, increased
social division\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` and poorer physical
health.\ :sup:`(n.d.ax)` In the UK, climate change is leading to more
flooding and heatwave events, which have adverse impacts on mental
health.\ :sup:`(n.d.ay)–(n.d.az)` In the global South and elsewhere,
additional hazards such as wildfires, droughts, hurricanes and cyclones,
are recognised drivers of poor mental health,\ :sup:`(n.d.ba)`
particularly for those with pre-existing difficulties.\ :sup:`(n.d.bb)`

Clinicians must prepare for this change and increase in mental disorder.
There will need to be flexibility built into the system, as the full
effects of climate change on the population are unknown.

.. _sec1-7:

Equipping psychiatrists to become sustainable practitioners, now and in the future
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Organisations must play the central role in directing a shift in the
organisation and delivery of clinical services. However, the
normalisation of such practice through education, knowledge sharing via
networks, and empowerment, is essential to allowing clinicians to play
their part.

.. _sec1-7-1:

Training
~~~~~~~~

There is broad interest among psychiatry trainees and medical students
in becoming sustainable practitioners, but many do not see it as a core
feature of their role as trainee doctors. Sustainability should be
integrated into training and established as a central responsibility of
a psychiatrist. Medical schools such as Lancaster Medical School are
already embedding sustainability into their curriculum,\ :sup:`(n.d.bc)`
and sustainable practice should be made part of e-portfolio and annual
review of competency progression commitments. There are also broader
arguments to place sustainability at the heart of the General Medical
Council's duty of a doctor Gold Guide.

.. _sec1-7-2:

Sharing good practice
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Attendees at conferences and meetings should routinely expect to see a
focus on sustainable healthcare, as has been the case at several
regional conferences to date. Video conferencing opens up more
opportunities to do this in a sustainable way. Networks such as
PsySustnet provide an additional resource to exchange learning. Awards
such as the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ annual sustainability prize
have successfully celebrated outstanding achievement in sustainable
mental healthcare.

.. _sec1-7-3:

Empowering employees
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mental health organisations should enable their employees to engage with
sustainable activities, and bring their knowledge and energy to their
workplaces. The psychiatry higher training programme has integrated
‘special interest’ time, where trainees can pursue projects to the
benefit of patients, Trusts and trainees alike. This could be widened to
other mental health practitioners to allow all to engage in
sustainability projects. A central part of empowerment should also
support the growing understanding of supporting the well-being of
clinicians.

.. _sec2:

Summary
=======

Mental health organisations must act now to prevent and adapt for the
climate and ecological emergency. Clinicians’ involvement is vital for
developing effective and safe sustainable models of care. There is much
work to be done, and there are significant changes to be made to the
system to adapt to these needs. The good news is that much can be
achieved through prevention of illness, choosing low-carbon treatment
strategies, controlling waste and empowering patients to be more in
control of their care and treatment. The best news is that sustainable
practice is also good practice.

**Dr Adam Monsell** is an ST5 in substance misuse services at Camden and
Islington Mental Health and Social Care Trust and sustainability scholar
at the Royal College of Psychiatrists, UK. **Dr Jacob Krzanowski** is an
ST6 in substance misuse servcies at South London and Maudsley Mental
Health NHS Trust and an associate at the Centre for Sustainable
Healthcare, UK. **Dr Lisa Page** is a consultant psychiatrist in liaison
services at Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, UK and Clinical
Senior Lecturer in Medical Education & Psychiatry at Brighton & Sussex
Medical School, UK. **Dr Sharon Cuthbert** is a consultant psychiatrist
in adult inpatient services at Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust,
UK. **Dr Guy Harvey** is a consultant psychiartist in adult inpatient
services at Cumbria Northumberland Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust,
UK.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref37

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref39

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref40

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref41

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref42

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref43

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref44

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref45

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref46

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref47

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref48

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref49

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref50

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref51

      n.d.ay.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref53

      n.d.az.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref54

      n.d.ba.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref55

      n.d.bb.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref56

      n.d.bc.
