---
author:
- Claire McKenna[^1]
date: 2021-12
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
title: "Peggy Seriès: Bayesian on a bike"
---

pmc

Born near Bordeaux in 1974, Dr Peggy Seriès is a senior lecturer and
principal investigator in the computational psychiatry laboratory at the
Institute for Adaptive and Neural Computation (ANC), University of
Edinburgh. Her career to date has included spells in prestigious
computational neuroscience labs in France, New York and University
College London.

Her move into computational psychiatry was motivated, she says, partly
by her own experience of anxiety, but also by witnessing the suffering
due to mental illness of her students and the death by suicide of two of
them.

Essentially, the Bayesian brain hypothesis suggests that brains use
probability calculations to make *predictions* about what we experience,
based on sensory inputs and our prior experiences. Seriès\'s research
work focuses on using mathematical and computer models to understand how
our expectations and prior beliefs about the world modulate our
perception. In particular she is interested in differences in prior
beliefs and learning in disorders such as schizophrenia, autism,
depression and anxiety.

Seriès edited and contributed to the first accessible textbook on the
emerging field of computational psychiatry.^1^ For any clinicians
feeling jaded, read it for an overview of computational approaches in
your psychiatric field of interest and to get excited about psychiatry
all over again.

Seriès only started cycling competitively at the age of 39. Since then
she has won multiple track cycling championships nationally and
internationally, completed three half ironmans and is in training for a
full ironman. In 2013 she cycled the full route of the Tour de France,
considered one of the most gruelling endurance competitions in the
world.

This interview took place via Zoom in June 2021 and has been edited for
length and clarity.

**I want to hear more about your cycling achievements! Is there a
connection between your love of cycling and your interest in maths and
neuroscience?**

Thanks for asking! I\'m actually very proud of my cycling achievements,
mostly because I started competing so late in life and it was never
something I thought I could do. Racing bikes has been such a blast!

I\'m not sure there is a clear connection, though maybe the pleasure I
get from both is the pleasure of feeling like an explorer, which is what
I wanted to be when I grew up. On the bike, what I like best is putting
my panniers on, carrying a tent and going for an adventure.

**You diverged from an undergraduate degree in maths and physics into
computational neuroscience -- was that always your plan?**

No, it\'s been a tortuous path, via electronic engineering and
artificial intelligence, but I\'m very happy about where I landed.

I think the deciding factor was that my father suffered an encephalitis
when I was 19. For a while he had short-term memory loss, olfactory
hallucinations and prosopagnosia. For me, it was a shocking awareness of
how delicate and complex the brain is and how a lot of our self-identity
is related to our memories: who are we if/when we lose our memories?
Initially, memory was what I wanted to study.

**Did anyone else inspire you?**

My mother was a neurologist but has always been fascinated by
psychiatry, so she\'d have to be on the list. Otherwise, in the people
I\'ve worked with, I\'d have to say Peter Dayan for his pioneering and
very inspiring work in computational psychiatry and Eero Simoncelli, who
has been a role model as a researcher and mentor.

**What gets you out of bed in the morning?**

Mostly porridge! After breakfast though, I think I am fascinated by
understanding how one\'s experience of life is shaped. How free are we
about how we feel, how happy we are? This is something I am working on
in my private life, having more control over my own experience, and I
see it related to my work as well, both my work on Bayesian perception
and on mental illness: how much are we shaped by our previous beliefs?
Where do those beliefs come from? How can we change them?

**What keeps you awake at night?**

That the causes of mental illness may lie more in how our society
pressures us and lets the vulnerable down than in how our brain might
become 'chemically unbalanced'. That all the neuroscience understanding
in the world can\'t compensate for a society that makes people feel
stressed and miserable.

**What do you love most about what you do?**

I\'d have to say interacting with students, seeing my PhD students
develop. In my teaching, having an honest discussion about mental
illness, when they are at an age when it starts to be relevant -- an age
at which I certainly would have liked to be more informed about it.

**Computational neuroscience still seems to be a field dominated by men
-- have you had any difficulties as a woman in this field?**

This year a woman has been recruited \[to the ANC\] but until now I have
been the only woman in my Institute out of 20 people. I think it\'s at
the current stage of my career that I see how male-dominated things are
in academia and when I feel that progression is harder. Or maybe I was
more naive before. There\'s a perception that women don\'t put
themselves forward as much as men do, and I think this was definitely
true of me, and it came at a cost.

I also think it is undeniable that it is hard for women to succeed in
academia while at the same time managing to settle down in one place and
with one person to build a family.

You asked me about the connection between my work in neuroscience and my
passion for cycling. I think the cycling gave me a lot of confidence. I
am more confident now in this world of men knowing that on a bike I can
actually beat them! It\'s as if I got on their kind of field and I am
actually competitive.

**Do you think things are any different now for young female academics
than they were for you?**

Yes, I think things are different now. Women were very clearly treated
differently from men when I was young. It was so ingrained in our
society that we (women) were not even aware of it.

A very long time ago during my studies, I was supposed to be supervised
for a small research project by a supervisor who, in the first meeting
with me, invited me for a drink and asked if I had a boyfriend. On our
second meeting, he was sitting topless in his office, feet on the table
and when I came through the door, commented that I was short. I never
went back but also never thought to tell anyone about this -- I just did
my project alone.

It is now covert and more subtle and probably takes different forms --
I\'d like to think that behaviours like this don\'t happen anymore, but
as in the rest of society, I think in academia women still feel they are
playing a game where the rules have been written mostly by, and for,
men.

**Thank you for sharing that. I was reminded of the ♯BalanceTonPorc
movement in France, the equivalent of the ♯MeToo movement. Did you ever
consider denouncing your aggressor?**

No. You know back then I just felt happy that I could work by myself and
I didn\'t realise what it was. But now I think about it as a supervisor
myself. If I imagine behaving like this with a student of mine, it\'s
very difficult to understand.

**You\'ve clearly done a lot to recruit, do research with and nurture
PhD students. You\'ve also written about the importance of 'scientific
humility' and making science more accessible. Perhaps this humility
doesn\'t serve women well in a field dominated by men. You have though
used your skills of collaboration to pull together international leaders
in the field of computational psychiatry for your new book. Why did you
think there was a need for a primer?**

The field has been growing steadily in the past few years, but it is not
often taught formally yet. I wanted to offer a book that could be
accessible to a broad audience. I had my students in mind but it is
hopefully also accessible to students coming from psychology or
medicine. The book is not perfect, but I think it\'s a start and
hopefully it will help to consolidate the field and lead to better
things.

I came from a background where people often like to explain things in a
very complicated way with very complicated vocabulary. I have been
inspired by researchers like Eero Simoncelli, who instead would say 'it
needs to be clear to your grandmother'. That was the contrary of
arrogance in how you present your work -- the need to aim for
accessibility. For me, it was very inspiring.

**Why did you use that Einstein quotation at the start of the chapter
you wrote:^1^ 'One thing I have learned in a long life is that all our
science, measured against reality is primitive and childlike -- and yet
it is the most precious thing we have'?**

What I meant is that the models we have at the moment are most certainly
oversimplified and naive, but we have to start somewhere and from there
we can grow and improve.

**I want you to give me a bit of an 'idiot\'s guide' to computational
psychiatry! How are computational theories of the mind linked to
computers -- is it anything to do with computer (hardware/software)
metaphors of the mind?**

In some sense -- the computational theory of mind views the mind as an
information processing system, and perception and cognition as a form of
computation that is realised by neural activity in the brain. The
software would be cognition and the hardware, the neurons.

The work we do operates at both levels: how can we describe cognitive
processes and how are those cognitive processes realised by the neural
substrate?

**Language is a limited and imprecise way to describe how our brain and
mind works. Is computation a tool to extend our own mental capacity and
escape the imprecision of words?**

Yes, verbal theories can only make general and somewhat vague
predictions. Mathematical descriptions offer a way to formalise theories
precisely and quantitatively so they can be tested, compared with data
and extended.

**Computational psychiatry has been called a 'Rosetta stone' linking
levels of explanation in mental illness -- do you agree?**

I don\'t think it will lead to an overnight understanding of mental
illness. But I think computational neuroscience tools are very good at
exploring and providing links between different levels of description,
for example linking the description of individual neurons and the
dynamics of networks of neurons, then linking networks of neurons and
behaviour etc. In that sense they can provide links between
neurobiological elements and descriptions related to symptoms.

**Why is Bayes' rule important in understanding the mind?**

Bayes' theorem tells us how to optimally calculate the probability of an
event based on new information that is, or may be, related to that
event, as well as prior information.

It is important in understanding how the mind works because the mind has
to do something like that: figure out at each moment in time what is in
the environment and what is the best action to take. It has to combine
uncertain bits of information and try to make sense of that information
in view of previous knowledge. Bayesian inference can thus offer a
benchmark of how the brain (I notice you say the mind and I say the
brain!) should do that if it were functioning optimally. It is often
found that this benchmark comes close to what the brain does in
practice.

**What is the difference between Bayesian inference and predictive
processing?**

Predictive processing, or predictive coding, is a theory of brain
function in which the brain is constantly generating and updating an
internal model of the environment. The model is used to generate
predictions of sensory input that are compared with actual sensory
input. This comparison results in prediction errors that are then used
to update and revise the mental model.

Bayesian inference is a method of statistical inference in which Bayes'
theorem is used to update the probability for a hypothesis as more
evidence or information becomes available.

Although the neuroscience literature often confuses the two, as both
theories are related to building an internal model of the environment to
generate predictions, they are distinct. Predictive processing can
implement Bayesian inference, but it does not necessarily do so, nor
would it be the only way to implement Bayesian inference.

**What is machine learning and how is this used in computational
psychiatry?**

Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence based on the
idea that systems can learn from data, identify patterns in the data and
make decisions with minimal human intervention.

We distinguish two types of computational psychiatry: theory-driven and
data-driven.

The first kind uses mostly models coming from computational
neuroscience, that formalise psychological or neural hypotheses about
how the brain learns or makes decisions and produces behaviour (such as
reinforcement learning models and Bayesian models). This is the type I
am mostly involved in.

The second kind uses machine learning to try to 'blindly' detect
patterns in psychiatric data or do prediction or classification (without
making assumptions about the underlying mechanisms).

Both types of work are complementary and can also be combined.

**What translational benefit has computational psychiatry had?**

There are already indications that machine learning can help predict
trajectories of mental illness or predict response to treatment. There
is for example a seminal study by Chekroud et al,^2^ showing that it is
possible to predict (somewhat significantly above chance) response to
treatment (citalopram) for people suffering from depression. But
overall, the field is really in its infancy.

**You pointed out that you tend to talk about 'the brain' and I tend to
say 'the mind'. Is computational psychiatry more concerned with the
computational representation of cognition, as opposed to the qualia of
consciousness?**

Yes, we computational neuroscientists commonly like to avoid talking
about qualia or even consciousness, we often feel uncomfortable around
those concepts and like to leave those to philosophers of the mind! I
think it\'s a shame that it\'s not a literature we often read and we are
not enough exposed to it. Philosophers of mind read us, but we don\'t
really read them.

I think, though, it will be very important to address the notion of
suffering and mental pain. At the end of the day it is not really the
content of the experience that makes a person feel 'ill' -- some people
have hallucinations they are perfectly comfortable with -- but that
feeling of suffering, that something is 'very wrong' or overwhelming,
that is perhaps difficult to measure or model quantitatively.

**What projects are you currently working on?**

One of my main projects is about clarifying the differences between
Bayesian theories in relation to autism and schizophrenia: the theories
are quite similar at the moment for the two disorders, while the
symptoms are very different.

**As far as I understand it, the similarities are related to the idea
that in both autism and schizophrenia there are 'weak priors', so that
the influence of prior expectations on perception is weaker?**

Yes, exactly. The ideas are very similar, that you\'d have a weak
influence of perceptual priors in both autism and schizophrenia, but
perhaps at a more cognitive level you would have stronger (possibly
maladaptive and overwhelming) priors in schizophrenia. But in reality
the pathologies have very rarely been compared using computational
methods.

I\'m really interested in actually testing these theories. And what\'s
interesting is that in our work we found differences \[between autism,
schizophrenia and controls\], but they are very subtle. And I find that
quite fascinating as well.

In reality, even between schizophrenia, autism, depression and anxiety,
it\'s very hard to find behavioural tasks that lead to very robust
differences that we can actually quantify and model. So at the moment,
there is some indication that these theories are somewhat promising, but
there\'s also data coming in that are against those theories. It\'s
quite hard to know how much progress we have really made, I think, with
these Bayesian theories and part of my work tries to assess that.

**The Bayesian framework for understanding the mind seems intuitively
appealing, and can be retrofitted to lots of psychological theories.
However, it is often applied very liberally, in a speculative kind of
way that seems unfalsifiable. The more I read about predictive
processing, the more I can apply it to just about anything! Is there a
risk of the Bayesian bandwagon running away with us?**

As a framework, the Bayesian approach is indeed unfalsifiable; there
will always be a Bayesian model that can fit the data. However,
individual models are falsifiable. I think the trick is not to use
Bayesian or predictive ideas in the vague sense, but to formalise these
ideas as much as possible in the form of mathematical models and
simulations and compare a family of different individual Bayesian models
and other types of model. Only then can we test quantitatively our
hypotheses, confront the data and really evaluate whether/which Bayesian
descriptions really correspond to the data.

**We may be able to understand the neural mechanisms behind the distress
related to psychiatric disorders, but do computational approaches to
understanding mental illness tell us at what level we should intervene
to relieve this distress? It may still be best to intervene at the level
of people\'s socioeconomic circumstances or preventing their trauma or
challenging their negative thought patterns.**

I agree, but I don\'t think these levels of explanation are
incompatible. A computational approach (such as machine learning) can be
informative in identifying what environmental factors are critical in
triggering mental illness, for example.

Work looking at reinforcement learning and Bayesian inference can also
hopefully ultimately inform learning-based psychotherapies, as
researchers like Michael Moutoussis^3^ have shown.

**If computational psychiatry were the Tour de France, which stage are
we currently at? What would represent the Champs-Élysées in
computational psychiatry for you?**

We\'re probably at the Prologue \[the time trial which starts the Tour\]
even if it feels like the Alps! The Champs-Elysées, for me, would be to
better understand the root causes of mental illness, either at a
biological or environmental level, and inform new therapies, in
particular psychotherapies.

[^1]: **Claire McKenna talks to Peggy Seriès**, editor of the first
    primer on computational psychiatry, about a field that sometimes
    seems wilfully inscrutable. Seriès also speaks about her alter ego
    as an elite cyclist and ironwoman and is frank on the barriers faced
    by women in academia.
