---
abstract: |
  This paper focuses on climate anxiety and its role in the psychology
  of climate change, compared with responses to the COVID-19 global
  pandemic. Four psychological hypotheses for why we do not act on
  climate change will be reviewed, and the role of anxiety for each, as
  well as potential solutions. Different types of climate anxiety both
  inside and outside the clinic will be explored, along with associated
  defence mechanisms and treatment.
author:
- Joseph Dodds[^1]Correspondence to Dr Joseph Dodds
  (<jdodds@faculty.unyp.cz>)
date: 2021-08
institute:
- 1Psychology Faculty, University of New York in Prague, Czech Republic
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
- id: ref38
- id: ref39
- id: ref40
- id: ref41
- id: ref42
- id: ref43
- id: ref44
- id: ref45
- id: ref46
- id: ref47
- id: ref48
- id: ref49
- id: ref50
- id: ref51
- id: ref52
- id: ref53
- id: ref54
- id: ref55
- id: ref56
- id: ref57
- id: ref58
- id: ref59
- id: ref60
- id: ref61
- id: ref62
- id: ref63
- id: ref64
- id: ref65
- id: ref66
- id: ref67
- id: ref68
- id: ref69
title: The psychology of climate anxiety
---

pmc

# Climate psychology and climate anxiety {#sec1}

The past decade has seen the important development of climate
psychology.^1--7^ Ursano and colleagues^2^ describe climate change as
one of the top threats to global health in the 21st century, and
psychology has begun to respond. The American Psychological
Association\'s 2010 report into climate change^1^ identified six key
areas for psychology, including risk perception, psychological and
behavioural causes of climate change, psychosocial impacts of climate
change, adaptation and coping strategies, psychosocial barriers to
action and the role of psychologists. At the same time, psychotherapists
and clinical psychologists are coming to terms with ecological loss,
anxiety and guilt in their patients, and also among themselves, as they
come to grips with the faltering biosphere.^8,9^

This article focuses on climate anxiety and its role in climate
psychology, while recognising that anxiety interacts with a range of
other emotions such as grief and rage. The American Psychological
Association^10^ refers to ecoanxiety as 'a chronic fear of environmental
doom', ranging from mild stress to clinical disorders like depression,
anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder and suicide,^11--13^ and
maladaptive coping strategies such as intimate partner violence^14,15^
and substance misuse.^16--20^ Cianconi et al^21^ found complex types of
climate anxiety and trauma, including intergenerational effects,
especially where environmental damage involves loss of a way of life or
culture.

It is essential to differentiate between pathological and adaptive
forms.^22^ *The Handbook of Climate Psychology*^4^ defines climate
anxiety as a 'heightened emotional, mental or somatic distress in
response to dangerous changes in the climate system', but suggests that
'paying heed to what is happening...is a healthier response than turning
away in denial or disavowal'. Climate anxiety can lead to symptoms such
as panic attacks, loss of appetite, irritability, weakness and
sleeplessness,^1^ yet given the increasing evidence about the impact of
climate change on health, psychological professionals might ask if their
patients feel too much anxiety, or whether they themselves feel too
little. Climate anxiety is being felt much more powerfully among the
young,^23,24^ by first responders to climate-related natural
disasters^25,26^ and climate scientists and activists, who are exposed
to information about the threat more than most and therefore may need
psychological support.

When considering the effects of climate anxiety, it is necessary to
focus on at-risk populations, including children, the elderly, the
chronically ill, those with mental illnesses and those with mobility
impairments.^2^ Those from lower socioeconomic groups are
disproportionately affected by climate change because of disparities in
infrastructure and health resources. Severe weather events can also
damage social support systems and mental health infrastructure, further
isolating the most vulnerable.^27--29^ Clayon^30,31^ reports that
anxiety, fatalism, hopelessness and fear have been increasing globally,
and offers a clinical approach to understanding, measuring and treating
climate anxiety, while emphasising the distinction between adaptive and
maladaptive types, and the need to keep the society-level response
required to combat climate change in mind.

Given our need to effectively mobilise in response to climate change,
the Climate Psychology Alliance^4^ suggests that psychologists and
psychotherapists should not aim to get rid of climate anxiety, but
instead 'support individuals and communities to build strong containers
that allow the expression and exploration of their emotions without
collapsing under it or turning away'. Climate change is a psychological
problem but that does not mean that it should be individualised or
medicalised. As Lawton writes,^32^ if ecoanxiety is treated as
pathology, 'the forces of denial will have won...what we are witnessing
isn\'t a tsunami of mental illness, but a long-overdue outbreak of
sanity'.

# Why do we not act? Four psychological hypotheses {#sec2}

Climate anxiety is heightened in those that are aware of and *feel* the
existential threat of climate change, by the fact that most of us, most
of the time, act as if it does not exist. The poverty of collective
responses to climate change is in stark contrast to its threat. Why do
we not act? This section explores four psychological hypotheses, the
role of anxiety for each, and comparisons with psychosocial responses to
COVID-19.^33^

## Faulty alarm hypothesis: cognitive bias in our evolved risk detection system {#sec2-1}

This explanation suggests humans have evolved the ability to respond to
certain types of threats optimally, especially those that are immediate,
visible, fast (something happens so slowly that it slips our notice),
with historical precedent, simple causality, clear and direct personal
impacts or caused by an 'enemy' tribe or group.^1,34,35^ From this
perspective, the problem with climate change is that we do not feel
enough anxiety as it slips our notice by missing all of the
characteristics above. The answer is to help us feel the anxiety, to
motivate us to act, turning up the volume on the threat and our
response. The lack of effective risk perception leads to behaviours that
worsen climate change.^36^ According to the 2018 American Psychological
Association report, 'the perception of risk regarding climate change,
belief in the ability to effect change, and the etiology attributed to
extreme weather events are important factors impacting the decisions
people make regarding climate change related behaviors'.^2^

### Comparison with COVID-19 {#sec2-1-1}

Both climate change and COVID-19 are environmental crises where human
behaviour and psychology are important factors, yet the latter happens
much faster, with clearer links between behaviour and consequence,
leading to much more dramatic responses. International efforts to
respond to COVID-19 may have the unintended benefit of shaking people
out of climate lethargy, by showing that the global mobilisation
required to confront climate change is possible, and allowing the public
to see (and feel) that invisible environmental dangers are very
real.^33^ However, as with climate change, with the COVID-19 pandemic we
also see huge levels of denial, anger and despair.

## Social dilemma: bystander effect {#sec2-2}

Social dilemmas (or commons dilemmas) involve conflict between
individual and collective self-interest.^37^ For example, it is in every
fisherman\'s interest for other fishermen to adopt quotas on how much
fish can be caught every year to ensure fish stocks recover, but
simultaneously, each would like to take what they can. Climate change is
the ultimate commons dilemma.^38^ How do we escape from this
'rational-disaster' model of human extinction? Games theory^39^ studies
such conflicts, most famously with the prisoners' dilemma. Anxiety here
refers to not only the 'costs' of the game when played badly, but of
predicting the behaviour of others. How can I trust that you will do the
right thing? And how can I trust that you trust that I will do the right
thing? Research in human and animal behaviour^40,41^ shows cooperative
strategies can flourish in a wide range of contexts. The key is to focus
on the structure of the game, to allow cooperative behaviour to
flourish.

### Comparison with COVID-19 {#sec2-2-1}

Responses to both involve social dilemmas. When reviewing how successful
different countries were/are in tackling the viral pandemic, it seems
that a crucial factor was not the wealth of the nation, but its social
cohesion and a collectivist versus individualistic orientation.^42--44^
To the extent that the measures were clearly enunciated, seemed fair and
received widespread social support, systems of trust were established
and each could play their part in the collective effort. Climate change
is another order of complexity beyond COVID-19, but important lessons
can be learned.

## Ecopsychology: the problem of disconnection from nature {#sec2-3}

Since the 1990s, ecopsychology has emerged as a particular response
within psychology to environmental problems, emphasising a holistic
approach,^45--48^ suggesting that our modern lives are so disconnected
from nature that we do not care enough to want to protect it, and fail
to realise that we are threatened by damage to the natural world.
Ecopsychology views disconnection from nature as also central to the
current mental health epidemic.^18,49^ Reconnecting to nature is seen as
a requirement for mental health that also provides the emotional link
that will drive us to act (out of love, not just fear). Ecopsychologists
emphasise that the anxiety, guilt, grief and anger we feel concerning
collapsing ecosystems, our 'pain for the World', are appropriate and,
although difficult, provides the starting point for action and a renewed
relation to Earth.^50^

### Comparison with COVID-19 {#sec2-3-1}

COVID-19 forces us to recognise that the 'split' between ourselves and
nature is not real, and shows that our social systems are all too
fragile in the face of environmental danger. On the other hand,
ecopsychology tends to downplay that nature does at times try to kill
us, and is not only a beneficial force that nurtures. For some, COVID-19
is a natural response of Earth to human degradation, as Gaia retaliates
against a human civilisation getting too close to remaining wild spaces.
In a sense, it has partially worked. COVID-19 has arguably done more
than any climate treaty to reduce carbon emissions,^33^ perhaps buying
us a little more time. Some hope this is a moment for 'waking up', to
take stock and give us a chance to change our futures.

## Psychoanalysis: climate denial and apathy as a defence against anxiety {#sec2-4}

The psychoanalytic model of environmental problems^5--7,51,52^ focuses
on the complex way humans deal with anxiety (see also terror management
theory^53^ ). In contrast to the faulty alarm hypothesis, the anxiety of
climate change is seen as not too little, but too much, defended against
through individual and socially structured defences.^9,54^ Defence
mechanisms are strategies the ego uses to defend against anxiety,
conflict and threats to self-esteem. From this perspective, as with the
Faulty Alarm hypothesis , we need to be able to feel the anxiety (and
other feelings) produced by climate change. However, merely amplifying
messages of fear and guilt can backfire, by strengthening and
rigidifying defences. Climate anxiety is therefore, in part, a realistic
but painful response to our situation, and difficult to hold onto,
especially in a social context of generalised denial.

### Comparison with COVID-19 {#sec2-4-1}

The psychoanalytic perspective helps explain certain factors the faulty
alarm theory cannot account for, in particular, why responses to climate
change include a substantial amount of anger and hostility. Climate
scientists have been the recipients of death threats and abuse, and
negative reactions in the context of COVID-19 are even more pronounced.

# Types of climate anxiety and defence {#sec3}

Melanie Klein^55^ identified two groups of anxieties. Paranoid--schizoid
anxiety involves feelings of persecution and fears of annihilation and
fragmentation, and is defended against by psychotic defences (denial of
reality), projective identification and splitting. Depressive anxieties
relate more to loss, guilt and fears of dependency, dealt with by
neurotic defences. We can relate these to the findings of affective
neuroscience,^56^ which differentiates the FEAR system (involving the
amygdala, medial and anterior hypothalamus, and the periaqueductal
gray), which generates anxiety in response to external threats; and the
PANIC system (centred on the anterior cingulate gyrus, with connections
to thalamic, hypothalamic and other nuclei, such as ventral tegmental
areas), which generates anxiety in response to the loss of attachment
figures.

The psychoanalytic model suggests that the threat of climate change
leads to two types of climate anxiety: first, the 'apocalyptic' fears
(fears of death, annihilation and extinction); and second, complex
feelings around loss, grief, dependency and guilt^52,57^ for losses that
have already occurred and those that are to come ('pre-traumatic
stress', 'anticipatory mourning', 'solastalgia'^58,59^ ). Responses to
climate anxiety include proximal defences (pseudo-rational,
threat-focused and more conscious), distal defences (functioning
unconsciously and taking a symbolic form) and facing difficult feelings
and generating adaptive responses.^60^ Anxiety, guilt and loss become
more manageable as they become more shared,^61^ and can be reflected
upon in a safe space where realistic possibilities for action open up.
All major defence mechanisms^62^ are clearly visible in relation to
climate change, focused on the two emotional threats: denying the
reality of climate change (it does not exist, it is a conspiracy), or
denying our losses, dependency or responsibility (nature might die but
we will be fine; it is caused by other humans or natural causes, the
Chinese or the sun, not me).

There are many shades of variation: not only outright denial, but
minimising the threat (it will not be that bad, it will happen in the
future, or to other species or countries), by finding scapegoats through
projection; intellectualisation (taking courses on climate change
without allowing emotional responses or behavioural change); idealising
charismatic leaders that support denial, repressing and suppressing
awareness; reaction formation (denying the reality or the impulse while
simultaneously giving expression to its opposite, e.g. those who 'burn a
tire for Earth day' or participate in 'coal-rolling', becoming
environmentally destructive to prove to themselves they either do not
believe in climate change or do not care, as an attack against perceived
group enemies, and a means of evacuating bad internal states);
hopelessness (it is too late anyway); apocalypticism (the end of the
world is exciting and allows for fantasies of the 'bad' being punished
for their behaviours, and we can start again and better^63^ ); or manic
defence behaviours, such as seeking distraction through increasing
addictive behaviours and consumption,^18,19^ to avoid thinking about the
problem. A certain amount of climate activism is also of a manic
reparation type, which can quickly lead to disillusion and burnout if
the movement\'s goals are not quickly met. These are just a few of the
responses/defences that climate change evokes, with many reactions
comparable with the COVID-19 pandemic.

# Working with climate anxiety {#sec4}

Adams^64^ asserts that treating climate anxiety needs to address the
underlying dangers. and therefore requires meaningful collective
responses, including 'acknowledging loss collectively and publicly' as
'an important step in facing up to the reality of the Anthropocene and
the impossibility of carrying on "as normal"'. Randall^57,59^ has
emphasised the importance of experiencing and articulating difficult
emotions, such as loss, grief and fear, in a shared context as a way of
developing forms of mutual support. In addition to dealing with anxiety
in their clinical practice, therapists can help support the development
of social containers to express, contain and mobilise climate anxiety
into positive social change.^4^ Ultimately, the results need to be
measured in reduced carbon dioxide emissions rather than necessarily
reduced expressions of fear.

By allowing feelings and thoughts we usually avoid to be brought into
awareness, we can avoid more pathological unconscious acting-out.
Bednarek^65^ agrees that climate anxiety should not be seen 'as a
problem to be solved or a condition to be medicated', but rather 'an
important encounter with our awareness of our impact on the world'. All
of us need to wake up to climate anxiety, including mental health
professionals. Those who are most informed about the current danger,
such as scientists, journalists, students or activists, often express
the most intense fears -- an anxiety heightened by feeling isolated in a
culture in denial.^66,67^ Instead of pathologizing their anxiety, which
only worsens mental health, we can ask 'what support do we collectively
need in order not to freeze and anaesthetise ourselves against this
context of so much loss?'^65^

The answer lies not only from work in individual psychotherapy, but in
developing strong social networks of supportive relationships, and a
living relationship with the natural world.^68^ Community is crucial for
collective resilience, as we are seeing in the COVID-19 pandemic. Nature
itself can function as one of these containing spaces.^8,46,69^ To
conclude, the symptoms of climate anxiety are not necessarily feelings
to be got rid of, but lessons to be learned, although only if they can
be felt in a safe way, through developing meaningful action and positive
social, psychological and ecological change.

**Joseph Dodds** (PhD) is a psychoanalyst (IPA) in private practice with
the Czech Psychoanalytical Society, a psychotherapist (UKCP), Chartered
Psychologist (BPS) and psychology lecturer with the University of New
York in Prague, and the Anglo-American University..

# Declaration of interest {#nts2}

None.

[^1]: This article was originally published with a second, incorrect
    affiliation for Joseph Dodds. This has now been corrected and an
    erratum published at <https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.58>
