=================================================================================
Effects of diet and fitness apps on eating disorder behaviours: qualitative study
=================================================================================



Elizabeth V. Eikey\ **Correspondence**: Elizabeth V. Eikey. Email:
eeikey@ucsd.edu

:date: 2021-09

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background
      :name: sec_a1

   Diet and fitness apps are often promoted in university and college
   settings and touted as a means to improve health with little
   attention given to unanticipated negative effects, especially among
   those at risk for or with eating disorders.

   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a2

   Few researchers have studied how these apps affect women with eating
   disorders in university and college settings. This research
   investigates the unintended negative consequences of engaging with
   these tools.

   .. rubric:: Method
      :name: sec_a3

   Data collection sessions comprised three components conducted with 24
   participants: survey (demographic and eating disorder symptoms),
   think-aloud exercise and semi-structured interview. Thematic analysis
   was used to analyse data.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a4

   Participants reported that diet and fitness apps trigger and
   exacerbate symptoms by focusing heavily on quantification, promoting
   overuse and providing certain types of feedback. Eight themes of
   negative consequences emerged: fixation on numbers, rigid diet,
   obsession, app dependency, high sense of achievement, extreme
   negative emotions, motivation from ‘negative’ messages, and excess
   competition. Although these themes were common when users’ focus was
   to lose weight or eat less, they were also prevalent when users
   wanted to focus explicitly on eating disorder recovery.

   .. rubric:: Conclusions
      :name: sec_a5

   Unintended negative consequences are linked to the quantified self
   movement, conception of appropriate usage, and visual cues and
   feedback. This paper critically examines diet and fitness app design
   and discusses implications for designers, educators and clinicians.
   Ultimately, this research emphasises the need for a fundamental shift
   in how diet and fitness apps promote health, with mental health at
   the forefront.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Diet and fitness apps often are touted as a means to improve users’
health. Most of these apps consist of nutrition, food, physical
activity, weight and even sometimes body measurement tracking tools and
connections to a community of users with similar goals. Although these
apps are popular\ :sup:`1,2` and can be helpful to some,\ :sup:`3` they
can have unintended adverse effects on others, such as university and
college students.\ :sup:`4–7` These apps often overwhelmingly focus on
weight loss and normalise weight control methods. Using weight loss as a
proxy for health is problematic because it may increase the risk of or
exacerbate eating disorder behaviours in already susceptible groups,
such as women attending university.\ :sup:`8` Further, these apps tend
to overlook the role of mental health in addressing physical health
challenges. The emphasis on weight loss within these apps is consistent
with and feeds into Western cultures’ obsession with thinness and
dieting. Diet and fitness apps also support and encourage dieting
behaviours. This is an issue because dieting behaviours and unhealthy
weight control methods are also risk factors for eating
disorders.\ :sup:`9,10` Additionally, when compared with, for instance,
paper tracking, these apps are always on hand and more discreet because
of the prevalence of and norms around smartphone use, making it easier
to constantly engage with diet and fitness content. They also often
provide users with a set plan based on how much weight they want to
lose, and leverage features, such as progress visualisations to
influence behaviour, colour choices to denote positive and negative
behaviours, and reminders and streaks to encourage consistent tracking.
Although disordered eating affects all genders, eating disorders and
eating disorder-related behaviours are extremely prevalent among women,
especially those in college and university settings.\ :sup:`8,11–13` In
fact, researchers have found that 13.5% of undergraduate women screen
positive for eating disorders,\ :sup:`8` and 40–49% of university women
engage in eating disorder behaviours at least once a week.\ :sup:`13`

Only somewhat recently have researchers studied diet and fitness apps in
the context of eating disorders.\ :sup:`4–6` For example, Honary et
al\ :sup:`6` found that almost half of the young people who participated
in their study had maladaptive eating and exercise behaviours from using
diet and fitness apps. In their study of 493 college students, Simpson
and Mazzeo\ :sup:`4` found that those who reported using diet and
fitness apps had higher levels of eating disorder symptoms. Similarly,
but focusing on individuals with clinically diagnosed eating disorders,
Levinson et al\ :sup:`5` found that in their cohort, 73% of those who
used MyFitnessPal perceived it as contributing to their eating disorder,
and these perceptions were correlated with eating disorder symptoms.
Although these studies are important to recognise the link between
eating disorders and diet and fitness apps, they do not shed light on
how these apps may unintentionally affect users and their eating
disorder symptoms. To address this gap, a qualitative study was
conducted to answer the following research question: what are the
unintended negative consequences of diet and fitness apps among women
attending university who exhibit eating disorder-related behaviours? The
term ‘unintended consequences’ refers to unforeseen or unpredicted
results.\ :sup:`42` This terminology is common when discussing
technological impact, especially related to health information
technology. These consequences can be positive, negative or neutral, but
often refer to adverse effects.

.. _sec1-1:

The research question
=====================

This study takes an interpretivist perspective: knowledge is contextual
and grounded in participants experiences.\ :sup:`15` This paper reports
on one portion of a study on the use, impact and perceptions of diet and
fitness apps (and if they are used in conjunction with other
technologies, such as social media). Eight themes emerged that highlight
the unintended negative consequences of diet and fitness apps. Findings
from this study can be used by app designers, educators and clinicians
to more carefully consider how these apps affect users, especially young
women to whom these apps are often marketed.

.. _sec1-2:

Eating disorder behaviours
==========================

For the purposes of this research, eating disorder behaviours are
behaviours associated with anorexia and bulimia nervosa. These include
excessive calorie or food restriction; intense fear of gaining weight;
obsession with weight and consistent behaviour to prevent weight gain;
self-esteem overly related to body image; bingeing; feeling of being out
of control during bingeing; purging; dramatic weight loss; preoccupation
with weight, food, calories, fat grams and dieting; refusal to eat
certain foods; comments about feeling ‘fat’; hunger denial; excessive
exercise regimen and development of food rituals.\ :sup:`16` Because
many women do not see a professional for their symptoms and thus never
receive a diagnosis,\ :sup:`8` eating disorder behaviours in this
context may or may not indicate full clinical eating disorders or
qualify to be categorised as other eating disorders, such as other
specified feeding and eating disorder or unspecified feeding and eating
disorder. The women in this study self-identify as having an eating
disorder. Therefore, in the remainder of this paper, eating disorder
behaviours and eating disorders are used interchangeably to emphasise
women's own perspectives and experiences with eating disorders, and the
importance of studying eating disorders even in the absence of a
clinical diagnosis.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

To capture rich information from individuals about how diet and fitness
apps may affect eating disorder-related behaviours and perceptions, a
primarily qualitative research approach was employed. This methodology
allowed for users to share their stories and experiences in their own
words and emergent themes unlikely to be discovered when using only
quantitative approaches. Three data collection methods were used:
surveys (demographic and eating disorder symptoms survey), think-aloud
exercises and semi-structured interviews.

.. _sec2-1:

Recruitment
-----------

In total, 24 participants took part in the study. The focus of this
research was university women with eating disorders who use or have used
diet and fitness apps in the USA. Participants who were either formally
or self-diagnosed were recruited. This was specifically done to include
the portion of women who do not seek a professional diagnosis or
treatment. Therefore, this study represents users whose needs are
largely invisible. This population is important to study because
anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and related eating disorder behaviours
tend to affect university women,\ :sup:`8` and diet and fitness app
users tend to be younger.\ :sup:`1` To recruit users, on-campus groups
were asked to share information on a campus listserv and fliers were
posted to social media. Additionally, paper fliers were posted on
bulletin boards on and off campus, such as at local gas stations.
Because eating disorders are stigmatised conditions, many people may be
wary of being seen getting contact information from fliers. Posting
paper fliers in discreet locations, such as on the backs of doors in
public restroom stalls where participants could covertly obtain
information for the study, was the most successful approach.

.. _sec2-2:

Measures
--------

.. _sec2-2-1:

Demographic and eating disorder symptoms survey
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The survey contained questions about age, gender, and race/ethnicity, as
well as eating disorders and app use. A combination of three well-known
measures for assessing the severity of disordered eating and exercise
behaviours and attitudes was used, which is similar to Tan et
al\ :sup:`17` and described in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__: the Eating
Attitudes Test (EAT-26),\ :sup:`18` the Eating Disorder Examination
Questionnaire (EDE-Q 6.0)\ :sup:`19` and the Clinical Impairment
Assessment Questionnaire (CIA 3.0).\ :sup:`23` Table 1Description of
eating disorder symptoms
measuresMeasureDescriptionInterpretationEAT-26The EAT-26 is a 26-item
self-report questionnaire that assesses symptoms and concerns
characteristic of eating disorders on a six-point scale (always to
never), using behavioural questions regarding the past 6
months.\ :sup:`18` It is often used as a first step in a multi-stage
screening process and has been useful as a screening tool to assess
eating disorder risk. It consists of three subscales – diet, bulimia and
food preoccupation, and oral control – that make up an overall score. As
part of the EAT-26, participants are also asked to self-report their
height, current weight, ideal weight, lowest adult weight and highest
adult weight.For those who score >19 and/or qualify for one or more of
the behavioural questions, the recommendation is to see a qualified
professional because they are exhibiting symptoms characteristic of
eating disorders. Even without the cut-off score, this measurement can
be used as a continuous measure of eating disorder symptoms.EDE-Q 6.0The
EDE-Q 6.0 is a 28-item self-report questionnaire that measures frequency
and impact of eating disorder behaviours in the past 28 days that
reflect severity of aspects of the psychopathology of eating disorders,
using seven-point scales (no days to every day; not at all to markedly),
and questions where respondents report the number of times or days they
engaged in particular behaviours.\ :sup:`19` A highly reliable and
validated tool, the EDE-Q 6.0 is the most commonly used assessment for
eating disorders.\ :sup:`17,20` It consists of four subscales –
restraint, eating concern, shape concern and weight concern – which make
up the global score.Higher scores indicate greater levels of symptoms.
Suggested cut-offs range from 2.30 with the occurrence of binge eating
and/or excessive exercise in community samples of young women to
indicate ‘probable’ eating disorders,\ :sup:`21` to ≥2.80 for clinical
samples.\ :sup:`22`\ CIA 3.0The CIA 3.0 measures the severity of
psychosocial impairment from eating disorder features in the past 28
days, on a four-point scale (not at all to a lot).\ :sup:`23` It is a
16-item measure that focuses on mood, self-perception, cognitive
functioning and work performance, which is intended to be taken after a
measurement of current eating disorder behaviours (such as the EDE-Q
6.0). It then provides values to assess the severity of psychosocial
impairment secondary to eating disorders.Higher scores indicate greater
psychosocial impairment. A score of 16 is suggested as a cut-point for
predicting eating disorder case status. [1]_

.. _sec2-2-2:

Think-aloud exercise
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The think-aloud is a method in which participants speak out loud
thoughts that come to mind as they go through a task.\ :sup:`24` The
objective with the think-aloud exercise was to explore participants’
perceptions linked to specific aspects of the app. Participants went
through three tasks: setting goals, viewing progress visualisations and
using social and community features of the app. As users went through
these tasks, they were asked to speak aloud what they were thinking and
feeling as they interacted with the app.

.. _sec2-2-3:

Semi-structured interview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The purpose of the interviews was to understand participants’ general
experience with and perceptions of diet and fitness apps. Participants
answered questions regarding why they used diet and fitness apps, the
role the app played in their eating disorder behaviours (both positive
and negative), unanticipated effects and their reflection on their use
over time. At approximately 14 interviews, repetitive themes in the
participant responses were apparent and converged into the same points
(i.e. data saturation).

.. _sec2-3:

Procedure
---------

Although there were distinct methods of data collection, they occurred
during the same session. All sessions began with the demographic and
eating disorder symptoms survey. All participants took the demographic
survey; five opted not to take the eating disorder symptom survey.
Current app users (*n* = 17) then participated in the think-aloud
followed by the interview. Former app users (*n* = 7), on the other
hand, only participated in the interview after taking the survey. In
those cases, participants discussed how they used the app and were asked
to recall specific features. Participants were compensated $25 each for
approximately 1 h of their time. All but one data collection session
took place in person (one was conducted via telephone).

.. _sec2-4:

Ethics
------

All procedures contributing to this work comply with the ethical
standards of the relevant national and institutional committees
(Institutional Review Board approval number: STUDY00004634) on working
with human participants. Institutional review board approval was
obtained from Pennsylvania State University, and written informed
consent was obtained from all participants. Materials were reviewed by a
mental health professional. Resources were provided to every
participant. Participants who currently did not use diet and fitness
apps were not asked to interact with apps to avoid potential triggers. A
plan was in place to work with participants in seeking support should
they need it during or after a session; participants were reminded they
could cease the session at any point. Because participants were students
at one university, the university's Center for Counseling and
Psychological Services was available to participants.

.. _sec2-5:

Data analysis
-------------

Excel for MacOS and JASP for MacOS (JASP Team, University of Amsterdam,
the Netherlands; see https://jasp-stats.org/) were used to organise and
analyse the quantitative data from the demographic survey and eating
disorder symptoms measures. Body mass index (BMI) was derived from
height and weight data. For those aged ≥20 years, BMI was computed with
the United States National Institute of Health calculator
(https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/lose_wt/BMI/bmicalc.htm),
and for those aged <20 years, BMI was calculated with the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention calculator
(https://nccd.cdc.gov/dnpabmi/calculator.aspx). Think-aloud exercises
were video and audio recorded, and interviews were audio recorded. In
total, the think-aloud exercises and semi-structured interviews were
21 h and 36 min. The think-aloud exercises and interviews were
transcribed for a total of 436 pages, and analysed together. The data
were analysed by the author, using Braun and Clark's thematic analysis
approach,\ :sup:`25` which included becoming familiar with the data,
systematically identifying codes and themes, and defining and naming the
common themes found across the entire data-set. Similar discussions and
answers were grouped together, and initial codes related to unintended
negative consequences were developed. During data collection, the
analysis was iteratively performed to refine the themes as more data was
collected. The videos and still images were used to better understand
specific app content and features to which participants were referring.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Participant demographics
------------------------

Participants were aged 18–23 years, with a mean of 20.63 years. The
majority of participants identified as White (non-Hispanic) (*n* = 18),
with one from Israel; three identified as Asian, Asian American or
Pacific Islander; two identified as multi-racial and one identified as
Native American or American Indian. Most participants had not been
professionally diagnosed with an eating disorder (*n* = 17), and most
reported being in recovery or recovered (*n* = 20). Participants
estimated they had an eating disorder anywhere from 2 months to 7 years
(mean 34.93 months, s.d. 26.78 months), and most (*n* = 20) felt that
their eating disorder began before using diet and fitness apps. The most
used app was MyFitnessPal (*n* = 21); however, many of the other apps
used had similar features to MyFitnessPal. Participants reported using
diet and fitness apps anywhere from 2 months to 8 years (mean 30.21
months, s.d. 30.05).

Participants reported current (mean 22.90, s.d. 3.58), high (mean 24.71,
s.d. 3.84), low (mean 19.54, s.d. 3.40) and ideal BMI (mean 21.13, s.d.
2.26). At the time of data collection, most participants were in the
healthy range (*n* = 16), followed by overweight (*n* = 2) and obese
(*n* = 1). Highest reported BMI for participants was most often in the
healthy range (*n* = 14), followed by overweight (*n* = 3) and obese
(*n* = 1). Lowest reported BMI most often fell in the underweight
(*n* = 8) or healthy range (*n* = 8), followed by overweight (*n* = 2).
Most participants reported an ideal weight in the healthy range
(*n* = 17), followed by underweight (*n* = 1) and overweight (*n* = 1).
Seventeen out of nineteen participants reported their ideal weight as
less than their current weight, and only two reported their ideal weight
as higher or the same as their current weight.

Sixteen out of nineteen participants answered one or more of the eating
disorder questionnaires in a way that suggested eating disorder
symptoms. For the EAT-26, the overall mean score was 21.32 (s.d. 10.63),
and 15 out of 19 participants exceeded the cut-off point. For the CIA
3.0, the overall mean of all 19 participants did not reach the cut-off
point of 16 (mean 14.84, s.d. 10.39); however, nine participants
exceeded this threshold. For the EDE-Q 6.0 global score, the overall
mean of 2.70 (s.d. 1.04) was between suggested cut-off
points.\ :sup:`21,22` Scores were also compared with the norms of
university women, which was computed by taking the norm mean (1.65) and
adding 1 s.d. (1.30), to equal 2.95;\ :sup:`26` ten participants
exceeded this threshold. Additional information can be found in
Supplementary Table 1 available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2021.1011.

.. _sec3-2:

Themes
------

Eight types of unintended negative consequences from using diet and
fitness apps emerged, which can be seen in `Table 2 <#tab02>`__. These
themes focus on the interaction between the user, context and app, and
how the design of apps affects attitudes and behaviours. These themes
include fixation on numbers, rigid diet, obsession, app dependency, high
sense of achievement, extreme negative emotions, motivation from
‘negative’ messages, and excess competition. Although these were common
when users’ focus was to lose weight or eat less, these adverse effects
were also prevalent when users wanted to gain weight, eat more or focus
explicitly on eating disorder recovery. As a result of these unintended
negative consequences, some participants reported secondary effects,
such as interference with personal relationships, social outings, school
and work, as well as increased health issues. Table 2Emergent themes,
definitions and example quotationsThemeDefinitionExample
quotationsFixation on numbersDeveloping a fixation on numbers associated
with food and exercise, an acute awareness of calories, an altered
relationship with food and/or a need for exactness from the
quantifications within the app‘I think it's [logging food and exercise
everyday] definitely very triggering because you look at food
differently. Like now when I look at food, I see like that's protein,
that's fat, that's carbs instead of like that's a chicken breast, that's
peanut butter, that's a piece of bread… it's definitely very, very
triggering to be tracking it all the time. And especially back then
[during my eating disorder], it was like, “Well, that's 100 calories
right there, like I need to eat broccoli instead, that's like 35
calories”… It's a number game basically….’ [U06]‘I try to get exactly on
[the number]… I like having it exactly on… It [the app] made me more OCD
[obsessive compulsive disorder] ‘cause I'm like, “I have to hit this
number”, basically… making sure I hit those numbers… There was one time
my parents wanted to go out to dinner… So, I called the [restaurant] so
I could already track it and have it as close as possible. And then my
parents get here, and they're like, “Oh, we're going go to [this other
restaurant] instead”. And I was literally having anxiety about going. I
didn't want to go to dinner. I was like, “No. I already had everything
perfectly planned for my day”, and that was probably a bad moment… I
feel like eating disorders stem from people trying to be perfect, and
with this, you're hitting numbers trying to be perfect, so I think that
could be kind of bad’ [U14]Rigid dietDeveloping a strict and rigid diet,
including eating the same foods every day and/or developing safe and
fear foods through the use of the app's food database, personalised
prior meals or the barcode scanner‘I think another kind of bad thing
about it is I eat the same thing almost every single day except for
dinner, but I think like just because in my head, I can kind of keep
track of the points, and I think that's probably part of it. I'm not
going to eat like a lot of new stuff if I have to like kind of go and do
the work for it and see how much it is, so I think that kind of makes me
eat the same thing every day’ [U08]‘I love how it could scan a label…
That was my favourite thing in the world… It got to the point where I
would never buy something that didn't have a label on it ‘cause I
couldn't track it… And I would be very secretive about just having a
picture and being able to successfully find it on the app. If I couldn't
find it on the app, I wasn't going to eat it ‘cause… It wouldn't have
been correct… You start to eat the same things… ’[U17]ObsessionBecoming
obsessed with logging and tracking, which can lead to the development of
obsessive thoughts around food and exercise‘I just think the entire app
in general is harmful… For someone like me, it's extremely dangerous.
Just everything. Being able to log your calories, ‘cause you become
obsessive over taking pictures of labels, you're measuring things, and
getting the correct amounts becomes impulsive and just like obsessive.
Exercise then, plays a same role in that… I got to be honest: before I
started using the app, I felt like my logging wasn't that dangerous. It
wasn't that compulsive or that obsessive, I should say…’ [U17]‘…I
remember, I had that year at least five, six anxiety attacks because I
was so anxious about what I'm eating, and I was so nervous about it. And
the app said one thing and then the computer said something else, and I
just lost my mind… So for me, it emotionally was a bad thing, the app…
That's when I was really obsessing, and I would make sure everything is
measured to the centimetre, to the ounce… I think it [the app] makes us
overthink food, which can lead to obsessing about it… So I think the
focus should be way more on health and way less of numbers… I think this
[the app] just reinforces the wrong thing’ [U12]App dependencyFeeling
that one needs the app, feeling safe and in control with the app,
developing anxiety when not using the app and/or not wanting to cease
app use‘In the moment, I didn't care. I knew it [the app] was harming my
brain because I knew it was messing with my head mentally, but I just
wanted to keep it because I felt like that was the one thing I could
control. Because when you have an eating disorder, that's the one thing
you want, is control. And I knew this app gave me control over what my
parents wanted me to eat, just in that sense. I never really told them
‘cause I didn't want to lose that control I had. Because being forced to
eat a sandwich or being forced to eat, to go see a therapist, I had no
control over those, but with the app, I felt like I had control over one
part of my life that I really wanted to change’ [U21]‘Last summer, I had
to delete it [the app]. I deleted it and had to get it back ‘cause I was
like, “Oh, my gosh, I need to know what I'm eating”… I literally got
anxiety, so I had to get it back… I was like, “Maybe I should just stop
tracking and just eat intuitively”. So, that's why I tried deleting it.
And then like a few days later, I had to get it back…’ [U14]High sense
of achievementFeeling extremely rewarded for eating under calorie and
nutrient budget, engaging in compensatory behaviours and inputting them
on the app, and losing weight; often occurs when receiving positive
feedback on the app, such as via green visualisations‘I definitely would
say that if I got to the end of the day… like if on Tuesday, I was a
little bit more in the green [on] Wednesday, I'd feel better about it.
So it was almost like an accomplishment *per se*\ … Sustaining it [my
eating disorder] would absolutely be seeing that when you're low or
you're in the green… You don't even think about green being a good thing
but just the colour cues that you associate with rewards… when you're
starting to reinforce eating less, eating less, eating less… So I think
it's [the app's] very much targeted towards the weight loss rather than
fitness, *per se*\ ’ [U19]‘I obviously like to be in the green for the
calories remaining… This thing, progress bar, I mean, I kind of like, I
mean, I used to like to see it really close to that like goal line or
even like below, which sounds bad. But because that looked better to me
if the bar's lower. So I mean, I guess, maybe that's kind of a problem,
but I mean, it kind of made me feel that I was kind of like successful
for the week if it was like mostly under the bar, obviously [laughs]
even though that's under your calorie thing, which is probably not good…
I just kind of wanted to see where I was in my calories for the day, and
if I was like under what they allotted me, then I was happy… If I went
to this bar and I saw everything was like below the goal, then that
would kind of make feel like all right, that was good’ [U04]Extreme
negative emotionsFeeling extreme negative emotions, such as guilt,
embarrassment and shame, especially when exceeding one's calorie or
nutrient budget or gaining weight; often occurs when receiving negative
feedback on the app, such as via red visualisations‘At the end of the
day, if I was still very hungry and I didn't have any calories left,
that whole red number… That red number would scare me a lot because I'd
be like, “Well, now I can't eat anything, and I'm really hungry, and I
can't sleep with an empty stomach”. Then if I ended up eating, I would
wake up feeling guilt for going over my intake because I felt like it
would get in the way of my goal of losing weight… Once it hit 200 or
more, I would get really stressed out, even panic because… I would be
ashamed because I felt like I wasted my whole day of when I was fasting
‘cause when I was fasting, it would be a really low goal of calories… So
it was just very stressful to deal with the red numbers… The red number
would come, and I'd be over my calories, and it just freaks me out all
the time. I wouldn't even want to go to school if I knew I ate too much
that night or that day before… I feel guilt for what I ate that day
‘cause it's usually something that was high in calories, like a cookie
or something. And then that caused that to become a fear food, like
dietitians like to call it, a fear food that I try to exclude from my
diet because that leads to a red number that embarrasses me’ [U21]‘I
don't like the colour red. I feel like it's bad, and it would always be
like a frowny face, like bad, like you didn't do what you're supposed to
today, and I was like, “I know, I know I didn't”… I think they
definitely need to be not as like strongly represented. Like if you're 1
calorie over, it's like, “Ok, like no big deal”. It should be like a
range, you know what I'm saying? One calorie over is different than
being like 400 calories over, and I think it definitely gave me the
wrong perception and made me kind of go like the other way especially
like when all my things were red in [my] app, I was like, “Ok, well,
then this makes me definitely not want to eat for like 3 days after
seeing that”’ [U05]Motivation from ‘negative’ messagesFeeling motivated
by ‘warning’ messages usually intended to curb unhealthy behaviours,
such as feedback that states low weight or low calorie intake‘…I was
under-eating, so they [the app] would show me, you would be 90 pounds in
a month or something if you kept on eating like this… I would just
under-eat more to make that happen faster… So, I used to exercise 400
calories, then I would just skip lunch, I would eat dinner… Over here it
would be 500 remaining or something. And at that point it would be, “Ok,
so you're going to be 95 pounds if you kept on eating like this in 2
weeks”. So that was more of a motivation, I think… Because you're trying
to lose so much weight, and you're like, “If you keep on under-eating,
you're going to be 98 pounds”, which is exactly what you want to be at
that point… It's not a warning…’ [U22]‘If you click this “Complete
Diary”… So it tells you, “If every day were like today, you would weigh
this amount”, which [laughs] it's like I have such mixed feelings about
it because like it can be motivating, but also it can be really
triggering… like someone with an eating disorder is like, “Yeah, yeah,
you're right; oh my god, I can weigh less than that in 5 weeks if I eat
less”… When you're in the middle of your eating disorder, you think this
is motivational, but when you look back on it, it's like, that's
horrible [laughs], like that's really horrible’ [U06]Excess
competitionMaking calorie consumption, expenditure and weight loss a
game by trying to beat the app or self; often achieved by netting fewer
calories each day and/or being under budget‘It was kind of like a game
to beat the calories, kind of. So one day I had a 0, maybe it was like a
negative calorie. I was like, “Oh, wow, like look at me, like that's
cool!”…Just because like you can visualise what you're eating, so the
more you don't eat, it's like, “Oh, I beat the app!”… I definitely
wanted to beat the calories they gave me. I feel like that kind of does
start an eating behaviour where you don't want to eat anything… Like
especially ‘cause they give you a calorie limit. I know when I was under
the calorie limit, I was like, “Ok, I won today”… I was like, wait a
second, the app kind of like made it a game for me to like not eat much’
[U07]‘It just became this weird competition thing with it [the app]… I
would just be like, “I need to be lower than what it was before”.
[laughs] I don't know… It just always had to be less than the day before
in the food and the weight and everything… Because then, if I wasn't,
then I was like a failure ‘cause that was what the eating disorder
thoughts were telling me’ [U13]

Participants discussed developing a fixation on numbers, fuelled heavily
by the app's quantification, which worsened their eating disorder
behaviours and changed their relationship with food. Having used the
apps so much, many participants reported already knowing the calorie
content of every food they ate before logging it. Participants also
explained that they tended to eat the same foods each day because they
knew the calorie content and could mitigate any unknowns about what they
were consuming (even if they abandoned the app). The app also fed into
the concept of fear foods and safe foods, where users would only buy and
track foods if they were aware of their calorie content (e.g. in their
personal app database or foods that had a barcode).

They described becoming obsessed with logging their food intake, and
developing obsessive thoughts around food and exercise that sometimes
interfered with schoolwork. For example, some participants used the app
to log all their meals in advance, which acted to strictly control their
consumption. Some also described developing a dependency on these apps.
Many participants discussed how they needed the app and became very
anxious when they stopped using it; they sometimes redownloaded the app
to relieve their anxiety. One participant described how uncomfortable
she was when she went to a clinician who wanted her to explore the idea
of not using her physical activity tracker (Fitbit).

A number of participants described the role of green progress
visualisations, which users see when they have remaining calories on
MyFitnessPal and similar apps. Many expressed feeling rewarded when
viewing this feedback, as it signalled they were consuming less than
their allotted calories. On the other hand, participants felt guilt,
embarrassment and shame over exceeding their calorie budget and being
shown red visualisations in response. The extent to which they exceeded
their budget affected participants differently. Some expressed that they
felt badly regardless of how much they went over their budget, whereas
others explained how they felt worse the higher their calorie number
exceeded their budget. Many participants also described being in an
unhealthy competition with themselves and with the app to eat less and
less each day, because the app ‘gamified’ eating, exercise and tracking.

Although there are some features in diet and fitness apps that attempt
to curb maladaptive eating and exercise behaviours, participants
explained that these did not work as intended. For example, MyFitnessPal
has a feature called ‘Complete Diary,’ which is a button that allows
users to tell the app they are finished logging food, exercise and
weight for the day. Once clicked, either a warning message or weight
projection appears. Many participants found both types of messages to be
motivating to continue to lose weight regardless of the content or
context of the message.

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

Unintended negative consequences are prominent regardless of where users
are in their journey (e.g. recovery or not). This is a result of the
design of diet and fitness apps, the individual and their context. This
section first discusses implications for educators and clinicians, and
then critically examines the design of diet and fitness apps and offers
suggestions for improvement.

.. _sec4-1:

Implications for clinicians and educators
-----------------------------------------

Understanding the unintended consequences can be useful for
psychiatrists, psychologists and other mental health experts, as well as
general practice clinicians, to aid in the diagnosis and treatment of
eating disorders. Especially in college and university settings,
healthcare professionals should be aware of and engage in discussions
about the use and potential downsides of diet and fitness apps.
Educators should also be privy to possible unintended negative effects
to prevent triggering or exacerbating maladaptive eating and exercise
behaviours. By encouraging or even requiring the use of digital food and
physical activity tracking as part of nutrition courses and ‘healthy’
university initiatives (e.g.
https://www.usatoday.com/story/college/2016/01/19/oklahoma-college-tracks-students-fitness-with-fitbits/37410983/),
educators may unknowingly exacerbate eating disorder-related issues,
especially among university women. Therefore, great caution should be
exercised when considering promoting diet and fitness apps, especially
in these settings. As always, it is important to remember that app users
and app use exist in a larger context, where societal norms and external
pressures influence the effects of these tools.

.. _sec4-2:

Rethinking diet and fitness app design
--------------------------------------

| The design of diet and fitness apps may partially contribute to
  unintended negative consequences, which are related to three major
  areas: the quantified self movement, our conception of appropriate
  usage, and visual cues and feedback. `Table 3 <#tab03>`__ outlines how
  these findings relate to app design, to help us understand where we
  can make improvements to minimise unintended negative consequences and
  focus more on promoting healthy behaviours. However, it is important
  to note that although small changes may have some positive impact,
  this work highlights the need to change how we think about health
  promotion in digital tools by focusing on the mental health needs of
  users and the interplay between mental and physical health. A more
  holistic and personalised approach is consistent with prior literature
  on supporting the needs of people with eating disorders.\ :sup:`27`
  Table 3Summary of suggestions to address diet and fitness app
  issuesAreaProblemRelated unintended negative
  consequencesSuggestionsQuantified self movementOverabundance of
  quantification despite the fact that not all aspects of health can
  easily be quantified
| Some quantifications are not good health indicators
| Too much of a number focus can trigger and exacerbate eating disorder
  behavioursFixation on numbers
| Rigid diet
| Obsession
| App dependency
| High sense of achievement
| Extreme negative emotions
| Motivation from negative messages
| Excess competitionWork meaningfully with people with eating disorders
  during all phases of designing these tools
| Find new ways to acquire user needs and non-numeric yet quick and easy
  methods for tracking behaviours
| Consult expert recommendations about healthy eating and exercise
  during design process
| Support healthy eating patterns, food variety, portion control,
  shifting to better food choices and various eating contexts
| Change exercise tracking to focus on performance and enjoyment rather
  than calorie expenditure
| Incorporate qualitative components to assess other aspects of
  healthConception of appropriate usagePush users to log consistently
  over long periods of time
| Tend to view breaks and abandonment as negative
| Encouraging overuse can trigger and exacerbate eating disorder
  behavioursObsession
| App dependencyReduce reminders to log daily
| Encourage breaks
| Rethink what app engagement is and reward users for engagement that is
  not actively logging or viewing numbersVisual cues and feedbackTry to
  use visualisations to motivate users but do not fully understand their
  effects
| Visual cues do not always match users’ goals
| Warnings have opposite of intended effect or are avoided
| Visualisations and messages can trigger and exacerbate eating disorder
  behavioursHigh sense of achievement
| Extreme negative emotions
| Motivation from negative messages
| Excess competitionStudy effects of design and warnings more thoroughly
  and on different users at different times
| Develop more nuanced design visualisations that better coincide with
  intended messages and users’ goals
| Rethink unhealthy eating and exercise pattern thresholds for showing
  feedback

.. _sec4-2-1:

Quantified self movement: moving beyond numbers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The quantified self is reflected in diet and fitness apps’ heavy focus
on numbers. Although self-tracking numeric data has
benefits,\ :sup:`28–30` findings cast light on issues with the
quantification and tracking of behaviours related to diet and exercise,
especially for those with a history of eating disorders, which has been
supported by other literature.\ :sup:`6,31` Users with eating disorder
behaviours develop a fixation on numbers and a rigid diet partly because
of diet and fitness apps’ heavy focus on numbers, as well as features
such as barcode scanners, which are aimed at reducing user burden but
actually encourage eating pre-packaged and fast foods,\ :sup:`32` which
often are not the healthiest options. Because food, exercise and weight
are quantified and goals are numerically driven, users become overly
preoccupied with numbers, and food begins to be viewed as its caloric
and macronutrient content.

Although the quantified self movement has its merits, it is clear that
using numbers as indicators of health has its limitations and feeds into
the need for control, which is a hallmark of eating disorders. To begin
to reduce unintended negative consequences, designers, developers and
researchers need to focus less attention on quantifying food, weight and
exercise. Instead, understanding what a healthy lifestyle is and finding
ways to promote that with technology is imperative. For example, rather
than focus mostly on calories, apps should be designed to help users
develop a positive relationship with food and their body, as well as
healthy eating patterns that include fruits, vegetables, protein, dairy,
grains and oils; focus on food variety, nutrient density and
amount/portion sizes; help limit added sugars and saturated fats, and
reduce sodium intake; find ways to help people shift to healthier
options and assist healthy eating in various settings (home, work,
school, restaurants, etc).

For physical activity, the focus should be less on exercise's
relationship to calories and more on how much exercise, what types,
ability to perform, enjoyment and its relationship to positive mental
health. Studies have shown that exercising for enjoyment rather than
appearance is correlated with low self-objectification, low body
dissatisfaction and less disordered eating.\ :sup:`33` By focusing on
exercise as something enjoyable and healthy, the focus will be less on
exercise as a means to lose weight or look ‘better’, and thus improve
overall mental health. Apps should also adapt to users’ personal
contexts and needs around physical activity and healthy eating, as well
as acknowledge systemic barriers and the role of trauma. Because
customisation may be crucial for supporting users’ needs, more
sensor-based and passive tracking are being explored.\ :sup:`34`
However, caution must be exercised, as automated detection often
reproduces biases and existing norms, exacerbating inequities, which can
worsen mental health.

Other important aspects of health not easily captured in many current
diet and fitness apps include positive body image, mental health and
bodily functioning. For example, does a user feel good in their clothes?
How is their self-esteem, emotion regulation, concentration, etc? Are
they depressed, anxious, etc? Are they experiencing any pain or
discomfort? Are they less tired throughout the day, and do they have
improved sleep? All these things are important aspects of health. Even
for users whose weight loss is a healthy goal, these factors may
influence their needs and ability to lose weight, which means supporting
these needs can positively affect all users.

.. _sec4-2-2:

Conception of appropriate usage: encouraging less logging (in some cases)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The quantified self movement coupled with our conception of appropriate
app usage can lead to an obsession (about logging, food, weight and
exercise) and the development of an app dependency, which is partly
fuelled by how much and how often designers, developers and researchers
think people should use these types of digital tools. To promote
consistent and long-term use, many apps contain reminders to log and
gamified aspects (e.g. streaks). This, coupled with the quantification,
leads to users becoming obsessed with logging, which is in line with
prior research.\ :sup:`6,32` However, contrary to some
research,\ :sup:`32` users with eating disorder behaviours do not really
‘lose the habit’ of logging, because they feel the need to have control
over their food and body. Despite numerous studies aiming to reduce app
abandonment,\ :sup:`32,35,36` abandonment is not always negative. In
fact, for users with eating disorder behaviours, taking a break from
apps can be beneficial.\ :sup:`7` Taking time off from apps can help
users learn to listen to their body's signals of hunger and fullness and
decrease their dependency on apps, which is important if we wish to
promote health. Therefore, reducing logging reminders and encouraging
breaks may be beneficial. Ways to reward users for engaging with apps
without viewing quantified behaviours or actively logging (e.g.
providing an alternative app view during break periods) could be
explored.

Moreover, we need to ask ourselves: what role should these apps play in
users’ lives? Are they meant to be used every day throughout a person's
life or are there more finite periods? How do we determine a success
versus a failure (and should we impose a viewpoint of ‘success’ or allow
users to choose)? We have to stop pushing an ideal, universal use and
start understanding how people actually use these technologies ‘in the
wild’, and how their needs change over time. Then we can design around
their natural patterns of use, be more adaptive and flexible, and
acknowledge different situations and contexts. Although app vendors want
users to use their technology long term, we also must understand that
this is not appropriate for all users and may even be harmful for some.

.. _sec4-2-3:

Visual cues and feedback: investigating effects more thoroughly
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Findings show that app visualisations and feedback, such as coloured
visualisations and messages, can unintentionally contribute to unhealthy
behaviours. Instead of promoting healthy behaviour change, red and green
visualisations in combination with the focus on numbers often result in
users feeling a high sense of achievement when being under their calorie
budget and extreme negative emotions when being over their budget, which
has been seen in other research.\ :sup:`6` These colours were likely
chosen because of the connotations they already have in some societal
contexts. However, these effects in the context of diet and fitness apps
are not well studied. Studying these effects is crucial, given that the
effects of colour choice can vary from context to context.\ :sup:`37–39`
Thus, we need to examine the effects of colours on users, and find ways
to balance emotion response and behaviour change strategies.

The rewards and punishments users get from diet and fitness apps through
these visualisations and the focus on the quantified self often promote
excess competition. Although many apps want to encourage competition,
users with eating disorder behaviours often develop unhealthy
competitive behaviours. Not only do these visualisations instil a sense
of reward in punishment in users, but they also tend to be very limited.
For instance, at the time of this study, in MyFitnessPal, users see the
red number regardless of whether they exceed their daily allotment by 1
or 1000 calories, which does not make sense if the focus of these apps
is promoting health. Therefore, we need to develop more nuanced
visualisations to motivate users without negatively affecting them.

Users also felt motivation from (what are intended to be) ‘negative’
messages and visual cues. For example, the ‘Complete Diary’ function in
MyFitnessPal is meant to motivate users in the appropriate context and
provide a warning to deter unhealthy habits. In many instances, users
felt both messages motivated them to continue unhealthy behaviours
regardless of the content, suggesting that more research is needed to
understand how warnings and other feedback messages influence user
perceptions and behaviours. One of the issues lies in the threshold that
is used to determine with what feedback is presented. Although these
algorithms are proprietary to MyFitnessPal, at the time of this study,
MyFitnessPal seems to use a baseline of 1000 calories consumed to
determine which message the app shows. If users do not hit this
threshold, then they are shown the ‘Based on your total calories
consumed for today, you are likely not eating enough’ message. If users
consume over 1000 calories, then the app presents ‘If every day were
like today, you would weigh X pounds in X weeks’ message. This occurs
regardless of how many calories users have remaining. Thus, more
research is needed to understand the appropriate thresholds to use to
provide different feedback based on users’ needs.

Further, precautions such as warnings should not focus on taking away
someone's agency or labelling someone or their behaviours as ‘bad.’
There is a tendency to do this with eating disorder-related behaviours,
which can increase stigma and reinforce negative emotions. Rather than
adding these types of features, users and potential users from a variety
of backgrounds should be more meaningfully involved in all aspects of
the design process in a way that honours their lived experiences as
expertise, and have the power to inform design decisions within these
apps.

.. _sec4-3:

Limitations
-----------

First, the sample comprised a small subset of rather homogenous users.
Thus, it is likely that not all consequences and perceptions are
represented in this work. Future research should include more users from
a variety of races, ethnicities, cultures, genders, ages and types of
conditions. Second, BMI has a number of problems and limitations. It was
used in this study as way to provide additional information only, not to
advocate for its blanket use to denote health or diagnose/treat eating
disorders. Third, unfortunately, normative clinical data that have
similar contexts and participants are not easily available for all
measures. In general, the means reported in clinical samples for the
EDE-Q 6.0 and CIA 3.0, (e.g. Dahlgren et al\ :sup:`40`) are higher than
the present study; however, it is important to note that participants in
this study were often recollecting past experiences with eating disorder
behaviours, and many reported being in recovery currently. Thus, it is
possible that eating disorder symptom scores at the time of the study
were lower than they would have been if the study had occurred during
what participants described as the worst points of their eating
disorders. The findings suggest that specific design choices are
problematic for some users. However, these design features and choices
themselves were not tested. Research could benefit from experimental
testing of these designs, as well as participatory and community-driven
design of diet and fitness apps.

In conclusion, the use of diet and fitness apps by women with eating
disorder behaviours is likely more common than many realise, given the
rates of dieting and weight loss among healthy weight and underweight
women.\ :sup:`41,42` This work identifies problematic aspects of design
and design suggestions, as well as implications for clinicians and
educators. Although this study focuses on users with a history of eating
disorders, redesigning apps to focus on health is beneficial to all
users. Ultimately, this research emphasises the need for a fundamental
shift toward a more holistic, personalised approach to health and how it
is represented in digital tools.

I would like to thank participants for sharing their experiences and
expertise. This research would not be possible without them.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2021.1011.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under grant number DGE1255832. Any opinions, findings and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study may be available upon
reasonable request from the corresponding author, E.V.E. Participant
privacy and consent is of utmost importance. The data are not publicly
available due to their containing information that could compromise the
privacy of research participants.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None

.. [1]
   EAT-26, Eating Attitudes Test; EDE-Q 6.0, Eating Disorder Examination
   Questionnaire; CIA 3.0, Clinical Impairment Assessment Questionnaire.
