==============
Raymond Tallis
==============

Abdi Sanati [1]_
:Date: 2021-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Professor Raymond Tallis is one of the most eminent polymaths in the UK.
He is an Emeritus Professor of Geriatric Medicine, poet, novelist,
philosopher and cultural critic. He has published numerous books and
articles in different fields, including his regular contribution to
*Philosophy Now* under the title of Tallis in Wonderland. I first came
across his work in his book *Aping Mankind*.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Professor
Tallis is politically active and his co-edited book *NHS
SOS*,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` written at the time of Andrew Lansley's
reorganisation of the NHS, continues to be relevant. I met Professor
Tallis virtually in the middle of the lockdown.

**Professor Tallis, thank you for your time. In the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, we recently had a kind of surge in neuroscience and I
remember 10 years ago, in Aping Mankind, you wrote of ‘neuromania’. I
wonder if you could elaborate for the readers.**

Of course. First of all, I am a great admirer of neuroscience: it is
perhaps the greatest cognitive achievement of humanity, because it
brings together so many sciences in an area that has such importance.
All my own research has been within clinical neuroscience, stroke and
epilepsy being my major areas of research. I therefore have no problem
with neuroscience. My target is neuromania. What is the difference
between neuroscience and neuromania? Neuroscience does acknowledge that
the brain is a necessary condition of normal consciousness and
behaviour. If you chop my head off my IQ falls precipitously, probably
down to zero, I guess! In addition, we are very familiar with the
effects of damage: there is often very precise correlation between
severe damage to the brain and deficits that follow. There are
lower-level deficits in sensation and motor activity and higher-level
deficits in cognitive function. So that is neuroscience: it acknowledges
the brain as a necessary condition of normal human consciousness,
behaviour, awareness and so on. Neuromania, however, claims that the
brain is not merely a necessary condition, but a sufficient condition of
these things. All that we are as persons can be translated into neural
activity.

It might be helpful for your readers to clarify the difference between
necessary and sufficient conditions. Let me give you an example. To be
knocked down by a bus outside the Royal College of Psychiatrists, it is
necessary that I should be outside the Royal College of Psychiatrists. I
am very pleased to say that it is not a sufficient condition. Otherwise,
everybody outside the Royal College of Psychiatrists would be knocked
down by a bus. According to those who embrace neuromania, the
stand-alone brain is the sufficient condition for human consciousness,
the person and so on. Neuroscience tells us the brain is merely a
necessary condition.

**One thing we have witnessed is a huge surge in imaging studies, fMRI
studies in particular. And they want to say that, for instance, this is
what love looks like. Or in terms of psychiatry, this is what, for
instance, depression looks like. It is kind of reductionism.**

It is, and of course, imaging is particularly seductive. Someone once
described the fMRI scan as a fast-acting solvent of the critical
faculty. So, if you see an image on a screen you start believing that
you are gaining direct access to the truth about our humanity. You
mentioned love and it reminds me of a study by Semir Zeki and his
colleagues that led them to identify the experience of romantic love
with activity in certain parts of the nervous system. The experimental
design was, to put it mildly, rather crude. They compared the responses
of the brain, recorded by fMRI, when individuals were exposed to
pictures of partners with whom they were deeply in love with the
responses to pictures of friends. By this means, they claimed to
identify brain activity corresponding to romantic love. But of course,
that's nonsense. Being in love is like a response to a stimulus. It's
not even a continuous condition like being a bit chilly or being a bit
cross. It is a very complicated business. It has narrative and cultural
contents. And it is associated with all sorts of things, like deciding
not to talk to somebody because you are very cross with them. All of
those things are incredibly complex, and remote from responding to an
external stimulus such as a picture. But Zeki et al's experiment is a
good example of how neuromania tries to reduce the life of a person to a
succession of cerebral discharges.

**I have been thinking about depression because it has many different
dimensions. The experience of someone who is depressed is very complex.
Trying to reduce it to certain kinds of activities of the brain won't
work. They are very different.**

Depression has a major narrative content in it. It reflects your
interpretation of the world and of your place in it. It encompasses what
you are telling yourself about yourself, what you tell yourself about
others and what you tell yourself about the world. These are not going
to be connected in any direct or simple way to alterations in neural
activity explained by depletions in particular neurotransmitter
pathways, even though this may have a causal role.

**Another issue that we have in psychiatry and we deal with it a lot,
especially in forensic psychiatry, is the issue of free will and
responsibility. I have talked to many people and they said, well,
neuroscience has solved the problem; there is no such thing as free
will. What is your opinion on that?**

You will not be surprised to know what my opinion is. I have just
finished a book on free will.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` I devoted a section to
so-called neurodeterminism and to the neurological experiments that are
supposed to demonstrate that we do not have free will.

It is worthwhile looking at the most famous ones conducted by Benjamin
Libet, 30 or more years ago, but repeated many times since in different
forms. What Libet did was to ask study participants to make a very
simple movement, just basically flexing their wrist or flexing their
finger, but in their own time, so it was a genuinely voluntary movement.
He also asked them to do something else: to time the moment when they
felt the *urge* to make the movement by noting the position of a spot
moving on a clock face on a screen. At the same time, Libet recorded the
so-called readiness potential, which is supposed to be a marker in the
prefrontal cortex of preparedness to make a movement. What he found was
that the readiness potential preceded the urge to make the move. It was
as if the brain were getting geared up to make a move, even before the
person was aware of the urge to do so. And it has been concluded from
this that the brain, not the conscious person, was calling the shots.
The decision to move had already been made before the person had
experienced the urge to do so. The readiness potential was ahead by only
0.3 s and there are many reasons for thinking that this might not be
significant. But then John-Dylan Haynes and colleagues performed similar
experiments around 20 years later. Instead of relying on EEG he employed
fMRI. He found that the interval between seemingly relevant neural
activity and the urge to make a movement (timed by noting letters
passing down a screen) was between something like 5 and 10 s and that
looked really serious. In Haynes's study, participants were asked to
choose to move either their right hand or their left hand to press a
button. That study seemed to indicate that the brain was getting all
geared up to make a movement well before the person had made a decision
to move.

There are two types of fundamental problem with these studies. There are
the methodological problems. But more interesting are the philosophical
problems arising from a complete misunderstanding of the nature of human
action.

Let me first talk about the methodological problems. There are problems
about timing an urge. How long does it take you, as it were, to register
an urge to enable you to time it? There was also some question about the
nature of the readiness potential. It may well be the case that when I
decide to make my movement, it is because I feel like I'm taking
advantage of the readiness potential: I am, as it were, sort of surfing
a wave. And there are many other methodological problems.

But there are more important problems due to a misunderstanding of the
nature of action. Think about the experiment from the point of view of
the participant taking part in it. Mrs Smith decides that she is going
to volunteer for Professor Libet's experiment. She rings up the
laboratory, having seen the advert in the newspaper, makes an
appointment for 2 weeks' time, sets her alarm the night before to make
sure she does not oversleep and upset Professor Libet. She sets out in
the car, having made arrangements for the children to be looked after.
She arrives at the research centre and has a blazing row with somebody
in the car park because they have taken the parking spot that has been
set aside for her. She eventually finds her way to the laboratory. She
sits down and listens to Professor Libet, and is persuaded that it is a
safe experiment to take part in, despite all the people in white coats
and all the intimidating machinery around her and the electrodes placed
on her head. She pays attention so that she understands what she has to
do. This background makes it evident that her action is not just moving
a finger. It's ‘taking part in Professor Libet's experiment’, and
clearly that is not something that is the product of an atomic urge, a
bit of willing causing a little movement. Taking part in the experiment
is actually much more reflective of the complexity evident in even the
most ordinary human actions. Most striking is the temporal depth of the
action – setting the alarm to get to the lab on time and so on. And then
there's the question of motivation. Perhaps Mrs Smith decided she wanted
to take part in the experiment so those clever scientists might find
something about brain entity, which might help a little boy next door
who has brain injury problems.

It will be evident from this that most of what voluntary human action is
about cannot possibly be captured in experiments like Libet's. And what
about the other participants in the experiments – Professor Libet and
Professor Haynes? They too are agents, and they probably had to apply
for a grant a couple of years before the experiments. They had to work
out the experiments and undergo training in order to understand how to
investigate the questions they wanted to explore. They had to perform
these experiments, and then they had to write all this stuff up.

The point is this: human agency is very complex, and it is not made of
little atomic urges and twitches. That is why arguments for determinism
based on these kinds of so-called empirical experiments don't impress me
the slightest bit. I think they have nothing to say about whether we do
or do not have free will.

**I assume that Libet and Haynes were not dualists, or perhaps to put it
better, substance dualists. They are more physicalists in terms of
philosophy of mind. What would they expect to see? Did they expect the
person to decide before their brain? In that case, where would be the
locus of decision? I wonder what would they expect to see in the case of
free will? They said because the brain activity happened before the
desire there's no free will. But what about the other way around? Would
that be satisfying, if the urge happens before the brain activity? What
would the source of the urge be?**

It has been said that Libet was a dualist and he somehow thought you and
your urges are separate and independent from the things you do. I do not
think we can ascribe a clear metaphysics to Libet, apart from a
commitment to identifying ourselves with neural activity. And once you
identify yourself with neural activity, you identify it with physical
events, which are necessarily causally stitched into the flow of other
physical events. If I say that my free will is to be identified with
neural activity, then of course I have already given up on the
possibility of free will.

There are many reasons why we cannot identify exercise of free will or
normal agency with neural activity. First, when I'm performing an
action, that action is associated with an intention, an intention that
is not localised in this moment in time. It reaches back to a past that
makes sense of my intention and towards something that doesn't yet
exist, a future, which also makes sense of my intention. And without
that temporal depth, which doesn't exist in the material world, there
will be no such thing as meaningful intentional action.

**There is another topic I wanted to discuss. I think in 2012, you
edited a book with Jacky Davis called NHS SOS.** :sup:`(n.d.b)` **How do
you see the progress and development of the NHS since then?**

I have spent an awful lot of time in the intervening 8 or 9 years,
marching, waving banners, writing to MPs and so on, though not in the
past year of course, because of COVID. And it seems to me that we've
gradually moved to a much more privatised NHS. But it's been done much
more subtly. After the Lansley Bill [the Health and Social Care Bill of
2011], and there was an enormous amount of anger about it, they decided
they needed to be more subtle. But it's interesting how in the COVID
crisis, we've had a brilliant demonstration of how the NHS works and how
privatisation and outsourcing doesn't. If you want to waste £37 billion,
give it to the private sector – Serco and others – and get them to run
Test and Trace. If you want to actually have something that's really
successful, get it run by the NHS – that's why the vaccination scheme,
which has been disseminated through the vascular tree of the NHS, has
worked so well. So, we've had a very interesting comparison between
things that are outsourced to the private sector, incredibly expensive,
totally wasteful, and things that have remained within the NHS and have
been very successful.

**Yes, we have this new White Paper** (n.d.d) **that wants to integrate
cooperation instead of competition. I might well be wrong but I don't
think competition worked.**

You're absolutely right. The White Paper at first sight looks really
good. They said let's say farewell to obligatory competitive external
tendering. Great. Let's say farewell to internal market. Great. Let's
integrate health and social care. Great. But… but… but. We need to be
very careful for two reasons. First, when you integrate health and
social care you're integrating something which is free at the point of
need and still mainly publicly provided (health) with something that is
overwhelmingly privately provided and is means tested (social care). But
when you bring those two together there's the danger that it could go
either way: to an entirely publicly provided, free at the point of need
service; or to entirely privately provided services subjected to means
testing. The second reason relates to the question of who is actually
responsible for the ‘integrated care system’. It is not impossible that
the system could be run from outside the NHS, even from an American
firm. We can see how real this possibility is by the gigantic
privatisation initiative that is the disastrous Test and Trace. And the
recent takeover of nearly 50 general practices in London by Centene in
the past few weeks.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` So, whereas I like the overall
principles in the White Paper, I worry that it could be the opportunity
for the biggest privatisation of all.

**There is a risk of that. And one thing I have observed is the amount
of bureaucracy. That is exponentially growing. People talk about being
more lean but I think this is only when they are discussing finances –
not many are thinking lean when it comes to paperwork.**

If you compare the percentage of funding that is spent on administration
with that spent on clinical care, it is much greater in privatised
health services than in the NHS as it was. We are still a long way
behind, for example, the USA in terms of the proportion of our funding
that is spent on administration, but the internal market and the
external market with compulsory competitive tendering has closed the
gap. So, one would hope that the new White Paper\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` would
genuinely liberate funds, taking them away from bureaucracy and
administration and bring them back to the front line of clinical care.
But there's no doubt about it – if we have a systemic privatisation,
which I feel we could have with an integrated care system, as opposed to
episodic privatisation, as we have at the moment, we will spend yet more
on administration – as well as converting more of taxpayer's money into
profits to be hidden in off-shore tax havens. And also, it'll be more
expensive. I mean, think of the States – they spend 18% of their GDP on
healthcare, and they have a worse system. Many US citizens have only
minimal healthcare coverage.

**Thank you very much for your time.**

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

.. [1]
   **Abdi Sanati meets Professor Raymond Tallis**, Emeritus Professor of
   Geriatric Medicine, University of Manchester, UK
