====================================================================================================
Teaching psychiatry to medical students in the time of COVID-19: experiences from UK medical schools
====================================================================================================



Ho Tim Timothy Leung
Ali Ajaz
Helen Bruce
Ania KorszunCorrespondence to Ania Korszun (a.korszun@qmul.ac.uk)
:Date: 2021-7-27

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Education leads for undergraduate psychiatry in UK medical schools
   completed questionnaires on adaptations made to undergraduate
   psychiatry education, their impact and what lessons could be learnt
   for the future.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Respondents from 24 medical schools across the UK reported a major
   shift to online teaching delivery, with reduced workplace learning
   and increased use of teleconferencing, online tasks and self-directed
   learning. Changes were implemented with some faculty training
   provided, but little additional funding or resources from medical
   schools or National Health Service trusts. A variety of challenges
   and opportunities were reported.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Despite the extraordinary efforts of education leads to maintain
   undergraduate psychiatry education, the pandemic may affect the
   development of students’ professional competencies and recruitment
   into psychiatry. Individual clinicians, trusts and medical and
   foundation schools have much to offer, and need to work with students
   to replace what has been lost during the pandemic.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In the UK, the first lockdown in response to the COVID-19 pandemic was
announced on 23 March 2020. This prompted rapid changes in medical
education, including withdrawal of students from clinical placements and
a shift to online teaching. As the pandemic continues, undergraduate
medical educators face difficult choices to ensure a continuing supply
of competent medical professionals for the future healthcare
system.\ :sup:`1` Clinical skills in psychiatry will particularly be
needed to address the significant impact of the pandemic on mental
health. Increased depression and anxiety symptoms have been reported,
including in young people,\ :sup:`2–4` and long-term consequences are
emerging in those who have recovered from COVID-19.\ :sup:`5`
Furthermore, many healthcare professionals are themselves experiencing
symptoms of anxiety spectrum disorders.\ :sup:`6,7`

To prepare our future doctors for the expected rise in demand,
high-quality psychiatric education must not only continue, but also be
prioritised. There is no consensus or guidance yet on what and how
adaptations to undergraduate psychiatry teaching should be implemented
during the pandemic. Although individual institutions outside of the UK
have shared their experiences,\ :sup:`8–11` there has been no work
published to date from the UK or on the collective experiences of
different institutions. Understanding the experiences of multiple
institutions provides a powerful opportunity to share learning and
identify the needs of this cohort of students.\ :sup:`12`

.. _sec1-1:

Objectives
==========

Our aims were to identify what and how adaptations to undergraduate
psychiatry teaching were made in response to the pandemic restrictions,
their impact and what lessons could be learnt from the collective
experiences of UK medical schools.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

We conducted an online cross-sectional questionnaire survey of education
leads for undergraduate psychiatry who represent their medical schools
on the Royal College of Psychiatrists Undergraduate Education Forum
(UEF). The questionnaire was drafted on Microsoft Forms (Microsoft,
Richmond, Washington, U.S.; see https://forms.microsoft.com/). Questions
were based on areas of adaptations identified in Gordon et al's scoping
review\ :sup:`13` and current reports of adaptations in psychiatry
teaching from other countries.\ :sup:`8–10` The UEF contributed to the
final design of the questionnaire, which consisted of both open and
closed questions, and included the following themes: changes to teaching
delivery and content, changes to the psychiatry rotation, changes to
assessment, support for learners, faculty development, funding and
resources, and impact of adaptations.

Respondents were asked to consider adaptations in the current academic
year. As clinical placements in psychiatry in most schools occur in the
penultimate year, responses were included only from the 33 registered
and publicly funded UK medical schools established before
2018.\ :sup:`14` The Queen Mary Ethics of Research Committee advised
that as an evaluation of teaching, research ethics review was not
required. The full survey is available in Supplementary File 1 available
at https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.67.

The survey was distributed via email to the members of the UEF on 20
November 2020, with one reminder email a month later. It remained open
for 2 months and participation was voluntary. Where omissions were
present in returned questionnaires, respondents were contacted for
clarification.

Data were exported from Microsoft Forms to Microsoft Excel version 16.33
for Mac, which was used to calculate descriptive statistics and create
graphs. Open-ended text responses were reviewed to describe adaptations
in more detail, and to compile a summary of opportunities and challenges
for psychiatry teaching during the pandemic.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Respondents
-----------

A total of 24 education leads completed the survey (72.7% response
rate). Respondents from schools in all four nations of the UK
participated, with 19 from England, 2 from Wales, 2 from Scotland and 1
from Northern Ireland.

.. _sec3-2:

Moving to online delivery
-------------------------

`Figure 1 <#fig01>`__ shows the changes that were made to delivery of
different teaching approaches, with a major shift to online delivery.
Fig. 1Method of delivery of different teaching approaches before and
during the pandemic.

Schools differed widely in the percentage of online teaching delivered
synchronously, with an average of 66.1% and range of 10–100% (*n* = 22).
In the 23 schools where it was used, asynchronous teaching employed a
range of existing resources, primarily e-learning resources (82.6%) and
recordings of previous content (82.6%) from respondents’ own medical
schools and e-learning resources obtained through the UEF (73.9%). Of
the schools that used asynchronous teaching, 87% created new resources
for this purpose. These included new recordings of teaching sessions,
simulated patient videos, online modules, workbooks to consolidate
materials and guide learning, revision notes, quizzes, question banks
and serious games.

.. _sec3-3:

Course content
--------------

A total of 83.3% of schools reported no change in the content of the
psychiatry curriculum; in three of the four schools where a change was
made, these had already been planned before the pandemic, and were
implemented during the pandemic or brought forward.

The amount of teaching across the six psychiatric subspecialties stayed
the same in the majority of schools (`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__). For every
subspecialty, more schools increased rather than decreased teaching; 25%
of schools increased teaching in general adult psychiatry, with no
schools decreasing teaching in this subspecialty. The subspecialties
that had most decreases in teaching were psychiatry of intellectual
disabilities (12.5%), forensic psychiatry (8.3%) and medical
psychotherapy (8.3%). Fig. 2Responses to the question ‘Has the amount of
teaching in the following subspecialties increased, decreased or stayed
the same?’.

.. _sec3-4:

Learning approaches
-------------------

Although 66.7% of schools made no change to the length of the overall
psychiatry module, 12.5% increased and 20.8% reduced the length. Also,
66.7% of schools did not change the length of clinical placements;
however, respondents noted that in practice, there was reduced time in
clinical settings and more time in self-directed learning. This is
reflected in 87.5% of schools decreasing the proportion of time students
spent in workplace learning (`Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__). In addition, 33.3% of
schools decreased the length of clinical placements. All schools
increased the proportion of time students spent completing online tasks,
and 62.5% of schools increased sessions officially designated for
self-directed learning. More schools increased small group teaching
(41.7%) than lectures (21.7%). Fig. 3Responses to the question ‘Has the
proportion of time spent by students learning using the following
approaches increased, decreased or stayed the same?’.

.. _sec3-5:

Clinical placements
-------------------

A total of 37.5% of schools increased numbers of students placed in
in-patient wards, and 33.3% of schools decreased numbers placed in
community teams (`Fig. 4 <#fig04>`__). For most schools, numbers of
students placed in home treatment teams (58.3%) and liaison psychiatry
(58.3%) stayed the same. Fig. 4Responses to the question ‘In the current
academic year, have the number of students placed in the following
clinical environments/subspecialties increased, decreased or stayed the
same?’.

Most schools placed the same number of students in general adult
psychiatry (62.5%), old age psychiatry (54.2%) and child and adolescent
psychiatry (54.2%) during the pandemic (`Fig. 4 <#fig04>`__). General
adult psychiatry had the most schools increasing numbers of students
placed in the subspecialty (25%), whereas old age psychiatry (25%) and
child and adolescent psychiatry (25%) had the most schools decreasing
numbers placed.

.. _sec3-6:

Teleconferencing in clinical placements
---------------------------------------

A total of 75% of schools had teleconferencing in some clinical
placements, with 20.8% in all placements. The only school where there
was no teleconferencing had moved all placements to the in-patient
setting. Teleconferencing allowed students to engage in clinical
activities remotely from home or from the same location as the
clinician. Students observed and participated in out-patient reviews,
and joined meetings and ward rounds. One school recruited patients who
could be interviewed by students via teleconferencing.

.. _sec3-7:

Assessment
----------

Regarding assessment, 66.7% of schools reported that assessment of the
psychiatry rotation changed during the pandemic. Changes included
reduced demands, such as reduced emphasis on documenting experiences,
reduced numbers of workplace-based assessments or case presentations,
and reduced attendance monitoring. Despite reduced assessment demands,
respondents were clear that standards would not be lowered or
compromised.

Some schools shifted toward formative assessments; for example, using an
assessed clinic letter or a portfolio of cases, reflections and
workplace-based assessments rather than a clinician-observed long case.
Greater onus was placed on individual supervisors to oversee
satisfactory student performance. Like teaching delivery, assessment
moved online. Online platforms, video stations and virtual cases were
used to assess clinical skills, case-based discussions and
presentations, and logbooks were completed online.

.. _sec3-8:

Supporting learners
-------------------

In 41.7% of schools, psychiatry teachers were involved in developing
resources or interventions to support learners’ mental health and
well-being during the pandemic. Respondents described developing
well-being talks and workshops. They established well-being drop-ins,
well-being champions, virtual student messes, and pastoral and
reflective groups, including for students volunteering in the National
Health Service (NHS). Well-being information was provided through
newsletters and online platforms. Existing mechanisms to support
learners were bolstered or reiterated to students.

.. _sec3-9:

Faculty development
-------------------

In 50% of schools, faculty received some training in adapting teaching
in response to COVID-19, with training in online teaching provided in
58.3% of schools. Training led by medical schools included sessions or
e-learning modules on delivering remote learning (e.g. blended learning
design, platforms), access to e-learning authoring tools, individual
discussions with education leads and opportunities to share practice.
Such training was less accessible to clinical staff, who received
additional support from psychiatry education leads. This included
training on online platforms, reflective groups to share practice and
ensuring adequate technology at clinical sites.

.. _sec3-10:

Funding and resources
---------------------

A total of 95.8% of education leads received no additional funding or
resources from their medical school to deliver psychiatry teaching
during the pandemic; only one school reported such support, which was
additional funding to develop e-learning materials. Further, 79.2% of
education leads received no additional funding or resources from their
affiliated NHS trusts. In those trusts that provided additional support,
this included laptops for students, computer equipment, funding for
consultant psychiatrist time to coordinate placements and support
clinicians, and funding for actors or patients to be interviewed by
students practising clinical skills.

.. _sec3-11:

Student involvement and response
--------------------------------

Half (50%) of education leads agreed that students were involved in
adapting the psychiatry course (`Fig. 5 <#fig05>`__). Education leads
reported that students had responded positively to adaptations, with
87.5% agreeing or strongly agreeing with the statement. Fig. 5Responses
to the question ‘To what extent do you agree or disagree with the
following statements?’.

.. _sec3-12:

The future
----------

A total of 62.5% of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that the
pandemic will change psychiatry education for the better (`Fig.
5 <#fig05>`__), and 54.2% of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that
the pandemic has raised the profile of psychiatry among medical
students.

In 87.5% of schools, the psychiatry rotation will not return to exactly
how it was before the pandemic. Changes will include increased blended
learning, with respondents noting the advantages of facilitating access
from distant placements and the ability to accommodate increases in
student numbers. Other changes include keeping modifications in
placement structure, online logbooks and the use of resources from other
schools.

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

This survey of adaptations to psychiatry teaching from 24 medical
schools across the four nations of the UK demonstrates the seismic
impact of the pandemic on psychiatry education. `Table 1 <#tab01>`__
summarises both the opportunities and challenges that emerge from the
survey data, with proposed solutions to meet the challenges. Table
1Opportunities, challenges and proposed solutions for undergraduate
psychiatry education during the pandemicOpportunitiesChallengesProposed
solutionsStudentsAccessibility and flexibility of online delivery
Reduced travelAsynchronous teaching accessible at convenient
timesClinical experiences available remotely, including for
self-isolating studentsGaining familiarity with telemedicineEducational
advantages of blended learning and flipped classroomsRequirements needed
for online delivery Adequate bandwidth and hardwareLimited access to
technology in clinical environmentsTime spent learning new
technologyExperiences of online delivery ‘Zoom fatigue’Negative impact
of isolation on student well-beingLess engaging than face-to-face
deliveryDifficulty in engaging with self-directed learningClinical
placements Reduced contact with patients, so reduced opportunities to
develop clinical skillsIn in-patient settings, space constraints and
need for social distancing may prevent students from accessing
opportunities such as ward rounds in personIn community settings, there
are fewer opportunities to engage with patients face to face and learn
to be in the room with patientsTravel to face-to-face placements during
pandemicService changes resulting in last-minute cancellations and
timetabling changesDifficult to get signed off by busy
cliniciansExperiences of teleconferencing on clinical placement Less
engaging than face to faceJuggling multiple IT accountsMore difficult
for students to participate in clinical tasksMissing out on pre-brief
and debrief before and after consultationsHard to feel part of the team
remotelyOnline delivery Investment in dedicated educational facilities
at hospital sitesScheduling adequate breaksInterventions to address
student well-beingSystems to identify students who are engaging poorly
with online learningEducating students about how to approach online and
self-directed learningClinical placements Inclusion of training in
psychiatry in foundation programmes and beyondIncreased clinical and
communication skills training delivered outside of clinical
placementsHonest dialogue with students about the potential for
disruption to their learning during the pandemicMaking use of all
available opportunities for face-to-face contact with patients, e.g.
students shadowing on-call staffPairing in-patient and community
placementsRing-fenced time for undergraduate education in clinicians’
job plansTeleconferencing on clinical placement Training teachers to
include student participation in consultationsDeliberate inclusion of
pre-brief and debrief timeIncluding students in all team activities,
e.g. meetingsIncluding multidisciplinary team members in
teachingTeachers Accessibility of online deliveryGaining familiarity
with telemedicineOpportunities for interactivity in online delivery
Increased clinical pressuresOnline delivery Time spent learning new
technology with little trainingSome students engage less with
synchronous teaching, e.g. cameras switched offManaging unprofessional
behavioursTeleconferencing Logistical demands of setting up
teleconferencingDifficult to build teacher–student relationships
remotely Increased training on online deliverySetting of expectations
for student engagement with teaching and digital
professionalismPromoting continuity to encourage the building of
teacher–student relationships. e.g. same tutor throughout
placementRing-fenced time for undergraduate education in clinicians’ job
plansCourse contentAccessibility of online delivery facilitates Webinars
with external speakersAttendance at mental health tribunalsIncreased
involvement of experts by experienceIncreased teaching in some
subspecialtiesAsynchronous teaching Expanded offer available to
studentsStandardisation of teaching quality Service changes (e.g. ward
closures) limit some learning opportunitiesAccess to other learning
opportunities (tasters) not possible because of social distancing
Increased online teaching on certain areas to compensate for lost
learning opportunitiesInclusion of training in psychiatry in foundation
programmes and beyondCourse organisation Booking and availability of
rooms no longer of concernSame lectures do not need to be recorded
multiple timesMore immediate student feedback leading to rapid
improvement of qualityExposing underfunding in undergraduate education
to justify additional resourcesShowing that online learning can be a
solution to accommodating increases in student numbersIncreased
collaboration between schools, e.g. sharing resources Some clinicians
are less keen to host students and engage in teleconferencingNeed for
faculty development for online teachingIncreased administrative burden
of organising online delivery and redesigning clinical placements in
accordance with public health measures, e.g. staff working from home,
social distancing and bubbles Incentives for clinicians to contribute to
undergraduate teachingIncreased training on online deliveryIncreased
administrative support and resources from medical schools and National
Health Service trustsPromoting psychiatry Improved attendance by
studentsIncreased recognition of the importance of reflective practice
across all specialtiesIncreased focus on student and staff
well-beingShowcasing psychiatry as an exemplar of innovations in
adapting teaching Reduced opportunities to meet role models with less
time on clinical placementReduced opportunities to combat stigma toward
mental illness with reduced contact with patients Maximising learning
opportunities during shortened clinical placementsIncreased activity of
student-led psychiatry societies to promote psychiatryBuilding in
opportunities to meet psychiatrists and experts by
experienceImplementing specific training on stigma toward mental
illnessIncreased postgraduate training in psychiatry clinical skills

.. _sec4-1:

Developing clinical skills in psychiatry
----------------------------------------

The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ curriculum recommendations, informed
by the General Medical Council's (GMC) ‘Outcomes for
Graduates’,\ :sup:`15` states that an important aim of undergraduate
psychiatry education is for ‘students to develop the necessary skills to
apply [professional] knowledge in clinical situations’.\ :sup:`16`

Clinical placements form the bulk of students’ experience in psychiatry
in the UK,\ :sup:`17` offering opportunities for experiential learning
and participation in authentic clinical environments.\ :sup:`18`
However, 87.5% of schools were forced to decrease the proportion of time
that students spent on clinical placement. Even when clinical placements
were possible, service changes and social distancing requirements
changed the nature of their learning opportunities. Without these
experiences, students may have difficulty in understanding how to apply
their professional knowledge in clinical contexts. Indeed, the Medical
Schools Council notes that ‘it is not possible for students to meet the
requirements set out in the GMC's Outcomes for Graduates without
undertaking clinical placements’.\ :sup:`19`

During the pandemic, schools continued to provide clinical skills,
role-play or simulation teaching, with 45.8% delivering these fully
online. Although online skills teaching can alleviate students’ concerns
about reduced patient contact,\ :sup:`20` learners feel less prepared to
use skills learnt in practice.\ :sup:`21` In a survey of UK medical
students in May 2020, three-quarters felt that online teaching had not
successfully replaced the clinical teaching that they received from
direct patient contact.\ :sup:`22`

A total of 95.8% of schools used teleconferencing on clinical
placements, which, though useful, has limitations. For instance, the
court judgment on remote Mental Health Act assessments noted that ‘a
psychiatric assessment may often depend on much more than simply
listening to what the patient says … [and] may involve a multi-sensory
assessment’.\ :sup:`23` In consultations by teleconferencing, clinicians
face difficulties in reading non-verbal communication, using silence and
incorporating physical examination.\ :sup:`24` Without the opportunity
to see clinicians demonstrating these skills and to practise these
skills themselves, students are left with an experience that translates
poorly to the face-to-face situations they will encounter in the future.
Moreover, clinicians cannot model some skills that are important in
face-to-face work, such as preparing consultation rooms or judging
physical distances between patient and clinician. Nevertheless,
telepsychiatry is likely to be used more widely in the
future.\ :sup:`25` Early training can foster specific skills, such as
conducting mental state examinations by telephone.\ :sup:`26` These
should supplement, but not supplant, the acquisition of skills for
face-to-face interactions.

The shift away from workplace learning was accompanied by an increase in
self-directed learning and the use of online tasks. Self-directed
learning prepares students for lifelong learning, and online tasks
provide the opportunity to develop a broader knowledge base. However,
some schools decreased teaching in the subspecialties, with psychiatry
of intellectual disabilities, forensic psychiatry and medical
psychotherapy most affected. This means that the only available
opportunities to learn skills in these subspecialties may have been
lost; for example, learning to communicate with people with intellectual
disabilities and understanding unconscious aspects of the doctor–patient
relationship.

The fact that assessments have continued with no change in standards
during the pandemic is reassuring. Indeed, the greater emphasis on
formative assessments and developmental conversations with individual
clinicians may provide more opportunities for students to receive
feedback.

.. _sec4-2:

Attitudes toward mental illness
-------------------------------

Reductions in time spent in clinical placements mean that students get
less contact with people with psychiatric conditions, which is so
important in dispelling stigma toward mental illness.\ :sup:`27` The
relative shift away from placements in community teams toward in-patient
wards during the pandemic may also have unintended consequences; in a
meta-analysis conducted before the pandemic, in-patient placements had
less effect in challenging stigmatising attitudes than community or
mixed placements.\ :sup:`28`

On the other hand, the greater emphasis placed on the mental well-being
of students\ :sup:`29` and healthcare staff\ :sup:`30` during the
pandemic may encourage students to pay attention to their own health and
well-being, and raise their awareness of the importance of mental
health. Psychiatry teachers are particularly well-equipped, with
expertise in both mental health and undergraduate education, to support
students.

.. _sec4-3:

Recruitment into psychiatry
---------------------------

Experiences during clinical placements affect career choices, with just
over half of students reporting that they were more inclined to choose a
career in psychiatry following their placement.\ :sup:`31` Placement
factors that encourage students to choose psychiatry include perceived
clinical responsibility and influence of teachers as role
models.\ :sup:`32,33` Although an international survey found no
relationship between placement length and choosing
psychiatry,\ :sup:`32` a placement should be sufficiently long for
students to get involved in the team and follow patients’
progress.\ :sup:`34` Shifting away from workplace learning reduces such
opportunities and may affect recruitment into psychiatry.

The pandemic has also limited opportunities (e.g. through lack of
availability of electives) for fully exploring different
subspecialties.\ :sup:`35` Tasters, where students spend short periods
of time experiencing subspecialties outside of their main clinical
placement, demonstrate to students the breadth of opportunities that a
career in psychiatry entails.\ :sup:`36` Social distancing measures
limit access to tasters. Despite these limitations, most education leads
agreed that the pandemic had raised the profile of psychiatry among
medical students. Increased awareness of reflective practice and a
renewed focus on student well-being may have contributed to this.
Whether this will translate into more positive attitudes toward
psychiatry from other specialties is unclear.\ :sup:`37`

.. _sec4-4:

A call to action in a time of change
------------------------------------

The pandemic has been a catalyst for spurring innovations in medical
education.\ :sup:`38` Even after the pandemic, there will be changes to
psychiatry teaching in the majority of schools. Most education leads are
optimistic that the pandemic will change psychiatry education for the
better. Students have responded positively to the adaptations to
teaching and, mirroring the changes predicted by our respondents, want
to continue with online lectures and increased access to online
resources in the future.\ :sup:`39` It remains to be seen whether
reactive adaptations implemented during the pandemic will be
sustainable, and help to manage another impending challenge: the surge
in student numbers resulting from the government temporarily lifting the
cap on medical school places.\ :sup:`40`

One year on from the first national lockdown, the course of the pandemic
remains uncertain. But what is becoming more certain is the profound
impact that the pandemic has had on the way we teach psychiatry. This is
most marked in the reduction of clinical placements, which may affect
the attainment of key competencies relevant to practice in all branches
of the profession, exposure to clinical role models and the challenging
of stigmatising attitudes to mental illness and psychiatry. Reduction in
clinical placement may also pose a threat to future recruitment into
psychiatry at a time when there will be an even greater need for
psychiatric skills, to manage increased demand following the
pandemic.\ :sup:`41,42`

This is the time for all of us in psychiatry to unite and rise to the
challenges that lie ahead. We call upon individual clinicians, NHS
trusts and medical and foundation schools to work closely together and
with students, to give this generation the training that they need to
best care for patients in the post-pandemic landscape.

Individual clinicians can offer so much to maximise the quality of
learning during shortened placements. They can offer opportunities for
students to participate fully in the care of patients and foster
experiential learning. Trusts continue to receive payment for educating
students, even with reduced time spent in clinical settings, and can
ensure a more equitable distribution of finances to front-line
educators.\ :sup:`43` Teaching during the pandemic has required
considerable planning and effort from education leads, yet in our
survey, few reported receiving additional funding or resources.

Medical schools should incorporate opportunities, wherever possible, for
students to meet psychiatrists and experts by experience, to implement
training on stigma and support the activities of student-led psychiatry
societies.\ :sup:`44` Lost learning opportunities should be prioritised
for inclusion in online teaching programmes both during and beyond
medical school. Foundation schools should similarly increase
postgraduate psychiatry teaching and the number of posts in psychiatry.
Greater collaboration between foundation programme leads and
undergraduate educators is important to replace what has been lost
during the pandemic.

Undergraduate psychiatry teaching in the UK has undergone extensive
adaptations in response to COVID-19. Educators have done a remarkable
job to maintain the integrity of teaching in the face of considerable
adversity. Lessons learnt during the pandemic will shape teaching in the
future. As we start our journey into the post-pandemic world, we hope
that readers will heed our call to action. We must not let the pandemic
set back decades of progress in the care of people with mental illness.

.. _sec4-5:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

To our knowledge, this is the first nationwide survey of adaptations in
undergraduate psychiatry teaching in any country. There was a good
response rate of 72.7%, with responses from all four nations of the UK.
By asking education leads about specific areas of adaptations, we may
not have captured all the adaptations made at individual schools.
Similarly, there was variable completion of open questions and depth in
respondents’ descriptions of adaptations. As a survey of education
leads, we have not explored first-hand the views of students and other
clinicians on the impact of adaptations. Lastly, the survey offers a
snapshot of adaptations at a particular moment in time, and does not
capture longitudinal changes in response to the course of the pandemic.

.. _sec5:

About the authors
=================

**Ho Tim Timothy Leung** is a Fellow in Medical Education in the Medical
Education Department at East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Ali
Ajaz** is a Consultant Psychiatrist in the Forensic Mental Health
Service at East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Helen Bruce** is a
Consultant Psychiatrist in Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
and Associate Dean for Undergraduate Education at East London NHS
Foundation Trust, UK. **Ania Korszun** is Professor of Psychiatry and
Education at the Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Queen Mary
University of London, UK.

We thank the members of the UEF who contributed to the design of the
questionnaire and participated in the survey.

.. _sec6:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.67.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, A.K., upon reasonable request.

All authors contributed to the design of the study. H.T.T.L. and A.K.
wrote the manuscript, and all authors contributed to the final version.

This work received no specific grant from any funding agency, commercial
or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
