=====================================================================
The climate crisis and forensic mental healthcare: what are we doing?
=====================================================================



Jack Tomlin
:Correspondence: Dr Jack Tomlin
(jack.tomlin@med.uni-rostock.de)

:date: 2021-02

:Abstract:
   The climate crisis poses the greatest threat to human health this
   century. Mental health services will be called on to address the
   psychological consequences of its effects on peoples’ lives,
   particularly the socially disadvantaged and those on low incomes.
   However, healthcare systems are also contributors to the climate
   crisis. This editorial discusses how services can continue to provide
   care while contributing less to climate change. Specifically, it
   suggests what services such as forensic mental healthcare, which is
   constrained by legal, political and resourcing concerns, can do
   differently.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Ten years ago, *The Lancet* identified climate change as the largest
threat to human health in the 21st century.\ :sup:`1` Changes in the
environment and biodiversity, alongside unpredictable natural disasters,
will have consequences for both the somatic and mental health of the
world's population. Individual and collective mental health are likely
to suffer owing to anxiety over fluctuating living conditions, loss of
means of income, broken social bonds and conflict linked to resource
scarcity, with low income and socially disadvantaged groups most likely
to be affected.\ :sup:`2–4`

Mental health systems will play a significant role in responding to the
psychological fallout of the climate crisis. Services will have to
respond to experiences of trauma following natural disasters and
longer-term mental health concerns, such as depression and anxiety,
linked to changes in lifestyles, environmental damage and resource
scarcity.\ :sup:`3` A study conducted 1 year after the 2005 Hurricane
Katrina in New Orleans, USA, found that 40% of 144 surveyed residents
had a probable mental illness, half of which were classified as severe.
This contrasted with a survey conducted between 2001 and 2003, which
estimated that 16% of respondents in the region had any type of mental
illness.\ :sup:`5` The authors attributed this to destroyed or damaged
housing and property, consequent dislocation and associated losses of
employment and community ties.

.. _sec1:

The healthcare sector's contribution to the problem
===================================================

Most causes of climate change are well acknowledged: overreliance on
fossil fuels, poisonous greenhouse gas emissions, unsustainable
agricultural practices. Yet paradoxically, while being tasked with
managing much of the future damage to human well-being, healthcare
systems are themselves contributors to the climate crisis. In the USA, a
‘top emitter’, 7.6% of national emissions (defined as carbon dioxide,
methane and nitrous oxide) come from the healthcare sector
(1.72 tCO\ :sub:`2`\ e/capita).\ :sup:`6` This is the equivalent to 141
coal power plants. In the UK, the healthcare system contributes 5.4%
(0.66 tCO\ :sub:`2`\ e/capita); the average across the European Union is
slightly lower: 4.7% (0.49 tCO\ :sub:`2`\ e/capita). A ‘lower than
average emitter’, India's healthcare system contributes 1.5% to total
emissions (58 times less than the USA per capita).

These contributions derive from the manufacture of pharmaceutical
products; the large amounts of resources needed to run equipment, heat
buildings and transport patients or staff to appointments; and the
disposal of waste products.\ :sup:`7` As health and social care services
constitute a substantial part of every country's economic and social
activity, the magnitude of their contribution may be understandable.
However, given the preventive and life-saving functions that healthcare
systems provide, significant questions remain – how can healthcare
systems provide perennially improving, high-quality care while
contributing less to the climate crisis? And what does this mean for
sectors particularly constrained by legal, political and resourcing
concerns, such as forensic mental health services – especially when the
number of forensic in-patient beds has been increasing in many North
American and European states?\ :sup:`8`

.. _sec2:

‘Sustainability’ in mental healthcare: the ideal…
=================================================

Recent efforts have attempted to embed the concept of ‘sustainability’
into routine mental healthcare. Sustainable mental health services are
those that weave sustainable thinking into decision-making at all
levels. The Joint Commissioning Panel for Mental Health and the Centre
for Sustainable Healthcare\ :sup:`7` identify four basic principles that
settings should adhere to. Services need to (a) promote patient
self-management, (b) prioritise prevention instead of response to
illness, (c) adopt sustainable methods of energy use and (d) increase
efficiency in service provision (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). These principles
should not be understood as detracting from the necessity for
gold-standard clinical care for those who need acute, urgent treatment
to manage severe mental illness. This reactive medicine must still be
available but with practitioners cognisant of a sustainable approach and
alert to the notion that embracing these principles can help lower or
buffer the growing future need for such care. Fig. 1Four basic
principles for sustainable mental healthcare.

What do these principles look like in practice? Taken together, these
recommendations aim to develop sustainable resource use. The more mental
illness is prevented and managed in the community, the less secondary
care services will be called on. When services are engaged, they should
minimise and embrace clean-energy use and maximise efficiency, so that
time, resources and medications are not wasted. Specific aims include
avoiding hospital admissions that might have been identified earlier and
managed in primary care; the development and monitoring of targets to
reduce carbon emissions, including seeking more efficient methods of
heating buildings and transporting food, medicines and materials, and
reducing amounts of waste; enabling patients to self-manage symptoms in
the community where possible; offering horticultural therapies, walking
groups and psychological interventions instead of prescribing
unnecessary medication; offering telephone or online interventions; and
reducing the number of missed appointments.\ :sup:`9`

.. _sec3:

…and the reality in forensic settings
=====================================

However, the transferability of these aims to forensic settings is not
immediately apparent. Forensic services are high cost and provide care
to patients who are, in law and fact, deprived of their liberty.
Patients are placed in care following the commission of a crime or when
risk of harm is too difficult to manage in general or out-patient
services. Thus, forensic settings reflect failures elsewhere to prevent
or manage mental illness and antisocial behaviour. They require
resource-intensive security measures; services may be reticent or unable
to promote patient self-management owing to seriousness of illness or
the custodial attitudes of staff and policy makers; patients may be kept
within inappropriately high levels of security because of political or
media attention; and they typically rely less on volunteers and carers
from the local community to help manage patient recovery and run
services than other health services might. Accordingly, efforts to meet
the aims of prevention, self-management and reducing carbon emissions
could face extra barriers.

.. _sec4:

Some suggested steps forward
============================

So, what can forensic services do? All services should develop a
sustainable development plan. Such a plan details aims, objectives,
strategies and priorities for improving local environmental and
socioeconomic impacts and should set measurable targets.\ :sup:`10`
These should reference national or regional standards for reducing
carbon emissions. These plans are already required by healthcare
providers commissioned by standard contracts in the National Health
Service in England and Wales. Patients should be involved in developing
targets and action plans. This should be complemented by routine
monitoring of procedural and substantive outcomes, including, for
instance, whether sustainability is incorporated within a service's
mission statement or the ways in which it is included in decision-making
structures, reductions in waste and energy use, or the number of meals
produced using food grown on-site. Plans can draw on the four basic
principles described earlier (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__).

Steps should be taken to integrate patients into local communities to
promote self-management of symptoms, prevent mental health problems or
risky behaviour due to social isolation or deskilling, and thus reduce
need for services. Peer support programmes run by former forensic
services patients or carers, work for patients outside secure settings,
and proactive attitudes towards granting leave could all be helpful.
Treatment paradigms such as the recovery approach and the Good Lives
Model that aim to improve the quality of patients’ lives holistically,
promote recovery and target criminogenic factors as well as treating
mental disorders should be used to increase the chance of successful
rehabilitation that carries though into the community and reduces future
service use.\ :sup:`11,12`

Punitive attitudes that discourage the placement of patients in lower
levels of security closer to the community should be tackled by
implementing training programmes that educate all staff on the
antecedents, symptoms and prognoses of patient diagnoses and thus
encourage a therapeutic mindset. The unnecessary use of medications
should be avoided. When tension or aggression is present on a ward then
the use of verbal de-escalation techniques by appropriately trained
staff might avoid the requirement for ‘as needed’ (p.r.n.)
medications.\ :sup:`13`

Finally, individuals working in secure services should develop a network
to (a) share sustainable development plans and best practices, (b)
identify challenges unique to forensic settings and (c) connect with
individuals in general mental health and somatic care who have already
developed such networks (e.g the Centre for Sustainable Healthcare in
the UK). Forensic services should be aware of how they contribute to and
can help alleviate the consequences of the greatest threat to human
health in the 21st century. To avoid doing so would be to ignore our
guiding principles of reducing harm and improving lives.

**Jack Tomlin** is a Research Fellow in the Department of Forensic
Psychiatry, University of Rostock, Germany.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.36.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
