==============================================================================================================
The article ‘Sex, gender and gender identity’ fails to adequately engage with the extant scientific literature
==============================================================================================================

Florence Ashley
:Date: 2021-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The recent paper titled ‘Sex, gender and gender identity: a
re-evaluation of the evidence’, which appeared as a Special Article in
the *BJPsych Bulletin*, contains concerning misrepresentations of the
scholarly literature. The article selectively cites sources to make
claims that are contrary to the available literature and best practices,
which strongly support access to social, legal and medical transition.
Using a direct quote, the authors claim that a Royal College of
Psychiatrists position statement includes ‘placing barriers [to] medical
transition’ within the meaning of conversion therapy. However, the
document actually says ‘place barriers in the way of trans people who
seek advice regarding medical and/or social transition’.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`
Raising barriers to transition and raising barriers to people seeking
advice are two different things altogether, and the elision
misrepresents the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ position statement.
Substantively altering quotes in this way is contrary to ethical
authorship practices and is difficult to explain. While I would agree
that preventing transition is a form of conversion therapy, as expressed
in a recent report by UN Independent Expert Victor
Madrigal-Borloz,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` this is not what the cited position
statement says.

Despite discussing these topics, the authors fail to cite available data
on the prevalence of anti-trans conversion therapy in the
UK;\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` fail to acknowledge strong methodological criticisms
of studies suggesting that most transgender youth grow up to be
cisgender;\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.e)` fail to refer to empirical evidence
of the harmfulness of misgendering and
deadnaming;\ :sup:`(n.d.f)–(n.d.g)` fail to mention that youth referred
to gender identity clinics are significantly similar to those in the
past despite changes in gender ratios;\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` fail to
substantially engage with significant evidence of mental health benefits
to transition by brushing it off as immaterial to youth;\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`
fail to refer to evidence demonstrating that trans youth can be trusted
about who they are and do not plausibly transition out of internalised
homophobia;\ :sup:`(n.d.j)–(n.d.k)` and fail to refer to a wealth of
data showing transition and gender affirmation to have an important
positive impact on mental health.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)–(n.d.m)` Many
references used in the article in support of substantial and contentious
points are of poor quality and include news reports, non-peer-reviewed
blog posts and a Tumblr survey.

Scientific literature must meet a high standard for publication. The
editorial and peer-review process is intended to screen for problems
such as these, which gravely threaten the quality of published works and
undermine the public's ability to rely on scholarly publication as an
indicium of reliability. Providing competent care for transgender youth
depends upon the integrity of the scientific process, of which
publication is an important part. The past few years have seen a
concerning rise in articles opposing gender-affirming care being
published in scientific journals despite failing to engage with the
available literature and, at times, being directly contradicted by it.
Transgender communities deserve high-quality research and scientific
publications.

Gender-affirmative care remains the leading approach to care for
transgender youth and is well supported by empirical evidence, clinical
experience and ethical reasoning.\ :sup:`(n.d.n),(n.d.o)` Contrary to
what the article's authors imply, gender-affirmative care does not
foreclose youth's futures. Quite the contrary.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` Attempts
to unduly delay or prevent social, legal or medical transition among
youth who desire them should be opposed. Children and adolescents
deserve unconditional acceptance and love at all points in their lives,
including in their gender.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.p.
