======================================================================================================================
Clozapine prescribing: comparison of clozapine dosage and plasma levels between White British and Bangladeshi patients
======================================================================================================================



Rahul Bhattacharya
Leah White
Laura Pisaneschi
:Correspondence: Dr Rahul Bhattacharya
(rahul.bhattacharya@nhs.net)

:date: 2021-02

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To compare differences in clozapine doses and plasma levels between
   Bangladeshi and White British patients. Following ethical approval we
   identified all current Bangladeshi and White British patients on
   clozapine maintenance in an east London clinic. We carried out
   univariate and multivariate regression analyses to examine
   associations between clozapine doses and ethnicity, age, gender,
   smoking status and weight. We also compared plasma clozapine levels
   of the two groups.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   On univariate analysis White British patients had on average 85 mg
   higher doses than Bangladeshi patients (*P* = 0.004). Older age, male
   gender and smoking were also associated with higher dose. On
   multivariate analysis only age and smoking status remained
   significant. A greater proportion of Bangladeshi patients had high
   plasma clozapine levels compared with White British (30.76% *v*.
   20.75%), although the difference was not statistically significant.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Our findings point to the need for the broadening of data collection
   on ethnic differences in clozapine prescribing within big data-sets
   such as Prescribing Observatory for Mental Health (POM-UK).
   Ethnopharmacological variations can inform more person-centred
   guidance on prescribing.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Clozapine is a unique antipsychotic that demonstrates superior efficacy
in people with treatment-resistant schizophrenia and is recommended for
treatment in such cases.\ :sup:`1` The response rate in these
individuals is around 40%.\ :sup:`2` Clozapine has been shown in several
pharmacoepidemiological studies to show superior long-term efficacy in
terms of reducing hospital admissions.\ :sup:`3` It also surpasses other
antipsychotics in reducing self-harm\ :sup:`4` and overall
mortality.\ :sup:`5`

The pharmacological basis for the unique efficacy of clozapine in
treatment-resistant schizophrenia is not clearly understood.\ :sup:`6`
Clozapine treatment is associated with a number of adverse
effects.\ :sup:`7–9` Unlike for most other antipsychotics, the decision
to stop clozapine is taken more often by prescribers than by patients,
and for reasons of adverse effects more than for lack of
efficacy.\ :sup:`10` The Prescribing Observatory for Mental Health
(POM-UK) conducts national audits of clozapine use in the UK, gathering
detailed information, for example that clozapine prescribing for people
with schizophrenia is higher in men than in women.\ :sup:`11` Although
the POM-UK audit collects ethnicity data, it does not compare
prescribing practices or variations between ethnicities.

Ethnopharmacology relates to the study of substances used medicinally by
different ethnic groups and examines variations in our body's processing
of drugs based on ethnicity, including pharmacogenetics. It is known
that prescribing rates for clozapine vary, ranging from less than 10
patients per 100 000 people to nearly 180 patients per 100 000
people.\ :sup:`12` Variations in dosage may be due to variations in
prescribing practice and/or the patient's metabolism. At either end of
the spectrum patients may be ‘poor metabolisers’ or ‘ultra-rapid
metabolisers’. Metabolic variation can be genetic, but it can also be
environmental (e.g. due to cigarette smoking). Ethnic variation in
metabolism along the cytochrome P450 has been known for a few
decades.\ :sup:`13` Drug clearance is represented by the
concentration-to-dose (C/D) ratio in blood plasma under steady-state and
trough conditions. A very low C/D ratio indicates an ultra-rapid
metaboliser, whereas a very high C/D ratio indicates a poor metaboliser.
In the USA, clozapine C/D ratios, measured in (ng/mL)/(mg/day),
typically range from 0.6 (male smokers) to 1.2 (female non-smokers).
Inhibitors (including fluvoxamine and oral contraceptives) and
inflammation can also increase clozapine C/D ratios.\ :sup:`14`

The British National Formulary recommends titrating clozapine to a dose
of 300 mg/day if tolerated, which can be further increased up to a
maximum dose of 900 mg/day.\ :sup:`15` Despite varied estimates of
response threshold, plasma levels can be useful in optimising treatment.
According to the Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines, in those not
responding to clozapine, dose can be adjusted to give plasma levels in
the range 0.35–0.5 mg/L (a range reflecting a consensus of the above
findings). The guidelines also mention that plasma levels may help in
decision-making in those who are not tolerating clozapine, for example
by a reduction to a dose guided by the plasma level range mentioned
above.\ :sup:`16` It is documented that plasma levels of clozapine may
be higher in ‘Asians’.\ :sup:`17` This was a study from Singapore in
which ‘Asian’ patients were noted to have more than twice the effective
clozapine concentration-to-dose ratio than ‘Caucasian’ patients. This
very high C/D ratio would suggest a higher prevalence of poor
metabolisers in this population. We are not aware of any similar studies
in South Asians or in the Bangladeshi population.

We looked at two self-assigned ethnicities as accepted by UK
census.\ :sup:`18` The London Borough of Tower Hamlets (an
administrative unit within the city) has a unique ethnic composition,
being home to the largest Bangladeshi population in England.\ :sup:`19`
The Bangladeshi population accounts for almost one-third of all
residents, closely followed by the second largest ethnic group, White
British (31%).\ :sup:`20` This unique ethnic composition provided a
particular opportunity for research into differences in prescribing of
clozapine and differences in plasma levels documented between these two
ethnic groups. We recognise that our study is not equipped to look into
actual genetic and epigenetic differences between the two populations.
However, comparing distinct subgroups, i.e. White British and
Bangladeshi, we minimise the heterogeneity in each group and make the
results more relevant to the populations being studied.

The primary aim of this study was to compare prescribed doses of
clozapine in the Bangladeshi population with those in the White British
population. The secondary aim was to see whether the odds of plasma
clozapine levels being above 0.5 mg/L (the upper limit of the
recommended therapeutic range) were increased by belonging to
Bangladeshi ethnicity compared with White British.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

All patients receiving clozapine (through the National Health Service)
in Tower Hamlets are registered to the Tower Hamlets Clozapine Clinic.
All such patients receive clozapine blood monitoring at the clinic and
they are registered with the Zaponex Treatment Access System (ZTAS),
which is an on-line patient data-base for monitoring treatment.

The study proposal was approved by the ethics committee of the local
healthcare provider (East London NHS Foundation Trust). We collected
cross-sectional data from the Tower Hamlets Clozapine Clinic as on 21
November 2018.

We defined ‘maintenance dose’ as a dose for which the patient is no
longer having blood monitoring as frequently as weekly, which generally
indicates that the patient has been taking clozapine for at least 18
weeks after dose titration. We took this as a proxy measure for
maintenance dose of clozapine for the purpose of the study. On 21
November we identified 79 Bangladeshi and 52 White British patients
receiving clozapine in their maintenance phase. We carried out
univariate linear regression analyses for ethnicity, age, gender,
smoking status and weight, followed by multivariate regression analyses
on the variables that were statistically significant on univariate
analysis.

For our secondary aim we searched for results of clozapine plasma level
tests conducted on the participants. Of the results available in the
clinic's records, 78 were obtained from the people of Bangladeshi
ethnicity and 53 were from the people of White British ethnicity. We
calculated how many of these results were above 0.5 mg/L. Subsequently
we analysed whether the odds of an individual recording a plasma level
above 0.5 mg/L was increased if they were of Bangladeshi ethnicity
compared with White British ethnicity.

The study did not gather any new data but analysed data that were
already available in the clinic's electronic patient records.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

Ethnicity, age, gender and smoking status were all significantly
associated with clozapine dose (significance was borderline for gender)
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). White British participants received on average
85 mg/day higher doses of clozapine than Bangladeshi participants. Older
people received on average 39 mg/day higher doses for each decade of
increasing age. Women received on average 67 mg/day lower doses than
men, but the difference was only borderline significant. Non-smokers
received on average 81 mg/day lower doses than smokers. Weight was not
significantly associated with dose in our sample. Table 1Clozapine dose
analysisUnivariate analysisMultivariate analysisMean dose, mg/dayMean
dose difference, mg/day95% CI\ *P*\ Difference95% CI\ *P*\ Dose by
ethnicityWhite British (*n* = 52)435.185.4(27.5 to
143.3)0.004\ `\* <#tfn1_1>`__\ 51.3(−12.3 to 114.8)0.11Bangladeshi
(*n* = 79)349.68Dose by smoking statusSmokers
(*n* = 59)427.9779.38(137.8 to 23.7)0.006\ `\* <#tfn1_1>`__\ 69.9(129.9
to 10.0)0.023\ `\* <#tfn1_1>`__\ Non-smokers (*n* = 72)348.59Dose by
genderFemale (*n* = 36)334.72−67.38(−131.9 to
−2.9)0.041\ `\* <#tfn1_1>`__\ −35.43(−101.8 to 31.0)0.29Male
(*n* = 95)402.1Dose by weightWeight (per 10 kg)1.2(−15.9 to
13.5)0.87Dose by ageAge (per decade)38.9(12.3 to
65.6)0.005\ `\* <#tfn1_1>`__\ 29.6(0.3 to
58.8)0.048\ `\* <#tfn1_1>`__\  [1]_

When we tested variables known to influence clozapine dose in a
multivariate model comparing age (per decade), gender, smoking status
and ethnicity, only age and smoking status remained statistically
significant. Difference based on ethnicity was no longer statically
significant at the 5% level, although the trend was towards White
British having higher doses. As weight was not significantly associated
in univariate analysis, we did not carry out multivariate analysis on
this variable.

Of the 78 results of plasma clozapine level tests obtained from
Bangladeshi participants, 24 (30.76%) had levels higher than the upper
limit of the therapeutic range. Of the 53 results obtained from White
British participants, 11 (20.75%) had levels higher than therapeutic
range. The odds ratio of a higher (above 0.5 mg/L) plasma level in a
Bangladeshi individual was calculated to be 1.697, although this was not
statistically significant as the confidence interval crossed 1 (`Table
2 <#tab02>`__). Table 2Odds ratio of a plasma clozapine level higher
than the upper limit of the recommended therapeutic range by
ethnicityEthnicityPlasma level >0.5 mg/L, *n* (%)OR (95% CI)Bangladeshi
(*n* = 78)24 (30.76)1.697 (0.748–3.852)White British (*n* = 53)11
(20.75)

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec3-1:

Key findings
------------

We are aware of several factors that could affect clozapine dose. We
found that Bangladeshi participants, women, younger participants and
non-smokers received lower doses. When we looked at our dosage data
using the multivariate model only, smoking status and age were
statistically significant. However, it is possible that we were not
sufficiently powered with our sample size to demonstrate the difference
in dosing between Bangladeshi and White British ethnicity. There was a
trend towards White British participants needing higher doses. We are
aware that other factors might also have influenced dosage (e.g.
co-prescribing), but this information was not available in the clinic's
regular monitoring records.

We examined records of plasma clozapine levels to explore whether higher
plasma clozapine concentrations were more likely to be reported in those
of Bangladeshi ethnicity compared to White British ethnicity. We found
that, despite receiving lower doses, Bangladeshi patients were more
likely to have higher plasma concentrations of clozapine when tested.
This would support the suggestion of a higher prevalence of high C/D
ratios and poor metaboliser status among Bangladeshi patients taking
clozapine. For simplicity of analysis, we used the Maudsley Prescribing
Guidelines reference therapeutic plasma level to analyse the plasma
level data as a binary variable. This study is not designed to assess
the therapeutic plasma range for clozapine. The data-base for clozapine
plasma levels did not have a record of associated variables. We used
existing clinic data for our analysis and were limited by the data that
were routinely collected.

.. _sec3-2:

Bangladesh and Bangladeshi populations
--------------------------------------

Bangladesh is a new country, created in 1971 from a division of Pakistan
decided on the basis of linguistic differences (eastern Pakistan was
predominantly Bengali-speaking), and previously separated from British
India on the basis of religion when Colonial rule ended in 1947.
Bangladesh is in the eastern part of South Asia, which has a high
internal ethnic homogeneity, with 98% identifying themselves as
‘Bangalees’.\ :sup:`21` In fact some residents of Tower Hamlets arrived
in the UK before the country was formed and many are second generation.
It is also recognised that people from the Sylhet region are the
strongest subgroup within this population. However, they also identify
themselves as Bangladeshi. Ethnicity is a different construct in each
society and may merge with local notions of ‘race’, national identity or
other invented traditions.\ :sup:`22`

There is a body of literature in cultural psychiatry in which the UK's
Bangladeshi population has been studied (e.g. in Mental Health Act
detention data). Information such as ours has implications in terms of
global health and can inform prescribing in other countries, especially
in Bangladesh, a country of 169 million people. Schizophrenia is the
most common diagnosis in mental health settings in Bangladesh, according
to a World Health Organization report across in-patient units, mental
hospitals and community-based clinics.\ :sup:`23` We believe that such
information and guidance has significant public health implications both
in Bangladesh, as well as for migrant populations of Bangladeshi origin
across the globe. We also believe that assuming large populations are
monolithic, for example as implied by concepts such as ‘Asian’ and
‘Caucasian’, risks overgeneralisation and misses out on differences
within these groups. Having smaller clearer groups might allow a
granularity in our understanding that would otherwise not be possible.

.. _sec3-3:

Ethnicity, pharmacology and study populations
---------------------------------------------

Ethnicity is reported to be an important, but often ignored factor in
psychopharmacology. A number of ethnically specific variations have been
found in the genetic and non-genetic mechanisms affecting
pharmacokinetics and dynamics of psychotropic drugs, which might
underlie differences in drug prescribing and response across
ethnicities. Although some of these ethnic differences might be
partially explained by genetic factors, a number of ethnically based
variables such as diet and cultural attitudes could potentially have a
significant impact.\ :sup:`24` This might include differences in smoking
habits between Bangladeshi and White British patients or levels of
comorbidity. Very few studies have analysed biological basis and
metabolic variations in relation to clozapine. A notable exception is
the above-mentioned 2005 study from Singapore and even then there are
difficulties with what the terms Asian and Caucasian mean.\ :sup:`17` We
acknowledge that our study design does not offer the opportunity to
explore these variables in detail. Although there has been some research
into ethnic variation in clozapine tolerability and effective dosing, a
significant evidence base is still lacking.

Most studies in the field are case–control studies such as ours,
comparing small samples of broad ethnic entities or case series,
sometimes with a more distinct ethnic group. The 2005 Singapore study
comparing 20 ‘Asian’ patients from Singapore with 20 ‘Caucasian’
patients from Australia reported that the mean clozapine dose for the
Asian group was 176 mg/day, whereas for the ‘Caucasian’ group it was
433 mg/day.\ :sup:`17` A more recent study found that ‘East Asians’
(Chinese in the sample) had a clinically relevant reduced clozapine
clearance (suggesting higher prevalence of poor metabolisers) compared
with ‘Caucasians’ (Italians in the sample).\ :sup:`25` However, the
ethnic groups ‘Asian’, ‘East Asian’ and ‘Caucasian’ are, in our opinion,
too broad and heterogeneous to safely generalise the findings in a
clinical setting.

We also discovered that findings were not always consistent. Results
from a study conducted in south London by the South London and Maudsley
NHS Trust reported no significant differences in clozapine dosage
prescriptions between in-patients from White, Black and Asian ethnic
groups.\ :sup:`26` Although the overall study sample was large, the
clozapine sample for which ethnicity was noted was only 188 and included
only in-patients, whereas we compared all patients on clozapine
(community and in-patients). As the south London study also included all
ethnicities, once again we would argue the categories were too broad.
The 11 ‘Asian’ patients included in the study did receive a lower mean
dose of clozapine but this was not statistically significant. In another
recent study the researchers concluded that clozapine bioavailability
did not vary between Maori and European patients.\ :sup:`27` Therefore
one needs a more nuanced approach rather than generalising diverse
minority groups as monolithic.

Studies that examined more coherent ethnic identities lacked control
groups. A review of 1256 records from Novartis Pakistan (one of the
monitoring systems for clozapine treatment) were analysed and the
average maintenance dose was found to be 230 mg/day.\ :sup:`28` A study
involving 162 Taiwanese patients with refractory schizophrenia reported
a mean dose of 379.5 mg/day (range: 100–900 mg/day).\ :sup:`29` The only
other study on the Bangladeshi population was a small case series
comprising 21 patients in a tertiary care centre in Bangladesh, which
revealed that most of the patients with treatment-resistant
schizophrenia (64%) responded to clozapine doses of 50–200 mg/day and
the remaining patients who responded to treatment required doses of
250–500 mg/day.\ :sup:`30` In these reports without a control group one
can argue that prescriber factors such as prescribing culture, habits or
even cost could have influenced the prescribed dose as opposed to
patient factors.

.. _sec3-4:

Clinical and research implications
----------------------------------

We believe that the information obtained from our study is important as
it provides an opportunity to explore variation in tolerability and
effective dosage controlled for prescriber factors. Even with relatively
small numbers we found a statistically significant difference in dosing
of clozapine. Although we did not find statistically significant odds of
high plasma levels in Bangladeshi participants it is possible that the
study was not sufficiently powered to elicit the statistical
significance. Of note, high plasma levels were reported in Bangladeshi
participants despite the lower mean prescribed dose, indicating a higher
C/D ratio and possibly higher prevalence of poor metabolisers in the
Bangladeshi population.

For more comprehensive exploration of these issues, we believe there is
need to analyse ‘big data’. POM-UK audits have the opportunity to do
this. We would like this national audit to analyse dosage and
tolerability variation data across ethnicity. Similarly, data on plasma
clozapine levels held in central repositories might offer sufficiently
large samples to enable study of ethnic variations and could steer
research in cytochrome-P450 variations between populations. If such
variation is clearly documented, it could inform prescribing guidelines
on a more cautious and conservative approach when titrating patients of
Bangladeshi ethnicity on clozapine.

We also suggest that studies of ethnic variations in clozapine doses and
plasma levels should select more coherent ethnic groups and be mindful
of heterogeneity within minority populations.

We thank Frank Röhricht, MD, FRCPsych, consultant psychiatrist, Medical
Director and Honorary Professor of Psychiatry, and Anthony Khawaja,
MA(Cantab), PhD, FRCOphth, consultant ophthalmic surgeon, for their
advice on statistical analysis.

**Rahul Bhattacharya** is a Consultant Psychiatrist and Associate
Clinical Director for Community Services in Tower Hamlets, East London
NHS Foundation Trust and an Honorary Senior Clinical Lecturer at Barts
and the London School of Medicine, UK. **Leah White** is a Consultant
Old Age Psychiatrist with East London NHS Foundation Trust and an
Associate Fellow of the Higher Education Academy, London, UK. **Laura
Pisaneschi** is Lead Nurse for the Tower Hamlets Clozapine Clinic, East
London NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, R.B., upon reasonable request

R.B conceived the project and data analysis, obtained ethical approval,
wrote the first draft of the paper and responded and amended the paper
in response to comments from peer reviewers. L.W. collected the data
from the Tower Hamlets clozapine clinic and has reviewed the manuscript.
L.P. was the Lead Nurse for the Tower Hamlets clozapine clinic and
helped in accessing data-bases and facilitated data collection.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.59.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. [1]
   *P* < 0.05.
