---
author:
- Ann Maria Albert
- Hannah Gallen
- Misha Gaur
date: 2021-12
institute:
- "GPST3, Oxford GPVTS, UK. Email: <Annmaria.albert1@nhs.net>"
- GPST1, Reading GPVTS, UK
- GPST3, Reading GPVTS, UK
references:
- id: ref1
title: Managing suicide risk in primary care
---

pmc

05 June 2021

We read with interest Professor Morgan\'s special article on predicting
short-term suicide risk.^1^ We are grateful for the mention of the
extensive body of evidence suggesting the futility of suicide risk
assessments and alleged risk factors including suicidal thoughts and
behaviours in predicting suicide risk. We appreciate the statements 'To
base assessment of ongoing risk on the individual\'s mental state during
a single interview is clearly likely to be highly unreliable' and 'An
important trigger for relapse is stress, particularly stress that has
previously been present and has not been resolved'. It is important that
the above facts are conveyed to the patient\'s general practitioner (GP)
via the suggested correspondence. However, we wonder about the purpose
of the proposed 123-word paragraph ending with the sentence 'Overall,
however, the predicted level of suicide risk must still be regarded as
significant, requiring vigilance until I next see him/her'. What action
is required of the GP when they receive similar letters about almost
every patient seen by the mental health services? If the patient
requires vigilance for their mental health, would this not best be
provided by secondary care mental health services with their array of
highly specialist teams and army of experts? What aspects of suicide
prevention are the GPs better equipped for than the secondary care
mental health services? It is important to acknowledge that it is not
possible to reliably predict suicide risk from single consultations.
However, it appears the suggested correspondence is unrealistically
asking an already overstretched primary care service to pick up
responsibility in a specialist area. Furthermore, we would be grateful
for any guidance on how to better assess and manage suicide risk during
a 10 min GP consultation than during the 30--60 min assessment by
specialists.
