========================================================================================================================================
Green care in first-episode psychosis: short report of a mixed-methods evaluation of a ‘woodland group’ in an early intervention service
========================================================================================================================================



Sharon Cuthbert
Harriet Sharp
Clio Berry
:Correspondence: Sharon Cuthbert
(sharon.cuthbert@sussexpartnership.nhs.uk)

:date: 2021-08

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   In the context of increasing recognition of the role of nature in
   well-being, but limited evidence for specific patient groups, we
   describe a mixed-methods evaluation of a 10-week green care
   intervention (a woodland group) for 18- to 30-year-olds who had
   experienced a first episode of psychosis. Data were collected using
   the Questionnaire on the Process of Recovery (QPR), semi-structured
   service evaluation questionnaires, the NHS Friends and Family Test
   (FFT), and focus group analysis.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   All participants present at week 10 (*n* = 5) would recommend this
   group to others; 4/8 participants showed reliable improvement on QPR
   outcome measures. Thematic analysis identified themes of connection
   with nature and others, development of a sense of well-being and
   ‘peacefulness’ and new perspectives on psychotic experience.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   This small retrospective evaluation describes patient-reported
   benefits, feasibility and acceptability of green care interventions
   within early intervention in psychosis services (EIS).


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Early intervention services (EIS) aim to reduce symptomatic periods and
improve developmental and social trajectories for those who have
experienced a first episode of psychosis (FEP).\ :sup:`1` Full recovery
and therapeutic engagement may be difficult to achieve.\ :sup:`2–4`
Green care uses natural environments to facilitate improvements in
well-being, with growing evidence to support effectiveness in the
general population.\ :sup:`5,6` Evaluations suggest that people with
mental health problems may benefit proportionally more from such
nature-based care.\ :sup:`7` Accessing green space may mitigate health
inequalities closely tied to severe and enduring mental illness
(SMI),\ :sup:`8,9` including for young people, among whom nature
‘connectedness’ is low.\ :sup:`10` Groups in natural spaces may also
confer potential advantages for therapeutic engagement and
work.\ :sup:`11–13` However, there is limited evidence for green care
for those with SMI\ :sup:`14,15` and, to our knowledge, none in FEP.
Green care is a ‘complex intervention’, combining psychological work,
physical activity and social interactions,\ :sup:`16` so our study used
a mixed-methods approach, as recommended by the Medical Research
Council.\ :sup:`17` This mixed-methods evaluation considers potential
benefits and barriers encountered in a green care programme delivered in
an EIS.

.. _sec1:

The intervention
================

The woodland group was facilitated by Circle of Life Rediscovery (CLR),
commissioned by Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust for 10 weekly
half-day sessions. Two CLR staff prepared and attended groups,
collaborating with EIS staff who facilitated transport and supported
individuals (up to 15), with an overall staff:participant ratio of at
least 1:3.

The group included a short walk, refreshments, contemplative time and
activities such as learning about plants and habitats, maintaining the
woodland area and cooking.

All participants were aged between 18–30 and had experienced FEP, some
demonstrating active psychotic symptoms. Target problems included
isolation, anxiety and depression.

.. _sec2:

Ethics and consent
==================

This study was conducted as a service evaluation and did not require
research ethics approval. All participants gave written consent for data
to be collected and used within evaluations of the service.

.. _sec3:

Data collection and analysis
============================

Participants completed the 15-item Questionnaire about the Process of
Recovery (QPR) at weeks 1, 3, 6 and 10. The QPR has good internal
consistency, high test–retest reliability and convergent
validity.\ :sup:`18,19` ‘Reliable change’, an estimate of statistical
significance of change in outcome scores, was calculated using the
Jacobson–Truax formula with published Cronbach's alpha and standard
deviation.\ :sup:`20,21` Participants in the final session also
completed a semi-structured service evaluation questionnaire and the NHS
Friends and Family Test (FFT).\ :sup:`22`

Qualitative data were invited through free-text portions of the
evaluation questionnaire and through intervention summaries completed by
participants and staff. A 20 min focus group (*n* = 7) was convened in
the final session, facilitated by the group leader and transcribed by
the first author. All three authors independently performed thematic
analysis of the data.

.. _sec4:

Results
=======

The QPR 5-point Likert scale ranges from 1 (disagree strongly) to 5
(agree strongly). Mean QPR scores increased from 3.4 (*n* = 3) at week 1
to 3.8 at week 10 (*n* = 8). Four patients showed reliable improvement
and one showed reliable deterioration for those with data at two time
points (*n* = 8).

All participants present at week 10 (*n* = 5) recommended the group on
the FFT.\ :sup:`22`

Results of the evaluation questionnaire (at week 10) are shown in `Table
1 <#tab01>`__. Table 1Participants’ (*n* = 8) scores on the service
evaluation questionnaire (at week 10)Mean (median)\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ I
feel more connected to the world around me4.4 (4)My emotional and
psychological well-being has improved4.3 (4)My recovery has been
helped4.1 (4)I have found ways to manage difficult emotions3.5 (3.5)I
have found things that can help me in a crisis3.8 (4)I have connected
with other people in a positive way4.8 (5)I have had some difficult
social encounters3.4 (3)I have been more worried about the world around
me2.5 (2.5)I feel more hopeful3.9 (4)I have felt more confident about
going to new places3.4 (4)I have learnt new skills4.3 (4)I have felt
more confident about meeting people4 (4)I have made friendships which
may continue4.1 (4) [1]_

All authors were concordant on two higher-order themes from the
qualitative data. The first was connection with others and nature.
Participants described reduced isolation and improved relationships:
“‘It's therapeutic to sit round a fire with other people […] it's nice
to feel connected.’‘The difference […] I'm not isolated […] I can feel
normal. You go to doctor's appointments, you're not part of the 9–5 but
we are still here.’‘I feel […] awe/curiosity for the natural world.’”

A second overarching theme was of positive change in self, including
skills development and emotional change. This was expressed as feeling
‘confident to do things’ or ‘I enjoyed the cooking […] it helped
distract me more, and it's skills I have used at home’. Participants
appreciated creativity and the chance to ‘take something away’ –
including physical objects, memories and new skills. They described
feelings of calmness: ‘100% impact. I feel better about myself […] I
feel supported, I feel able. I have found stillness, calmness […]. It is
very healing’. Staff noted that participants appeared more relaxed in
the woodland group than in other settings.

Particularly relevant to this group were repeated suggestions that the
group enabled changed perspectives on psychosis. One participant wrote
‘[it] showed me what's real in my […] psychotic state’ and another ‘[it]
helps me understand other people's perception of psychosis’.

Barriers to participation included short sessions and poor weather. No
adverse events, near misses or concerns regarding risky behaviour were
reported.

.. _sec5:

Discussion and conclusions
==========================

This evaluation offers promise for green care as an intervention in FEP.
Unusually, group attendance improved over time and all participants
recommended it. Sequential QPR measures showed positive trends across
all recovery domains; additionally, attendees described increased
insight and contextualisation of difficulties, alongside distraction
from problematic symptoms. Participants spontaneously discussing their
beliefs and experiences, potentially enabled by the attention-restoring
and stress-reducing properties of the woodland environment, seems to
have encouraged reflection and reality testing. The group was
therapeutic, with features of universality, development of socialising
skills and interpersonal learning.\ :sup:`23`

Feedback for improvement was sparse. The location, with associated
travelling costs, and the intensive EIS staff involvement were cited as
barriers to re-commissioning. CLR staff reported that the ‘scaffolding’
provided by NHS support enabled them to facilitate the group. Without
this early input, successful engagement of this patient group seems less
likely. Full economic (and carbon) costings, including staff resource,
should be part of future evaluations and commissioning for such groups,
as within the wider social prescribing context.\ :sup:`24`

The findings are limited by small sample size, areas of incomplete data
and use of patient-reported outcome scales only. We have no data from
those who chose not to attend the intervention. Although qualitative
analysis allows themes to emerge from the data, defining components and
aspects of the intervention which may be poorly understood,\ :sup:`25`
thematic saturation was likely not reached, and participants may have
felt constrained by facilitator presence in the focus group. Further
exploration of the increased reflective ability on personal psychotic
experiences that participants reported feeling within the grounding and
supported woodland setting would be particularly helpful.

Initiatives to boost green prescribing are expanding.\ :sup:`26` This is
a preliminary report, indicating promising features for green care as a
sustainable intervention in EIS. As a community-based intervention it is
empowering and there is potential benefit from developing nature
connectedness, which is associated with increased conservation
behaviours.\ :sup:`27` Although further exploration of the benefits of
green care, including its influence on psychotic experience and
longer-term outcomes, is needed, the experiences this group describe
suggest that nurturing opportunities for patients to access nature could
promote recovery and rebalance relationships with the environment.

Thanks to Marina Robb, Circle of Life Rediscovery, and to the Hailsham
Early Intervention Service.

**Sharon Cuthbert** is a consultant psychiatrist with Sussex Partnership
NHS Foundation Trust, based at Millview Hospital, Hove, UK. **Harriet
Sharp** is an Academic Clinical Fellow in psychiatry with Sussex
Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, Hove, UK. **Clio Berry** is a lecturer
in Healthcare Evaluation and Improvement in Primary Care and Public
Health at Brighton and Sussex Medical School, Brighton, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available on
request from the corresponding author. The data are not publicly
available owing to potential compromise of the privacy of those who
contributed.

S.C. gathered and analysed evaluation and focus group data and produced
the first draft. H.S. and C.B. contributed to qualitative analysis and
contributed to subsequent drafts. All authors meet ICJME criteria for
authorship.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. [1]
   Scores are on a 5-point Likert scale: 1, ‘strongly disagree’, 5
   ‘strongly agree’.
