---
author:
- Claire Hilton
date: 2021-02
institute:
- "Historian in Residence, Royal College of Psychiatrists. email:
  <claire.hilton6@gmail.com>"
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
title: Healthcare poverty-inequality and government quick fixes
---

I welcome the editorial by Peter Byrne and Adrian James^1^ on
poverty-inequality, and their note about lessons from history. Reports
indicating the damage to health caused by poverty-inequality in Britain
go back at least as far as Benjamin Seebohm Rowntree\'s study of York
around 1900, Julian Tudor Hart\'s 'inverse care law' in 1971, and the
government-commissioned and suppressed Black Report of 1980.^2^ The
narrative of governments abandoning some of the most deprived and
vulnerable people in society is ongoing.

As Byrne and James point out, people with severe mental illness today
have an additional layer of disadvantage, a 'lower status conferred on
them', a state of 'subcitizenship', due to stigma and marginalisation,
associated with societal and government disinclination to resource care
for them. This too is long term. In 1908, psychiatrist William
Stoddart^3^ accused the asylum leadership (which had statutory
responsibility for the care of mentally unwell people) of having
'excessively economical tendencies', neglecting their patients, the
subcitizens of their time. This neglect was associated with adverse
outcomes, such as excess morbidity and mortality from physical illness:
in asylums, the death rate from tuberculosis, a poverty-related
potentially preventable disease, was ten times higher than in the
community. Then, as now, it was convenient for the authorities to
attribute high rates of physical illness to a person\'s underlying
mental disorder, rather than providing resources to allow services to
support those patients adequately, whether in the asylums of the past or
in the community today.

Government bodies have repeatedly sought the cheapest short-term
measures for managing mental disorders, overlooking social and
environmental root causes of the problems and failing to consider
longer-term health and social benefits of adequate resourcing. Sometimes
these principles extend to public health more generally. Perhaps the
most outstanding recent demonstration of a quick-and-cheap government
fix was the advice at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic for
everyone to take vitamin D, based on the finding of high mortality from
COVID-19 in Black and minority ethnic groups, who are particularly
likely to have low levels. If vitamin D has any effect, it appears to be
non-specific.^4^ In other words, the quick-and-cheap fix did not work.
Rather, COVID-19 deaths, as Byrne and James remind us, are associated
with social deprivation, which may also be associated with low vitamin
D. Vitamin D won\'t fix the real problems.
