---
abstract: |
  # Aims and Method {#sec_a1}

  Twelve intellectual disability psychiatry trainee representatives and
  13 training programme directors were surveyed to assess the current
  state of training, to establish what motivated specialty trainees to
  choose intellectual disability psychiatry, and to explore issues that
  might affect retention.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  The combined survey response rate was 83%. All trainees had chosen
  intellectual disability psychiatry after experience in either their
  personal or working life. Overall, specialty trainees were satisfied
  with their training; the majority felt supported to meet training
  requirements. Trainee isolation was the main concern for current
  trainees.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  Recruitment for specialty training in intellectual disability
  psychiatry is acknowledged to be a concern for workforce planning and
  could affect access to and quality of psychiatric care for people with
  intellectual disability. The results of this survey could be used as a
  guide to improve efforts to attract trainees. Acknowledging and
  reducing trainee isolation could improve trainee morale.
author:
- Catherine Walton
- Fionnuala Williams
- Simon Bonell
- Mary BarrettCorrespondence to Catherine Walton
  (<catherine.walton@wales.nhs.uk>)
date: 2021-02
institute:
- 1Swansea Bay University Health Board, UK
- 2Perth & Kinross Learning Disability Team, UK
- 3Plymouth Community Learning Disabilities Team, UK
- 4Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
title: "The current state of training in psychiatry of intellectual
  disability: perspectives of trainees and trainers"
---

People with intellectual disability have higher rates of mental health
problems than the general population, estimated at between 30 and
50%.^1,2^ The complex interplay of predisposing biological,
psychological and social risk factors for an individual with
intellectual disability will have a significant effect on their
presentation, which may not fit the 'classic' models of psychiatric
presentations. Associated physical health problems such as epilepsy and
sensory and communication problems can further complicate the
presentation of psychiatric disorders. Social and environmental factors
have a major role. Mental capacity, choice and control are also
important issues to consider. These factors can make working in the
specialty of psychiatry of intellectual disability challenging yet
highly interesting and rewarding. Owing to clinical complexity,
psychiatrists rarely work alone; there is a strong emphasis on
multidisciplinary working and regular co-working with social care.
However, psychiatrists may work as the sole doctor within a
multidisciplinary team. These teams may be geographically distinct, at
some distance from each other and based away from mainstream psychiatry
colleagues.^3^ This can pose particular challenges for trainees in
intellectual disability psychiatry, and there is evidence to suggest
that trainees can feel isolated.^4^

Speciality training in psychiatry of intellectual disability in the UK
comprises 3 years of training after attaining membership of the Royal
College of Psychiatrists. This is in order to attain the Certificate of
Completion of Training in Psychiatry of Learning Disability awarded by
the General Medical Council (GMC). Trainees apply for a training post in
a specific geographical area of the UK and usually rotate between a
range of community and in-patient posts.

Recruitment in psychiatry in the UK has long been acknowledged as a
concern in terms of workforce planning, with a lack of trainees
recruited to fill gaps left by those retiring.^5^ Recruitment at the
level of core training continues to be less than required -- in 2012,
78% of year 1 posts were filled^6^ -- and has remained static, with 78%
of posts being filled in 2018.^7^ The 'Choose Psychiatry' campaign by
the Royal College of Psychiatrists has aimed to improve recruitment to
the specialty and successfully bolstered numbers of doctors entering
core training by 30% between 2017 and 2018; however, the overall picture
is that entry rates into the specialty remain similar to those of
2012.^8^

Once trainees have completed core training, they apply for specialty
training posts. The fill rates for specialty training posts in
psychiatry of intellectual disability do not compare favourably with
those of other similarly sized subspecialties. Whereas fill rates have
fluctuated for the other psychiatric subspecialties, recruitment has
been especially poor in psychiatry of intellectual disability, where
there have never been more than 30% of vacancies filled in each
recruitment round since 2017.^9^ This is in spite of it scoring higher
than general adult psychiatry (GAP), old age psychiatry, or child and
adolescent psychiatry for overall trainee satisfaction in the 2019 GMC
National Training Survey.^10^ Clearly, recruitment to the specialty is a
challenge. It is predicted that there could be a shortfall in
consultants in the specialty by 2033 of between four and 26
full-time-equivalent posts.^11^ Such data suggests a significant effect
on the psychiatric care this vulnerable population will receive.

In order to inform future efforts to improve recruitment, we undertook a
survey to investigate the reasons current trainees chose psychiatry of
intellectual disability. We also assessed the current status of
intellectual disability training in the UK by surveying the opinions of
individuals currently in training and their trainers.

# Method {#sec1}

## Setting {#sec1-1}

This survey was aimed at trainers and trainees currently working in
psychiatry of intellectual disability in the UK. All training programme
directors (TPDs) and the network of Regional Trainee Representatives for
psychiatry of intellectual disability were approached in order to obtain
a spread of opinion across the four nations.

## Ethical considerations {#sec1-2}

An introduction to the survey gave potential respondents information
regarding the aims and objectives of the survey. Implied consent was
assumed by completion of the survey. The survey was created and agreed
by the Specialty Advisory Committee of the Faculty of Psychiatry of
Intellectual Disability.

## Data protection {#sec1-3}

Participants were approached using the email address provided to the
Faculty. Once the survey link had been used, no further identifiable
personal information was required.

## Survey design {#sec1-4}

A pilot survey of TPDs had been undertaken 1 year previously; the
findings from this, along with information from the 2018 GMC Survey
Specialty Specific Questions, were used to design the survey questions.
The survey was created with SurveyMonkey and consisted of nominal and
free-text questions. All questions requiring more than a 'yes' or 'no'
response had free-text responses. Functionality and content validity
were assessed by the authors, including both trainees and consultant
psychiatrists.

The adaptive questionnaire design used two separate versions, depending
upon whether the respondent identified as a trainee representative or as
a TPD. Each version posed the same questions but from the perspective of
either a trainee or a trainer. (The full survey is available in the
supplementary material, available online at
<http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.68>).

## Survey distribution {#sec1-5}

The survey link was emailed to the regional trainee representatives and
TPDs in the specialty for each of the regions. The survey remained open
for 6 weeks during early 2019. There was no incentive offered to
complete the survey. A reminder email with a link was sent 1 week prior
to the closure of the survey period.

## Response rate {#sec1-6}

There are 16 regions of the UK, with a total of 40 intellectual
disability psychiatry specialty trainees, each represented locally by a
trainee representative and a TPD. From the perspective of the trainee
representatives, one region did not have an allocated representative,
and one regional trainee representative was on long-term leave.
Therefore, 12 of a possible 14 regional representatives responded,
giving a trainee response rate of 86%. Of the TPDs, three individuals
from the possible regions did not respond. The response rate for the
trainers was 81%, giving a combined survey response of 83%. All returned
surveys were fully completed with no missing answers.

## Analysis {#sec1-7}

All nominal responses were collated using the SurveyMonkey software.
Primarily quantitative data were produced. The free-text answers were
analysed separately by the four authors, and responses from the
participants were used to illustrate the qualitative findings of the
study.

# Results {#sec2}

## Respondent demographics {#sec2-1}

Of the trainee respondents, one was an ST4 trainee, two were ST5 and
nine were ST6. For one area of the UK, there was no response from either
the trainee representative or the TPD.

## Analysis of responses {#sec2-2}

### Recruitment: the attraction of psychiatry of intellectual disability for a prospective trainee {#sec2-2-1}

#### Factors influencing choice of psychiatry of intellectual disability training {#sec2-2-1-1}

Trainees were asked about their core training experience. The majority
of the trainees had completed a post in psychiatry of intellectual
disability, or in both psychiatry of intellectual disability and child
and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS). One trainee had completed
neither. Trainees were asked to use free text to explain what factors
had led them to choose higher training in psychiatry of intellectual
disability. All 12 trainee representatives commented that their core
training post had influenced their decision-making with respect to
higher training options, from 'opening their eyes' to psychiatry of
intellectual disability to 'cementing a decision'. Other factors
influencing their choice included seeking a good work--life balance and
working within a multidisciplinary team. Medical school experiences were
viewed as important, with one trainee having been influenced by a
lecture given in medical school.

Personal experience outside medical training also had a strong influence
for some respondents, with one trainee having worked with people with
intellectual disability in a social care setting as a medical student,
and another having a close family member with intellectual disability.

Fifty-four per cent of TPDs reported that core trainees in their area
were required to undertake a developmental psychiatry post (CAMHS or
intellectual disability) as part of their training, whereas 31% reported
that this was not mandatory within the local training programme. The
remainder were unsure. Currently, although competencies in developmental
psychiatry are an important part of the core psychiatry curriculum and
are best met through gaining experience in a developmental psychiatry
post, this is not an essential training requirement.^12^

#### The role of dual training in improving recruitment {#sec2-2-1-2}

Dual training opportunities are now being considered as an option to
improve the breadth of training, to meet the needs of a changing
population and to improve recruitment. The only approved option
currently available with psychiatry of intellectual disability is CAMHS,
and very few training posts are advertised for this combination at
present.

Trainees were asked whether they would have considered applying for dual
training had it been available. Ten of the 12 trainees confirmed that
they would have, with the majority opting for general adult psychiatry
(GAP) or old age psychiatry. The reasons for choosing these
subspecialties included the cross-over of cases, in particular, for
individuals with mild or borderline intellectual disability in GAP, and
those with dementia in old age psychiatry. More general reasons included
a wider range of job opportunities for the future and an extension of
training. From the perspective of trainers, 12 of the 13 TPDs responded
that they would consider offering dual training posts. Most trainers
also suggested considering dual training with forensic psychiatry. Other
suggestions were GAP, old age psychiatry and CAMHS. Again, the reason
cited for these choices was the overlap of the specialties. Dual
training combining forensic psychiatry with intellectual disability was
mentioned by one trainer as a need from the perspective of workforce
planning in order to meet the requirements of the Transforming Care
Programme.^13^

### Retention: the current state of psychiatry of intellectual disability training in the UK {#sec2-2-2}

#### Special interest sessions {#sec2-2-2-1}

Special interest sessions are an opportunity for trainees to broaden
their perspectives and portfolio, to gain further experience and to
understand other specialties allied to psychiatry of intellectual
disability. Trainees should be able to spend up to a day each week on a
special interest session or research of their choice. All trainees
responded that their special interest sessions met their training needs.
[Figure 1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"} illustrates the breadth of options
currently used by trainees. Fig. 1Special interest sessions. ADHD,
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder; ASD, autism spectrum disorder;
ID, intellectual disability; SOTP, sex offender treatment programme.

Trainers responded that a wide range of special interest opportunities
were available in their area or in neighbouring areas. According to
trainees, barriers to accessing the sessions included a lack of time,
conflict with other clinical commitments and difficulties travelling
outside one\'s own trust for specific services.

#### Psychotherapy training {#sec2-2-2-2}

Half of the trainees surveyed responded that adequate supervised
psychotherapy learning opportunities were available to them. Of those
able to access these opportunities, 100% responded that the modalities
available met their training curriculum needs.

The barriers to adequate opportunities, according to trainees, included
a lack of supervision, with team psychologists often having their own
students to supervise. Trainees sought clarity on the requirements for
psychotherapy training, with a lack of formally agreed methods of
supervision being cited as a barrier to accessing adequate experience.

The TPD responses were similar, with 46% responding that there was
limited or no availability of psychotherapy opportunities available.
Free-text responses mentioned the need for clarification of exactly what
was required in terms of training needs for the intellectual disability
population, and that a broad interpretation of what a psychotherapy
learning opportunity entailed was required in order to allow a trainee
to gain adequate experience.

#### Research {#sec2-2-2-3}

As illustrated in [Fig. 2](#fig02){ref-type="fig"}, trainees were
generally positive about accessing research opportunities in psychiatry
of intellectual disability. Barriers cited by both trainees and trainers
included a lack of protected time to undertake research and a clash with
clinical commitments. Trainees found accessing research networks
difficult, as well as knowing how to engage with an appropriate
supervisor in the local area with specific intellectual disability
research interests. It was acknowledged that it can be difficult to
complete research projects during the 3 year training period. However,
TPDs were very positive about research opportunities and all stated that
they knew of research opportunities for trainees. Fig. 2Trainee
responses: are you adequately supported to carry out research?

#### Clinical governance: audit and quality improvement {#sec2-2-2-4}

Responses indicated that audit networks have been established, and that
70% of trainees had a great deal or a lot of support to access these
opportunities. Trainees reported that the consultant body tended to be
experienced in this area and could offer support and project
opportunities. Trainees also responded positively regarding access to
quality improvement training, with 90% having lots of or moderate
support. This appeared to be supported by pre-existing networks in
place. However, with quality improvement being a relatively new entity,
the lack of consultant experience in this area was cited as a barrier.
This was reflected in the TPD responses, with two of the 13 (15%)
respondents mentioning lack of experience and training of consultants in
quality improvement as a barrier, along with a need for more clarity as
regards training requirements in this area.

#### Out-of-hours experience {#sec2-2-2-5}

Psychiatry of intellectual disability trainees are required to gain
experience of emergency psychiatry, part of which includes being on an
on-call rota for out-of-hours work. The rotas can vary regionally. As
shown in [Fig. 3](#fig03){ref-type="fig"}, most trainees participated in
a GAP rota; the trainees undertaking this rota found it a positive
experience owing the opportunity to gain to increased emergency
psychiatry and Mental Health Act experience as a trainee. There were
some opposing opinions, however, with some trainees stating that the GAP
rota did not give them enough out-of-hours experience in psychiatry of
intellectual disability. Overall, trainees were positive, and
out-of-hours work was found to meet training needs. The responses of the
TPDs reflected those of the trainees; overall, they felt that the
experience met training requirements. Fig. 3Psychiatry of intellectual
disability (ID) out-of-hours experience.

#### Less than full time (LTFT) training {#sec2-2-2-6}

Of the 12 trainees, three were LTFT trainees. All replied positively
regarding whether the current psychiatry of intellectual disability
training programme supported their training needs. TPD responses were
generally positive, indicating a belief that LTFT trainees receive
adequate support to meet their training needs. However, it was noted
that it can be more difficult for these trainees to access conferences
and courses. One TPD stated that the support offered to LTFT trainees
was a strength of the training scheme.

#### Retention: trainee well-being and support {#sec2-2-2-7}

All trainees responded that they felt supported in the training
programme. Regular contact with approachable TPDs was cited as
important. Trainees mentioned regular academic programmes and meetings
with other trainees and clinicians as important aspects of trainee
support. Supervisors who were available and approachable maintained this
support.

One area has introduced a scheme allowing trainees to give feedback to
neutral senior colleagues about training needs, which is then fed
directly to the local TPD and Specialist Training Committee; this was
reported by the local TPD to have been received positively.

Trainers and trainees both acknowledged trainee isolation; 30% of TPDs
and 36% of trainees stated that they had experienced or noted trainee
isolation personally. Reasons given for this were that psychiatry of
intellectual disability is a small training scheme spread over wide
geographical areas; therefore, in some areas, there are limited
opportunities to meet with other trainees regularly. Solutions currently
in place include a continuing professional development forum and digital
solutions such as intellectual disability trainee WhatsApp groups. A
lack of appointments to certain geographical regions, or trainees
leaving posts, has also added to isolation in some regions.

# Discussion {#sec3}

The aim of this survey was to assess trainees' reasons for choosing
psychiatry of intellectual disability and to find out more about the
current state of intellectual disability training in the UK. The survey
had a good overall response rate, with 86% of regional trainee
representatives and 81% TPDs responding.

In terms of choice of specialty, it was apparent that previous
experience within the specialty was critical to the choice of the
majority of trainees. In the main, this was core training experience,
but trainees highlighted other experiences such as medical school
lectures as having an effect. The influence of experience in working
with individuals with intellectual disability on choice of future work
has been demonstrated widely, including in other health services, for
instance, in Australia.^14^ It is concerning, therefore, to find that at
least one-third of areas do not currently require core trainees to
undertake a clinical placement in developmental psychiatry. At present,
a review of the curricula is being undertaken by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists; therefore, there is potential for this to change in the
future.

Recruitment strategies need to include lobbying for more core psychiatry
trainees to have opportunities to rotate through psychiatry of
intellectual disability. Forging links with medical schools and offering
regular experiential and teaching opportunities would also raise the
profile of psychiatry of intellectual disability. Current intellectual
disability trainees have presented at the National Student Psychiatry
Conference in order to improve knowledge of the specialty and access to
further experiences.

It was apparent that current trainees were very interested in the option
of dual training with another specialty to broaden training
opportunities and experiences. This finding is in keeping with the
findings of a recent survey of dual trainees in old age psychiatry and
GAP^15^ and fits with recommendations from the Shape of Training review
(2013),^16^ which aimed to broaden training experiences to meet changing
patient requirements. The option of dual training is currently being
explored by the Psychiatry of Intellectual Disability Specialist
Advisory Committee as part of the curriculum rewrite process and should
also be considered by the wider Faculty. However, the current system of
advertising training numbers may be a barrier to offering further dual
training opportunities. The system allows very little flexibility, which
will need to be addressed.

Overall, trainees and trainers responded positively to questions about
current training. All the trainees felt supported, including positive
responses from LTFT trainees. Trainees felt supported to undertake
special interest sessions and had undertaken a broad range of these.
Responses to questions about research opportunities were more varied,
with common barriers cited by both trainees and trainers; these were
mainly due to a lack of protected time to undertake research.
Psychotherapy training, where available, was reported to be of a quality
such that trainees were able to meet the requirements of the curriculum,
but it was clear that there were some regions where trainees were unable
to access adequate supervision and support. Out-of-hours experience
varied between regions, but overall trainees felt that this met their
training needs.

A third of both groups reported trainee isolation. Reduced recruitment
to training posts in certain regions and trainees leaving the specialty
were among the reasons given for this. Trainee isolation has been
reported previously in the literature,^4^ and physical isolation can be
further compounded by feelings of stigma by association -- the process
by which relatives, friends, support staff and associates feel
stigmatised by contact with a stigmatised or marginalised group, such as
those caring for a vulnerable patient group with intellectual disability
who face marginalisation and disadvantage in their daily lives.^3^
Acknowledgment of this as an issue continues and there is ongoing work
in this area. Psychiatry of intellectual disability trainees are now
invited to join 'Basecamp', an online forum where trainees can
communicate with each other, ask questions and raise concerns. It is
managed by the national trainee representatives who meet regularly with
the Faculty of Psychiatry Intellectual Disability Executive Committee
and the Specialty Advisory Committee. On a more local level, regular
meetings with TPDs, academic sessions and trainee networks have reduced
trainee isolation and have received positive feedback locally. Trainee
support groups for issues specific to intellectual disability trainees
have worked well for geographical networks of trainees.^3^

In the current climate of political and economic uncertainty,
recruitment to medicine in general is a challenge. Doctors are choosing
to take longer breaks between foundation and specialty training,^17^ and
recruitment to core training posts remains static.^6,7^ Psychiatry has
traditionally been considered a less glamorous 'Cinderella specialty',
losing out in recruitment to the larger medical specialties. As a small
subspecialty, intellectual disability psychiatry loses out again among
the psychiatric subspecialties.^9^ Investment in recruitment with
campaigns such as 'Choose Psychiatry'^18^ will go some way towards
increasing awareness of the benefits of training in psychiatry in
general. It is also hoped that the introduction of foundation
fellowships^19^ will encourage high-quality trainees into psychiatry.

For intellectual disability psychiatry training specifically, there is
further scope to highlight the results of the GMC National Training
Survey data^7^ and overall trainee satisfaction rates, which reflect
favourably on intellectual disability training. The positive results of
this survey also highlight the benefits of intellectual disability
training in terms of trainee support, scope for LTFT training, and
flexibility in special interest sessions and research. Opportunities to
experience intellectual disability psychiatry are widening and include
an intellectual disability psychiatry taster programme that has been
developed successfully in the West Midlands.^20^ The development of
foundation programme posts in intellectual disability psychiatry could
increase exposure to the specialty, and there is scope to broaden this
further, with five foundation posts currently available in the UK. The
2019 National Intellectual Disability trainee conference, held in
Cardiff, offered discounted entry for medical students and for
foundation and core trainees. Such national events showcase the scope of
opportunity within intellectual disability psychiatry and give
opportunities for all, including medical students, to contribute posters
and presentations, increasing audience participation and interest.

A strength of this survey was its good response rate, at 83%, with full
completion of the returned questionnaires. The survey covered multiple
geographical regions for both trainees and TPDs. There was one
geographical region with no representation from either trainer or
trainee. However, the accuracy and generalisability of the findings were
limited by the low overall number of participants. The selection of only
trainee representatives and TPDs could have led to bias, for example,
toward selecting those trainees with a more positive training
experience. The personal characteristics of a trainee representative
could also cause bias, with such representatives potentially being more
engaged and having more awareness of opportunities in their local area.
TPDs may offer a better training experience to trainees on placement
with them and therefore assume that all other posts in the respective
deanery are also positive. Sending the survey out to all trainees was
considered; however, when this has been attempted with similar surveys
in the past, the response rate has been poor, and data protection
requirements led to further complications. It was felt that targeting
trainee representatives was likely to lead to a better response rate and
a broader picture of training across the UK. The fact that certain
regions did not have a response from both trainee and TPD could have
biased results, with those regions potentially having empty posts or
reflecting areas with more challenging training experiences or less
engaged trainers. Broadening the scope of the survey to capture the
views of core trainees who did not choose intellectual disability
psychiatry, and the reasons why, would be of particular value for future
recruitment.

# Conclusions {#sec4}

This survey of trainers and trainees across the UK indicates that,
overall, intellectual disability trainees are broadly positive about
their training and feel supported, with adequate training opportunities.
Trainee isolation is a theme that has been highlighted and might be
remedied by the improvement of trainee networks. The survey demonstrates
that there is scope to continue improving training opportunities, in
particular for psychotherapy and research. The opportunity for dual
training was popular with the survey cohort; this is a potential key
finding in terms of recruitment.

Trainees have provided insight into their reasons for choosing the
subspecialty. Hopefully, this will guide improvements in recruitment to
this rewarding subspecialty of psychiatry. The survey showed that a key
motivator for trainees selecting this specialty was having had a core
training placement in intellectual disability. Increasing the
availability of such opportunities may not only help to bring people
into the subspecialty, but also ensure that all trainees have a good
grasp of intellectual disability psychiatry, which is important whatever
specialty of psychiatry they ultimately choose. Recruitment to
psychiatry is a continuing concern, with current and long-term impact on
patient care to be considered. This survey contributes to a much broader
picture that needs further research to investigate key motivators and
barriers regarding choice of higher training specialties.

We thank Drs Ken Courtenay, Ashok Roy and John Russell for specific
advice, and for reviewing and commenting on the manuscript.

**Catherine Walton** is an ST6 in Psychiatry of Intellectual Disability,
Swansea Bay University Health Board, Cardiff, UK. **Fionnuala Williams**
is a Consultant in Psychiatry of Intellectual Disability, Perth &
Kinross Learning Disability Team, Murray Royal Hospital, Perth, UK.
**Simon Bonell** is a Consultant Psychiatrist for Adults with Learning
Disabilities and Training Programme Director for Learning Disability
Psychiatry, Peninsula Deanery, Plymouth Community Learning Disabilities
Team, Westbourne, Plymouth, UK. **Mary Barrett** is a Consultant
Psychiatrist for Adults with Learning Disabilities, East Midlands Region
Training Programme Director for Psychiatry of Learning Disability, and
Chair of the Psychiatry of Intellectual Disability Specialty Advisory
Committee, Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust, Learning Disability
Service, Leicester, UK.

Supplementary material is available online at
<https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.68>

C.W. was responsible for questionnaire design, interpretation of
results, and completion of the draft article. F.W. and M.B. were
responsible for questionnaire design, interpretation of results, and
review of draft article. S.B. was responsible for questionnaire design
and distribution, interpretation of results, and review of the draft
article.

# Declaration of interest {#nts4}

None.

# Supplementary material {#sec6}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.68.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::
