=========================================
Is climate change a mental health crisis?
=========================================

Daniel RomeuCorrespondence to Daniel Romeu (danielromeu@doctors.org.uk)
:Date: 2021-08

:Abstract:
   The Earth's climate is in a complex state of change as a result of
   human activity. The interface between climate change and physical
   health has received significant attention, but its effects on mental
   health and illness are less understood. This article provides an
   insight into the psychiatric sequelae of climate change, suggests
   strategies that psychiatrists can use to take action, and argues that
   it is their responsibility to do so.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Anthropogenic climate change is irrefutable and has become increasingly
difficult to ignore. It is currently considered by experts to represent
the largest existential threat to humanity, endangering life itself
through environmental degradation, rising ambient temperatures and
extreme weather events, among other mechanisms. Efforts to tackle this
complex and unpredictable issue have assumed national and international
priority, exemplified by the introduction of the 2008 Climate Change Act
and the International Paris Agreement, respectively. A global youth
movement calling for action on this matter has also received widespread
media attention.

The World Health Organization regards climate change as this century's
defining issue for health systems. The body of research connecting
climate change with health has primarily focused on physical health. Of
the literature investigating mental health, the majority either
describes effects on vulnerable localities or presents qualitative
data,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` limiting the universal generalisability of such
findings. Individuals with mental disorders are particularly susceptible
to the effects of climate change. This is hardly surprising, given its
widespread influence on physical, social and economic systems, all of
which are key determinants of psychological well-being. It is already
apparent that climate change is contributing to an impending and
inevitable global mental health crisis.

There is a growing wealth of research examining extreme weather events,
including hurricanes, floods and wildfires, in the context of mental
health.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Climate experts anticipate an increased
periodicity and intensity of such events in a collage of unfolding
disasters, rendering these crises harder to predict and respond to. The
Australian bushfires and Hurricane Eta are just two examples that caused
mass devastation in 2020.

It is helpful to divide the mental health consequences of extreme
weather events into direct and indirect.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Such events are
associated with mass destruction, and expose the population to direct
danger, physical injury and death. Immediate psychological responses
include acute stress and grief reactions. The long-term
psychopathological patterns that occur following trauma are well
understood, and it is recognised that extreme weather events increase
the prevalence of post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety,
substance misuse and stress-related relationship
difficulties.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

We must also consider the destructive impact of extreme weather events
on infrastructure, specifically properties, transport services, social
support networks and employment. They place additional strain on already
overstretched healthcare resources such as community and in-patient
mental healthcare systems. In 2005, Hurricane Katrina resulted in a
surge in neurotic and affective disorders that disproportionally
affected women, young people and those of lower socioeconomic
status.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` The identification of at-risk groups is
essential in ensuring effective prevention and treatment of
weather-related mental illness.

Associated with climate change are destructive, enduring and largely
irreversible long-term environmental changes – desertification,
deglaciation, thawing permafrost, rising sea levels, loss of
biodiversity and species extinction, to name a few. Sadness,
hopelessness, anxiety and grief reactions are recognised individual
psychological responses to environmental degradation.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`
Societal sequelae include scarcity of resources and involuntary
climate-related migration, both of which are likely to result in
increased armed conflict and exacerbation of mental health issues. Much
of the existing evidence of these responses to climate change come from
vulnerable areas, such as coastal and circumpolar regions, which should
be regarded as predictions of the future globally.

Global warming is an already demonstrable facet of climate change, and
rising temperatures are known to have adverse effects on mental health
outcomes. Associations between warmer temperatures and mania in older
people, transient affective disorders, substance misuse and psychiatric
hospital admissions have all been established
empirically.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` Furthermore, those affected by mental
illness are up to three times more likely to die from a heatwave than
those unaffected.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` Factors that may explain this
vulnerability include poorer baseline physical health, increased
isolation and institutionalisation, maladaptive behaviours and the
effects of psychotropic medications. Rates of suicide have consistently
been found to rise during heatwaves.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Global warming thus
represents a key factor influencing psychiatric morbidity and mortality.

Climate change has been shown to increase the risk, frequency and
distribution of foodborne, waterborne, vector-borne and zoonotic
infectious diseases.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` This is likely to be compounded by
an uncontrollable surge in global antimicrobial resistance. The profound
psychological burden of infectious diseases is plainly exemplified by
the COVID-19 pandemic. Restrictive measures, including quarantine,
isolation and social distancing, superimposed on vast economic setbacks
and a widespread unemployment crisis, have undeniably contributed to a
mental health emergency whose full extent is yet to be determined.

Individual psychological responses to COVID-19 are wide-ranging, from
anxiety and low mood to insomnia, denial, fear and even anger. The
phenomenon of ‘headline stress disorder’, a heightened emotional
reaction to seemingly endless news reports that can induce somatic
symptoms of anxiety, has been observed throughout the
pandemic.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Frontline healthcare workers were particularly
susceptible to psychological symptoms during the initial stages of the
outbreak,\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` and this disproportionate impact on our future
healthcare workforce will only inflate the magnitude of the crisis. It
is probable that ongoing climate change will bring about further
pandemics, and COVID-19 provides a means of predicting and mitigating
the psychiatric ramifications of new infectious diseases.

The above phenomena are already influencing diagnostic frameworks in
psychiatry. There is an advent of integrating new terminology for
climate-specific mental disorders into the lexicon, highlighting the
growing awareness of climate-driven psychological experiences.
‘Ecoanxiety’ relates to fears about environmental doom and uncertainty,
and ‘solastalgia’, a contraction of nostalgia and solace, conceptualises
psychological distress secondary to environmental degradation. A range
of ‘psychoterratic’ syndromes have since been described, in an attempt
to capture the diverse emotional disorders seen in response to climate
change.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`

At present, the DSM-5 and ICD-11 offer no specific references to mental
disorders related to climate change, but it is likely that such
phenomena will soon be incorporated. Psychiatric phenomenology has
historically adapted to contemporary cultural issues, and climate change
should be no exception. In 2008, Wolf and Salo described the first
patient diagnosed with a putative ‘climate change
delusion’.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` The patient in question was a 17-year-old boy
with a depressive illness, who refused to drink and compulsively checked
taps based on the belief that he would deprive others of water. Seasonal
affective disorder, now widely regarded as valid and common just 40
years after its first description, is a further example of the evolution
of psychiatric frameworks in response to environmental factors.

We have a moral and professional duty as mental healthcare professionals
to act on the impending climate-driven health crisis. Every-Palmer et al
identify the ‘CARM’ approach – collaborate, advocate, research and
mitigate – as a useful tool for conceptualising our opportunities to do
so.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

Interdisciplinary collaboration with policy makers, healthcare
organisations and other stakeholders represents the most comprehensive
and effective means of raising awareness of this emerging issue. The
*BMJ*, *Lancet* and *PLOS Medicine* have conveyed the responsibility of
mental health experts to provide clear information detailing the mental
health sequelae of climate change.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

It is best practice to treat patients holistically by considering the
environmental, social and economic determinants of health and illness.
Climate change and its associated complications are a prominent example
of such determinants. The literature consistently report a
disproportionate impact of climate-related psychological consequences
for those with pre-existing mental health issues. We must identify and
advocate for vulnerable populations, to ensure equity of resource
allocation.

Our understanding of the complex interactions within and between climate
change and mental health is in its infancy. Future research in the field
should be prioritised to attain a more concrete understanding of these
interactions, and to inform the development of effective interventions
for both prevention and treatment of climate-related mental health
issues. It is crucial that mental healthcare professionals anticipate
the inevitable psychological and psychiatric burden of climate change.

The future of global mental health and the planet is in our hands. We
should therefore strive to reduce the environmental impact of our
institutions and practices. As doctors, our carbon footprint from
clinical practice is ten times greater than that from our personal
lives.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` The Royal College of Psychiatrists’
Sustainability Committee has generated a summary of ten ways to reduce
one's footprint in the professional setting\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` – a good
starting point for those willing to make a difference. Mental health
professionals take pride in providing individualised care, but we must
acknowledge that continuing clinical practice that ignores this issue
will contribute to an international mental health crisis. Our decisions
will not be forgotten by the patients and psychiatrists of tomorrow.

**Daniel Romeu**, MB BChir MA (Cantab) PGCert, is an Academic Clinical
Fellow in General Psychiatry at the Leeds Institute of Health Sciences
in the School of Medicine, University of Leeds, UK. His clinical work as
a Core Psychiatry Trainee is in Acute Inpatient Services at Leeds and
York Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.
