============================================================================================================================
Referral of patients with emotionally unstable personality disorder for specialist psychological therapy: why, when and how?
============================================================================================================================



Matthew Roughley
Amy Maguire
Grace Wood
Tennyson LeeCorrespondence to Matthew Roughley (mattjroughley@gmail.com)
:Date: 2021-02

:Abstract:
   Although we commonly work with patients with emotionally unstable
   personality disorder (EUPD) in community mental health teams (CMHTs),
   only some enter evidence-based psychological therapies. Many patients
   are not considered ready to engage in specialist treatments and
   remain in CMHTs without any clear focus or structure to their
   treatment, which is unsatisfactory for patients, clinicians and
   services. We present a fictional case and synthesise available
   literature and lived experience to explore readiness and ways to
   promote it. We highlight relevant issues for trainees to consider in
   practice. Patients with EUPD who have not received specialist
   treatment can be considered in terms of the transtheoretical model's
   stages of change. Identifying a patient's stage can help guide how to
   increase readiness for referral and decide when to refer.
   Interventions available to all healthcare professionals which may
   promote readiness include: psychoeducation, personal formulations,
   crisis planning, goal-setting, peer support, distress tolerance
   skills, motivational interviewing and mindfulness.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Case scenario
=============

You are a psychiatry specialty trainee in a community mental health team
(CMHT) seeing Miss ML in a routine appointment. She is a 29-year-old
woman with emotionally unstable personality disorder (EUPD). She
presents repeatedly with suicidal thoughts and has had numerous
psychiatric admissions. She uses cannabis and alcohol in a binge
pattern. She self-harms regularly, typically following difficult
interpersonal events. You often feel unsure how you are helping Miss ML
other than monitoring her mental state and risk and reviewing
medication. At times you have felt irritated with her; she expects help
but does not seem to help herself.

In the appointment, Miss ML requests therapy. She says she wants help
with all the bad feelings, and wants to stop cutting but does not know
how. She asks you why she feels like this, and what does personality
disorder even mean? Miss ML complains that nobody understands her or is
helping her. She asks you directly: ‘Are you going to refer me for
therapy?’ You feel anxious as an earlier referral was declined by the
personality disorder service. You feel an enormous pressure to say you
will refer her again. What will you do?

In this paper we consider the following questions: •\ *Why* am I
referring for psychological therapy?•\ *When* should I refer for
psychological therapy?•\ *How* can I help a patient reach a stage where
they are ready to engage in psychological therapy?

.. _sec2:

Introduction
============

We commonly work with patients with EUPD in secondary care mental health
services. The prevalence of EUPD in this setting is estimated at
20%,\ :sup:`1` and it is associated with considerable suffering,
psychosocial impairment and high resource use.\ :sup:`2` A number of
evidence-based treatments are available, developed from cognitive or
behavioural therapies (e.g. dialectical behaviour therapy,
schema-focused therapy) or from psychodynamic/psychoanalytic origins
(e.g. mentalisation-based treatment, transference-focused
psychotherapy).\ :sup:`3` A significant number of patients, however,
will never enter such treatment. There are many different reasons for
this, but a proportion of patients do not reach a stage where they are
considered ‘ready’ to enter treatment. This potentially represents a
lost opportunity to improve functioning and reduce suffering.

Patients with EUPD who are not ready for specialist treatment may remain
in CMHTs, which poses recognised difficulties. Chaotic and risky
behaviour and social problems often interfere with treatment. Resolving
these ‘exclusion criteria’ can seem unrealistic.\ :sup:`4` Professionals
report feeling isolated and inexpert and that CMHTs are an interim ‘no
man's land’, where referrals for specialist treatment are difficult.
Patients report experiences of not being helped and being passed around
services (`Box 1 <#box1>`__).\ :sup:`4–6`

When considering psychological treatment for EUPD, the National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) advises considering the
patient's choice and preference, willingness to engage, motivation for
change, ability to work within a therapeutic relationship and
availability of support. However, they make no recommendations regarding
how to increase a patient's readiness for psychological
therapy.\ :sup:`7`

A systematic search was conducted to identify literature addressing
enhancing readiness of patients with EUPD for therapy. The EMBASE,
PsycINFO and CINAHL databases were searched using the National Health
Service's Healthcare Databases Advanced Search from inception to January
2019, combining terms relevant to personality disorder (personality
disorder*, EUPD), therapy (therap*, treat*) and readiness (readiness,
prepar*). None of the studies identified specifically examined methods
to increase readiness in EUPD. A theoretical model suggesting factors
influencing treatment readiness in personality disorder was identified.
Internal (patient) factors included: cognitive (problem recognition,
belief in ability to change), affective (emotional states and
regulation), volitional (motivation and pursuit of goals), traits
(impulsivity), relating (ability to trust and form a therapeutic
alliance) and comorbidity (co-occurring psychiatric or medical
illnesses). External factors included those related to the patient
(current life stressors, support network and practical barriers to
attendance) and service factors (accessibility, availability, staff
skill and motivation).\ :sup:`8`

.. _sec3:

Practical management
====================

.. _sec3-1:

Why am I referring?
-------------------

Clinicians should be mindful of why they are referring *this* patient at
*this* time? Although specialist EUPD treatments have demonstrated
effectiveness, referrals which are declined or do not lead to treatment
may lead to patients developing negative views about services and damage
confidence in their ability to change.

Indicators that a patient is not currently suitable for psychotherapy
include: gross instability of accommodation or finances, marked chaotic
or risky behaviour, and harmful or dependent alcohol or drug use.

If considering referral despite such factors, the clinician should
regard their own countertransference and whether they are referring as a
defence against feelings of anxiety, despair or even countertransference
hate (see below). It may be more appropriate to acknowledge their own
and the patient's feelings and construct a plan to work towards referral
using the interventions suggested below. Box 1Patient perspective.‘It
felt unjust, unfair and I was mystified when I was told I was not ready.
The consultant spoke to me like a child. They explained it was better to
wait than fail trying, which I appreciate more now but I was furious at
the time.‘The main issue affecting my readiness was alcohol. I had tried
and failed to stop drinking for years. Alcohol was my coping mechanism
and they wanted to me to stop but without giving me other ways to cope.
No service knew what to do with me and I was passed around. Eventually I
found Alcoholics Anonymous who really helped, they tolerated my erratic
behaviour and through them I met a community of other people with lived
experience of alcohol misuse and some with personality disorder. A
homeless charity provided practical support. Eventually my CMHT
consultant arranged a joint meeting with the alcohol service and the
personality disorder service to try and find a way forward. This felt
like a special gesture and that they were serious about helping me. I
wonder if I had sometimes been testing teams to see if they
cared.‘Becoming ready for therapy took years and was like chipping away
at a rock. I attempted suicide four times. Maybe if joint meetings and
developing clear plans had occurred sooner I would have been passed
around less and my journey would have been quicker and smoother.’

Patients may be displeased at a suggestion that they are ‘not ready’,
and this this should be communicated with care and validation. Senior
team member support may be beneficial. `Box 2 <#box2>`__ contains an
example of how this could be discussed with a patient. Box
2Communication suggestions for clinicians about readiness.‘It is really
positive you have asked for help with [list problems]. This is an
important first step. To take things forward from here and to benefit
from a specialist therapy, you would first need to address [specify
issues]. The reasons for this are, e.g. •Therapy focuses on how you
think and feel. For therapy to work, you need to be in touch with how
you are thinking and feeling. [Alcohol/illicit substances] can block or
numb your thoughts and feelings, which although it can help in the
short-term, will stop therapy working. We want to work with you, but you
will need to reduce [alcohol/illicit substances] and we can support you
through this.•Therapy can at times make people feel very distressed and
uncomfortable. At the moment, owing to [self-harm/active suicidality],
we do not think it would be safe for you to start therapy as it could
increase this. We will think with you about your crisis plan and ways to
help you reduce [self-harm/suicidal thoughts].I realise what I say may
be frustrating, but there are things other than therapy that can help
such as [suggest interventions], which may also help us in working
towards a referral for therapy.’

.. _sec3-2:

When should I refer?
--------------------

Readiness for referral can be considered in terms of the
transtheoretical model of stages of change;\ :sup:`9,10` in particular,
the *precontemplation*, *contemplation* and *preparation* stages.

Patients in the precontemplation stage are not aware of having a
problem, and there is no current intention to change behaviour. They
would be unlikely to recognise a diagnosis of personality disorder or
any contribution of personality traits to their problems. They do not
see a requirement to change their behaviour or have psychological
therapy. Some patients may report a wish to change in response to
external pressure, e.g. from family or social services. Once external
pressure is reduced, engagement may dwindle.

Patients in the contemplation stage are aware that a problem exists and
are seriously thinking about overcoming it but have not made a
commitment to take action. They have awareness of difficulties relating
to personality traits and express wishes to address these and change
their behaviour. They are considering the benefits of change in
comparison with the energy and effort of change.

Patients in the preparation stage combine intention and some behavioural
change. They have made some reductions in problem behaviours but have
not yet taken effective action, although they intend to do so soon. They
would be likely to recognise a diagnosis of personality disorder, have
the intention to change and be making small behavioural changes, e.g.
reducing self-harm or substance misuse. We suggest that patients in this
stage are most appropriate for referral.

The transtheoretical model has previously been applied to EUPD by
Livesley in his integrated treatment model.\ :sup:`11` This highly
developed framework for treating personality disorder combines and
coordinates different treatment modalities. Our simpler pragmatic
approach is aimed at generalists and is not a specialist treatment. Only
one study has examined the stages of change in relation to EUPD; it
showed that patients in precontemplation were most likely to drop out of
specialist treatment.\ :sup:`12`

Readiness for referral is also related to the services available, which
may have differing referral criteria and work with patients at different
stages of readiness. Liaison with the local personality disorder service
(see below) will help clarify this and determine the likelihood of
successful referral.

.. _sec3-3:

How can I help a patient with EUPD become ready to engage in psychological therapy?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The transtheoretical model also describes the processes by which change
occurs.\ :sup:`9,10` The processes of change that are important in the
precontemplation and contemplation stages include: consciousness raising
(increasing awareness of the causes and consequences of their problems),
self re-evaluation (assessment of self-image with and without problem
behaviours) and environmental re-evaluation (assessment of how behaviour
affects their environment, including relationships). Processes that are
important at later stages but which seem significant in EUPD include:
self-liberation (belief that change is possible and commitment to act),
contingency management (consequences of taking steps in a particular
direction), counterconditioning (learning healthier behaviours to
substitute problem behaviours) and stimulus control (avoiding triggers
of behaviour).

Many commonly used interventions (see below) utilise one or more of
these processes, which may help patients to progress from one stage to
the next. They can be used by any healthcare professional when trying to
enhance readiness for referral. The choice of intervention will be
guided by the patient's current stage of change, preference and
available resources. We suggest focusing on one intervention at a time
to avoid care becoming confused.

.. _sec3-4:

General principles
------------------

Some strategies and clinical issues are relevant at any stage of
readiness.

.. _sec3-4-1:

Common service factors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Successful treatments for EUPD (specialist or generalist) have common
factors including: •Focus on the therapeutic relationship, empathy and
validation;•promotion of patient self-agency;•helping patients identify
their emotions and the connections between events, emotions and
behaviours;•clinicians observant of their own thoughts and feelings and
an active system for support and supervision.\ :sup:`13`

Structured clinical management is a manualised generalist approach
utilising these factors and may be effective.\ :sup:`13`

.. _sec3-4-2:

Transference and countertransference
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Clinicians should be aware of their thoughts and feelings towards
patients with EUPD and how these may influence interactions and
decision-making. Thoughts and feelings commonly evoked by these patients
include: anxiety, rescue fantasies, anger, guilt, failure and even
hate.\ :sup:`14,15` If not processed, clinician responses can be
unhelpful or even dangerous; for instance, malice, when the clinician
may be sadistic or cruel, and aversion, which tempts the clinician to
abandon the patient.\ :sup:`15` These dynamics can also be played out at
a systems level and affect whole teams or services.

Managing countertransference is vital to accepting, tolerating and
containing such feelings. A sudden decision to refer or discharge a
patient needs to be assessed for whether it is an acting out of the
countertransference. Although this is a complex field, one approach is
for the clinician to first recognise their thoughts and feelings, digest
and try to understand them, then consider their response to them and
whether this seems appropriate or not.\ :sup:`16,17` Supervision or
Balint groups can be used to explore transference and
countertransference reactions.

.. _sec3-4-3:

Trauma
~~~~~~

Patients with EUPD may have experienced trauma and during the assessment
phase should be sensitively asked whether they wish to disclose trauma.
Trauma-informed approaches advocate thinking ‘what happened to you?’ as
opposed to ‘what is wrong with you?’

A number of principles of trauma-informed care overlap with the general
principles discussed above. These include trusting and transparent
relationships between clinicians and patients, collaboration, patient
empowerment and choice. Clinicians should also be mindful of the risk of
inadvertent re-traumatisation in their interactions with
patients.\ :sup:`18`

Some patients may agree with a formulation describing how traumatic
experiences might influence interpersonal problems, and may meet
caseness for EUPD but disagree with a ‘personality disorder’ diagnosis.
In this situation, the authors suggest trying to ascertain which
problems and goals are a priority for the patient to address, with
further discussions delegated to specialist personality disorder and
trauma services to determine which therapeutic approach may be
appropriate initially. There is debate regarding the overlap of
personality disorder and complex trauma, but this is beyond the scope of
this article.

The possibility of active trauma, e.g. domestic violence, should also be
considered, both for patient safety and as it would impair readiness.
Clinicians can provide advice, support and signposting to relevant
organisations and consider whether safeguarding is indicated.

.. _sec3-4-4:

Specialist personality disorder services
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a patient is not ready to engage in specialist treatment, personality
disorder services should provide advice and support to CMHTs. This can
include linking a personality disorder service team member to each CMHT.
This liaison service can help by discussing referrals, advising on
interventions and providing feedback if referrals have been declined or
treatment not initiated. Joint meetings and shared planning on how to
increase readiness should be offered. Some services use a shared active
list of patients in the pre-treatment stage as a means of supporting and
sharing responsibility with CMHT members. In addition, personality
disorder services should develop and provide training locally.\ :sup:`7`

.. _sec3-4-5:

Continuity
~~~~~~~~~~

Therapeutic alliance and relational continuity are of particular
importance when working with patients with EUPD; change of team members
can be experienced as a re-enactment of loss or abandonment and thus
should be avoided where possible.\ :sup:`13,19` However, this is
challenging in CMHTs with turnover of staff and trainees.

Although junior doctors change rotation it is essential for their
training to gain experience in assessing and managing patients with
EUPD. The transition between trainees should be recognised as
potentially difficult and planned for with clear communication and
structure. Personal formulations, crisis plans and goals should be
handed over to aid continuity.

NICE provides little guidance on the role of care coordinators in
EUPD.\ :sup:`7` More broadly, the Care Programme Approach is indicated
for patients who are at high risk and require multi-agency support,
active engagement, intense intervention and support with dual
diagnoses.\ :sup:`20` Whether patients meet this threshold is decided on
a case-by-case basis. A recent Royal College of Psychiatrists position
statement recommends that all patients in Tier 2 services (and above) be
allocated a long-term lead clinician who can support the patient through
the engagement process.\ :sup:`19` In our experience, patients with EUPD
present with a very wide range of functioning, risk and support needs,
and we suggest that care coordination is decided on a case-by-case
basis. Most CMHTs would require a significant increase in the number of
care coordinators to facilitate meaningful input for all patients with
EUPD. Possible alternatives include use of support workers and peer
support workers, with appropriate supervision, as a source of continuity
and assistance with goals. However, if more than one clinician is
working with a patient, clear communication and coordination are
essential to avoid splitting or a confusing approach.

.. _sec3-4-6:

Validation
~~~~~~~~~~

Patients with EUPD may have experienced invalidating
environments.\ :sup:`21,22` Validation and the process of listening and
understanding is central to many therapies for EUPD.\ :sup:`23,24`
Levels of validation include: being attentive and alert, enquiring then
reflecting back the patient's reported thoughts and feelings, reflecting
back observed non-verbal communication, and validating the patient's
experience based on the current context and their personal
history.\ :sup:`24`

.. _sec3-5:

Interventions suggested for patients in precontemplation stage
--------------------------------------------------------------

.. _sec3-5-1:

Psychoeducation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Educating patients (and significant others) about EUPD is an
intervention in itself.\ :sup:`25` The diagnostic criteria, e.g.
difficulty with relationships, emotion dysregulation, impulsivity and
hypersensitivity, can be linked to examples offered by the
patient.\ :sup:`13` Giving the diagnosis can be used to stimulate
reflection. Information can also be provided about the range and nature
of treatments available.

.. _sec3-5-2:

Personal formulation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Providing a diagnosis alone is insufficient; co-constructing a personal
formulation is key in exploring a person's understanding of their
problems.\ :sup:`19` One approach is the ‘5 Ps’ model (problems,
predisposing, precipitating, perpetuating and protective factors).
Through this process, ways to avoid or challenge precipitating and
perpetuating factors and strengthen protective factors can be
identified, as can goals to work towards.\ :sup:`17`

.. _sec3-5-3:

Goal-setting
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Clarifying a patient's goals, identifying obstacles to goal attainment
and considering how therapy might assist with these may increase
motivation to enter treatment.\ :sup:`26` Encouraging a patient to
evaluate how they and their life may look different in relation to their
goals could be part of this. Goals should be specific, with defined
patient and professional responsibilities. The clinician can help
identify manageable short-term treatment aims with achievable steps.
Long-term goals, e.g. those relating to employment, can give direction
to the treatment strategy.\ :sup:`7`

.. _sec3-5-4:

Crisis planning
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Collaborative crisis planning is important as part of risk management
and can be seen as an early form of treatment contracting. It promotes
safety and quicker recovery from crises. Steps include identifying
triggers, thoughts and feelings associated with an emerging crisis,
actions that can avert an escalating crisis and actions to avoid when in
crisis.\ :sup:`13`

.. _sec3-5-5:

Substance misuse
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Clinicians should assess the level of misuse regularly and clarify its
function. Active substance misuse reduces the benefits of therapy, and
harmful or dependent users are unlikely to be accepted into specialist
treatments. NICE advise referring patients with EUPD and dependence on
alcohol or substances to appropriate services; the care coordinator
should remain involved and provide information on community support
networks, e.g. Alcoholics Anonymous.\ :sup:`7` Distinctions can be made
between patients using as a form of self-harm, using to manage emotions,
and dependent use, although overlap does occur. If the use is viewed as
self-harm, general strategies to reduce self-harm can be applied, such
as delaying use after an urge, distraction, relaxation or finding other
outlets. Chain analysis can explore and link events leading to
use.\ :sup:`13`

.. _sec3-5-6:

Distress tolerance skills
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These skills help patients to manage intense emotional states, recognise
triggers and endure negative emotions so that problem-solving can occur.
Distress tolerance skills include distraction, self-soothing, relaxation
and acceptance.\ :sup:`27,28`

.. _sec3-5-7:

Housing and finances
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Stressors such as housing and finances may affect readiness for
treatment.\ :sup:`8` Support in stabilising a patient's social situation
is a therapeutic intervention and may support building a therapeutic
alliance.\ :sup:`13` Maslow's hierarchy of needs could be used as a
visual psychoeducational tool to explain the importance of addressing
physiological and safety needs before focusing on ‘higher’
needs.\ :sup:`29`

.. _sec3-6:

Interventions suggested for patients in contemplation stage
-----------------------------------------------------------

.. _sec3-6-1:

Motivational interviewing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Fluctuating engagement may be related to ambivalence about
change.\ :sup:`30` Using an overly directing style with patients can
result in resistance or passivity. Motivational interviewing involves
helping patients to say what they want to change, identify why (pros and
cons of change), gain confidence in their ability to change and consider
how they might change.\ :sup:`31` Motivational-based interventions can
increase motivation and confidence, and decrease substance use and risky
behaviours.\ :sup:`26,32`

.. _sec3-6-2:

Mindfulness
~~~~~~~~~~~

Mindfulness emphasises being present in the moment and increases
awareness and acceptance of experiences, which fosters emotional
processing and distress tolerance.\ :sup:`33` Mindfulness offers insight
into the ‘process’ of specialist treatments, as it creates a space
between thoughts and feelings.\ :sup:`34` Improvement in attention and
impulsivity was demonstrated when mindfulness was practised alongside
general psychiatric care in patients with EUPD.\ :sup:`35`

.. _sec3-6-3:

Peer support groups
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Learning from other patients at different stages of change can provide
patients with evidence that change is possible. Service user network
(SUN) projects are community-based support groups for patients with
EUPD. They can help patients develop ways of coping and reduce crises.
Use of SUN projects is associated with improved functioning and reduced
use of services.\ :sup:`36`

.. _sec3-6-4:

Offering a range of interventions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Specialist treatments are a significant commitment for patients in terms
of time and emotional expenditure. Initial use of lower-intensity or
alternative therapies, e.g. art, music or movement, could provide an
introduction to the nature of therapy, attending to a frame and
developing a trusting relationship with a therapist. Therapies which are
not based on verbal communication may also be more acceptable to some
patients. Although these are not evidence-based treatments for EUPD,
their completion could lead to referral for specialist treatment.

.. _sec3-6-5:

Volunteering or employment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Activities that help create structure and promote responsibility and
confidence in ability to change may be beneficial. Some CMHTs have
access to employment advisers with experience working with people with
mental health problems, who can be particularly helpful.

`Table 1 <#tab01>`__ groups the interventions suggested above into
internal and external factors and according to the stage of change of
the patient. Table 1Interventions which may increase readiness for
referral for specialist treatmentFactors affecting readinessStage of
changePrecontemplationContemplationInternal •Psychoeducation regarding
personality and diagnosis•Personal formulation•Collaborative
goal-setting•Crisis planning•Distress tolerance skills•Address substance
misuse •Psychoeducation regarding therapy•Collaborative
goal-setting•Mindfulness•Motivational interviewing•Lower-intensity or
alternative therapies, e.g. art, music or movement therapy•Peer support
groups, e.g. SUN projectExternal •Key worker or peer support
worker•Support for dependents or carers•Support or signpost regarding
domestic violence or other safety issues•Support or signpost regarding
social stressors, e.g. accommodation, finances •Support with employment
or volunteering•Address practical barriers to attendance, e.g. bus
pass•Support or signpost regarding social stressors, e.g. accommodation,
finances•Liaison with personality disorder service

.. _sec3-7:

Should I discharge?
-------------------

**‘**\ Precontemplation’ suggests that change will be considered at some
time in the future. Experience suggests this does not always occur,
raising the issue of how to manage such patients. To the best of our
knowledge, no evidence exists regarding whether to continue to try to
engage patients in a CMHT or discharge them. Opinions and practices
vary.

We suggest that patients in precontemplation should be offered
interventions as above, with an agreement between patient and clinician
regarding timeframe and responsibilities, e.g. attending appointments,
setting goals, and following crisis plans. After the agreed timeframe,
if there has been no clear benefit or effort to work towards goals or
adhere to responsibilities, then discharge could be considered. NICE
advises discussing the discharge process with the patient and agreeing a
care plan with steps to manage distress, cope with future crises and
re-engage in the future.\ :sup:`7` This should be clearly communicated
to the general practitioner, including how they can access support.

However, this approach may be challenging for patients with repeated
risky behaviour. It may be more pragmatic not to discharge but to focus
on promoting safety, emotion and behaviour regulation, and social
stability. It is noteworthy that being within a CMHT may offer some
containment and stability, even if this is not readily apparent. That
said, there are potential negative effects of prolonged unfocused CMHT
input, including ineffective resource use and the fostering of
dependence as opposed to recovery. As noted already, clinicians should
also be mindful of discharging in response to their countertransference.

.. _sec3-8:

Limitations
-----------

There are limitations in applying the transtheoretical model to EUPD. It
has typically been used in single health behaviours, e.g. smoking or
alcohol misuse, whereas multiple complex behaviours are present in EUPD.
We also note that a binary ready/not ready approach is an arbitrary and
artificial oversimplification of what is a complex dynamic process, and
it could be used inappropriately to obstruct access to treatment.
However, our systematic search did not identify any evidence regarding
increasing readiness in EUPD and, in the absence of other suggested
frameworks, we believe our model is pragmatic and can aid clinical
thinking and decision-making.

.. _sec4:

Conclusion
==========

EUPD is commonly encountered in mental health services, but some
patients are not at a stage where they are ready to engage in specialist
treatments. No guidelines exist regarding how to manage such patients,
and prolonged unfocused treatment in CMHTs is not ideal.

We suggest that readiness for referral can be considered in terms of the
transtheoretical model of stages of change. A range of approaches and
non-specialist interventions exist which can enhance readiness and which
can be used in a shared plan working towards referral for specialist
treatment. Further research is required into which approaches may best
increase readiness and what best practice is for patients who, despite
intervention, remain unable to engage in specialist treatment.

.. _sec5:

About the authors
=================

**Matthew Roughley** is a specialty trainee at the Centre for
Understanding Personality Disorder (CUSP), Deancross: Tower Hamlets
Personality Disorder Service, Mile End Hospital, East London NHS
Foundation Trust, UK. **Amy Maguire** is a counselling psychologist at
the Centre for Understanding Personality Disorder (CUSP), Deancross:
Tower Hamlets Personality Disorder Service, Mile End Hospital, East
London NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Grace Wood** is a People
Participation team member at Trust Headquarters, East London NHS
Foundation Trust, UK. **Tennyson Lee** is a consultant psychiatrist in
psychotherapy at CUSP, Deancross: Tower Hamlets Personality Disorder
Service, Mile End Hospital, East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK

We thank Orestis Kanter-Bax for his insightful comments on a draft of
the manuscript.

All authors (M.R., A.M., G.W. and T.L.) contributed to the conception,
drafting, revision and final approval of the manuscript. All authors
take responsibility for the accuracy and integrity of the work.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency or
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec6:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.48.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
