---
abstract: |
  In most countries, social or behavioural interventions are recommended
  for autism. However, in France, psychoanalysis is still used, despite
  objections by patients, families and mental health experts. Supporters
  of psychoanalysis maintain that the choice of therapeutic approach is
  a matter of cultural preference, and that objections to psychoanalysis
  arise from misunderstandings. We argue that more deep-rooted problems
  are the lack of an evidence base for psychoanalysis and its focus on
  sexual relationships between children and adults, which demonises
  mothers and can put children at risk of abuse. Furthermore,
  psychoanalysis in France is protected from criticism by powerful
  educational and political networks.
author:
- D. V. M. Bishop
- Joel SwendsenCorrespondence to Dorothy Bishop
  (<dorothy.bishop@psy.ox.ac.uk>)
date: 2021-04
institute:
- 1University of Oxford, UK
- 2National Centre for Scientific Research, France
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
title: "Psychoanalysis in the treatment of autism: why is France a
  cultural outlier?"
---

# Psychoanalysis as an intervention for child language disorders {#sec1}

There have always been geographical differences in the practice of
medicine, even within Western societies, but in psychiatry, especially
child psychiatry, national variations are taken to extremes. The first
author realised the enormity of the divide between French and British
practices in 2001, when asked to write an endorsement for *The Silent
Child: Exploring the World of Children Who Do Not Speak* by Laurent
Danon-Boileau.^1^ The book\'s author was described as one of France\'s
most respected child psychoanalysts, with a particular interest in
language. The book contained a series of case studies of children who
did not have any formal diagnoses but appeared to fit criteria for
autism, intellectual disability or dyslexia. As Law^2^ noted in a
review, there was no recognition of developments in social cognition and
developmental psycholinguistics. Rather, there were confident assertions
about the child\'s inner state, and children\'s lack of communication
was generally attributed to affective and motivational causes relating
to psychodynamic factors, rather than to any problems with understanding
or formulating language.

To a child language expert, it is surprising that anyone should imagine
psychoanalysis, the quintessential talking therapy, would help a child
with impaired communication. Yet psychoanalysis is still taken seriously
as an intervention for autism in a few countries, with France being the
most notable example. This was documented in a film, *Le Mur*,^3^
produced in 2011 by journalist Sophie Robert. In a series of interviews,
child psychoanalysts interpreted language limitations in their young
clients through the lens of psychoanalytic theory. The parents were
directly implicated in causing autism, and the child\'s communicative
problems were regarded as a reflection of a difficult parent--child
relationship. The flavour of the content is conveyed by a few direct
quotes from the English transcript. "'What we can notice when we take
care of autistic children is precisely that autistic children are sick
of language. That autism is a way to defend themselves from language.'
(Esthela Solano)'At the beginning, the child thinks that he is his
mother's phallus. Namely that he is this object that would give
everything, fill his mother with joy, make her have orgasm ... The
father is there to forbid and at the same time protect the child. That
is, to protect the child from the incestuous desire of the mother.'
(Yann Bogopolsky)"

Laurent Danon-Boileau was one of the interviewees. It was illuminating
to hear him describe a session with an autistic child; he did not seem
to see his part as to facilitate the child\'s development, but rather to
adopt a passive, interpretative role.

*Le Mur* was shocking for autism experts outside France. Although there
are child psychoanalysts in the English-speaking world, they are a small
minority and recommendations by the National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence^4^ for intervention in autism make no mention of this
approach. In the UK, autism is regarded as a neurodevelopmental
condition with a predominantly genetic aetiology, and intervention
focuses on working directly with social communication and behaviour. The
goal is to bring about an improved developmental trajectory, rather than
gaining any insights into the deeper meaning of the symptoms.

# French cultural and political influences on acceptance of psychoanalysis {#sec2}

It is worth reflecting on how such differences in practice have come
about. Language barriers play a part in preventing the flow of ideas
across national borders, but this cannot account for the unique status
of psychoanalysis in France, where it is celebrated and protected.

Houzel,^5^ in recounting the history of psychoanalysis as a treatment
for autism, noted that French society has 'a very marked cultural
identity that results in a certain impermeability to external currents
of thought' (p. 742). For Houzel, himself a psychoanalyst, this has
certain benefits: 'One advantage is a capacity to resist certain
fashions that is no doubt greater than elsewhere. That is why France
remains today a country where the application of psychoanalysis to the
treatment of autists persists in spite of all the attacks that it is
subjected to' (p. 742).

Houzel further noted how French intellectuals are drawn to abstraction
and speculative theorisations; these are exemplified by the work of
Jacques Lacan, who did not himself work with children but developed an
influential system of thought, based on Freudian theory, with its own
specific French flavour. Its appeal to French intellectuals remains a
mystery to those of us with a less credulous frame of mind, who suspect
that when an author writes obscurely it is not because the ideas are
brilliant, but because they are using verbiage to hide muddled thinking.
As Billig^6^ concluded: 'academic authors do not advance the cause of
critique by putting their readers in a subservient position where
authority has to be taken on trust and where obscurity takes priority
over clarity' (p. 22).

Houzel\'s paper put the development of psychoanalysis in France in a
historical context and noted its cultural and political influences, but
it also emphasised the extent to which psychoanalysis, as a treatment
for autism and related developmental disorders, has come under repeated
criticism over recent decades. Some parent organisations have attacked
psychoanalysis on the basis that their children are denied the kind of
interventions that are routinely available in other countries.^7^ In
2012, a political bill was put forward to the French National Assembly
calling on the government to 'condemn and prohibit psychoanalytic
practices in all their forms concerning the treatment of autism'.^8^ In
parallel with these developments, there have been a series of National
Autism Plans, starting in 2005; there is now significant funding of
research from the perspective of autism as a neurodevelopmental disorder
and a cadre of French autism researchers with international standing.^9^
Yet French psychoanalysts remain politically powerful and have waged a
campaign against those who challenge them, including an attempt to sue
director Sophie Robert on the grounds that *Le Mur* misrepresented their
views.^7^

# Psychoanalytic interpretations of maternal factors in aetiology {#sec3}

Houzel^5^ suggested that the chief reason for rejection of
psychoanalysis is a mistaken belief that psychoanalysis blames mothers
for their children\'s difficulties. He argued that this is not the case:
psychoanalysis is not adequate for identifying aetiologies, and 'Its
quest is more in the direction of meaning than that of cause' (p. 731).

To maintain that psychoanalysis does not blame parents seems
disingenuous. There are many varieties of psychoanalysts, and it is true
that some, including most British psychoanalysts, overtly state that
parents should not be blamed for their child\'s difficulties.^10^
Nevertheless, in France, the role of parents, especially mothers, in
causing disorders has been a core feature of psychoanalytic work with
children. Briggs^11^ noted how the work of Bruno Bettelheim had been
influential in France, with his view of cold, rejecting mothers (the
classic 'refrigerator mother' of Kanner) from whom the child withdraws
into his shell. Bates^7^ cited numerous examples of mothers being told
bluntly that they were responsible for their child\'s autism, although
the more common accusation was that mothers were overinvolved and
'smothering', with an unhealthy desire for the child that led to the
child being unable to achieve a separate identity. *Le Mur*, and a more
recent film by Sophie Robert, *Le Phallus et le Néant*,^12^ contain
several examples of psychoanalysts putting forward such viewpoints.

Bates^7^ noted that these ideas fell on fertile soil in France, as they
fitted well with notions of toxic mothers already endorsed by French
psychoanalysts. Several relevant quotes by Françoise Dolto, one of the
most influential French child psychoanalysts of the last century, can be
found on the Freud Quotidien website,^13^ including this on autism:
"'The child wants what they see the adult wanting. If they focus the
desire of the adult, the source of the desire in them dries up and what
remains of it is inflected on their own vegetative material person,
causing autism, that is to say disorders of its spatio-temporal
reference and of communication. This mental illness, leading in the
worst case to infantile dementia in a previously open and intelligent
baby, is established in the infant separated from all their references.
It has also been called "hospitalism" which, at all levels, depending on
the duration of the pain, is in fact a disease of the desire. While
needs are preserved, desire loses in this child its magnetic vector
calling for communication. but "hospitalism" can also be observed in a
family environment, in infants whom the mother or rather the neurotic
employee isolates in an obsessive way by exclusive possessiveness, or
who is the object of perfect care, technically speaking, given without
joy by a depressive adult' (translated by Julien Basch)."

# Rejection of the need for a conventional evidence base for psychoanalysis {#sec4}

Houzel also bypassed two further objections to psychoanalysis, which are
particularly concerning to any dispassionate observer of French child
psychiatry. The first is the lack of any accepted evidence base for
psychoanalytic treatments. Houzel^5^ regarded behavioural approaches to
intervention as mere fashions in reductionist thinking, and noted that
they have not been strikingly successful in gaining understanding of the
nature or causes of autism, nor in creating improved outcomes for
children. This point has some justification -- progress has certainly
been slow and there is no miracle cure.^14^ The difference compared with
psychoanalysis, however, is that these developments occur within a
scientific framework that allows one to test the ideas and reject those
where the evidence does not fit. Popper^15^ used psychoanalysis as one
of his classic examples of pseudoscience, able to explain all phenomena
but with no possibility of being disproven: if the scientific framework
is itself rejected, then any viewpoint is as valid as another. Billig^6^
pointed out that Lacan\'s supporters ignored attempts by experimental
psychologists to evaluate his work, because they regarded orthodox
psychology as invalid; yet, even when considered in its own terms,
Lacan\'s citation of evidence was sloppy and inaccurate. Sokal and
Bricmont^16^ were particularly harsh on Lacan, for producing obscure
writings with all the trappings of technical language and concepts but
no coherent meaning. Consistent with this, Law^2^ noted that
Danon-Boileau^1^ did not engage in any discussion of evidence-based
practice and indeed seemed to make a virtue of his lack of reading in
the area. The impression is that many French psychoanalysts regard
themselves as revolutionary thinkers who, in rejecting mainstream
science, are challenging the conventional power structures in society.
But they ignore the potential for abuse of adults' power over children,
who are defenceless against having their thoughts and motivations
interpreted in terms of the analyst\'s unevidenced theory.

# Psychoanalytic accounts of sexual relations between adults and children {#sec5}

A different type of critique of French psychoanalysis is highlighted in
Robert\'s most recent film, namely, that it has been used to validate
incest and child abuse. Freud, and his follower Lacan, regarded children
as sexual beings, strongly influenced by erotic desire for a parent and
preoccupied by concerns about castration, lack of a penis or violence.
Given that these are seen as universal human desires, incest and
paedophilia are regarded as natural phenomena. According to this view,
psychic conflicts are largely due to the need to fit in with the norms
of a society that strictly prohibits such behaviours and hence to
repress natural instincts. The focus on child sexuality was one reason
that many of Freud\'s contemporaries ultimately broke away from him;^17^
he was seen as imposing his own dogmatic views, derived from his
self-analysis, on others, treating concepts such as the Oedipus complex
and castration anxiety as universal, to the neglect of other, non-sexual
risk factors for mental disturbances. In *Le Phallus et le Néant*, we
see how this viewpoint can open the way for abusive relationships
between a powerful therapist and vulnerable children.

The risk of abuse needs to be viewed in relation to a distinct French
cultural perspective with regard to an age of consent.^18^ In 1977, a
group of 60 prominent intellectuals signed a petition that was published
in *Le Monde*, coinciding with the trial of three men who had been
accused of having sex with 13- to 14-year-old children. The argument in
the petition was that children had the capacity to consent to sex, and
that adoption of an age of consent was patriarchal and a denial of
children\'s rights. A similar petition was published 1979, in support of
a man on trial for having sex with girls between the ages of six and 12.
'Desire and sexual games have their place in the relationship between
children and adults' was the argument put forward, with the claim
reiterated that children\'s rights were being abused by denying them
sexual gratification.

One signatory of the 1977 petition was Françoise Dolto, a media-friendly
psychoanalyst who regularly appeared on a radio programme between 1976
and 1978, where she answered parents' questions. In 1979 she was
interviewed by the magazine *Choisir* on the topic of incest; a
transcript can be found online.^19^ Her responses indicated that she
regarded children as willing participants in sexual activity who should
take responsibility for their actions. The same website reported quotes
from a 1999 book, *L\'Enfant, le Juge et la Psychanalyste*, in which
Dolto discussed with judge Andrée Ruffo the legal implications of sexual
relationships between adults and children. Dolto recommended that
children should be taught early that sexual contact with an adult is
against the law, so that there will be no doubt about their complicity
if they do engage in such activities: "'If children knew that the law
prohibited sensual privacy between adults and children, well, from the
moment an adult asks her, if she accepts, that makes her an accomplice,
she doesn\'t have anything to complain about' (authors'
translation)."Dolto continues to be held in high regard in France. Not
only has Paris named a street after her, but in 2018 the government
printed a special postal stamp in her honour. *Le Phallus et le Néant*
makes it clear to what extent her legacy lives on, with interviewees
maintaining that children are sexual beings who are capable of behaving
provocatively towards their parents, who must repress their 'inner
paedophile drive'.

Such discourse is not merely symbolic: it has real consequences for
children. Growing unease in French society about the cultish status of
psychoanalysis came to a head this year with the publication of a book
*Le Consentement* by Vanessa Springora,^20^ who described how at the age
of 14 she was drawn into a sexual relationship with a celebrated
50-year-old writer, Gabriel Matzneff. Matzneff was one of the
signatories of the 1977 petition for decriminalising paedophilia. He
defended himself by arguing that his relationship with the teenaged
Springora and others of her age were love affairs.

No doubt there are many child psychoanalysts who would be horrified at
the notion that their methods were being used to defend incest and child
abuse. The problem, though, is that if someone were inclined towards
paedophilia, then Dolto\'s version of psychoanalysis would appear very
attractive, promoting as it does the idea that sexual relationships
between adults and children, while prohibited by society, are a natural
and therefore blameless aspect of the human condition. Psychoanalysis
can provide professional respectability, a good income and access to
vulnerable children. We should be clear: we are not saying that these
views are common among French child psychoanalysts. Nevertheless, so
long as the psychoanalytic movement in France sets no limits as to what
can count as psychoanalysis, it runs the risk of causing harm to
children, as well as to its profession.

# Continuing power of psychoanalysis in French political and academic life {#sec6}

The key question is no longer how France arrived at this point but
rather how it cannot seem to fully get beyond it. Although
psychoanalysis is now marginal in France for psychiatry as a whole, it
is a different story for the subdiscipline of child psychiatry that has
been dominated by this orientation for decades. In 2012, the High Health
Authority of France implemented recommendations for the treatment of
autism, but they were not obligatory and inefficient psychoanalytical
therapies continued to be proposed for individuals with autism.^21^ Even
though new generations of physicians are trained in evidence-based
treatments, the older generations that were trained to see
psychoanalysis as a viable treatment for autism are still in practice.
This presence is visible at all levels of the French healthcare system,
including public hospitals, clinics and private practice. Perhaps the
biggest problem in France concerns the training of clinical
psychologists. Psychologists are ten times more numerous than
psychiatrists, and they occupy a large number of positions in clinics
and hospitals treating children with autism. The second author, an
expert for the National University Council (Conseil National des
Universités), recently provided a scientific criticism of psychoanalysis
as well as quantitative analysis of the training received by clinical
psychologists in French universities.^22^ This analysis demonstrated
that of the 26 universities charged with the training of clinical
psychologists, half still provide substantial psychoanalytic training.
In nine of these universities, the training provided in clinical
psychology is *exclusively* psychoanalytic in orientation. Clinicians
trained in these institutions are not routinely exposed to
evidence-based approaches in the treatment of autism (or other mental
disorders, for that matter), and no national examinations or
professional licensing criteria require them to have such training
before assuming positions at hospitals throughout the country. The
French government and university presidents have turned a blind eye to
this psychoanalytic monopoly at institutions of higher education.

In sum, the defence of psychoanalysis as a treatment for autism rests on
the idea that choice of one form of therapy over another is purely due
to cultural preferences and fashion. A deeper investigation, however,
reveals that psychoanalysis is qualitatively different from other forms
of therapy. It is not only bereft of any evidence of effectiveness, but
it is so ill-defined that it is unclear what such evidence would look
like. It is only legitimised because it is promoted by authority figures
and maintained by circles of power and influence. Moreover, in its more
extreme forms, it has potential to cause damage to parents, especially
mothers, who are demonised both for being too involved with and too
remote from their children, and to children themselves, who are regarded
as seducers rather than victims when involved in sexual relationships
with adults.

# About the authors {#sec7}

Dorothy Bishop, M.A., M.Phil., D.Phil., is Professor of Developmental
Neuropsychology in the Department of Psychology, University of Oxford,
UK. Joel Swendsen, M.A., Ph.D., is Director of Research at the National
Centre for Scientific Research, France.

We thank Julien Basch for assistance with translation of sources.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

# Author contributions {#nts3}

Both authors contributed to the writing of this article and approved the
final text.

# Declaration of interest {#nts4}

## Supplementary material {#sec8}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.138.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::
