---
author:
- Gethin Morgan
date: 2021-12
institute:
- "Emeritus Professor of Mental Health, University of Bristol, Bristol,
  UK. Email: <hilary.howard@blueyonder.co.uk>"
title: "Author\\'s reply:"
---

pmc

17 June

I am grateful to Drs Albert, Gallen and Gaur for their interest in my
paper. Unfortunately they appear to have misunderstood some major points
which I make. I certainly do not suggest that the assessment of suicidal
thoughts is futile in short-term prediction of suicide. I argue exactly
the opposite, presenting evidence that provided this is carried out
correctly and appropriately, it should have significant predictive
value.

What is more, I do not in any way suggest that ongoing care of suicidal
patients should be handed back to the general practitioner (GP),
certainly not before their problems have been resolved. My suggested
letters are meant as clinical summaries which should be sent routinely
to GPs by any psychiatric team as part of good ongoing clinical care.
They do not mean, in any way, that the secondary service thereby should
relinquish ongoing clinical care of their patients before treatment is
complete.

How to maintain good ongoing supportive care of patients who have
experienced a suicidal crisis is an important clinical challenge. My
paper considers how the psychiatrist might attempt to achieve this, by
emphasising concern to provide the form of help which would be most
acceptable to the patient, and to which he/she would readily turn should
the crisis recur.
