==================================================================================
Perspectives of GCSE students attending a psychiatry summer school in south London
==================================================================================

Clementine Wyke
Glori-Louise de Bernier
Chun Chiang Sin Fai Lam
Clare Holt
Sophie Butler
Anto Praveen Rajkumar Rajamani
Charlotte Wilson JonesCorrespondence to Dr Clementine Wyke
(clementine.wyke@slam.nhs.uk) [1]_ [2]_
:Date: 2021-04

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and Method
      :name: sec_a1

   This study evaluated a pilot psychiatry summer school for GCSE
   students in terms of participant experience, effects on attitudes to
   mental illness and perception of psychiatry as a career option. This
   was done using the Community Attitudes towards the Mentally Ill
   scale, career choice questionnaires and a discussion group following
   the week-long programme attended by 26 students.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Students were significantly more likely to choose psychiatry after
   the summer school (*P* = 0.01). There were statistically significant
   changes in scores for social restrictiveness (*P* = 0.04) and
   community mental health ideology (*P* = 0.02). Qualitative analysis
   generated four themes: variation in expectations, limited prior
   knowledge, perception of the summer school itself and uniformly
   positive attitudes to psychiatry after the summer school.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Targeting students at this early stage appears to be an underexplored
   positive intervention for improving both attitudes towards mental
   illness and recruitment to psychiatry.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Introduction
============

Summer schools allow students to access educational experiences that are
not otherwise available to them. They are a successful facet of the
Royal College of Psychiatrists’ #ChoosePsychiatry
campaign\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` and, if well designed, can improve attitudes to
psychiatry among medical students.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` However, as summer
schools are primarily aimed at medical students and foundation doctors,
opportunities to experience psychiatry while at school remain limited. A
psychiatry scheme for school leavers\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` and work experience
placements focusing on mental health for A-level
students\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` have been reported with positive outcomes.
However, these examples concentrate mostly on those already committed to
applying to medical school. Such programmes, especially those with
entrance processes requiring evidence of prior interest, tend to favour
those already motivated to work in psychiatry. Thus, there is
recruitment potential in prioritising those that have little prior
knowledge of the subject.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` Studies have shown that
medical students reporting an interest in psychiatry before medical
school are more likely to subspecialise in it in the
future.\ :sup:`(n.d.f),(n.d.g)` Therefore, the evidence suggests that a
summer school for students following their GCSEs would allow them to
obtain valuable early experience of psychiatry and hopefully garner a
potential untapped interest in psychiatry as a career. The aim of this
study was to evaluate the experiences of GCSE students attending a
psychiatry summer school, with a secondary aim of assessing its
influence on attitudes to mental illness and perception of psychiatry as
a career.

.. _sec2:

Methods
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Setting
-------

| The summer school was a joint venture by the Institute of Psychiatry,
  Psychology and Neuroscience (IoPPN) and the local mental health trust,
  South London and the Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust. It was a free 5
  day programme (see `Table 1 <#tab01>`__) for GCSE students, with
  participants recruited from state and private secondary schools within
  south-east London. Table 1Summer school
  timetableMondayTuesdayWednesdayThursdayFridayIntroduction to Mental
  Health
| 0930–1030 Welcome session
| Break
| 1045–1215 Breakaway groups on ‘What is Illness?’ and ‘What is mental
  illness’?Psychiatry & Society
| 0900–1000 The evolution of consciousness
| 1015–1115 History of Psychiatry
| Break
| 1130–1245 Psychiatry Case 2 (forensic patient)Life as a Psychiatrist
| 0915–1030 From start to finish
| *Psychiatrists at varying stages of their careers*
| Break
| 1100–1230 Psychiatry Case 3 (patient with FND)Psychiatry Specialties
| 0900–1100 Quick Fire Specialties
| *Psychiatrists working in subspecialties, including psychotherapy,
  affective and psychotic disorders, addictions and eating disorders*
| Break
| 1115–1230 Psychiatry Case 4
| (CAMHS patient)Looking to the Future
| 0900–0930 Old Age Psychiatry
| 0930–1000 Thoughts on Psychiatry
| 1000–1115 Psychiatry Case 5
| (patient with psychosis)
| Break
| 1130–1300 Debate
| (joint with medical students)
| ‘This House believes that social media damages your mental
  health’LUNCHLUNCHLUNCHLUNCHLUNCH1330–1430 What is Psychiatry?
| 1430–1500 Myth Busting
| Break
| 1515–1630 Psychiatry Case 1
| (patient with PTSD)
| *Consultant psychiatrist & their patient*\ 1400–1430 Global Mental
  Health
| 1430–1715 Psychiatry in the Arts1345–1600 Extreme Psychiatry
| (joint with medical students)1330–1430 Psychiatry of homelessness
| 1430–1530 Military Psychiatry
| Break
| 1600–1700 Neuropsychiatry1400–1600 Life at Medical School & How to Get
  There
| *Medical school psychiatry society*
| 1600–1630 Feedback and discussion group [3]_

.. _sec2-2:

Selection of participants
-------------------------

Letters were sent to careers advisors at all 15 eligible schools within
a 1.5 mile radius of the IoPPN, inviting them to nominate two
participants and two waiting-list students each for the summer school.
Non-eligible schools were those that only catered for pupils with
special education needs or were sixth form only. Each school
independently decided on the selection procedure, with the only proviso
being that the student should be academically capable of entering a
medicine degree course. They did not have to have expressed any interest
in medicine as a career.

.. _sec2-3:

Curriculum development and structure of summer school
-----------------------------------------------------

The curriculum was developed and implemented by a volunteer committee of
psychiatry trainees, led by the Director of Undergraduate Psychiatry.
The programme included a mixture of lectures and small group workshops,
in addition to three joint sessions with an established summer school
for medical students being held in parallel. Content included daily
sessions with patients and their psychiatrists and the breadth of
psychiatry subspecialties, but also addressed the wider context of
mental illness such as social factors, transcultural applications and
the history of psychiatric practice.

.. _sec2-4:

Assessment
----------

This was a mixed quantitative and qualitative methods evaluation with
ethical approval obtained through the Research Ethics Office at King's
College London.

All participants were invited to take part in the evaluation, and
participants gave written informed consent. Pre-programme, demographic
information and prior exposure to mental illness were collected.
Participants’ top three career choices, likelihood of choosing a career
in psychiatry and score on the Community Attitudes towards the Mentally
Ill (CAMI) scale\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` were obtained pre and post programme.

The CAMI scale comprises 40 items representing the following four
dimensions: authoritarianism (the view that the mentally ill are
different and require coercive measures), benevolence (sympathetic views
towards the mentally ill), social restrictiveness (that the mentally ill
are dangerous and need to be separated from society) and community
mental health ideology (importance of community care for the mentally
ill).\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.i)` It was selected for its utility within a
community rather than a professional population, as the sample consisted
of school students with no medical training.

On the final day, a short discussion group was run to gather feedback on
the summer school experience. All students were informed of the group,
and six randomly selected volunteers contributed. The facilitator
(G.-L.d.B.) was known to the students, so left the room after posing
each question to enable free unconstrained responses, which were
recorded.

The contributors were asked three open questions, which were designed to
enable discussion and aimed to assess ‘before and after’ attitudes in
relation to the summer school and psychiatry. •Why did you want to come
to the summer school and are you glad that you came?•What did you hope
to get out of the summer school and what did you actually get out of
it?•How did you feel about psychiatry before and after the summer
school?

.. _sec2-5:

Statistical analyses
--------------------

Only one of the participants did not complete post-training preferences
for medicine and psychiatry, and these missing values were not imputed.
Participants’ characteristics and other variables were initially
analysed by descriptive statistics. We checked whether the continuous
study variables followed a Gaussian distribution by Shapiro–Wilk tests.
We employed appropriate non-parametric tests when the continuous study
variables did not follow a Gaussian distribution. Changes in the career
choices of the participants between the two time points were analysed by
McNemar's test or Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Changes in CAMI subscale
scores between the two time points were analysed by appropriate tests of
statistical significance. All analyses were performed using the
statistical software STATA 15.1 (StataCorp, TX, USA).

After transcription of the discussion group, the responses were
initially analysed using open coding by a researcher independent of the
summer school programme (C.H.). Alongside a second researcher, who had
overseen the discussion (G.-L.d.B.), these open codes were grouped into
axial codes, which were then further distilled into themes.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Quantitative
------------

Of the 26 participants, ten (38%) were from private schools and the
remainder were from state schools. Of the participants, 20 (77%)
voluntarily completed both the pre- and post-programme questionnaires.
Of these students, 12 (60%) were from non-White ethnicities. Data on
demographics and career choices can be found within `Tables
2 <#tab02>`__ and `3 <#tab03>`__. The majority (70%) reported life
experience of mental illness before attendance at the summer school, and
50% had received some school teaching on the subject. Table 2Demographic
characteristicsDemographic characteristic\ *n* (%)Total
number20GenderMale7 (35)Female12 (60)Not specified1 (5)Age (years)151
(5)1619 (95)EthnicityWhite8 (40)Mixed2 (10)Black/African/Caribbean6
(30)Asian4 (20)Experience in mental healthLife experience
(personal/friends/family)14 (70)Work experience/volunteering2 (10)School
teaching on mental health10 (50)Family member working in mental health6
(30) Table 3Career choicesBefore programme (*N* = 20)After programme
(*N* = 19)Choice\ *n*\ %95% CI\ `a <#tfn3_1>`__\ *n*\ %95%
CI\ `a <#tfn3_1>`__\ First210.001.23–31.70526.329.15–51.20Second210.001.23–31.70210.531.30–33.14Third00.000.00–16.84\ `b <#tfn3_2>`__\ 210.531.30–33.14Within
top 3420.005.73–43.66947.3724.45–71.14 [4]_ [5]_

According to the measure of a student's likelihood to choose psychiatry
as a career, participants were significantly more likely to choose
psychiatry after the summer school week (*z* = 2.46; *P* = 0.01).
Pre-course, four participants ranked psychiatry within their top three
career choices. This increased to nine post-course, which was a
statistically significant change (McNemar's χ\ :sup:`2` = 5.00;
*P* = 0.03). Two participants ranked psychiatry as their top career
choice pre-course, and this increased to five post-course. However, this
change was not statistically significant (McNemar's χ\ :sup:`2` = 3.00;
*P* = 0.08).

On review of the CAMI scale, there were statistically significant
changes in scores pre- and post-programme for both social
restrictiveness (viewed less positively, pre: 18.6, post: 16.05,
*t* = −2.25; d.f. = 19; *P* = 0.04) and community mental health ideology
(viewed more positively, pre: 38.45, post: 40.5, *t* = 2.48; d.f. = 19;
*P* = 0.02). There were no significant changes for benevolence (pre:
41.15, post 41.55, *P* = 0.54) or authoritarianism (pre: 20.8, post:
19.8, *P* = 0.33).

.. _sec3-2:

Qualitative
-----------

Qualitative analysis of the discussion group generated 29 open codes and
ten axial codes, from which four themes were generated.

.. _sec3-2-1:

Theme 1: Variation in expectations of summer school
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The group was divided between those who had positive expectations for
the programme and others who described initially feeling less
enthusiastic about attendance. Those with an existing interest in
medicine or mental health tended to express expectations that the summer
school would enhance their knowledge of mental health conditions and
provide further insight. “‘\ *I definitely wanted to go into medicine so
I just wanted to see about the different areas’*\ ‘\ *I hoped to get
more informed about different mental disorders…because I've been
interested in that for a while*\ ’”

Others had a more generic reason for signing up to the programme, with
half mentioning wanting to keep themselves occupied over the summer
holiday or participate in an activity that was both enjoyable and
worthwhile. One participant admitted being coerced by his mother to
attend. The students discussed their negative preconceptions; some
anticipated that the sessions would be wholly didactic in nature, with
senior doctors leading and no element of interaction. There was also a
concern voiced that, as school students, they may have felt patronised.
“‘\ *My expectation coming in was that it would be a lot less involved
than I thought it would be. I thought it would just be doctors talking
over us instead and to us instead of actually letting us
discuss’*\ ‘\ *I hoped that I would be treated in a way that wasn't a
GCSE student that's like dumb and doesn't know anything, doesn't really
know what they want to do and over dumbed-down for them’*”

.. _sec3-2-2:

Theme 2: Limited prior knowledge and exposure to psychiatry
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a group, the participants admitted to very limited previous knowledge
about mental illnesses, the scope of psychiatry and the management
options available. Most brought up a lack of understanding of the
difference between the disciplines of psychology and psychiatry,
including those who had been exposed to the topic in lessons and school
talks. “‘\ *I didn't know that a psychiatrist was actually a doctor, I
didn't know that mental illnesses were such a wide range and they were
so important and there are different ways of dealing with them’*”In
their personal lives, there was one suggestion of first-hand experience
of mental health difficulties and one student whose parent worked in the
field. However, familiarity was not necessarily advantageous – the
aforementioned parent allegedly refused to talk about their job to their
child. Some referenced impressions of psychiatry that had been created
and influenced by the media. “‘\ *I thought it [psychiatry] was about
medicating people and torturing them in a way and putting them to sleep
(laughing) I'm serious, I'm actually being serious, because of the
movies’*”

.. _sec3-2-3:

Theme 3: Perception and experience of summer school
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Perception of the summer school retrospectively was consistently
positive across the cohort. All felt they had benefited in at least one
respect, such as better knowledge of mental health conditions, increased
interest in the area or even a sense of privilege from involvement in
the programme.

Repeated comments were made about the rare opportunity to associate with
professionals and medical students, which was found to be a valuable way
of gaining insight from those directly involved in clinical work.
Interest was expressed in not only the substance of their work but also
personal experiences and perspectives. “‘\ *…to talk to actual patients,
talk to actual doctors, actual medical students and I think it's a
really amazing opportunity and I wish there were more that were just as
easily accessible and just as free and as local’*”The daily sessions
with past or current patients exploring their experiences of mental
illness and treatment were frequently mentioned as a highlight of the
programme. The participants appreciated the university-style teaching
methods, particularly the interactive components and being given space
for further discussion on the topics broached. “‘\ *…we have had the
opportunity to talk and express our own opinions about other stuff which
I didn't think we'd be able to, and while doing that, also shown a lot
of really good stuff about what it's like to be a doctor or a
psychiatrist’*\ ‘\ *We were in actual lecture theatres listening to
lectures university style, we were looking at patients… It was really
amazing, I got a lot more knowledge and experience out of this week then
I could have possibly thought. I just hoped I'd get an opportunity to
talk about psychiatry but nothing on this kind of scale’*”

.. _sec3-2-4:

Theme 4: Uniformly positive attitudes towards psychiatry following summer school
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In addition to their experience of the summer school as a programme, all
participants had a positive impression of psychiatry in itself. Those
who began with a limited or negative perspective indicated that prior
misconceptions had been challenged and questions had been answered.
Psychiatry was compared favourably with other areas of medicine, and
psychiatrists as a group were looked upon positively. “‘\ *The treatment
of the patients has been fulfilling to them [psychiatrists] personally
as well. It might be a lot more interesting than the other professions
or the other parts of being a doctor, which I guess is a
change’*\ ‘\ *It's also the relationships that they have with the
patients. They talk about it like they actually remember them and they
actually care which is really nice to know’*”

Although not specifically asked about career intentions in the
discussion group, most volunteered that they were considering psychiatry
as an option for the future as a result of the summer school. This
included those who were not previously interested in medicine and also
those who had considered becoming a doctor but were focused on other
branches of practice. Some had even forged interests in specific
subspecialties. “‘\ *From the very first day and the very first session,
my eyes were really opened as to what exactly psychiatry is about and
how it can appeal to somebody like me, especially considering I wanted
to be doing a different kind of speciality, like surgery, but now I
think I have a much more open viewpoint on the different specialities,
especially psychiatry’*\ ‘\ *This week has changed my perspective so
much that I'm actually wanting to go into military psychiatry so yeah
it's changed me as a person’*”

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

Our evaluation of this inaugural summer school has demonstrated that an
educational project such as this has the potential to encourage students
yet to start their A-levels to consider a career in psychiatry.

Despite increasing awareness of the importance of mental health in the
public domain, participants showed limited knowledge about mental
illnesses, including misconceptions about the role of a psychiatrist, a
lack of knowledge about treatment options and influence from negative
media portrayals of the profession. This indicates that campaigns and
media interest\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` do not necessarily translate into
awareness of career opportunities, which must be a separate strand of
work in parallel with stigma reduction. The improvement in understanding
and awareness shown by the time of the discussion group demonstrates the
direct effect of the summer school.

Although clinical contact has not always been an essential factor in
improving attitudes towards psychiatry,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` our experience
was that witnessing the doctor–patient relationship and hearing about
the effects of the work of a psychiatrist were key strengths of the
summer school identified by the participants. In keeping with medical
student and trainee experience,\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` it appears that role
models are also important early on to enable students to visualise their
own potential next steps.

This evaluation adds to the body of evidence that educational
interventions can change the attitudes of adolescents towards mental
illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.k)–(n.d.l)` Although this was not the
primary purpose of the summer school, it was a welcome side-effect. It
is noted that not all subscales of the CAMI showed significant change
pre and post course. However, given how little current comparative data
exist on attitudes to mental illness in our population group, further
research is required to fully explain these results.

The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ current recruitment
strategy\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` is inclusive of school students, having aimed
to roll out regional sixth-form career events by the end of 2019. We
propose that GCSE student events are an area worth exploring further.
These may serve to inspire students who perhaps have a less fixed
commitment to one career path, have not considered medicine previously
or have little knowledge of the scope of psychiatry and still have time
to change their A level choices. We felt the following aspects were
crucial to making the summer school accessible to a range of students
and meeting the national efforts to widen participation.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`
•Enabling students of all socioeconomic backgrounds to participate; it
was free of charge and food was provided.•Ensuring there was no
competition between private and state schools for places.•Proactive
chasing of schools that did not immediately respond (these tended to be
state schools, who were less likely to have a dedicated careers
advisor).•Timing the summer school before A-level choices so students
had the option to change these if they wanted.

The main limiting factor in this study was the small sample size of 20
students. Our qualitative data from the discussion group did not reach
saturation, demonstrating that not all potential data were garnered from
this aspect of the evaluation. More discussion groups would be required
in further research. In addition, although our cohort comprised a mixed
demographic from a diverse part of south-east London, even if they had a
variety of motivations, expectations and career interests, the students
were still a self-selecting group, with all agreeing to attend a
week-long summer school on psychiatry. We did not collect information
such as family history of higher education and parental occupations, but
doing so would help to assess whether students from all socioeconomic
backgrounds were accessing the summer school. A barrier to
transferability is that areas without potential funding from a major
educational institution such as the IoPPN and a large pool of academics
and clinicians to draw upon may find it challenging to provide this
intensity of programme for a relatively small number of participants.
Finally, as this is a little-studied population, it is unclear which
assessment tool is most suited to explore school students’ attitudes
towards psychiatry.

.. _sec5:

Conclusion
==========

Targeting students at this early stage appears to be an under-utilised
intervention for psychiatry recruitment, and one which offers exciting
potential for further work. The participants reported universally
positive experiences of the summer school and demonstrated a shift
towards considering psychiatry as a future career. There was also a
valuable side-effect of more positive attitudes towards those with
mental illness. We plan to repeat this summer school in future years and
undertake longer-term follow-up in regard to participants’ A-level and
degree choices and ongoing interest in psychiatry as a career.

**Clementine Wyke** is a CT3 in Psychiatry at South London and Maudsley
NHS Foundation Trust, Maudsley Hospital, London, UK. **Glori-Louise de
Bernier** is a CT3 in Psychiatry at South London and Maudsley NHS
Foundation Trust, Maudsley Hospital, London, UK. **Chun Chiang Sin Fai
Lam** is a Consultant Liaison Psychiatrist at South London and Maudsley
NHS Foundation Trust, King's College Hospital, London, UK. **Clare
Holt** is a General Adult and Old Age Psychiatry Registrar at South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Maudsley Hospital, London, UK.
**Sophie Butler** is a General Adult Psychiatry Registrar, South London
and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Maudsley Hospital, London, UK. **Anto
Praveen Rajkumar Rajamani** is a Clinical Associate Professor in Old Age
Psychiatry at the Institute of Mental Health, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK. **Charlotte Wilson Jones** is Director of Undergraduate
Psychiatry & Director of Mental Health Education (MBBS) at the Institute
of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience: Academic Division, UK.

C.W. helped to organise and run the summer school and assisted in the
drafting of the paper. G.-L.d.B. ran the discussion group, transcribed
and analysed the data and assisted in the drafting of the paper.
C.C.S.F.L. led the organisation of the summer school and collection of
quantitative data and assisted in the editing of the paper.

C.H. advised on the running of the discussion group and assisted on the
analysis and write-up of the qualitative data. S.B. contributed to the
organisation of the summer school and assisted in the drafting and
editing of the paper. A.P.R.R. performed the statistical analysis of the
quantitative data and assisted with editing of the paper. C.W.J.
provided oversight and guidance on the running of the summer school and
data collection and assisted with editing of the paper.

None.

.. _sec6:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.76.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.m.

.. [1]
   See editorial, this issue.

.. [2]
   Joint first authors.

.. [3]
   CAMHS, child and adolescent mental health services; FND, functional
   neurological disorder; PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder.

.. [4]
   Binomial exact confidence interval.

.. [5]
   One-sided 97.5% confidence interval.
