---
author:
- Melissa Beaumont
- Kate Chalker
- Layla Clayton
- Emily Curtis
- Heidi Hales
- Duncan Harding
- Rhiannon Lewis
- Gabrielle Pendlebury
date: 2021-04
institute:
- Team Lead & Clinical Nurse Specialist, Health & Wellbeing Team Feltham
  YOI, Central and North West London NHS Trust, UK
- Wye CAMHS Clinical Nurse Specialist Hounslow YOT West London NHS
  Trust, UK
- Assistant Psychologist, Health & Wellbeing Team Feltham YOI, Central
  and North West London NHS Trust, UK
- Youth Justice Liaison and Diversion Hammersmith and Fulham Youth
  Offending Service, UK
- Consultant Psychiatrist, North West London FCAMHS, West London NHS
  Trust, UK
- Consultant Psychiatrist, South London FCAMHS, UK
- Consultant Clinical Psychologist and Clinical Lead for SECURE STAIRS
  and the Enhanced Support Unit, HMYOI Feltham, Central and North West
  London NHS Trust, UK
- "Consultant Adolescent Psychiatrist and Medico-legal Adviser, FCAMHS
  at The Port, Tavistock and Portman NHS Trust, UK. Email:
  <g_pendlebury@hotmail.com>, <@PendlesGabriel>"
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
title: Invisible youth during times of Covid
---

Covid-19 continues to devastate, the elderly and those in care homes
being particularly vulnerable. However, there is an unexpected
population that is at great risk of morbidity due to Covid-19, the
adolescent forensic population. This increased morbidity is a result of
the care offered by statutory agencies being greatly diminished across
all settings owing to the pandemic.

One of the first things that you learn in adolescent forensic psychiatry
is that perpetrators are also victims, and it can be hard to distinguish
between the two. This does not excuse the crimes they have committed but
does add an extra complexity to their treatment. Young people who
present with complex forensic issues are particularly vulnerable, often
having histories that include early trauma, repeated loss, attachment
issues, learning difficulties and mental health problems.^1^ This
population is notoriously difficult for professionals to engage with,
for many of the above reasons but also because of the possible
consequences for them and their families of talking about the criminal
aspects of their lives. The reduced consistency that services currently
provide has affected their engagement and the possibility of a
therapeutic alliance, thus increasing risk for themselves and the
public.

A further contributing factor to increased morbidity has been school
closures and agencies working remotely, leading to reduced access to
support and structure, which has exacerbated vulnerabilities.
Challenging behaviours were previously mitigated by the provision of
education and other prosocial activities; the reduction has led to
increased episodes of violence.^2^ This has particularly affected young
people with neurodevelopmental disorders and special educational needs,
with the effects likely to be long term, complicated by loneliness and a
disconnection from their community.

Youth custody has had to be increasingly vigilant to ensure the safety
of detainees and prevent Covid transmission. There is a need to isolate
those being transferred into custody in the first 2 weeks to prevent
transmission of Covid.^3^ It is known that this is the time of greatest
risk of suicide for young people in custody, when young people are now
needing to isolate for Covid, thus increasing isolation and risk. Staff
shortages, education closure and the need for Covid 'bubbles' has meant
extended time alone in cells even after those first few weeks, which
increases the risk of self-harm and suicide.^4^ Furthermore, the
pandemic has led to a backlog in the courts, and concern over community
services has meant that more young people are being remanded and for
longer periods. It is of note that the majority (63%) of children given
custodial remand did not subsequently receive a custodial outcome in
2018.^5^ These factors -- extra time in cells and longer time on remand
-- can mean the compounding of an already traumatic experience for many
in youth custody.

Young people with a combination of mental health and forensic issues are
placed in secure adolescent psychiatric units to receive appropriate
treatment. The effect of the Covid pandemic on staffing in these units
has negatively affected the availability of support, and things that are
often a lifeline for these young people, such as community access,
planned leave and family visits, have been cancelled. A bottleneck has
occurred, with transition back to the community being stalled owing to
the services around the young person not being readily available to
facilitate these moves or provide the relevant opportunities in the
community.

Isolated young people with social communication, cognitive or emotional
difficulties are at increased risk of exploitation by others in all
settings. In the community, risks relevant to this group go beyond the
risk of offending and risk to others and include being groomed into
gang-related activities. Such gangs appear to have been more active and
accessible to this group of young people during this time (including
county lines and other criminal exploitation).

We realise that everyone is having a difficult time at the moment but
believe it is essential to highlight some of the issues that this
frequently invisible population is experiencing, in the hope that they
will not be forgotten.

However, it is not all doom and gloom; with any change there are gains
as well as losses, and the gains have highlighted the dedication of the
professionals working with this population. They have stepped up to the
mark, through increased productivity, improved multi-agency working,
increased uptake of virtual conferencing and appropriate
information-sharing, with the aim of keeping these young people safe.
The young people have noted these efforts and there has been feedback
that this way of working has made them feel safer, so we hope, as a
network, that we will be able to maintain the benefits as we return to
the new normality.

This letter was compiled by the London Youth Justice Child and
Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) Forum, which comprises
professionals working in the following services: Youth Justice Liaison
and Diversion, Youth Offending Teams (YOTs), Community Forensic CAMHS
(FCAMHS), Youth Offending Institutions (YOIs, including SECURE STAIRS
implementation) and secure adolescent units.
