---
author:
- Robert van Voren
date: 2021-08
institute:
- "Chief Executive, Federation Global Initiative on Psychiatry, The
  Netherlands. Email: <rvvoren@gip-global.org>"
title: Mr Sluggish Schizophrenia
---

pmc

r.t.l. Anatoly Smulevich, unknown, Marat Vartanyan, Aleksandre Tiganov.
Photo Credit: Robert Van Voren

On 15 April 2021, the World Psychiatric Association (WPA) congratulated
the Russian professor Anatoly Smulevich on his 90th birthday on its
website. It wrote that 'his work is highly regarded both in Russia and
around the world ... the WPA would like to wish Prof. A.B. Smulevich the
happiest of birthdays and thank him for his long-standing contribution
to the world of psychiatry'.

To most, the name Smulevich rings no bells. I have been involved in the
fight against the political abuse of psychiatry for almost 45 years and
know full well that he was one of the main researchers in the field of
'sluggish schizophrenia', the main diagnosis used against dissidents in
the Soviet Union. He belonged to the small group of 'nomenklatura
psychiatrists' who monopolised all contacts with the outside world and
dominated psychiatry in the USSR. Their actions caused the forced
hospitalisation of thousands of dissenters, who were subjected to
torturous 'treatment', and established a repressive and abusive
psychiatry that affected millions of people and disabled many for the
rest of their lives. Like the Nazi euthanasia programme, this Soviet
political abuse of psychiatry is among the worst violations of medical
ethics. Professor Smulevich not only contributed significantly to the
'scientific basis' of this perversion of medicine, he also actively
defended the position that criticism against Soviet psychiatry was a
matter of politically inspired slanderous allegations. He was considered
by the KGB to be a 'trusted psychiatrist'.

In an interview on 29 September 1986, he claimed that in the USSR 'a
sane person cannot be sent to a psychiatric hospital'. In March 1989,
during a meeting with an American delegation, he explained that 38.1% of
all schizophrenics suffered from sluggish schizophrenia and described
the symptoms, which included 'anti-Soviet thinking' and 'delusions of
reformism'. He then argued that all dissidents could be diagnosed as
suffering from sluggish schizophrenia. During the discussion of the case
of an alleged victim, Smulevich continued: 'In the Soviet system this is
a person who has overvalued ideas. Yes, one can fight for freedom in a
thousand and one ways but it should not be to the neglect of other areas
of his life. \[He\] fought for freedom and even wrote books about
freedom, neglecting all other ideas in his life. His life became
unbalanced, all of his interests were expressed in one area'. In the
same year, he published an article in the *British Journal of
Psychiatry*, actively defending the concept of sluggish schizophrenia.

In most of the biographies of Professor Smulevich that one can now find
on the internet, most of his work on sluggish schizophrenia and his
activities during the Soviet period are omitted, but those who were sent
to psychiatric hospitals because of their convictions very well remember
the man nicknamed 'Mr Sluggish Schizophrenia'.

# Declaration of interest {#nts1}

None.
