=====================================================================
Freedom to think should not mean freedom from evidence and experience
=====================================================================



Peter Swann
Timothy Swann
Reubs J. Walsh
:Date: 2021-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Evans made a number of inaccurate statements in his originally published
article, which subsequently resulted in the publication of a
corrigendum. Some of the inaccurate statements and implications for
scholarship and clinical practice are referred to in our letter, which
was first submitted on 23 August 2020. Gender identity is a pertinent
and timely topic, given the current moral panic around transgender
individuals. Evans\ :sup:`1` states several fallacies that risk
increasing the stigma towards transgender and non-binary individuals.
Throughout, motivated reasoning that seeks to describe transgender
individuals as inherently disordered is apparent. This manifests in the
very limited selection of evidence cited and in unsupported claims made
contrary to the bulk of existing evidence.

It is also important to put the letter in context. The consensus among
the World Psychiatric Association,\ :sup:`2` Royal College of
Psychiatrists, American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and
American Psychiatric Association is that psychological treatments to
‘suppress or revert gender diverse behaviours are unscientific and
unethical’. The reports from these groups follow detailed review of the
current literature.

Evans relies heavily on personal accounts and experiences reported by
media organisations. Although each individual story deserves hearing,
understanding and respect, there is an inherent danger to highlighting
cherry-picked examples from blog posts or newspapers. These sources
often have political standpoints or biases. The quoted Christian
Institute, for instance, writes on their website that transgender
ideology ‘seeks to completely destroy the distinction between men and
women that God in his wisdom has created’, and the Sunday edition of the
quoted *Times* has been forced to correct a number of inaccuracies in
articles about the Tavistock after intervention from the press
regulator.

The existence of a few examples of adverse outcomes does not lend
support to the idea that affirming care is harmful. In any area of
medicine or psychiatry there are always patients who regret treatment,
but provided informed consent is obtained and the proportion remains
low, that risk is deemed acceptable. What little legitimate research
into detransition exists finds a miniscule rate,\ :sup:`3` with the
primary cause being lack of social support for the affirmed gender
identity. By contrast, trans young people supported in their social
transitions show radically reduced rates of internalising disorders
compared with those that are unsupported.\ :sup:`4` The claim that
transition is predicated on a ‘fantasy that the body can be rapidly
sculpted as a way of being rid of profound psychological problems’ is
spurious; the body need not be altered at all for these effects of
affirmation to occur (the Olson study included children receiving no
medical interventions; instead, inclusion criteria were that children
should be affirmed in their identity by their families and healthcare
professionals), and being trans is not a ‘profound psychological
problem’ any more than homosexuality is.

It is also important not to conflate alleged failings of a specific
institution or clinicians with that of an entire practice.
Psychotherapists or psychiatrists not adhering to professional
standards, such as those around informed consent, require a response of
upholding good and agreed practices and laws, not stopping provision of
care to those who seek it. It is also notable that not all consent
violations are presented on an equal basis by Evans and those who share
his viewpoint. Withholding access to care because a doctor personally
disagrees with the informed choice of a patient for reasons based on
speculation or ideology also violates informed consent, particularly
where that decision has irreversible consequences for the patient, as in
the case of withholding puberty blockade.

There is danger in not involving transgender perspectives on work that
affects transgender individuals specifically. Work like this risks
contributing to the known stigma and discrimination that the trans
community already faces\ :sup:`5` and allowing the credibility of
peer-reviewed science to be misused by transphobic groups to promote a
harmful ideology. Journals, editors and reviewers have a responsibility
to ensure that published material meets a minimum standard of rigour.
Evans makes claims including ‘there is considerable evidence that
children are signing up to treatments with long-term implications, with
very little real understanding of the consequences’ and ‘There is
considerable evidence of children and adolescents changing their minds
if given enough time and space to explore things’ without providing
references to this ‘considerable’ body of work; we are aware of no such
evidence for the former, and the latter claim has been thoroughly
debunked.\ :sup:`6` Similarly, the claim that ‘a new diagnostic
category, ‘recent-onset gender dysphoria’ [sic], mak[es] up a
substantial proportion’ of Gender Identity Development Service referrals
is made without any citations to literature. ‘Rapid-onset gender
dysphoria’ is a proposed diagnostic category, based on a single, flawed
study.\ :sup:`7` It is not currently recognised for use in clinical
settings.

There are common but false comparisons between gender dysphoria and body
dysmorphia or body image disturbance in anorexia. Body dysmorphia is a
preoccupation with a perceived flaw in part of the body. Transgender
individuals do not falsely perceive their body to be different to how
others perceive it, only that it is perceived (by themselves and/or
others) in a way that does not reflect their gender identity. We think
this is an important distinction and failure to appreciate it could lead
to attempts at ineffective or dangerous ‘treatments’, much like the
unethical and pseudoscientific conversion therapy targeting
homosexuality, which is now widely discredited. It is also a common
mistake to try to define these complex issues through our own
professional lenses – whether labelling as a psychiatric disorder or as
a psychoanalytic defence mechanism that unfairly pathologises gender
identities that do not fit our traditional western belief systems.
Psychiatry has a history of falling into this trap, and we would hope
the profession could learn from its mistakes.

We accept that this was a ‘special article’ rather than original
research and not a research article, but we do not think that this
excuses it from the high standards of evidence expected in an esteemed
publication. We would echo the call for greater research into
psychiatry's role in ensuring transgender youth ‘fulfil their potential
in comfort’ (https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/pdf/PS02_18.pdf) and would
recommend that this begins with the people most affected, listening to
their concerns and values, and using scientific rigor rather than
anecdote and ideology.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================
