=============================================================================================
Freedom to think: the need for thorough assessment and treatment of gender dysphoric children
=============================================================================================

Marcus Evans [1]_Correspondence to Marcus Evans
(marcusevans3012@outlook.com)
:Date: 2021-10

:Abstract:
   Referrals (particularly natal female) to gender identity clinics have
   increased significantly in recent years. Understanding the reasons
   for this increase, and how to respond, is hampered by a politically
   charged debate regarding gender identity. This article starts with a
   discussion of the so-called ‘affirmative approach’ to gender
   dysphoria and considers the implications of the Memorandum of
   Understanding on conversion therapy. I then say something about the
   relationship between gender dysphoria and the developmental problems
   that are characteristic of adolescence. Finally, I outline what
   changes to the current approach are needed to do our best to ensure
   these patients receive the appropriate treatment.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
There has been a 3264% rise in referrals to the national gender identity
service at the Tavistock and Portman NHS Trust in London over the past
10 years (from 77 in 2009–2010 to 2590 in 2018–2019).\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`
The profile of referrals has also undergone a major transformation: we
have seen a reversal of the gender ratio from two-thirds male:female to
two-thirds female:male, with a recently described clinical phenomenon of
as yet uncertain diagnostic significance making up a substantial
proportion. This gender dysphoria of recent onset among adolescents
(sometimes termed ‘recent-onset gender dysphoria' or ROGD, ‘rapid-onset
adolescent dysphoria’\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` or ‘adolescent-onset transgender
history’\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`) lacks an agreed name or established diagnostic
criteria, but its emergence has been documented by a number of gender
clinics worldwide.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` Bernadette Wren, the then associate
director of the Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust’s Gender
Identity Development Service (GIDS), gave evidence to a House of Commons
select committee in which she summarised the GIDS intake in the
following terms: ‘many of the young people, and increasing numbers of
them, have had a gender-uncontentious childhood, if you like, and it is
only when they come into puberty and post-puberty that they begin to
question. That now represents a substantial proportion of our
group’.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` We have very little understanding of what
underlies these changes, and indeed of the understanding of this whole
area is extremely limited and it is particularly important to examine it
from different perspectives. This is very difficult in the current
environment, as the necessary debate and discussion is continually being
closed down, either through individuals being prevented from expressing
their views or being self-censoring through fear of the accusation of
‘transphobia’.

.. _sec1:

The ‘affirmative approach’
==========================

The affirmative approach to gender dysphoria appears to have been
adopted by the majority of NHS and privately provided children's
services in the UK. Again, Bernadette Wren stated in the House of
Commons: ‘I work in a service where a lot of the young people – and
anybody who wants it – have physical intervention. We have no record of
turning people down for physical intervention’.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` This
approach endorses the child's belief that they were born in the wrong
body and practitioners are required to support the child's
self-identification. Commenting on the decision of the American Academy
of Paediatrics (AAP), Cantor says ‘Although almost all clinics and
professional associations in the world use what's called the “watchful
waiting approach” to helping gender diverse children, the AAP statement
instead rejected that consensus, endorsing gender affirmation as the
only acceptable approach’.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` This is despite research
findings which strongly suggest that most of these cases would
eventually desist if left untreated.\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.h)` The
‘affirmative approach’ risks sending children down a path towards
concrete and sometimes irreversible medical interventions for what is in
very many cases a psychological problem. This approach, in my view, is
driven by political ideology rather than clinical need and inhibits the
clinician's curiosity and freedom to explore a child's underlying belief
systems and motivations. The ‘affirmation approach’ looks narrowly at a
problem in only one area of psychological functioning, as if one part of
the individual could be isolated from other areas of the personality, so
ignoring the complex relationship between the overt symptomatic picture
and trauma, social anxieties and even the relatively normal turbulence
of adolescence.

.. _sec2:

The Memorandum of Understanding on Conversion
=============================================

The Memorandum of Understanding on Conversion, which many healthcare
professionals have signed, purports to protect the patient from
conversion therapy. The Royal College of Psychiatrists signed the first
version of the Memorandum (in 2015)\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` as it referred to
homosexuality but declined to sign the second Memorandum
(2017)\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` as the definition had been expanded to include
transgender individuals. The Memorandum is very often interpreted as
obstructing the clinician's freedom to examine and explore the various
pathways that have led to gender dysphoria, but, somewhat surprisingly,
when one reads the document one discovers an acknowledgment that the
therapist or healthcare professionals’ job is to help the patient
discover and come to terms with who they really are: “‘For people who
are unhappy about their sexual orientation *or their transgender status*
[my italics], there may be grounds for exploring therapeutic options to
help them live more comfortably with it, reduce their distress and reach
a greater degree of self-acceptance’.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)`”

This Memorandum implies that there is a fixed category called
‘transgender’ which, like eye colour, is simply a given that need not be
thought about or understood. Children's sexual orientation and gender
identity are formed out of a complex developmental process that involves
an interaction between their body, their mind and society at large.
Sexual identity and gender identity are developmental processes that
evolve as the individual goes through the different life stages.

The Memorandum is, in my view, symptomatic of the way that political
agendas have influenced this area of clinical practice. We do not just
accept/affirm a patient with anorexia when, although she weighs 45 kg,
she thinks she is overweight and needs to diet more carefully. Instead,
we take it as our duty to try to understand what it is that is driving
that belief while persuading her that she needs to eat.

.. _sec3:

Children with complex problems
==============================

There is a growing body of knowledge that connects the development of
gender dysphoria with psychological factors.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)–(n.d.m)` A
group of parents whose children were treated at the Tavistock and
Portman NHS Foundation Trust's Gender Identity Development Service
(GIDS) in London wrote to the trust's board. In their letter they
express deep concern that children with no long history of gender
dysphoria, who were on the autism spectrum or suffered from social
anxiety adjustment disorders were, with very insufficient investigation,
diagnosed as transgender. They believed that the GIDS adopted a
superficial approach that was in danger of colluding with the child's
belief that all their problems will be solved if only they could change
gender.

The parents wrote to *The Guardian*, which reported on Saturday 3
November 2018 that children were ‘fast-tracking’ young people into
life-altering decisions without fully assessing their personal
histories. Their letter stated that::sup:`(n.d.n)` “‘the GIDS team is
being asked to engage with and assess complex and difficult cases within
a highly constrained time frame’.”

They also believed that their children had been indoctrinated as a
result of online websites that recruited the child into membership of
the trans community.

.. _sec4:

Research
========

One needs to be very cautious about recommending medical and surgical
interventions that place a lifelong burden of treatment on patients. We
know little about their effectiveness (there have been no long-term
follow-up studies). Carl Heneghan, Oxford University's Professor of
Evidence-Based Medicine and Editor-in-Chief of the journal *BMJ
Evidence-Based Medicine*, has called the puberty blocker treatment an
‘unregulated live experiment on children’.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` *Research
Digest*, published by the British Psychological Society, reported on an
Australian review which concluded that the current medical approach is
based on extremely limited evidence.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` The Royal Society
of General Practitioners has drawn attention to ‘the significant lack of
evidence for treatments and interventions which […] is a major issue
facing this area’.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` Professor Robert Winston (Lord
Winston) of Imperial College London has expressed concern about
medically transitioning young people without having ‘really defined what
is really wrong: what is the cause for people seeking gender
reassignment? Until we define the problem, I think we're going to have a
very blunderbuss problem’. Winston also highlights how often medical
transition may not meet the expectations of patients: “‘He said 40 per
cent of people who undergo vaginal reconstruction surgery experience
complications as a result, and many need further surgery, and 23 per
cent of people who have their breasts removed “feel uncomfortable with
what they've done”. He added: “What I've been seeing in a fertility
clinic are the long-term results of often very unhappy people who now
feel quite badly damaged. “One has to consider when you're doing any
kind of medicine where you're trying to do good not harm, and looking at
the long-term effects of what you might be doing, and for me that is
really a very important warning sign.” He added that the long-term
effects of taking hormones “are likely to affect reproductive
function”.’\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`”

Even GIDS's own senior psychologist Bernadette Wren has mused: ‘Of
course, you have to think that in another generation we will have done
something which is not regarded as having been wise.’\ :sup:`(n.d.r)`
Professor Donal O'Shea, an endocrinologist, has been highly critical of
the World Professional Association for Transgender Health's (WPATH's)
Standards of Care, which inform NHS England's guidelines: ‘Aligning with
them would result in significant harm accruing to those with gender
confusion’. His colleague, psychiatrist Dr Paul Moran, considers that
the WPATH guidelines ‘are clinically unsafe, and unsuitable for use in a
public healthcare gender clinic.’\ :sup:`(n.d.s)`

.. _sec5:

Patients that regret treatment
==============================

An increasing number of ‘regretters’ or ‘detransitioners’ are speaking
out on social media and at conferences to argue they have been let down
by mental health services that have failed to assess their psychological
problems before prescribing medical treatments such as puberty blockers
and cross-sex hormones, or surgery as treatment for their gender
dysphoria. A number of clinicians have called for research into
desistance, detransition and regret among gender dysphoric adolescents.
The US National Institutes of Health (NIH) Sexual & Gender Minority
Research Office (SGMRO) recently named detransition in its report
outlining scientific research gap areas in the field of sexual and
gender minority health.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` The 8th edition of WPATH's
Standards of Care will include a section on
detransitioning.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)`

Sky News reported on Saturday 5 October 2019 that Charlie Evans, who has
detransitioned, has set up a charity to help others in a similar
situation and has been contacted by hundreds of people seeking
advice.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)`

During the 1980s, I led a parasuicide service in King's College
Hospital, London, and treated a number of individuals who had
self-harmed or attempted suicide after gender reassignment surgery.
These patients had a history of serious and enduring mental illness
and/or a personality disorder. Having developed a late-onset gender
dysphoria, they were often angry at the loss of their biological sexual
functioning and aggrieved with psychiatric services, which they felt had
failed to examine their motivations for requesting reassignment surgery
and/or to adequately investigate their psychological difficulties. A
common theme in their presentations was a belief that physical
treatments would remove or resolve aspects of themselves that caused
them psychic pain. When the medical intervention failed to remove these
psychological problems, the disappointment led to an escalation of
self-harm and suicidal ideation, as resentment and hatred towards
themselves were acted out in relation to their bodies.

.. _sec6:

Informed consent
================

David Bell was approached by a large number of clinicians who had very
serious ethical concerns about the service. His report was presented to
the Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust board. In his report he
wrote: ‘This is a highly complex and difficult area which appears at
times to be treated superficially’. *The Times* (8 April 2019) quotes an
anonymous clinician from the GIDS as saying: ‘It was regarded as taboo
to discuss the impact of medical intervention on later sexual
functioning in such a young cohort’.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)`

In the National Health Service (NHS), clinicians are usually required by
law to discuss the potential negative effects of any treatment. However,
for reasons that are not clear, the treatment for gender dysphoria has
evolved operating outside the usual medical/professional practice.
Children are signing up for treatments that permanently modify their
bodies, but they may not fully understand the life-long consequences of
their decision or acknowledge the potential risks and uncertainties of
treatment. Their ability to provide informed consent has been
questioned, including by some clinicians working in gender
clinics.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)–(n.d.y)` Are children of 12 and under really
aware of what it will mean to become an infertile adult, who cannot have
an orgasm and has to remain a patient dependent on hormones and medical
care for the rest of their lives? Do girls know what it will mean in the
future to have to undergo hysterectomy to avoid vaginal atrophy? It is
also important to discuss openly that, although patients may decide in
the long term to transition, they cannot eradicate the biological
realities of their natal sex and will have to find some way of living
with the losses involved. A full assessment and psychological engagement
over a prolonged period can help the individual think through the
social, psychological and biological implications of the medical
interventions.

.. _sec7:

Comprehensive assessment
========================

A thorough assessment process involves two parts. First, an extended
open-minded psychotherapeutic approach has the capacity to create the
conditions whereby the factors, conscious and less conscious, that have
led to the presentation can be understood (it needs to be borne in mind
that a large number of individuals present with ‘rapid-onset gender
dysphoria’, suggesting underlying triggering factors). An understanding
of the family and social context will, of course, be critical. This
difficult psychological work needs to be carried out by experienced
mature and sensitive clinicians, as it can easily be felt to be
threatening, especially where the individual presents with strongly held
convictions – for example many believe that only a change in physical
sexual identity can bring them the relief they need. There is
considerable evidence of children and adolescents changing their minds
if given enough time and space to explore things. Second, it is clearly
vital that consent be fully explored. For example it will be important
to gauge how much understanding the individual has of the implications
of medical and surgical treatment. If an individual has no concern at
all about the prospect and outcomes, this lack of concern should be
thought of as *a symptom* that needs to be investigated and understood,
rather than being treated superficially as a positive indication of
their motivation. Unfortunately this kind of superficial approach is not
uncommon. One needs to be able to empathise deeply with the individual's
confusion, distress and mental pain, yet maintain adequate separation in
order to be able to resist the pressure to join the patient in their
view that active medical rather than psychological intervention is the
only solution that can be even considered.

We must not forget our ordinary understanding of adolescence as a time
of turmoil and considerable psychic pain as individuals have to come to
terms with who they are, their strengths, weaknesses and limitations.
Much of this, of course, centres on coming to terms with changes in the
body and the new social roles that these changes demand. Gender services
very often discuss only gender, with little mention of the relation with
the changing sexual body. One young woman in my clinic, who was on a
path to transitioning and then changed her mind, reported that there was
no discussion of any biological realities in the pro-trans groups: ‘Lots
of talk about gender politics and none about the physical realities
involved in transitioning’. The majority of children prescribed puberty
blockers go on to take cross-sex hormones.

.. _sec8:

Gender conflicts are a normal part of development
=================================================

We also need to bear in mind that adolescence is a time of
experimentation that inevitably stirs up all sorts of conscious and
unconscious confusions, doubts and conflicts which drive individuals to
manage the anxiety and psychic pain through the use of powerful
psychological defences such as denial, projection and splitting. When
the child or adolescent is in danger of being overwhelmed there will be
a tendency to focus on a fixed solution to deal with the most pressing
concern, particularly the unbearable pain of confusion. The experience
of being dislocated from one's body, which is changing rapidly in many
ways, is not uncommon in adolescence. (This is perhaps one element of
Kafka's classic tale *Metamorphosis* (1915) of a man who wakes up as a
monstrous insect.) These feelings may be dealt with by premature
foreclosure: ‘I am not the gender of the biology I was born with; I am
the other’ – a statement that any experienced and mature clinician would
resist through trying to create the conditions where confusion and
psychic pain can be more tolerated. One of the central developmental
tasks of adolescence is to come to terms with all sorts of realities,
providing the basis for an integration of body and mind.

A political, rights-based approach to the treatment of children is at
risk of forcing these complex psychological needs into the background.
Pro-transitioning websites encourage children to view anyone who puts a
different view, including parents, as suspect/the enemy; to
self-diagnose and view the taking on of a trans identity as a
wide-ranging solution to all their problems; to learn a script/obtain
online tutoring so that the clinician who carries out the assessment
will came to the ‘right’ conclusion, i.e. medical referral for
transitioning. The so-called ‘affirmative approach’ persuades schools
and others to accept unquestioningly the child's claims. Clinicians work
in a take out zone where question is not welcomed. These various forces
combine to ensure that these children very often get an assessment that
is nowhere near adequate.

This radical disconnection of gender dysphoria from its potential roots
in psychological disorder is fiercely promoted by pro-trans lobbies, who
brand clinicians as ‘transphobic’ if they insist on a thorough
psychological assessment of young people seeking to
transgender/transition. That is, clinicians who are trying to protect
the child from embarking prematurely on irreversible treatment are
rebranded as a malign influence getting in the way of what the child
‘needs’.

In 2019, Dagny, a young woman who later realised her mistake and seeks
to live again as her natal sex (a ‘de-transitioner’) published an
article about her experience of transitioning. She highlights the
influence of the online site Tumblr and gives a very good description of
the ways in which she internalised the ideals of the
website::sup:`(n.d.k)` “‘One of these unhealthy beliefs I held was the
belief that if you have gender dysphoria, you must transition. And
anyone that appeared to stand in my way was a transphobe – an alt-right
bigot.’”

De-transitioners often describe being ostracised by the pro-trans group
when they started to express doubts or question the treatment. Dagny
writes that she became a different person when she started using Tumblr:
“‘My online experience, having been affected by that level of
groupthink, that level of moral policing and the constant implicit
threats of social exposure and ostracisation made me an intensely
internal and anxious person. It made me paranoid about the motives of
people around me – I saw my parents as bigots because Tumblr told me to;
because they held out for so long to prevent me from starting
hormones.’”

Children can also get online tutoring on how to get past the assessment
process. *The Times* of 16 February 2019 also quoted David Bell as
saying that they ‘have learnt through online resources [or] coaching
from parents or peers exactly what to say in order to get the results
they want’.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)`

Many parents have expressed concern that school counsellors and child
and adolescent mental health services are adopting an unquestioning
gender-affirmative approach. They describe how, once children announced
that they believed they were the wrong sex, practitioners immediately
endorsed this belief, often after only one meeting. Politically driven
proposals proclaim the right of the child to define their own identity.
But this denies the fact that identity is developed in relation to
internal and external realities, both of which remain outside the
individual's control. We do not control our biological inheritance and
we cannot have complete control over the way we are seen by others.

.. _sec9:

Political pressure on institutions and research
===============================================

The extraordinary grip of powerful trans lobbies is having the effect of
silencing clinicians who fear them. Television producers and journalists
continually report that, although clinicians at GIDS are willing to
speak in confidence to them about their reservations of treatment in
these areas, they shy away from being named for fear of the consequences
– being branded a transphobic bigot. Some fear disciplinary action being
taken against them by their trust. Kenneth Zucker, a well-known
researcher and clinical lead of the Child, Youth and Family Gender
Identity Clinic in Toronto, was sacked from his post after being accused
of conducting ‘conversion therapy’. The centre had a policy of first
trying to help the individuals deepen their understanding of themselves
before recommending medical interventions. The investigation
subsequently completely exonerated Zucker.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` James
Caspian, a psychotherapist with considerable experience of working with
transgender patients, has described his sudden realisation of the
increasing number of patients who regretted the sexual reassignment they
had undertaken. In 2019, he wrote that he had been contacted by more
than 50 patients in the preceding 2 years. However, his proposal to
carry out a formal research project to investigate this phenomenon was
rejected by his university department for fear of a
backlash.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` In 2018, Lisa Littman described the insights
of parents whose adolescent children had recently adopted a transgender
identity – a phenomenon she provisionally labelled ‘rapid-onset gender
dysphoria’.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` Littman's paper prompted huge controversy:
*The Guardian* called her work ‘a poisonous lie used to discredit trans
people’ and the result was that the paper was withdrawn, only to be
subsequently republished with only very modest
revisions.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)`

It is thus clear that this politically driven culture interferes with
the freedom of thought necessary to work with these very troubled
children and adolescents. It ceases to be possible for them to be
assessed with an open mind, as individuals with their own unique
difficulties and instead they become political symbols, actors in a
wider ideological conflict – prejudice – and this is causing very
serious damage.

.. _sec10:

Conclusions
===========

The fantasy that the body can be rapidly sculpted as a way of being rid
of profound psychological problems needs to come under much closer
scrutiny. There is a great reluctance to even consider that the
difficulties can be understood, at least sometimes, through the lens of
body dysmorphia, where the individual becomes obsessed with a perceived
physical flaw. Plastic surgeons are very familiar with patients who seek
surgery to erase a psychological difficulty and refer these individuals
accordingly. Medical and surgical interventions in those with gender
dysphoria very often leave the underlying problems completely
unaddressed. It is, of course, not the case that surgical interventions
can remove all evidence of natal sex – which remains as a source of
persecution, a constant reminder of the continued existence of an
unwanted aspect of the self. Individuals need help and support in coming
to terms with who they are, as part of the maturational process.
However, patients often put enormous pressure on family, schools and
clinical services to join with them in the belief that to transition to
the ‘ideal’ body, i.e. to eradicate unwanted aspects of their body, is
the only solution to their problems. Perelberg makes the point that, if
the family or clinical service accepts this without sufficient question,
then there is a ‘confusion of registers’, i.e. the patient acts as if
they are convinced that a problem of self-representation existing in the
mind can be cured by concretely treating the body. The cost is that the
individual is dissociated from their own body, treating it like a
mannequin rather than a part of the self with anxieties, feelings and
confusions.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)`

Whatever decisions are made regarding medical treatment, a thorough
psychotherapeutic and psychiatric assessment is essential to enable us
to help these vulnerable young people, their families and their clinical
teams make informed decisions. It is a process of opening up a dialogue
with the individual about their motives, beliefs, the issues they are
struggling with – and, crucially, trying to understand the complex role
of gender identity in their more global functioning. A clinician has a
duty to protect and this cannot be honoured without a thorough
understanding of who the child is and how they arrived at the place they
are.

.. _sec11:

Recommendations
===============

Clinicians and patients need a service that is independent and protected
from intrusions by pressure groups to force a rigid ‘one size fits all’
affirmative approach to gender dysphoria. NHS gender identity services
have been functioning as if acting outside the ordinary requirement of
good medical and psychiatric practice. The accusation of transphobia
serves to shut down thoughtful enquiry and has been remarkably
successful. As a result, the very thing that is most needed to protect
children from harm is lost. This rapidly expanding and poorly understood
phenomenon requires a new regulator tasked with appropriate oversight of
gender identity services to ensure a more clinically rigorous, balanced
and ethical approach to this complex area. Perhaps the Human
Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) developed to address
ethical concerns in a rapidly expanding new field can provide the right
kind of model.

**Marcus Evans** is a former Head of Nursing and Associate Clinic
Director of the Adult and Adolescent Departments, Tavistock and Portman
NHS Foundation Trust, London. He is now a psychoanalyst in private
practice and author of *Making Room for Madness in Mental Health: The
Psychoanalytic Understanding of Psychotic Communication*.

.. _sec12:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.72.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

M.E. and his wife Sue Evans have provided witness statements for a UK
judicial review examining whether minors are able to provide informed
consent for gender-affirming treatments. M.E. has previously raised
concerns about such treatments with the Board of Governors and the CEO
of the Tavistock Trust. Sue Evans administrates the online pages for a
crowd justice fund, which will be used to pay the legal fees of the
judicial review. Neither M.E. nor Sue Evans has received or will receive
any financial reward for participation in the case.

An ICMJE form is in the supplementary material, available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/\ `bjb.2020.72 <bjb.2020.72>`__.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ad.

.. [1]
   The online version of this article has been updated since original
   publication. A notice detailing the changes has also been published
   at https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.124.
