========================================================================================
Predicting short-term suicide risk: allowing for ongoing variation in severity of intent
========================================================================================



Gethin MorganCorrespondence to Gethin Morgan
(hilary.howard@blueyonder.co.uk)
:Date: 2021-04

:Abstract:
   This article considers the role that assessment of suicidal ideation
   may have in short-term prediction of suicide. Suicide risk assessment
   is a multifactorial process and it is assumed that assessment of
   suicidal ideation is one component. Denial that suicidal ideation has
   any useful role in risk assessment fails to allow for the marked
   ongoing short-term variability in severity of intent, which is a
   common feature of the suicidal state of mind. It is concluded that
   the assessment of suicidal ideation, provided it is carried out
   correctly and applied appropriately, should continue to be regarded
   as a central component of the overall prediction process. A
   ‘two-take’ approach to short-term risk assessment and mitigation is
   proposed that takes variability in severity of intent into account
   and includes anticipatory treatment planning for any problems that
   may occur in the near future.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

When a suicide occurs in one of our patients, as clinicians it is only
too easy to blame ourselves even though our care had been exemplary.
Nagging doubts easily linger as to whether the suicide might have been
prevented if we had done this or that in a different way. It is very
important in such circumstances to take a step back, accept that it can
indeed be very difficult to predict suicide, let alone prevent it, and
acknowledge that occasionally quite inevitably we will not
succeed.\ :sup:`1`

However, in our day-to-day work we are probably more effective in
preventing suicide than we allow ourselves to acknowledge. Such a
happening goes unnoticed and is never recorded: a prevented suicide is a
statistical non- event for which we get no credit. Yet no doubt it can
occur. So even though the task is difficult, it is important that we
should continue to scrutinise the effectiveness of our clinical skills,
strive to achieve their further improvement and only discard them with
caution.

This review focuses particularly on assessment of suicidal ideation,
evaluating its role in the care of suicidal individuals and in
predicting short-term suicide risk. Assessment of suicidal ideation is
regarded as a central clinical component of the overall risk assessment
process, which is of course multifactorial and has a wide
clinical/social base.\ :sup:`2` Long-term prediction is a highly
questionable exercise and I do not consider it here.

In in-patient care, surely there can be no controversy regarding the
importance of suicidal ideation: careful monitoring of any suicidal
ideation that may be present is essential. Management of serious
immediate risk is incomplete without minute-by-minute awareness of level
of intent, and awareness of risk level should be part of any decision
concerning a patient being allowed leave the ward. In the out-patient
clinic evaluation of risk level, provided it can be shown to achieve an
acceptable degree of reliability, should not only help us to determine
the risk level at the time the patient is seen: but further it should
also guide us regarding ongoing risk, thereby helping to decide the
optimal length of time to the next out-patient appointment, as well as
clarifying the most appropriate treatment.

.. _sec1:

Assessment of suicidal ideation criticised
==========================================

A review of several meta-analyses concerning suicide prediction reached
the following conclusion: ‘None of the meta-analyses found that any
individual clinical risk factor, including suicidal thoughts and
behaviours, was sufficiently accurate as a basis to allocate
interventions’.\ :sup:`3`

Further cautionary advice comes from the National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence (NICE), which states in its 2011 guidelines on
self-harm: ‘Do not use risk assessment tools and scales to predict
future suicide or repetition of self-harm [or] to determine who should
or should not be offered treatment or who should be
discharged’.\ :sup:`4`

A number of other studies have found that the majority of patients who
died by suicide had denied having suicidal ideas at the time of the
final interview.\ :sup:`5–7` This has been taken to mean that assessment
of suicidal ideation is not to be recommended as part of suicide
prediction because of its unreliability.

In the face of such a consistent body of evidence suggesting that it has
no value, I will review the part that assessment of suicidal ideation
might play in short-term suicide prediction. In doing so I will
scrutinise the way it is used and asks whether this is appropriate.

.. _sec2:

Assessment of suicidal ideation looked at anew
==============================================

.. _sec2-1:

Criticisms answered
-------------------

The assessment of suicidal ideation, although it is a fundamental
element of any comprehensive attempt to assess risk, often seems to be
taken for granted and not described in any detail even in research
literature. The procedure itself has been subjected to criticism and
this needs to be answered.

There is no reason to believe that appropriate enquiry concerning the
presence of suicidal ideation increases suicide risk. Nor is a person
who volunteers to having suicidal ideas necessarily at low risk.
Exploration of suicidal ideation is not an isolated exercise. Throughout
it must be carried out in full knowledge of the total clinical picture
and integrated into the whole therapeutic effort. It is a sensitive
empathic reaching out to encourage sharing of distressing and often
frightening ideas, as dynamic as any other form of intervention can be.
It should not be a questionnaire-type Yes/No interrogation. It should
involve progressive exploration of suicidal ideas themselves, their
intrusiveness, frequency and acceptance as reasonable, and also of
feelings of loss of control, perhaps part of delusional thinking, or of
seeing suicide as the only way out of an impossible life situation. The
role of ambivalence and personality traits tending towards the impulsive
should never be ignored. All this requires gentle patience and warm
concern. It is not intended to be a matter of focusing on a patient's
weaknesses rather than strengths: it is simply a guide that can help us
make things safe. At all points we need to remember that it is for the
benefit of the patient and not, for example, just a way primarily of
coping with our own anxieties concerning adverse sequelae if things go
wrong. A confident, realistically encouraging attitude is essential: an
ambivalent patient will soon pick up doubts on our part and the whole
exercise can then become counterproductive. It is never appropriate as a
carer to identify with a patient's despair. It needs to be recognised
that aggressive behaviour can occur in parallel with significant suicide
risk. Clarify any risk to others. A brusque hurried approach can leave
the patient feeling stigmatised and undervalued, as well as encouraging
denial of intent or even encouraging suicidal motivation. Discussing
together any reasons why denial may occur and how to mitigate them,
being available and offering urgent help at any time should suicidal
thoughts recur, both represent a mark of respect for the patient's
intrinsic worth.

Although all of this is a complex and difficult clinical task it would
be a mistake to lose sight of the important positive part that
discussing suicidal ideation can have in caring for suicidal
individuals. To carry it out properly is comparable to having
responsibility for dispensing medicines: the results of
maladministration of either could be dire. So, it is reasonable to
expect that each psychiatric hospital ward should ensure that all
clinical staff have been well trained in assessing suicidal ideation.
Appropriate privacy is important if this sensitive and complex task is
to be carried out reliably.

.. _sec2-2:

Allowing for variability in severity of intent
----------------------------------------------

To base assessment of ongoing risk on the individual’s mental state
during a single interview is clearly likely to be highly unreliable. It
can mislead not because suicidal ideation is intrinsically valueless in
prediction and should be discarded, but rather because such an approach
makes no allowance for the marked short-lasting and ongoing variation in
severity of intent that is a common feature of the suicidal state of
mind. The following case series and studies illustrate this in suicidal
individuals during the weeks before death.

Over a 10-year period (1968–1978), 12 deaths by suicide occurred among
patients who were under my sole consultant care, either while they were
resident in a single psychiatric hospital ward or within 2 months of
discharge. They had all expressed suicidal ideation. I knew each of them
well, day in, day out, usually over several weeks, yet in spite of my
close continuing contact with them and the majority reassuring me about
their safety, they ended their lives. In an attempt to understand all
this further, I put all their case records together and looked at them
as a whole.\ :sup:`8` A half showed marked variability in severity of
suicidal intent, in some even over the course of a single day, with
short episodes of corresponding misleading clinical improvement in which
suicidal ideas were denied. Variable contact and unresolved stress
factors and impulse seemed relevant. For example, one patient happily
organised a charity walk from the hospital only to take her own life the
following weekend when, still apparently well, she went home on leave to
be confronted with an unresolved domestic crisis.

Two later case series consisted of all psychiatric in-patients in the
City of Bristol during two separate periods (1982–1984 and 1991–1993)
who died by suicide either from hospital wards or within 2 months of
discharge.\ :sup:`9,10` In the two studies, 52 and 61% respectively
showed episodes of misleading clinical improvement. Stress was a common
background to relapse: 44 and 50% respectively killed themselves when
clinically improved but with stress factors unresolved.

Although the number of cases in these three studies was small (12, 27
and 18 respectively) and they bridged a time span of 30 years, the
findings were derived from detailed observations at ward level by
clinicians responsible for the patients’ clinical care and were
remarkably consistent. They confirmed that short-term variability of
intent exists in a considerable proportion of suicidal patients. This
reinforces the view that to judge assessment of suicidal ideation as a
predictor of ongoing suicide risk merely on its efficacy when recorded
in a single interview ignores a common clinical feature of the suicidal
state of mind, namely its variability in severity of intent. To put it
bluntly, it asks the impossible of it.

The following discussion focuses particularly on out-patient work but
its principles apply to the in-patient situation too. We need to ask: In
the face of such practical difficulties what can we do to make
prediction of suicide more reliable so that we can rely on it over the
short term until the next out-patient interview?

.. _sec3:

An attempt to take things forward
=================================

The approach which is proposed here tries to take into account
variability in severity of intent when predicting suicide risk. It is
suggested that, in addition to assessing risk specific to the time of
interview, any attempt at predicting ongoing short-term risk should also
invariably include a projected evaluation of whether suicidal ideation
is likely to recur if difficulties are encountered before the next
clinical contact with the patient. This represents an attempt to
ameliorate the confounding effect of ongoing variation in severity of
intent. It also allows anticipatory treatment plans to be laid for any
difficulties that may recur, thereby targeting therapeutic efforts more
efficiently. Assessment of suicidal ideation remains a central component
of the whole process. The following proposed guidance incorporates this
approach with regard to follow-up of patients who have recently
experienced an episode of significant suicidal feelings. It is
provisional, its aim being to highlight the points made in this article
and to stimulate debate regarding them. It has not been used clinically
nor evaluated in any way. However, it is hoped that, after wider
evaluation and any necessary amendments have been made, its principles
might prove to be of practical value in taking forward the difficult
task of predicting short-term suicide risk.

.. _sec3-1:

Out-patient care of suicidal individuals: guidance on assessment of short-term ongoing risk
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Remember that predicting ongoing risk of suicide merely on the basis of
the patient's mental state at the time of a single interview can be very
unreliable. Evaluation of suicidal ideation and intent should be more
broadly based and cover the whole of the follow-up period. Remember that
ongoing day-to-day variation in severity of intent can be marked. Always
give serious consideration to any evidence of suicidal intent, expressed
or otherwise. Keep in mind the possible reasons specific to each case
why relapse might occur, as well as the overall risk assessment picture.
An important trigger for relapse is stress, particularly stress that has
previously been present and has not been resolved. Try to assess the
likelihood that difficulties, stress related or otherwise, will recur
before the next appointment and whether suicidal ideation will
complicate them. Overall evaluation should invariably take such
anticipated risk into account. Clarify what urgent help could be made
available in such a forthcoming crisis, ensure that it would be
acceptable to the patient, work through any hesitation expressed
regarding seeking that help and review the appropriateness as well as
any security provision related to prescribed medication. All this should
be integral to the assessment process.

.. _sec3-2:

Implementing the suggested guidance
-----------------------------------

This guidance is put forward in the hope that it might improve our
ability both to predict suicide risk in the short term and to target
more effectively the ongoing treatment we offer. It is no more than a
care plan, but one that not only focuses on the present: it also insists
on searching for potential risk at some point in the future. According
to it, no assessment of ongoing suicide risk would be regarded as
complete without such a ‘two-take’ approach covering the follow-up
period and aimed at what amounts to a moving target. This allows plans
to be laid in advance for an acceptable form of urgent help should
problems recur. Predicted suicidal ideation at any level of severity
without stratification and particularly ideation that is triggered by a
stressful event should be taken as sufficient to indicate significant
continuing risk.

As mentioned above, variability in severity of intent has been found to
occur in about half of patients with suicidal ideation who proceed to
suicide.\ :sup:`8,9,10` In the remaining patients, environmental stress
factors that presumably trigger such variability are presumably either
absent or do not cause significant problems for the patient. Does the
proposed guidance therefore have value only for half of patients? Not
necessarily. It is possible that, in other patients, careful
anticipatory enquiry might reveal a need to plan help for problems that
otherwise would have remained unexpected.

From what has been presented here it is clear that the process of
predicting suicide risk even in the short term is a difficult clinical
exercise. Regarding someone whose stress factors have not been fully
resolved, a letter to the general practitioner (GP) taking all relevant
issues into consideration might read as follows: “‘Suicidal intent
appears to be low or non-existent today. This is not in itself a
reliable predictor of ongoing suicide risk, which could recur again for
a variety of reasons relevant to the illness itself or significant
stress. Our discussion today showed that such stress might well recur
prior to the next appointment and the patient was anxious about having
to face it. Recurrence of suicidal ideation could not be ruled out. We
discussed ways in which we could offer urgent help in such circumstances
and as a result the patient felt more confident about being able to get
through it all. Overall, however, the predicted level of suicide risk
must still be regarded as significant, requiring vigilance until I next
see him/her.’”

Great care should be taken before one is ever tempted to suggest that
ongoing risk is totally absent in someone who has experienced suicidal
ideation in the recent past. In such a situation a letter to the GP
might read along the following lines: “‘The patient denied having
suicidal ideas today, stress factors appear to have been resolved,
family/social support has always been strong and remains so, and adverse
events that might lead to relapse seem unlikely to recur during the
follow-up period before I see him/her again. In spite of this reassuring
picture, vigilance is required during the follow-up period. This is
because relapse, especially if stress related, can occur unexpectedly in
anyone who has been at risk of suicide and it is early days since he/she
experienced suicidal ideation. I have discussed with him/her the
availability of urgent help and as a result he/she feels confident about
being able to cope until the next time we meet. For the moment, the
predicted level of suicide risk must remain as uncertain.’”

.. _sec4:

Conclusions
===========

It is hoped that the dynamic ‘two-take’ approach to predicting ongoing
short-term suicide risk that is proposed here might prove to be a useful
contribution to the overall risk assessment process by helping to
ameliorate the ‘moving target’ problem due to varying levels of intent
over short periods of time. Ongoing treatment should also be targeted
more precisely as a result of its forward-looking approach. There are
several other ways in which assessment of suicidal ideation can have a
useful role in caring for suicidal individuals. Its value in detecting a
certain group of in-patients especially vulnerable to suicide has been
described elsewhere.\ :sup:`11` Whatever the setting, shared knowledge
of suicidal ideation can also contribute to a therapeutic alliance with
the patient, promoting a readiness to discuss suicidal ideas fully and
thereby helping to alienate such ideas, making defensive denial less
likely. Such mutual collaboration and trust not only have therapeutic
and preventive value: they can then also facilitate the process of
prediction.

Given this overall picture it seems reasonable to conclude that the
assessment of suicidal ideas, provided it is carried out correctly,
applied appropriately and always used within the wider context of risk
assessment as a whole, can play a valued part in the overall care and
prediction of risk in suicidal individuals. Surely it is here to stay.

I am grateful to the late Dr Chris Vassilas for his much valued advice
and support. I also thank Dr Pamela Priest and Ruth Stanton, Research
Fellows, for their major contributions to research studies mentioned in
this paper, the Avon consultant psychiatrists, Emma Place, Librarian
Bristol University, HM Coroners in Bristol and the South Western
Regional Health Authority Research Committee for research funding over
the years.

Gethin Morgan, MD Cantab, FRCP, FRCPsych, DPM is Emeritus Norah Cooke
Hurle Professor of Mental Health in the Department of Psychiatry at the
University of Bristol, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were
created or analysed in this study.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.90.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
