=====================================================================================================================================
Patterns and motivations for method choices in suicidal thoughts and behaviour: qualitative content analysis of a large online survey
=====================================================================================================================================



Lisa Marzano
Dafni Katsampa
Jay-Marie Mackenzie
Ian Kruger
Nazli El-Gharbawi
Denika Ffolkes-St-Helene
Hafswa Mohiddin
Bob Fields\ **Correspondence:** Lisa Marzano. Email: l.marzano@mdx.ac.uk
:Date: 2021-03

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background
      :name: sec_a1

   Choice of suicide method can strongly influence the outcome of
   suicidal behaviour, and is an important aspect of the process and
   planning involved in a suicide attempt. Yet, the reasons why
   individuals consider, choose or discard particular methods are not
   well understood.

   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a2

   This is the first study to explore method choices among people with a
   history of suicidal behaviour and individuals who have experienced,
   but not enacted, suicidal thoughts.

   .. rubric:: Method
      :name: sec_a3

   Via an online survey, we gathered open-ended data about choice of
   methods in relation to suicidal thoughts and behaviours, including
   reasons for and against specific means of harm.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a4

   A total of 712 respondents had attempted suicide, and a further 686
   experienced suicidal thoughts (but not acted on them). Self-poisoning
   was the most commonly contemplated and used method of suicide, but
   most respondents had considered multiple methods. Method choices when
   contemplating suicide included a broader range of means than those
   used in actual attempts, and more unusual methods, particularly if
   perceived to be lethal, ‘easy’, quick, accessible and/or painless.
   Methods used in suicide attempts were, above all, described as having
   been accessible at the time, and were more commonly said to have been
   chosen impulsively. Key deterrents against the use of specific
   methods were the presence of and impact on other people, especially
   loved ones, and fears of injury and survival.

   .. rubric:: Conclusions
      :name: sec_a5

   Exploration of method choices can offer novel insights into the
   transition from suicidal ideation to behaviour. Results underscore
   the need for preventative measures to restrict access to means and
   delay impulsive behaviour.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1-1:

Background
==========

Suicide is a leading cause of death worldwide.\ :sup:`1` In England, the
2014 Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey found that a fifth of adults
(20.6%) reported thoughts of taking their own life at some point, and
one person in 15 (6.7%) has made a suicide attempt.\ :sup:`2` Choice of
method is one of the most important determinants of whether suicidal
behaviour is fatal, and a key aspect of the process and planning
involved in a suicide attempt. Indeed, earlier studies have shown that
gathering information and access to means of suicide are known
indicators of high suicidal intent and risk.\ :sup:`3,4` Yet, previous
literature has mostly focused on prevalence of methods, and associations
with gender, age and mental disorder.\ :sup:`5` How or why individuals
consider, choose or discard particular methods are not well understood.

Epidemiological studies have shown that different methods, and
combinations of methods, vary not only in relation to lethality, but
also in the extent to which they predict subsequent suicidal behaviour
and ‘method switching’.\ :sup:`6–10` Their wider impact can also vary,
not least by virtue of the exposure and potential clustering/‘contagion'
effects associated with more public, unusual and ‘newsworthy’
methods.\ :sup:`11` Indeed, avoiding ‘excessive detail of the method […]
to prevent simulative acts’ remains to date the only official regulation
for the reporting of suicide in the UK.\ :sup:`12`

This clearly points to the importance of better understanding the
cultural and cognitive availability of different methods of suicide.
Previous studies in this emerging field have identified these as key
drivers in people's method choices, but have explored their significance
in relation to a relatively narrow range of methods and with generally
small study samples.\ :sup:`5` Furthermore, earlier literature has
tended to focus on fatal and non-fatal suicidal behaviour, overlooking
its immediate, and generally less understood, precursor: suicidal
ideation. Understanding the psychological processes preceding a suicide
attempt is crucial for the potential to intervene, as is knowing what
prevents the majority of individuals in distress from acting on thoughts
of suicide, at a particular moment and/or over time.

The stability, or otherwise, of method choices also warrants further
attention. A recent systematic review found that a third of individuals
(33.3%) switch methods between successive episodes of self-harm, and
almost half (42.11%) between an episode of self-harm and
suicide.\ :sup:`13` Based on prevalence of methods, there appears to be
no discernible or predictable pattern to such means
switching.\ :sup:`9,13` Exploration of meanings, motivations and
mechanisms may, however, offer valuable new insights. For example, a
study in Austria showed that, despite method switching between episodes
of self-harm being common, choice of means in the time immediately
preceding a suicide attempt is often stable, and focused on a single
method.\ :sup:`8`

.. _sec1-2:

Aims
====

The present study aimed to investigate, for the first time, first-person
accounts of the factors deterring and prompting consideration and/or use
of specific methods of suicide among people with a history of suicidal
behaviour and those who have experienced, but not enacted, suicidal
thoughts. Dominant models of suicidal behaviour point to this as an
important distinction, with potential for novel insights into the
transition from suicidal ideation to behaviour.\ :sup:`14,15` Given the
disproportionate risk of suicide in men in the UK,\ :sup:`16` gender
differences in method choices were also explored, in relation to both
suicidal ideation and behaviour.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

.. _sec2-1:

Online survey
-------------

Data were gathered as part of a wider study of method and location
choices in relation to suicidal thoughts and attempts in the UK (QUEST,
Qualitative Understanding of Experiencing Suicidal
Thoughts\ :sup:`17,18`). A national online survey inviting people to
share their experiences of suicidality was advertised through suicide
prevention organisations such as Samaritans UK, online forums, social
media and special interest groups. Study posters and leaflets were also
placed on university bulletin boards, at local branch offices of
relevant charities, in the National Suicide Prevention Alliance
newsletter and were mailed out to supporters of the charity Campaign
Against Living Miserably (CALM).

The 16-item anonymous survey asked participants if they had ever
experienced suicidal thoughts and, if applicable, to describe in an
open-text format whether this involved a specific method or methods, and
why. Those who reported prior suicidal behaviour were then asked the
same question in relation to their suicide attempt/s. All questions were
optional, and no word limit, prompting or structure were imposed on
open-ended responses. This also meant that multiple methods and/or
reasons for (or against) using different means of suicide could be
provided. Further information was gathered about the specific location
or locations of suicidal thoughts and behaviours; about suggestions for
preventative measures at different locations; and sociodemographic
details (see Supplementary Appendix available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2021.15 for a copy of the full survey).

Links to further information about the study and to support services for
those experiencing suicidal thoughts were available both at the
beginning and the end of the survey. All participants gave informed
consent to participate in this study, and all research materials and
procedures were reviewed and approved by the Psychology Department
Research Ethics Committee at Middlesex University (reference:
ST019-2015).

.. _sec2-2:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

Open-ended survey responses were coded through a multi-stepped approach.
Suicide methods were classified using the intentional self-harm
(X60–X84) codes of ICD-10.\ :sup:`19` Reasons for engaging in specific
methods were analysed inductively for content,\ :sup:`20` and an
additional coding category was created to capture deterring factors,
where reported. Three coders (D.F.St-H., H.M., N.E.-G.) coded 10% of the
data, with substantial interrater reliability (Kraemer's kappa 0.774)
(see Supplementary Appendix for a full description of the coding
protocol and details of interrater reliability in relation to individual
code categories).

Survey data are presented as frequencies or percentages, as appropriate.
Variations in method choices were analysed using chi-square tests (for
categorical variables) and *t*- and Mann–Whitney *U-*\ tests (for
continuous variables). All statistical analyses were performed at a 5%
level of significance.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

We analysed the responses of 1398 people (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Of
these, 68.5% identified as females, 29.5% as males, and 2.0% as
transgender/gender fluid. Participants had a median age of 32 years
(range 16–73), and around a third were aged between 18 and 30 years old
(37.7%). The majority of the participants described themselves as White
(92.8%), heterosexual (74.7%), and non-religious (53.0%). Table
1Self-reported characteristics of the participantsAll participants
(*n* = 1398)Prior suicidal ideation only (*n* = 686)Prior suicidal
behaviour (*n* = 712)Age, years: median (range), *n*\ 32 (16–73) 128232
(16–73) 60632 (16–72) 676<18 years old, *n* (%)120 (9.4)61 (10.1)59
(8.7)18–30 years old, *n* (%)483 (37.7)224 (37.0)259 (38.3)30–45 years
old, *n* (%)436 (34.0)201 (33.2)235 (34.8)45–60 years old, *n* (%)214
(16.7)102 (16.8)112 (16.6)>60 years old, *n* (%)29 (2.3)18 (3.0)11
(1.6)Gender, *n* (%)Female896/1308 (68.5)390/618
(63.1)\ `\* <#tfn1_2>`__\ 506/690 (73.3)\ `\* <#tfn1_2>`__\ Male386/1308
(29.5)215/618 (34.8)171/690 (24.8)Transgender/gender fluid26/1308
(2.0)13/618 (2.1)13/690 (1.9)Sexual orientation, *n*
(%)Heterosexual923/1235 (74.7)457/591 (77.3)466/644
(72.4)Bisexual167/1235 (13.5)69/591 (11.7)98/644
(15.2)Gay/lesbian106/1235 (8.6)48/591 (8.1)58/644
(9.0)Ambivalent/unsure19/1235 (1.5)7/591 (1.2)12/644 (1.9)Asexual20/1235
(1.6)10/591 (1.7)10/644 (1.6)Any religion (versus none), *n* (%)572/1217
(47.0)262/581 (45.1)310/637 (48.7)Ethnicity, *n* (%)White1147/1236
(92.8)548/588 (93.4)599/648 (92.4)Asian47/1236 (3.8)24/588 (4.1)23/648
(3.5)Black and minority ethnic14/1236 (1.1)3/588 (0.1)11/648 (1.7)Mixed
race28/1236 (2.3)13/588 (2.2)15/648 (2.3) [1]_ [2]_

All participants reported prior thoughts of suicide. Of these, 686
respondents (49.1%) had experienced suicidal ideation but not engaged in
suicidal behaviour; 712 (50.9%) reported having engaged in at least one
suicide attempt. The latter subsample included a higher proportion of
women, but did not differ significantly from the former in relation to
the other sociodemographic characteristics captured (`Table
1 <#tab01>`__).

.. _sec3-1:

Self-reported method choices: suicidal thoughts
-----------------------------------------------

When asked about previous thoughts of suicide, all but a small minority
of respondents reported having considered a specific method, or methods
(*n* = 1279, 91.5%). For most (*n* = 799, 57.2%), multiple methods had
been contemplated (median 2; maximum 10), at different times or over
time. On average, respondents with a prior history of suicidal behaviour
reported having considered more suicide methods than those who had never
attempted suicide (mean 2.17 (s.d. = 1.48) *v.* 1.84 (s.d. = 1.3),
*P* < 0.001), with no significant difference between male and female
respondents.

Overall, self-poisoning was the most frequently contemplated method of
suicide (809/1398, 57.9%), including when only one method was considered
(220/480, 45.8%). Approximately a quarter of the participants had
experienced thoughts of suicide by hanging (381, 27.3%) or jumping from
a high place (330, 23.6%) and fewer had considered self-harm by a sharp
object (275, 19.7%), train (208, 14.9%) or other vehicle collision (208,
14.9%; all other methods were mentioned by under 10% of the
participants).

There were some significant differences in the suicide methods
contemplated by those who had and had not engaged in suicidal behaviour.
The latter were more likely to cite relatively unusual methods such as
crashing a vehicle (thoughts only versus behaviour: 85/686 (12.4%) *v*.
41/712 (5.8%); χ\ :sup:`2` = 18.74; *P* < 0.001) and handgun discharge
(thoughts only versus behaviour: 36/686 (5.2%) *v*. 21/712 (2.9%);
χ\ :sup:`2` = 4.72; *P* = 0.030), whereas those with a history of
suicidal behaviour were more likely to report thoughts of suicide by
hanging, strangulation or suffocation (behaviour versus thoughts only:
229/712 (32.2%) *v*. 153/686 (22.3%); χ\ :sup:`2` = 17.10; *P* < 0.001),
self-poisoning (behaviour versus thoughts only: 489/712 (68.7%) *v*.
320/686 (46.6%) χ\ :sup:`2` = 69.56; *P* < 0.001) and self-harm by a
sharp object (behaviour versus thoughts only: 159/712 (22.3%) *v*.
116/686 (16.9%); χ\ :sup:`2` = 6.50; *P* = 0.011).

Self-poisoning and self-cutting were more commonly reported by female
respondents, compared with males (self-poisoning, females versus males:
606/896 (67.6%) *v*. 151/386 (39.1%); χ\ :sup:`2` = 90.7, *P* < 0.001;
self-cutting, females versus males: 193 (21.5%) *v*. 60 (15.5%);
χ\ :sup:`2` = 6.1, *P* = 0.013). In contrast, male respondents were more
likely to have considered death by hanging, strangulation and
suffocation (males versus females: 131 (33.9%) *v*. 221 (24.7%);
χ\ :sup:`2` = 11.65; *P* = 0.001) and, but less frequently, by gasses
and vapours (males versus females: 27 (7.0%) *v*. 31 (3.5%);
χ\ :sup:`2` = 7.81; *P* = 0.005), or handgun discharge (males versus
females: 30 (7.8%) *v*. 24 (2.7%); χ\ :sup:`2` = 17.35; *P* < 0.001).

.. _sec3-2:

Suicidal behaviour and method choice ‘switching’
------------------------------------------------

Fewer, and often different, methods choices were described in relation
to actual suicide attempts (median number of methods reported in
relation to suicidal behaviour  1; maximum 7). Self-poisoning was again
the most commonly reported method in this context (555/712, 77.9%),
particularly among female respondents who had attempted suicide (females
versus males: 426/506 (84.2%) *v.* 104/171 (60.8%), χ\ :sup:`2` = 41.1,
*P* < 0.0001). This was followed by self-harm by sharp object (118/712,
16.6%), hanging (103/712, 14.5%; males versus females: 37 (21.6%) *v*.
64 (12.6%); χ\ :sup:`2` = 8.1, *P* = 0.004), and jumping from a high
place (60/712, 8.4%).

A small proportion of those who had considered self-poisoning when
contemplating suicide (47/602, 7.8%) reported having adopted a different
method or methods when engaging in suicidal behaviour. Relatively less
common methods, such as jumping/falling from a height, drowning or
vehicle collision, were reported considerably more frequently in
relation to thoughts than actual suicidal behaviour.

Among respondents who had made one or more suicide attempts, the vast
majority who had considered jumping/falling from a height (137/197,
69.5%), or in front of a train (96/116, 82.8%) or other vehicle (54/86,
62.8%), had not then attempted suicide by these specific methods. This
was also observed in relation to suicide by gasses and vapours
(24/33,72.7%), chemicals and noxious substances (28/45, 62.2%), drowning
(52/77, 67.5%), crashing of a motor vehicle (38/48, 79.2%), and less
frequently reported methods such as handgun discharge (17/22, 77.3%),
and smoke, fire and flames (7/10, 70%). A smaller, but considerable,
proportion of those who had contemplated suicide by hanging (143/246,
58.1%), sharp object (91/209, 43.5%) or poisoning by alcohol (29/84,
34.5%) had also then used different methods when attempting suicide.

.. _sec3-3:

Motivations for and against method choices
------------------------------------------

Self-reported reasons for considering one or more methods of suicide
were varied and often multiple. In describing their motivations for
contemplating or attempting suicide by a specific method or methods,
most respondents focused on more than one factor, particularly when
discussing suicidal thoughts (815/1238, 65.8%, maximum 11; 359/679,
52.9% mentioned more than one reason in relation to suicide attempts,
maximum 8).

There were some interesting differences in the reasons given for
considering a specific method when contemplating suicide, as opposed to
engaging in suicidal behaviour (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). Fig.
1Self-reported motivations for method choices in relation to suicidal
thoughts (*n* = 1398) and suicide attempts (*n* = 712).

Effectiveness, accessibility, ease and speed of a suicide method were
the most commonly cited reasons for contemplating suicide by a specific
method, alongside the wish to minimise pain and violence. Almost 70% of
participants who stated one main reason for contemplating suicide by
specific means cited one of these factors (287/423, 67.8%). However,
when respondents commented on their motivations for attempting suicide
by a given method, accessibility became the single most recurrent
concern (reasons for suicidal behaviour versus ideation (all
participants): 316/712 (44.4%) *v*. 319/1398 (22.8%),
χ\ :sup:`2` = 104.3, *P* < 0.0001), and impulsivity a more frequently
cited reason (behaviour versus ideation: 86/712 (12.1%) *v*. 85/1398
(6.1%), χ\ :sup:`2` = 22.8, *P* < 0.0001), particularly among women
(females versus males: 70/506 (13.8%) *v*. 12/171 (7%),
χ\ :sup:`2` = 5.6, *P* = 0.018).

Accessibility was the most commonly reported reason for attempting
suicide by a specific method even when excluding motivations for
self-poisoning (the most common method of suicidal behaviour in the
participants), and in relation to each method individually (alongside
method ease and/or effectiveness for attempts by chemicals and noxious
substances, other gasses and vapours, and handgun discharge). The only
exceptions were attempts by jumping or lying in front of a vehicle
(including trains), for which method effectiveness was the most
frequently cited reason (13/45, 28.9%), and smoke, fire and flames (for
which, however, only three participants provided data).

When discussing suicidal behaviour, ease of method remained among the
more frequently cited reasons for choosing a specific method, but speed,
effectiveness and the desire to minimise pain and violence were less
commonly mentioned than in relation to suicidal thoughts (speed,
behaviour versus ideation: 62/712 (8.7%) *v*. 272/1398 (19.5%),
χ\ :sup:`2` = 39.4, *P* < 0.0001; effectiveness, behaviour versus
ideation: 86/712 (12.1%) *v*. 364/1398 (26.0%), χ\ :sup:`2` = 54.8,
*P* < 0.0001; minimising pain and violence, behaviour versus ideation:
99/712 (13.9%) *v*. 300/1398 (21.5%), χ\ :sup:`2` = 17.6, *P* < 0.0001).

Among those who had engaged in suicidal behaviour, effectiveness
appeared to be a marginally (but significantly) greater concern for
males (males versus females: 29/171 (17.0%) *v*. 54/506 (10.7%),
χ\ :sup:`2` = 4.7, *P* = 0.03) and reducing pain and violence for
females (females versus males: 82/506 (16.2%) *v*. 14/171 (8.2%),
χ\ :sup:`2` = 6.8, *P* = 0.009). In total, 10% of respondents reported
having used a specific method of suicide following exposure to that
method (via family and friends as well as media reports). Less common
reasons, in relation to both suicidal thoughts and behaviour, included a
desire for privacy and to avoid interruption, to minimise the impact on
loved ones and other bystanders, or to maximise pain.

Some of the differences in the decision-making around suicidal thoughts
versus behaviour were reflected in the motivations for contemplating a
specific method in those who had engaged in suicidal behaviour and those
who had not. In particular, accessibility of method was more frequently
mentioned by those with a history of suicidal behaviour (behaviour
versus thoughts only: 180/712 (25.3%) *v*. 139/686 (20.3%),
χ\ :sup:`2` = 5.0, *P* = 0.025), alongside perceived lethality
(behaviour versus thoughts only: 205/712 (28.8%) *v*. 159/686 (23.2%),
χ\ :sup:`2` = 5.7, *P* = 0.017) and, less often, a wish to maximise pain
(behaviour versus thoughts only: 32/712 (4.5%) *v*. 9/686 (1.3%),
χ\ :sup:`2` = 12.41, *P* < 0.0001). Respondents who had never acted on
suicidal thoughts were instead more likely to mention wanting to
minimise the impact on others (thoughts only versus behaviour: 116/686
(16.9%) *v*. 83/712 (11.7%), χ\ :sup:`2` = 7.9, *P* = 0.005), including
and especially family and friends (thoughts only versus behaviour:
63/686 (9.2%) *v*. 43/712 (6.0%), χ\ :sup:`2` = 4.9, *P* = 0.026), and,
in smaller numbers, to be in an isolated location where one's attempt
and body would not be discovered (thoughts only versus behaviour: 21/686
(3.1%) *v*. 10/712 (1.4%), χ\ :sup:`2` = 4.4, *P* = 0.035).

Concern about the impact on others was also a key theme in the responses
of participants who mentioned motivations for not using specific methods
(57 respondents discussed discarding a particular method of suicide for
this reason), alongside fears around survival (potentially with
injuries, *n* = 58), and of not ‘getting it right’ (*n* = 51). Further
deterring factors included concerns over the violent/painful nature of a
method (*n* = 35), its ‘messiness’ (*n* = 11) or slowness (*n* = 7),
lack of access (*n* = 19) or privacy (*n* = 5), and the discarding of a
method having used it previously (*n* = 4) or researched it (*n* = 9).

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec4-1:

Main findings and interpretation
--------------------------------

Although specific methods, and composite methods, have been associated
with a higher risk of death and subsequent suicidal behaviour,
epidemiological analyses of repeat hospital admissions for self-harm
have concluded that ‘method of self-harm is fluctuating and
unpredictable’.\ :sup:`9` The results of this exploratory study of
first-person accounts suggest that, although indeed changing and
complex, method choices are reasoned, personally and culturally
meaningful, and a crucial element of the processes and planning involved
in attempting (or desisting from) suicide. With very few exceptions,
individuals who had contemplated suicide had considered a specific mean
(or, more often, means) of taking their own life, even when they had
never then engaged in suicidal behaviour. Almost 90% described a
particular reason, or set of reasons, for considering or discarding such
method/s.

To date, method choices have primarily been investigated in relation to
completed suicide and suicide attempts.\ :sup:`5,21,22` This is the
first study to explore patterns and motivations for method choices in
relation also to suicidal ideation, which is a surprising gap in
knowledge given that 10–20% of individuals experiences lifetime suicidal
ideation.\ :sup:`2,23` Suicidal thoughts are a known risk factor and
immediate precursor of suicidal behaviour, and key to understanding the
transition from ‘suicidal ideation to action’.\ :sup:`14,15` In relation
specifically to methods choices, suicidal thoughts provide some
important insights into the acceptability and cognitive availability of
different means of suicide. In other words, they can help us understand
which methods are cognitively available to individuals in crisis (in a
given sociocultural context), and what makes them more or less
‘attractive’ to them.

In this study, self-poisoning was the most commonly contemplated method
of suicide. However, most respondents had considered multiple methods of
suicide, particularly those who had also engaged in suicidal behaviour.
These included a fairly wide range of potential methods and, especially
among individuals who had never attempted suicide, relatively uncommon
means such as jumping or lying in front of a moving object, drowning,
handgun discharge and crashing of a motor vehicle. In England and Wales,
self-harm involving a moving object, drowning or fall and fracture
accounts, all together, for 12% of all suicides,\ :sup:`24` and only 1%
of hospital presentations for self-harm.\ :sup:`10` Firearm use,
although a common suicide method in countries with less stringent gun
control such as the USA,\ :sup:`25` is even rarer in the UK, accounting
for less than 2% of all suicides\ :sup:`26` and 0.03% of self-harm
hospital presentations.\ :sup:`10` Although these are only a small
proportion of completed suicides and hospital presentations for
self-harm, such methods tend to be disproportionately reported in the
media,\ :sup:`11` which may reflect and account for their
over-representation and over-availability in people's suicidal thoughts
(in the UK, most suicides are hanging\ :sup:`16` whereas most hospital
presentations for self-harm involve self-poisoning\ :sup:`10`). Almost
10% of the participants explicitly identified exposure to a given method
as a primary motivation for considering it as a means of suicide. Even
more common reasons were perceived method ease, accessibility, speed and
effectiveness, alongside the desire to minimise pain and violence.

However, the range of methods described in relation to actual suicidal
behaviour was narrower, as were respondents’ motivations for using such
methods. Over three quarters of respondents attempted suicide by
self-poisoning, with many switching to this method having also
considered more violent or unusual means. For almost half of the
participants, choice of attempt method was primarily dictated by
accessibility, and ease of method and the minimisation of pain were more
common concerns than perceived speed or likelihood of death. An
exception was jumping/lying in front of a vehicle, for which method
effectiveness was the most frequently cited reason (see also Marzano et
al\ :sup:`18`).

In relation to all methods, lethality appeared to be a greater concern
for male than female respondents, and impulsivity less common, as also
reported elsewhere.\ :sup:`27,28` Together with the increased use of
methods other than self-poisoning,\ :sup:`29` this might contribute to
the disproportionate risk of suicide in men.

Of note are also some of the differences between respondents who had
contemplated but never engaged in suicidal behaviour, and those who had
previously attempted suicide. The former were more likely to mention
wanting to minimise the impact on others, especially family and friends,
and, in smaller numbers, to be in an isolated location where one's
attempt and body would not be discovered. This points to the presence
and impact on bystanders and loved ones as important ‘dissuaders’ in
relation to suicide. Indeed, these were also among the most frequent
reasons for not attempting suicide by a specific method. Other common
deterrents were fears of surviving with injuries and of ‘not getting it
right’.

Interestingly, impulsivity was not a more common theme in those who had
attempted suicide *per se*, but was cited more frequently in relation to
suicidal behaviour than ideation. This finding lends support to the idea
that individuals who attempt suicide may not have significantly elevated
trait impulsiveness, compared with ‘ideators’; however, they may have
higher impulsiveness when in a negative state.\ :sup:`30`

.. _sec4-2:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

We analysed rich descriptions of people's choice of methods in relation
to suicidal thoughts as well as behaviours, with strong interrater
reliability, and no prompting, structure or limit to the answers that
could be provided. This exploratory, inductive approach is rare with
samples as large as the current study's, and allows for appropriately
powered statistical analyses, as well as more nuanced, in-depth analyses
of particular groups or methods, including the different images, myths
and cultural scripts that exists around – and against – specific means
of suicide (as presented elsewhere in relation to railway
suicide\ :sup:`18`).

However, findings were based on a self-selected, predominantly female
sample, and may not necessarily be representative of all individuals who
consider, attempt or indeed die by suicide, within the UK and more
widely. National and cultural variations in suicide method choices
suggest the need for replication with broader and more diverse
samples,\ :sup:`25` in a wider range of community and clinical settings.

Given the exploratory nature of this study, we did not gather systematic
information about potentially important factors such as prior
psychiatric and family history, nor about the sequence or temporality of
suicidal thoughts and behaviour. This limits the conclusions that may be
drawn in relation to method switching, escalation and substitution, and
prevented us from making inferences about age differences in method
choice. Further, longitudinal studies could usefully investigate how the
frequency, intensity and intent of suicidal thoughts and behaviour may
affect method choices in different groups and communities. A more
structured approach to gathering information about deterring factors
could also offer important insights into how best to prevent, and
‘dissuade’ from, specific means of suicide, in different contexts and
locations.

.. _sec4-3:

Implications
------------

Previous research has concluded that ‘people's risks or needs [cannot
be] based simply on the method of harm’,\ :sup:`9` or the potential
lethality of that method. The results of this study also suggest that
the methods people consider when contemplating suicide are often not the
ones that are then enacted in a suicide attempt, nor are they
necessarily chosen for the same reasons. Nonetheless, exploring method
choices is far from a fruitless activity, and can usefully inform
preventative initiatives.

Consistent with earlier literature, our findings suggest that cognitive
and physical availability are key drivers in the choice and prevalence
of suicide methods. The former appears to be particularly relevant in
the context of people's suicidal thoughts, with methods perceived to be
‘easy’ and lethal featuring highly in individuals’ so called ‘ideation
menu’.\ :sup:`31` The latter (i.e. the accessibility of a given method),
becomes especially important in the context of a suicide attempt, and
impulsivity relatively more common. This clearly underscores the need
for preventative measures that restrict access to means and delay
impulsive behaviour, such as the erection of barriers at high-risk
locations and reduced pack sizes of paracetamol.\ :sup:`32` Avoiding
depictions and descriptions of suicide methods in the media may help
limit the cognitive availability of specific means, particularly for
methods portrayed as lethal, easy, quick and painless. This may be
especially important in the reporting of celebrity suicides. A recent
meta-analysis found that when the suicide method used by a celebrity was
reported, there was an associated 30% increase in deaths by the same
method.\ :sup:`33`

In clinical settings, exploring the decision-making around specific
methods may help challenge unhelpful myths and misconceptions, identify
areas of ambivalence and hope, and develop appropriate safety and
treatment plans. At public-health level, factors known to attract
individuals and subgroups to lethal means of suicide may be challenged
via targeted communication and media strategies, and common ‘dissuaders’
reinforced. However, the risk and unintended consequences of different
approaches to means and ‘myth-restriction’ need careful thought and
evaluation, whether in the context of means-restriction
counselling\ :sup:`34` or as part of wider public health approaches.
Further research is needed in this area, but the risks and ethics of how
and where research findings are disseminated and ‘translated’ need
careful attention to avoid reinforcing the acceptability and
availability of (lethal) means of self-harm.

We are greatly indebted to the hundreds of people who generously shared
their time, stories and experiences with us. This programme of research
was commissioned by Samaritans and funded by Network Rail on behalf of
the rail industry. We are grateful to the Project Stakeholder Group for
their support throughout the research, particularly Ian Stevens, Rachel
Watters and Caroline Kingston (Network Rail), Kim Tuley (British
Transport Police), Michael Woods (RSSB), Gary Cooper (ATOC (Association
of Train Operating Companies) and National Task Force) and Susie Beevor
(ATOC), Stephanie Aston, Ola Rzepczynska and Lorna Fraser (Samaritans).
The late Mark Smith, MBE, Head of Suicide Prevention and Mental Health
at British Transport Police, played a key role in supporting this
research, and several other suicide prevention initiatives. His
dedicated and intelligent approach to suicide prevention has helped save
many lives, and inspired countless others. Thanks are also due to
Professor Keith Hawton, Fiona Malpass, Ian Noonan and Professor Damien
Ridge, who provided invaluable advice and support at several stages of
the project. Additional thanks are due to the National Suicide
Prevention Alliance (NSPA), Rethink and CALM (Campaign Against Living
Miserably) for their assistance with participant recruitment, and Andy
Bardill, Kate Herd and Kirsty Tither of Redloop (Middlesex University)
for help with the study website and recruitment materials.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2021.15.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

The data that support the findings of this study are available on
request from the corresponding author (L.M.). The raw data are not
publicly available as they include qualitative quotes that could
compromise the privacy of research participants.

L.M. and J.-M.M. designed the questionnaire. I.K. and B.F. designed the
coding protocol and tool; D.F.St-H., H.M., N.E.-G. coded all open-ended
data. L.M., I.K., B.F. and D.K. analysed the data. L.M. and D.K.
searched the literature, and wrote the first draft. All authors
interpreted the data and edited the manuscript.

Network Rail on behalf of the rail industry. Funders had no role in the
research or in the decision to publish.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

ICMJE forms are in the supplementary material, available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2021.15.

.. [1]
   Denominators vary because of missing data.

.. [2]
   χ\ \ :sup:`2` = 16.12; *P* < 0.001.
