============================================================================
Psychoanalysis in the treatment of autism: why is France a cultural outlier?
============================================================================

D. V. M. Bishop
Joel SwendsenCorrespondence to Dorothy Bishop
(dorothy.bishop@psy.ox.ac.uk)
:Date: 2021-04

:Abstract:
   In most countries, social or behavioural interventions are
   recommended for autism. However, in France, psychoanalysis is still
   used, despite objections by patients, families and mental health
   experts. Supporters of psychoanalysis maintain that the choice of
   therapeutic approach is a matter of cultural preference, and that
   objections to psychoanalysis arise from misunderstandings. We argue
   that more deep-rooted problems are the lack of an evidence base for
   psychoanalysis and its focus on sexual relationships between children
   and adults, which demonises mothers and can put children at risk of
   abuse. Furthermore, psychoanalysis in France is protected from
   criticism by powerful educational and political networks.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Psychoanalysis as an intervention for child language disorders
==============================================================

There have always been geographical differences in the practice of
medicine, even within Western societies, but in psychiatry, especially
child psychiatry, national variations are taken to extremes. The first
author realised the enormity of the divide between French and British
practices in 2001, when asked to write an endorsement for *The Silent
Child: Exploring the World of Children Who Do Not Speak* by Laurent
Danon-Boileau.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` The book's author was described as one of
France's most respected child psychoanalysts, with a particular interest
in language. The book contained a series of case studies of children who
did not have any formal diagnoses but appeared to fit criteria for
autism, intellectual disability or dyslexia. As Law\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`
noted in a review, there was no recognition of developments in social
cognition and developmental psycholinguistics. Rather, there were
confident assertions about the child's inner state, and children's lack
of communication was generally attributed to affective and motivational
causes relating to psychodynamic factors, rather than to any problems
with understanding or formulating language.

To a child language expert, it is surprising that anyone should imagine
psychoanalysis, the quintessential talking therapy, would help a child
with impaired communication. Yet psychoanalysis is still taken seriously
as an intervention for autism in a few countries, with France being the
most notable example. This was documented in a film, *Le
Mur*,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` produced in 2011 by journalist Sophie Robert. In a
series of interviews, child psychoanalysts interpreted language
limitations in their young clients through the lens of psychoanalytic
theory. The parents were directly implicated in causing autism, and the
child's communicative problems were regarded as a reflection of a
difficult parent–child relationship. The flavour of the content is
conveyed by a few direct quotes from the English transcript. “‘What we
can notice when we take care of autistic children is precisely that
autistic children are sick of language. That autism is a way to defend
themselves from language.’ (Esthela Solano)‘At the beginning, the child
thinks that he is his mother’s phallus. Namely that he is this object
that would give everything, fill his mother with joy, make her have
orgasm … The father is there to forbid and at the same time protect the
child. That is, to protect the child from the incestuous desire of the
mother.’ (Yann Bogopolsky)”

Laurent Danon-Boileau was one of the interviewees. It was illuminating
to hear him describe a session with an autistic child; he did not seem
to see his part as to facilitate the child's development, but rather to
adopt a passive, interpretative role.

*Le Mur* was shocking for autism experts outside France. Although there
are child psychoanalysts in the English-speaking world, they are a small
minority and recommendations by the National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` for intervention in autism make no
mention of this approach. In the UK, autism is regarded as a
neurodevelopmental condition with a predominantly genetic aetiology, and
intervention focuses on working directly with social communication and
behaviour. The goal is to bring about an improved developmental
trajectory, rather than gaining any insights into the deeper meaning of
the symptoms.

.. _sec2:

French cultural and political influences on acceptance of psychoanalysis
========================================================================

It is worth reflecting on how such differences in practice have come
about. Language barriers play a part in preventing the flow of ideas
across national borders, but this cannot account for the unique status
of psychoanalysis in France, where it is celebrated and protected.

Houzel,\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` in recounting the history of psychoanalysis as a
treatment for autism, noted that French society has ‘a very marked
cultural identity that results in a certain impermeability to external
currents of thought’ (p. 742). For Houzel, himself a psychoanalyst, this
has certain benefits: ‘One advantage is a capacity to resist certain
fashions that is no doubt greater than elsewhere. That is why France
remains today a country where the application of psychoanalysis to the
treatment of autists persists in spite of all the attacks that it is
subjected to’ (p. 742).

Houzel further noted how French intellectuals are drawn to abstraction
and speculative theorisations; these are exemplified by the work of
Jacques Lacan, who did not himself work with children but developed an
influential system of thought, based on Freudian theory, with its own
specific French flavour. Its appeal to French intellectuals remains a
mystery to those of us with a less credulous frame of mind, who suspect
that when an author writes obscurely it is not because the ideas are
brilliant, but because they are using verbiage to hide muddled thinking.
As Billig\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` concluded: ‘academic authors do not advance
the cause of critique by putting their readers in a subservient position
where authority has to be taken on trust and where obscurity takes
priority over clarity’ (p. 22).

Houzel's paper put the development of psychoanalysis in France in a
historical context and noted its cultural and political influences, but
it also emphasised the extent to which psychoanalysis, as a treatment
for autism and related developmental disorders, has come under repeated
criticism over recent decades. Some parent organisations have attacked
psychoanalysis on the basis that their children are denied the kind of
interventions that are routinely available in other
countries.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` In 2012, a political bill was put forward to
the French National Assembly calling on the government to ‘condemn and
prohibit psychoanalytic practices in all their forms concerning the
treatment of autism’.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` In parallel with these
developments, there have been a series of National Autism Plans,
starting in 2005; there is now significant funding of research from the
perspective of autism as a neurodevelopmental disorder and a cadre of
French autism researchers with international standing.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`
Yet French psychoanalysts remain politically powerful and have waged a
campaign against those who challenge them, including an attempt to sue
director Sophie Robert on the grounds that *Le Mur* misrepresented their
views.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

.. _sec3:

Psychoanalytic interpretations of maternal factors in aetiology
===============================================================

Houzel\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` suggested that the chief reason for rejection of
psychoanalysis is a mistaken belief that psychoanalysis blames mothers
for their children's difficulties. He argued that this is not the case:
psychoanalysis is not adequate for identifying aetiologies, and ‘Its
quest is more in the direction of meaning than that of cause’ (p. 731).

To maintain that psychoanalysis does not blame parents seems
disingenuous. There are many varieties of psychoanalysts, and it is true
that some, including most British psychoanalysts, overtly state that
parents should not be blamed for their child's
difficulties.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` Nevertheless, in France, the role of
parents, especially mothers, in causing disorders has been a core
feature of psychoanalytic work with children. Briggs\ :sup:`(n.d.k)`
noted how the work of Bruno Bettelheim had been influential in France,
with his view of cold, rejecting mothers (the classic ‘refrigerator
mother’ of Kanner) from whom the child withdraws into his shell.
Bates\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` cited numerous examples of mothers being told
bluntly that they were responsible for their child's autism, although
the more common accusation was that mothers were overinvolved and
‘smothering’, with an unhealthy desire for the child that led to the
child being unable to achieve a separate identity. *Le Mur*, and a more
recent film by Sophie Robert, *Le Phallus et le Néant*,\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`
contain several examples of psychoanalysts putting forward such
viewpoints.

Bates\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` noted that these ideas fell on fertile soil in
France, as they fitted well with notions of toxic mothers already
endorsed by French psychoanalysts. Several relevant quotes by Françoise
Dolto, one of the most influential French child psychoanalysts of the
last century, can be found on the Freud Quotidien
website,\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` including this on autism: “‘The child wants
what they see the adult wanting. If they focus the desire of the adult,
the source of the desire in them dries up and what remains of it is
inflected on their own vegetative material person, causing autism, that
is to say disorders of its spatio-temporal reference and of
communication. This mental illness, leading in the worst case to
infantile dementia in a previously open and intelligent baby, is
established in the infant separated from all their references. It has
also been called “hospitalism” which, at all levels, depending on the
duration of the pain, is in fact a disease of the desire. While needs
are preserved, desire loses in this child its magnetic vector calling
for communication. but “hospitalism” can also be observed in a family
environment, in infants whom the mother or rather the neurotic employee
isolates in an obsessive way by exclusive possessiveness, or who is the
object of perfect care, technically speaking, given without joy by a
depressive adult’ (translated by Julien Basch).”

.. _sec4:

Rejection of the need for a conventional evidence base for psychoanalysis
=========================================================================

Houzel also bypassed two further objections to psychoanalysis, which are
particularly concerning to any dispassionate observer of French child
psychiatry. The first is the lack of any accepted evidence base for
psychoanalytic treatments. Houzel\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` regarded behavioural
approaches to intervention as mere fashions in reductionist thinking,
and noted that they have not been strikingly successful in gaining
understanding of the nature or causes of autism, nor in creating
improved outcomes for children. This point has some justification –
progress has certainly been slow and there is no miracle
cure.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` The difference compared with psychoanalysis,
however, is that these developments occur within a scientific framework
that allows one to test the ideas and reject those where the evidence
does not fit. Popper\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` used psychoanalysis as one of his
classic examples of pseudoscience, able to explain all phenomena but
with no possibility of being disproven: if the scientific framework is
itself rejected, then any viewpoint is as valid as another.
Billig\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` pointed out that Lacan's supporters ignored
attempts by experimental psychologists to evaluate his work, because
they regarded orthodox psychology as invalid; yet, even when considered
in its own terms, Lacan's citation of evidence was sloppy and
inaccurate. Sokal and Bricmont\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` were particularly harsh
on Lacan, for producing obscure writings with all the trappings of
technical language and concepts but no coherent meaning. Consistent with
this, Law\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` noted that Danon-Boileau\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` did
not engage in any discussion of evidence-based practice and indeed
seemed to make a virtue of his lack of reading in the area. The
impression is that many French psychoanalysts regard themselves as
revolutionary thinkers who, in rejecting mainstream science, are
challenging the conventional power structures in society. But they
ignore the potential for abuse of adults’ power over children, who are
defenceless against having their thoughts and motivations interpreted in
terms of the analyst's unevidenced theory.

.. _sec5:

Psychoanalytic accounts of sexual relations between adults and children
=======================================================================

A different type of critique of French psychoanalysis is highlighted in
Robert's most recent film, namely, that it has been used to validate
incest and child abuse. Freud, and his follower Lacan, regarded children
as sexual beings, strongly influenced by erotic desire for a parent and
preoccupied by concerns about castration, lack of a penis or violence.
Given that these are seen as universal human desires, incest and
paedophilia are regarded as natural phenomena. According to this view,
psychic conflicts are largely due to the need to fit in with the norms
of a society that strictly prohibits such behaviours and hence to
repress natural instincts. The focus on child sexuality was one reason
that many of Freud's contemporaries ultimately broke away from
him;\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` he was seen as imposing his own dogmatic views,
derived from his self-analysis, on others, treating concepts such as the
Oedipus complex and castration anxiety as universal, to the neglect of
other, non-sexual risk factors for mental disturbances. In *Le Phallus
et le Néant*, we see how this viewpoint can open the way for abusive
relationships between a powerful therapist and vulnerable children.

The risk of abuse needs to be viewed in relation to a distinct French
cultural perspective with regard to an age of consent.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)`
In 1977, a group of 60 prominent intellectuals signed a petition that
was published in *Le Monde*, coinciding with the trial of three men who
had been accused of having sex with 13- to 14-year-old children. The
argument in the petition was that children had the capacity to consent
to sex, and that adoption of an age of consent was patriarchal and a
denial of children's rights. A similar petition was published 1979, in
support of a man on trial for having sex with girls between the ages of
six and 12. ‘Desire and sexual games have their place in the
relationship between children and adults’ was the argument put forward,
with the claim reiterated that children's rights were being abused by
denying them sexual gratification.

One signatory of the 1977 petition was Françoise Dolto, a media-friendly
psychoanalyst who regularly appeared on a radio programme between 1976
and 1978, where she answered parents’ questions. In 1979 she was
interviewed by the magazine *Choisir* on the topic of incest; a
transcript can be found online.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` Her responses indicated
that she regarded children as willing participants in sexual activity
who should take responsibility for their actions. The same website
reported quotes from a 1999 book, *L'Enfant, le Juge et la
Psychanalyste*, in which Dolto discussed with judge Andrée Ruffo the
legal implications of sexual relationships between adults and children.
Dolto recommended that children should be taught early that sexual
contact with an adult is against the law, so that there will be no doubt
about their complicity if they do engage in such activities: “‘If
children knew that the law prohibited sensual privacy between adults and
children, well, from the moment an adult asks her, if she accepts, that
makes her an accomplice, she doesn't have anything to complain about’
(authors’ translation).”Dolto continues to be held in high regard in
France. Not only has Paris named a street after her, but in 2018 the
government printed a special postal stamp in her honour. *Le Phallus et
le Néant* makes it clear to what extent her legacy lives on, with
interviewees maintaining that children are sexual beings who are capable
of behaving provocatively towards their parents, who must repress their
‘inner paedophile drive’.

Such discourse is not merely symbolic: it has real consequences for
children. Growing unease in French society about the cultish status of
psychoanalysis came to a head this year with the publication of a book
*Le Consentement* by Vanessa Springora,\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` who described
how at the age of 14 she was drawn into a sexual relationship with a
celebrated 50-year-old writer, Gabriel Matzneff. Matzneff was one of the
signatories of the 1977 petition for decriminalising paedophilia. He
defended himself by arguing that his relationship with the teenaged
Springora and others of her age were love affairs.

No doubt there are many child psychoanalysts who would be horrified at
the notion that their methods were being used to defend incest and child
abuse. The problem, though, is that if someone were inclined towards
paedophilia, then Dolto's version of psychoanalysis would appear very
attractive, promoting as it does the idea that sexual relationships
between adults and children, while prohibited by society, are a natural
and therefore blameless aspect of the human condition. Psychoanalysis
can provide professional respectability, a good income and access to
vulnerable children. We should be clear: we are not saying that these
views are common among French child psychoanalysts. Nevertheless, so
long as the psychoanalytic movement in France sets no limits as to what
can count as psychoanalysis, it runs the risk of causing harm to
children, as well as to its profession.

.. _sec6:

Continuing power of psychoanalysis in French political and academic life
========================================================================

The key question is no longer how France arrived at this point but
rather how it cannot seem to fully get beyond it. Although
psychoanalysis is now marginal in France for psychiatry as a whole, it
is a different story for the subdiscipline of child psychiatry that has
been dominated by this orientation for decades. In 2012, the High Health
Authority of France implemented recommendations for the treatment of
autism, but they were not obligatory and inefficient psychoanalytical
therapies continued to be proposed for individuals with
autism.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` Even though new generations of physicians are
trained in evidence-based treatments, the older generations that were
trained to see psychoanalysis as a viable treatment for autism are still
in practice. This presence is visible at all levels of the French
healthcare system, including public hospitals, clinics and private
practice. Perhaps the biggest problem in France concerns the training of
clinical psychologists. Psychologists are ten times more numerous than
psychiatrists, and they occupy a large number of positions in clinics
and hospitals treating children with autism. The second author, an
expert for the National University Council (Conseil National des
Universités), recently provided a scientific criticism of psychoanalysis
as well as quantitative analysis of the training received by clinical
psychologists in French universities.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` This analysis
demonstrated that of the 26 universities charged with the training of
clinical psychologists, half still provide substantial psychoanalytic
training. In nine of these universities, the training provided in
clinical psychology is *exclusively* psychoanalytic in orientation.
Clinicians trained in these institutions are not routinely exposed to
evidence-based approaches in the treatment of autism (or other mental
disorders, for that matter), and no national examinations or
professional licensing criteria require them to have such training
before assuming positions at hospitals throughout the country. The
French government and university presidents have turned a blind eye to
this psychoanalytic monopoly at institutions of higher education.

In sum, the defence of psychoanalysis as a treatment for autism rests on
the idea that choice of one form of therapy over another is purely due
to cultural preferences and fashion. A deeper investigation, however,
reveals that psychoanalysis is qualitatively different from other forms
of therapy. It is not only bereft of any evidence of effectiveness, but
it is so ill-defined that it is unclear what such evidence would look
like. It is only legitimised because it is promoted by authority figures
and maintained by circles of power and influence. Moreover, in its more
extreme forms, it has potential to cause damage to parents, especially
mothers, who are demonised both for being too involved with and too
remote from their children, and to children themselves, who are regarded
as seducers rather than victims when involved in sexual relationships
with adults.

.. _sec7:

About the authors
=================

Dorothy Bishop, M.A., M.Phil., D.Phil., is Professor of Developmental
Neuropsychology in the Department of Psychology, University of Oxford,
UK. Joel Swendsen, M.A., Ph.D., is Director of Research at the National
Centre for Scientific Research, France.

We thank Julien Basch for assistance with translation of sources.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts3:

Author contributions
====================

Both authors contributed to the writing of this article and approved the
final text.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

.. _sec8:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.138.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.
