=====================================================================================================================================================
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of integrating mental health services in primary care in low- and middle-income countries: systematic review
=====================================================================================================================================================



Leonardo Cubillos
Sophia M. Bartels
William C. Torrey
John Naslund
José Miguel Uribe-Restrepo
Chelsea Gaviola
Sergio Castro Díaz
Deepak T. John
Makeda J. Williams
Magda Cepeda
Carlos Gómez-Restrepo
Lisa A. Marsch
:Correspondence: Leonardo Cubillos
(leonardo.cubillos@dartmouth.edu)

:date: 2021-02

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   This systematic review examines the effectiveness and
   cost-effectiveness of behavioural health integration into primary
   healthcare in the management of depression and unhealthy alcohol use
   in low- and middle-income countries. Following PRISMA guidelines,
   this review included research that studied patients aged ≥18 years
   with unhealthy alcohol use and/or depression of any clinical
   severity. An exploration of the models of integration was used to
   characterise a typology of behavioural health integration specific
   for low- and middle-income countries.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Fifty-eight articles met inclusion criteria. Studies evidenced
   increased effectiveness of integrated care over treatment as usual
   for both conditions. The economic evaluations found increased direct
   health costs but cost-effective estimates. The included studies used
   six distinct behavioural health integration models.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Behavioural health integration may yield improved health outcomes,
   although it may require additional resources. The proposed typology
   can assist decision-makers to advance the implementation of
   integrated models.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1-1:

Burden of depression and unhealthy alcohol use
==============================================

Depression and unhealthy alcohol use are worldwide public health
problems. Depression is the single most significant contributor to
global disability, accounting for 7.5% of all years lived with
disability.\ :sup:`1` Unhealthy alcohol use accounts for 5.9% of all
global deaths and 5.1% of the entire global burden of disease,\ :sup:`2`
and >80% of this occurs in low- and middle-income countries. Individuals
suffering from depression and unhealthy alcohol use are at increased
risk for poorer health outcomes from other illnesses, such as
tuberculosis, maternal and infant conditions and HIV/AIDS.\ :sup:`3,4`
In low- and middle-income countries, societal impacts related to
depression and unhealthy alcohol use can exceed healthcare
costs.\ :sup:`5,6` The affected populations have higher rates of
unemployment, reduced job functioning and lower educational
attainment.\ :sup:`7`

Despite the existence of cost-effective interventions for these
conditions, up to 90% of individuals living with mental illnesses in
low- and middle-income countries lack access to care.\ :sup:`8,9`
Moreover, in low- and low-middle-income countries, only 1% of the
population with substance use disorders has access to minimally adequate
treatment.\ :sup:`10` Factors like low levels of public expenditures,
reliance on out-of-pocket payments, preferential funding of
hospital-based models of care and significant workforce shortages reduce
the availability and accessibility of mental healthcare.\ :sup:`11–13`

.. _sec1-2:

Typology of behavioural health integration in high-income countries
===================================================================

Behavioural health integration into primary care is thought to be an
effective way to reduce the treatment gap in resource-constrained
settings.\ :sup:`14` Nonetheless, the vast majority of studies assessing
the effectiveness of this integration originate in high-income
countries. A meta-analysis, including mostly studies from high-income
countries, found moderate-quality evidence that brief interventions in
primary healthcare can reduce alcohol consumption in unhealthy drinkers
compared with minimal or no intervention.\ :sup:`15` Similarly, research
studies from high-income countries revealed significantly better
outcomes for adults with depression treated with collaborative care
management compared with care as usual.\ :sup:`16,17`

In high-income countries, different integration models have been
classified based on the nature and level of coordination between highly
specialised providers. Several high-income countries have developed
their own classification adapted to their health system, and these
typologies are commonly used in research and healthcare management. For
example, the United States Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration conceptualised a typology based on the degree of
collaboration between primary care and behavioural healthcare
specialists.\ :sup:`18` At the most basic level, specialists refer
patients to another location (coordinated care). At the intermediate
level, providers deliver care at the same site but do not share
treatment plans (colocated care). At the highest level of integration,
specialists are part of the same team with a unique treatment plan, and
the patient experiences a single system (integrated care). Collaborative
care management, the most commonly studied integration models in
high-income countries,\ :sup:`19` is most often located in this highest
level of integration. However, we are unaware of the existence of a
typology built specifically for low- and middle-income countries.

.. _sec1-3:

Behavioural health integration in low- and middle-income countries
==================================================================

In low- and middle-income countries, researchers have studied
task-shifting, often referred as task-sharing, which is the use of
non-specialist primary health workers (such as general practitioners or
nurses) and lay health workers to deliver mental health interventions
and increase the availability of mental healthcare
services.\ :sup:`20–22` A review of evidence found that interventions
delivered by lay health workers may increase the number of adults
recovering from depression, reduce symptoms for mothers with perinatal
depression and decrease the quantity of alcohol consumed by unhealthy
drinkers.\ :sup:`23` In another review, Seidman and Atun\ :sup:`24`
found task-shifting to hold potential for cost-saving and efficiency
improvements in health systems in the care of tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.
Evidence for mental health conditions is unclear.\ :sup:`24` Both
reviews found minimal relevant economic studies.

This systematic review aims to summarise the evidence of effectiveness
and economic evaluation of the behavioural health integration of the
management of depression and unhealthy alcohol use into primary
healthcare in low- and middle-income countries. For the purpose of this
review, all types of economic evaluations (such as cost-minimisation,
cost–utility, cost–benefit and cost-effectiveness analysis) were
included.\ :sup:`25` We included all types and levels of severity of
depression and unhealthy alcohol use. Additionally, we propose a
typology to characterise the models of behavioural health integration in
low- and middle-income countries, using the evidence of the experimental
studies included in the review. This typology could assist hospital and
district managers, programme planners and policy makers in their
decisions to improve the availability of mental healthcare services.

This systematic review is part of the formative phase of Project
Detection and Integrated Care for Depression and Alcohol Use in Primary
Care (DIADA), an implementation research project in Colombia, Peru and
Chile, funded by the National Institute of Mental Health. Project DIADA
studies technology-enhanced service delivery models for treating
comorbid depression and unhealthy alcohol use in primary healthcare in
multiple sites in urban and rural Colombia.\ :sup:`26`

.. _sec2:

Method
======

.. _sec2-1:

Protocol and registration
-------------------------

We designed this systematic review according to Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines.\ :sup:`27` We
registered this review in the PROSPERO International Registry of
Systematic Reviews (identifier CRD42017057340).

.. _sec2-2:

Phase 1: search strategy
------------------------

| This systematic review had five phases. In the first phase, medical
  librarians developed the search strategy, translating research
  concepts into controlled subject headings and natural language terms.
  The search included articles from 1990 to 2017. We chose to start the
  search at 1990 because before this date few, if any, studies in low-
  and middle-income countries were utilising behavioural health
  integration models. The following databases were searched for relevant
  abstracts: Medline – PubMed (search date 28 April 2017), Web of
  Science (search date 28 April 2017), PsycINFO (search date 28 April
  2017), EMBASE (search date 4 May 2017), Cochrane Central Register of
  Controlled Trials (search date 28 April 2017) and the World Health
  Organization's (WHO) Global Index Medicus (search date 28 April 2017).
  The search also included relevant conference proceedings, grey
  literature and review references in related articles (`Table
  1 <#tab01>`__). Abstracts in English, French, Spanish and Portuguese
  were included based on co-authors’ proficiency in these languages. The
  search found 8786 abstracts after removing duplicates. Search keywords
  included, but were not limited to, ‘depression’, ‘alcohol use
  disorder’, ‘integrated care’ and ‘developing country’. A full list of
  search terms for all databases searched, including PubMed (Medline),
  can be found under Supplementary File 1 available at
  https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.35. Table 1Overview of databases
  searchedDatabasePlatformYears coveredDate conductedNo. of
  resultsMedlinePubMed1990 to current28 April 20172520EMBASEElsevier1990
  to current4 May 20172927Web of ScienceThomson Reuters1990 to current28
  April 20175181Cochrane Central Register of Controlled TrialsWiley1990
  to current
| DSR: issue 4, April 2017
| Trials: issue 3, March 2017
| Methods: issue 3, July 2012
| EconEval: issue 2, 201728 April 2017376
| (DSR: 31
| Trials: 339
| Methods: 2
| EconEval: 4)WHO Global Index Medicusglobalhealthlibrary.net1990 to
  current28 April 20171254
| (LILACS: 775
| WPRIM: 356
| IMEMR: 61
| IMSEAR: 53
| AIM: 9)PsycINFOProQuest1990 to current28 April
  20171241Total13 499Total with duplicates removed8786 [1]_

.. _sec2-2-1:

Eligibility criteria
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We searched for experimental and non-experimental studies that examined
the effectiveness or that performed economic evaluations of the
implementation of a behavioural health integration model on the
management of depression and unhealthy alcohol use in primary healthcare
in low- and middle-income countries. Articles eligible for inclusion
were required to meet the following criteria: (a) studies included
patients aged ≥18 years, of any gender and with a diagnosis of alcohol
use disorder and/or depression of any severity; (b) studies performed
with a population living in low- and middle-income countries as per the
World Bank country income classification\ :sup:`28` during the year that
the study started; (c) studies included patients who received mental
health services (in depression and/or alcohol use disorder) in fully or
partially integrated primary health services in low- and middle-income
countries\ :sup:`29` and (d) studies included the integration of
pharmacological or psychological interventions, or a combination of
both. All study designs were considered. We excluded single-case
studies, presentations, abstracts, notes, corrections and studies that
did not report effectiveness or economic evaluation outcomes.

.. _sec2-3:

Phases 2 and 3: abstract and full-text review
---------------------------------------------

Using previously agreed inclusion criteria, three teams of two
researchers per team each independently screened a third of the
abstracts and titles (approximately 2918 abstracts). Disputed references
(around 11%) were sent to an arbiter who settled the discrepancies. A
total of 147 articles (roughly 1.7% of original abstracts) were selected
for full-text appraisal of inclusion criteria. In each team in phase 3,
one reviewer acted as the primary reviewer, the second reviewer
evaluated the work for discrepancies and an arbiter settled the
differences. This full-text review identified 58 articles meeting
inclusion criteria, 40 of which met study design criteria and provided
sufficient statistical data to be included in a subsequent meta-analysis
(`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). Fig. 1Flow chart of search results.

.. _sec2-4:

Phase 4: data extraction
------------------------

In phase 4, we completed an in-depth data extraction with a previously
designed form (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). We also completed a standardised
assessment of bias of all the included randomised controlled trials,
using methods described in the Cochrane Collaboration's tool for
assessing risk of bias.\ :sup:`30` This assessment of bias included a
team of two of the authors independently evaluating the studies across
seven categories: random sequence generation, allocation concealment,
blinding of participants and personnel, blinding of outcome assessment,
incomplete outcome data, selective reporting and other bias. Studies
were rated across these categories as having a ‘low risk of bias’,
‘unclear risk of bias’ or ‘high risk of bias’, and all discrepancies on
risk classifications were resolved by a third author. Table 2Phase 5:
list of variablesSetting of careWhere does the screening take
place?Where does the intervention occur?Where does the follow-up take
place?Human resourcesWho screens?Who delivers the clinical
intervention?Who prescribes?Who provides additional services?How is
supervision done?Who refers the patient?Who receives the referral?Who
pays the salaries of the intervention team?How is the intervention team
paid?Who provides training?Who receives
training?InterventionsDescription of the interventionDescription of the
trainingWhat is the relation between the clinical intervention team and
the PHC?Elements of the collaborative care management modelPresence of
care managersRole of care managers in symptom assessmentRole of care
managers in monitoring treatment adherenceComposition of
multidisciplinary teamsExistence of patient education programmesWhat is
the role of patient data in the care of the patient? [2]_

.. _sec2-5:

Phase 5: patterns in the organisation of care of behavioural health integration models
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

During phase 4, we noticed patterns in the reorganisation of care that
enabled the delivery of integrated mental health interventions in the
treatment arms. We used the 2018 Joint Commission Ambulatory
Accreditation Quality of Care Standards to assess the dimensions of
quality of care involved in these reorganisations of care.\ :sup:`31` We
updated the data extraction form used in phase 4, adding variables
related to organisation of care, and reviewed all articles once again
(`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). We extracted data by structural coding. During
phases 4 and 5, one researcher (L.C.) extracted these data, with a
second reviewer (S.B.) assessing the data for discrepancies. An arbiter
resolved any differences that the researchers found.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Description of the included studies
-----------------------------------

The 58 included publications corresponded to 53 unique studies assessing
the effectiveness or performing an economic evaluation of behavioural
health integration in 19 low- and middle-income countries. Of the 58
articles, 20 took place in a rural setting, 3 took place in semi-urban
settings, 23 took place in urban settings, 7 took place in both rural
and urban settings, and the settings of the remaining 5 are unclear or
unable to be categorised. The vast majority of the studies introduced
interventions in primary healthcare, although some interventions were
introduced in communities, over the phone or in public hospitals. Of the
55 articles for which this categorisation applies, 22 articles studied
only women, 3 studied only men and 30 studied both women and men. Eleven
articles came from low-income countries, 19 articles came from
lower-middle income countries and 28 articles came from upper-middle
income countries. Based on the WHO regional grouping
classification,\ :sup:`32` 22 articles came from Africa, 15 articles
came from the Americas, 13 articles came from Southeast Asia, 8 articles
came from the Eastern Mediterranean region and 2 articles came from the
Western Pacific region. Two studies counted for both India and Pakistan,
which are classified in two different WHO regions (Supplementary Table
1).

We found that of the 58 total articles, 46 focused on depression, 9
focused on unhealthy alcohol use and 3 focused on both illnesses.
Further, 49 assessed the effectiveness of integration models, 6
performed economic evaluations, 2 performed both assessments and 1
presented a descriptive analysis. Of the 51 publications reporting
effectiveness data (8 reported economic evaluation data), 40 focused on
depression, 9 focused on alcohol use and 2 presented data related to
both conditions. These 51 publications also varied in study design: 36
studies were randomised controlled trials, 7 were quasi-experimental
studies and 8 were observational studies.

We found a high risk of selection bias among our studies, owing to a
lack of blinding of ‘participants and personnel’; more than 75% of our
studies had a ‘high risk’ of this type of bias. This finding was not
surpirising given the nature of the mental health interventions, for
many of which it was not possible to blind the study participants. The
effect on the evidence quality is low since the authors used
standardised and objective methods for outcome measurement (`Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__). Fig. 2Consolidated risk of bias graph.

.. _sec3-2:

Results of the effectiveness studies
------------------------------------

.. _sec3-2-1:

Depression
~~~~~~~~~~

Forty-two articles presented effectiveness data on depression care
(Supplementary Table 1). The most frequently studied primary outcome was
severity of depression. The treatment arm usually received a
psychological intervention like cognitive–behavioural therapy,
problem-solving therapy, psychoeducation or interpersonal therapy,
whereas the care for the control arm was enhanced with screening only.
Thirty-six articles reported that the integration groups had a greater
reduction in depression severity than the control groups. Of these 36
articles, 5 articles reported effect size. Overall, differences between
arms sustained through secondary follow-ups ranged from 3 months to 36
months post-intervention. Three of the articles that found no difference
between the control and treatment groups offered only a general training
on mental healthcare to their lay or primary healthcare workers
expecting to change their clinical behaviours.\ :sup:`33–35` Two other
publications lacking positive findings selected primary outcomes highly
susceptible to confounding.\ :sup:`36,37` In India, Pradeep et
al\ :sup:`38` sought to improve treatment-seeking behaviours and
adherence to antidepressant medications by enhancing usual care. In
Iran, Malakouti et al\ :sup:`39` sought to reduce the number of
suicides. In Pakistan, Husain et al\ :sup:`40` compared the
effectiveness of psychotherapy to antidepressant medications in reducing
depression and improving quality of life. This group compared two
integrated interventions without contrasting it to usual care and found
no difference between these two arms.

.. _sec3-2-2:

Alcohol use
~~~~~~~~~~~

Eleven articles reported effectiveness data related to unhealthy alcohol
use.\ :sup:`41–51` All 11 used a reduction in alcohol consumption as
their primary outcome. Ten of these articles were randomised controlled
trials (Supplementary Table 1). Of these, five favoured the intervention
arm,\ :sup:`41,42,45,48,50` five did not show differences between arms
or after the intervention\ :sup:`43,44,46,49,51` and one had unclear
results.\ :sup:`47` For the studies that favoured the intervention arm,
only one paper reported effect size (*d* = 0.95).\ :sup:`52` For most
studies, secondary follow-ups showed that statistically significant
differences sustained over 3 months to 12 months post-intervention. The
two most commonly delivered interventions were screening followed by
brief intervention or by motivational interviewing. In Thailand, Noknoy
et al,\ :sup:`41` and in South Africa, Rendall-Mkose et al,\ :sup:`48`
found that motivational interviewing arms produced better outcomes than
enhanced usual care in improving patient outcomes. In Kenya, L'Engle et
al\ :sup:`45` found that screening and a brief intervention can reduce
self-reported alcohol consumption among female sex workers at risk for
HIV. In South Africa, Mertens et al\ :sup:`44` found that patients
receiving brief intervention had significantly reduced Alcohol, Smoking
and Substance Involvement Screening Test scores. However, in South
Africa, Peltzer et al,\ :sup:`46` and in Thailand, Assanangkornchai et
al,\ :sup:`51` found no difference between brief intervention and simple
advice as both arms similarly reduced alcohol consumption. Similarly, in
South Africa, Sorsdahl and Petersen,\ :sup:`49` in an uncontrolled
before-and-after study, did not find a significant decrease in alcohol
use in pregnant women following a brief intervention.

In Kenya, Papas et al\ :sup:`50` found effectiveness of
cognitive–behavioural therapy over treatment as usual in reducing use
and attaining abstinence in patients living with HIV. In India, Nadkarni
et al\ :sup:`42` developed a novel and culturally adapted psychotherapy
for unhealthy alcohol use delivered by lay health workers, called
counselling for alcohol problems. Patients receiving counselling for
alcohol problems showed higher remission rates and higher proportion of
alcohol-free days than individuals receiving enhanced usual care.

.. _sec3-3:

Results of the economic evaluation studies
------------------------------------------

We identified eight studies performing economic evaluations
(Supplementary Table 1). These studies were conducted in Chile, India,
Mexico, Nigeria and Pakistan. Six of these studies assessed
interventions related to depression,\ :sup:`52–57` one study evaluated
interventions related to alcohol use\ :sup:`42` and one publication
evaluated both conditions.\ :sup:`58` Four of these studies used a
healthcare perspective in their economic analysis,\ :sup:`52,56–58` two
used a societal perspective\ :sup:`54,55` and two used both
perspectives.\ :sup:`42,53` In economic analysis, a healthcare
perspective includes all costs and benefits directly affecting patients,
providers and payers.\ :sup:`25` Conversely, a societal perspective
takes a broader approach to include healthcare plus other private and
public benefits and costs related to a given condition. Concerning the
type of economic analysis, five studies performed a cost-effectiveness
analysis,\ :sup:`52,55–58` two completed a cost–utility
analysis\ :sup:`42,53` and one study performed both types of economic
analysis.\ :sup:`54` Three studies used modelling
techniques\ :sup:`52,57,58` and five studies used experimental data from
effectiveness trials.\ :sup:`42,53–56`

Two of the articles using modelling techniques\ :sup:`52,58` utilised
the sectoral approach to cost-effectiveness analysis developed by the
WHO's ‘Choosing Interventions that are Cost-Effective’
initiative.\ :sup:`59` These studies found that a combined intervention
of medications and therapy plus proactive case management yielded the
highest effectiveness among the alternative options. In a study in
Nigeria, Gureje et al\ :sup:`58` found that a combination of tricyclic
antidepressants, psychotherapy and proactive case management had the
highest cost-effectiveness ratio, closely followed by tricyclic
antidepressants only (approximately 0.5% less cost-effective). In
Mexico, Del Carmen et al\ :sup:`52` found that a medication-only
intervention was the most cost-effective, followed by a combination of
medication, psychotherapy and proactive case management (approximately
10.5% less cost-effective).

From a healthcare perspective, the economic analyses of the experimental
studies showed that the intervention arms had increased effectiveness
and costs.\ :sup:`42,53,54,56` The increased direct costs were
associated with increased utilisation of healthcare personnel and
medications. These interventions were deemed cost-effective based on the
acceptability threshold and commonly accepted values for
cost-effectiveness. Using a Markov model, in Chile, Siskind et
al\ :sup:`57` modeled the cost-effectiveness of a stepped-up care
intervention throughout the lifetimes of a cohort of Chilean adult
females. This study also evidenced increased direct healthcare costs,
but found integration to be very cost-effective.

Notably, from a societal perspective, these interventions were found to
reduce costs, usually associated with decreased time costs to patients
and families, as well as fewer productivity losses.

.. _sec3-4:

Models of behavioural health integration
----------------------------------------

| The control arm of the experimental studies included in this review
  used treatment as usual (minimal or no services) or enhanced usual
  care. In contrast, to integrate mental healthcare, the treatment arms
  redesigned their care by selecting at least one of the seven strategic
  intervention options (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__). Each strategic
  intervention option represents a discrete active enhancement to the
  primary healthcare affecting workforce capacity, information
  management or daily flow of care.\ :sup:`31` The behavioural health
  integration models tested in the research are made up of one or more
  strategic intervention options. Furthermore, the treatment arms of the
  53 studies included in this secondary analysis clustered around 6 of
  these integration models (`Table 4 <#tab04>`__). We were unable to
  include five studies in this secondary analysis: two owing to paucity
  of data\ :sup:`55,60` and three owing to use of modelling methods for
  economic evaluation that did not study any specific behavioural health
  integration model.\ :sup:`52,57,58` Table 3Organisational strategic
  options used in the integration modelsStrategic intervention
  optionsDescriptionJoint Commission standard of ambulatory quality of
  care (standard label)1General training on mental healthcare for lay
  and primary healthcare workersHuman resources (H.R. 01.05.03)2Specific
  training on mental healthcare skills and interventions for lay and
  primary healthcare workersHuman resources (H.R. 01.05.03)3Addition of
  dedicated lay or primary healthcare workers to provide mental health
  servicesHuman resources (H.R. 01.06.01)4Addition of specific mental
  healthcare tasks to existing lay or primary healthcare workersHuman
  resources (H.R. 01.05.03)
| Provision of care (P.C. 02.01.01)5Increased coordination between lay
  or primary healthcare workers with mental health workersProvision of
  care (P.C. 02.01.05)6Strategic data management to improve patient
  outcomesProvision of care (P.C. 02.01.05)
| Information management (I.M. 02.02.01)7Utilisation of care manager or
  care coordinatorProvision of care (P.C. 02.01.01)
| Provision of care (P.C. 02.01.05) Table 4Summary of the integration
  models and the organisational strategic options used in each
  modelStrategic intervention options1234567Models of behavioural health
  integrationGeneral training on mental healthcare for lay and primary
  healthcare workersSpecific training on mental healthcare skills and
  interventions for lay and primary healthcare workersAddition of
  dedicated lay or primary healthcare workers to provide mental health
  servicesAddition of specific mental healthcare tasks to existing lay
  or primary healthcare workersIncreased coordination between lay or
  primary healthcare workers with mental health workersStrategic data
  management to improve patient outcomesUtilisation of care manager or
  care coordinatorType of healthcare workers involved in the model1.
  General training on mental healthcare for lay health workers and
  primary health workersYesNoNoNoNoNoNoLHW, PHW,2. Mental healthcare
  interventions delivered by lay health workersYesYesNot essential but
  could be addedNot essential but could be addedNoNoNoLHW3. Mental
  healthcare interventions delivered by primary healthcare
  workersYesYesNot essential but could be addedNot essential but could
  be addedNoNoNoPHW,4. Consultation liaisonNot essential but could be
  addedNoNoYesYesNoNoLHW, PHW, MHW5. Stepped careYesYesNot essential but
  could be addedYesYesYesNoLHW, PHW, MHW6. Collaborative
  careYesYesYesYesYesYesYesLHW, PHW, MHW, care coordinator [3]_

Models 1–3 rely on building the capacity of non-specialist health
workers in primary care, and they represent different task-sharing
models. These models heavily depend on organisational strategic
intervention options 1–4. Unlike models 4–6, the first three models do
not depend on increased coordination between primary health workers, or
between the primary healthcare site and other healthcare organisations.
There are also minimal modifications in the daily flow of care. Starting
in model 4, these integration models increasingly require collaboration
and information flows across multidisciplinary teams. Patient-level data
is strategically used to improve the care of patients in models 5 and 6.

.. _sec3-4-1:

Model 1: general training on mental healthcare for lay health workers and primary health workers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Seven studies met the criteria for model 1. This model utilises
strategic intervention option 1. In this model, following training only,
lay or primary healthcare workers (general physicians and nurses) are
expected to have an increased ability to diagnose and treat mental
health conditions adequately. For example, a study in
Colombia\ :sup:`61` compared the diagnostic accuracy and effectiveness
of general physicians who had received formal training on mental
healthcare to that of similar general physicians who did not. The study
found that patients in the intervention arm received better treatment,
had increased rates of retention and had lower depression scores than
the control arm.

.. _sec3-4-2:

Model 2: mental healthcare interventions delivered by lay health workers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Twenty studies met the criteria for model 2. In addition to general
training (strategic intervention option 1), lay health workers also
receive specific training, ranging from a few days to 2 weeks (strategic
intervention option 2), that prepares them to deliver targeted
interventions, such as screening, problem-solving or interpersonal
therapy. This model requires that the primary healthcare site either
hires new lay health workers (strategic intervention option 3) or
reassigns those currently delivering other services (strategic
intervention option 4). This model may benefit from having primary
health workers (general physicians or nurses) perform supervisory
functions. Using this model, a study in rural South Africa\ :sup:`62`
compared the effectiveness of a 12-week course of interpersonal therapy
delivered by lay health workers to enhanced care in the reduction of
depression among low-income women. Patients in the intervention arm
showed a significant decrease in depression symptoms upon completion of
the 12-week course.

.. _sec3-4-3:

Model 3: mental healthcare interventions delivered by primary health workers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Eleven studies met the criteria for model 3. This model uses strategic
intervention options 1 and 2 plus either strategic intervention option 3
or 4. This model often uses flow of care modifications to carve out
dedicated time for the primary health workers. A study in rural
Thailand\ :sup:`41` compared the effectiveness of nurse-delivered brief
interventions versus treatment as usual (e.g. no brief intervention) in
the reduction of alcohol consumption among low-income males. Patients in
the intervention arm reported a more substantial decrease in drinks per
drinking day and frequency of unhealthy drinking assessed 6 months after
the intervention.

.. _sec3-4-4:

Model 4: consultant liaison
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One study met the criteria for model 4. This model offers the primary
health worker access to onsite or telemedicine consultation services
from a mental health worker such as psychologists or psychiatrists
(strategic intervention option 5), although the primary health worker
continues to be the main provider. Consultation services include
education, problem-solving and feedback to the primary health worker
regarding diagnostic or treatment strategies.\ :sup:`63,64` Strategic
intervention option 5 is essential in this model. A study in
Chile\ :sup:`36` compared the effectiveness of treatment delivered by
general physicians with access to online psychiatric consultation
services with that of those without access to this support in the
management of urban women diagnosed with depression. Patients in the
intervention arm had a statistically significant reduction in their
depression scores compared with those in the control arm at 3 months of
the intervention.

.. _sec3-4-5:

Model 5: stepped care
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Eight studies met the criteria for model 5. This model provides a
structured way to match treatment intensity with the patient's
needs.\ :sup:`65` More complicated patients are cared for by a mental
health worker (strategic intervention option 5), whereas more
straightforward cases remain under the care of the primary health worker
(strategic intervention option 4). Some studies used lay health workers,
creating a three-level stepped care model (strategic intervention option
3). This model distinctively uses a set of clinical criteria and a
pathway of care to systematically step up or step down each case. Thus,
this model adds outcome tracking to inform the level of care provided to
a patient (strategic intervention option 6). A post-rollout evaluation
in Iran\ :sup:`39` assessed the effectiveness of a suicide prevention
strategy for adults with depression. In this programme, a lay health
worker reached out to patients to screen them for depression and
referred positive cases to a primary health worker for management and
stabilisation. In turn, the primary health worker referred refractory
cases to psychiatrists who delivered specialised services.

.. _sec3-4-6:

Model 6: collaborative care management
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Six studies met the criteria for model 6. There is variation in the
literature regarding the components of collaborative care management,
and there are different levels of complexity within collaborative care
management itself.\ :sup:`66` For this systematic review, strategic
intervention options 6 and 7 are considered critical. Other
collaborative care management elements, such as linkage to community
resources, patient self-management support, regular case consultation
from a psychiatrist, provider decision support and healthcare
organisation support, could also be present.

In China, a study\ :sup:`67` compared the effectiveness of two
modalities of depression treatment for adults aged ≥60 years. In the
intervention arm, general physicians (strategic intervention option 4),
primary care nurses serving as care managers (strategic intervention
option 7), and psychiatrists (strategic intervention options 5)
comprised the treatment team. General physicians received written
guidelines for the treatment of depression, as well as in-depth training
in the prescription of antidepressants and the appropriate use of
referrals to the psychiatrist (strategic intervention options 1–3).
Nurses acting as care managers provided psychoeducation to patients and
families, assistance with communication between patients and providers,
and support for the patient's adherence to treatment. A study
psychiatrist was made available in case of referrals. General physicians
in the control arm only received written guidelines for depression
treatment, patients’ PHQ-9 scores and major depression diagnoses from
the screening stage. Patients in the intervention arm experienced
significantly greater reductions in Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression
scores than those in the control arm.

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec4-1:

Overview
--------

The findings of this systematic review support the effectiveness of
different models of integrating depression and unhealthy alcohol use
care in primary healthcare in low- and middle-income countries. Patients
receiving treatment in the integrated models tend to have better
outcomes compared with those receiving regular care. The evidence
appears more robust for depression than for unhealthy alcohol use. The
economic analyses indicate that integrated models have higher direct
costs to primary health, and that from the healthcare perspective, these
models are cost-effective. It is also possible that behavioural health
integration saves costs to society by increasing productivity and
decreasing time losses, among other benefits. The typology proposed in
this article can improve the understanding of the different models of
behavioural health integration in low- and middle-income countries. This
information can be valuable for policy makers and hospital managers
responsible for the organisation and delivery of care. Additional
implementation studies are required to further characterise the
different models of integration and to understand better the conditions
needed for the implementation of each of them.

.. _sec4-2:

Increased effectiveness across different settings and populations
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The studies included in this review showed that integrated models can
improve patient outcomes in different subtypes of depression such as
perinatal depression, late-in-life depression, comorbid depression and
HIV, and depression associated with trauma disorders in war-affected
areas.\ :sup:`68,69` Previous research shows that some psychological
treatments can be as effective as antidepressant medications, with
higher retention rates and better continuing outcomes.\ :sup:`70,71` We
found that different psychotherapies can be effectively delivered by an
array of integration models. These can be more culturally
adaptable,\ :sup:`72` and possibly less stigmatising than
medication-based treatments. They can also be potentially scalable in
low- and middle-income countries contexts where community bonding is
strong, labour is more available and procurement and distribution chains
for pharmaceuticals are precarious.

This systematic review suggests that integration of care for unhealthy
alcohol use might produce better outcomes for the general population,
pregnant women and people living with HIV in low- and middle-income
countries. The control arm of seven included trials compared screening
and minimal psychoeducation to screening and brief intervention or
motivational interviewing offered in the intervention
arms.\ :sup:`41–44,46,48,51` The enhancement of the control arms could
account for the non-positive results, particularly in settings where
neither screening nor minimal psychoeducation is routinely offered in
primary healthcare. There is evidence that screening alone can affect
the patients’ behaviours, which could explain the lack of difference
between arms in some studies.\ :sup:`73` Kaner et al\ :sup:`15` found
that screening and brief interventions can reduce alcohol consumption in
hazardous and harmful drinkers compared with minimal or no interventions
in primary healthcare in high-income countries. Although the findings of
the articles included in this review are similar to those in high-income
countries, we found few studies targeting unhealthy alcohol use that
fulfilled our selection criteria, which may affect the generalisability
of our findings. More research in the adequate care of unhealthy alcohol
use in low- and middle-income countries is needed.

.. _sec4-3:

Increased funding is a necessary, but not sufficient condition to increase access to care
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The economic evaluations included in this review indicate that
integrated models may result in increased direct costs to primary
health, stemming from increased utilisation of personnel and
medications. Nevertheless, they may save costs to
society.\ :sup:`42,53,57` These findings are similar to those found in
high-income countries.\ :sup:`74` Given the low levels of spending on
mental healthcare in many low- and middle-income countries,\ :sup:`11`
where the vast majority of primary healthcare sites do not provide
access to mental health services, the finding that increasing the
availability of mental health services increases direct costs should not
surprise. Since low- and middle-income countries favour funding of
mental health hospitals,\ :sup:`11` new resources should be earmarked to
sustain behavioural health integration in primary care. Moreover, the
way in which the health system pays or transfers funds to primary
healthcare should also be carefully examined. Health economics
literature has extensively shown that these payment mechanisms are key
determinants of providers’ behaviours.\ :sup:`75` The most commonly used
payment mechanisms in many low- and middle-income countries are
out-of-pocket, capitation and historically determined
allocations;\ :sup:`76` however, since they are not explicitly linked to
outputs or outcomes, they do not provide adequate incentives to increase
the availability of integrated services. Recent research in high-income
countries has studied the development of new payment mechanisms to
promote increased integration and coordination of care for populations
with multiple chronic comorbidities.\ :sup:`77,78` Additional research
is needed to specifically adapt payment mechanisms to offset the
increased direct costs related to behavioural health integration, thus
encouraging primary care in low- and middle-income countries to increase
the availability of services.\ :sup:`75` Importantly, public and private
providers may respond differently to these incentives, as evidenced in
several studies included in this review where integration models
affected patient outcomes in public, but not in private
organisations.\ :sup:`79,80`

.. _sec4-4:

Typology of integration for low- and middle-income countries: a tool for decision makers
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The reviewed studies tested a variety of models of integrated care for
depression and unhealthy alcohol use. We offer a typology of the models
in `Table 4 <#tab04>`__ and show how they are built from one or more of
seven organisational strategic intervention options. The typology aims
to assist decision makers in selecting the models that are likely to
work over time in their setting. The strategic intervention options, and
the models that flow from them, are not hierarchical but do vary in
terms of cost, complexity and how much organisational capacity they
require to implement and sustain. Decision makers can choose models that
match the characteristics and capacity of their health system and
primary healthcare. An appealing complex model may not be the right
choice if it is too expensive or requires too much change from the
workforce to be implemented or sustained.\ :sup:`81` An integration
model that fits well with current programmes and available resources
might have a greater effect over time. Since complex strategic
intervention options require more resources to implement and sustain,
they are more likely to be chosen in higher income nations. Decision
makers must consider effectiveness, acceptability, sustainability and
scalability in choosing a model to meet their system's needs.

.. _sec4-5:

Limitations
-----------

This review has several limitations. Some of the studies included in
this review were not rigorously designed trials and did not have
adequate comparison conditions. For example, some of the studies were
post-rollout evaluations and other were pragmatic or quasi-experimental
trials. This review focused on the care of depression and alcohol use
disorder. Therefore, our findings may not be generalisable to other
mental or substance use disorders. Similarly, we excluded studies
assessing the effectiveness of psychological interventions for these two
conditions in low- and middle-income countries when they did not reflect
the integration of these treatments into existing primary healthcare
settings. Nonetheless, this systematic review offers important insights
into the value and implementation of integrated models in global mental
healthcare.

.. _sec4-6:

Implications for the global mental health policy field
------------------------------------------------------

The findings of this review build on a wealth of knowledge strongly
supporting the value of integrating mental healthcare into primary
care.\ :sup:`77,78` The next generation of research should aim to
understand the arrangements at the system and organisational levels
necessary to scale up integrated models in low- and middle-income
countries and to promote the delivery of quality healthcare. In
particular, we need to strengthen the instruments used to measure the
quality of integration in low- and middle-income countries. Similarly,
understanding the reasons underpinning the rampant mental health
workforce shortage is critical because behavioural health integration
heavily relies on existing and newly available workforce. To a certain
degree, a combination of additional funds and targeted payment
mechanisms can provide the right incentives to overcome some of these
implementation challenges and to sustain quality of mental healthcare.
Further research related to payment mechanisms in primary care in low-
and middle-income countries is therefore critically needed.

The global mental health field can learn from other successful global
health movements. Efforts to address HIV, reduce child mortality and
improve maternal health were able to permeate political spaces and
become global health priorities, channelling substantive resources, some
of which have been used to integrate these services into primary care.
At the national level, the experiences of Chile and Zimbabwe where
research studies influenced the governments to expand publicly funded
mental healthcare programmes can illustrate processes that occupied the
political agenda and affected public policy.\ :sup:`82,83` Furthering
our understanding of the operation of behavioural health integration
into primary care and bettering our ability to scale up these integrated
models can help close the treatment gap and raise the quality of mental
care in low- and middle-income settings.

We thank Mary Ann Sweeney, MS, independent researcher; Pamela Bagley and
Heather Blunt from the Medical Library at the Geisel School of Medicine
at Dartmouth College, USA; and Loretta Grikis from Medical Library at
the White River Junction, Veteran Administration Medical Center, USA for
the development and conduction of the search strategy. We also want to
thank Sarah K. Moore, PhD, MSW, for her insightful comments on this
manuscript.

**Leonardo Cubillos** (MD, MPH) is a senior policy advisor for the
Center for Technology and Behavioral Health at Geisel School of Medicine
at Dartmouth College, USA. **Sophia M. Bartels** (BA) is a research
assistant at the Center for Technology and Behavioral Health at Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth College, USA. **William C. Torrey** (MD)
is Professor and Vice Chair for Clinical Services for the Department of
Psychiatry at Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, USA. **John
Naslund** (PhD) is a research fellow in the Department of Global Health
and Social Medicine at Harvard Medical School, USA. **José Miguel
Uribe-Restrepo** (MD, MPH) is Chairman of the Department of Psychiatry
at Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Colombia. **Chelsea Gaviola** (MPH,
BA) is a medical student at Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth
College, USA. **Sergio Castro Díaz** (MD) is a researcher in the
Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics at Pontificia
Universidad Javeriana, Colombia. **Deepak T. John** (BA) is a research
coordinator at the Center for Technology and Behavioral Health at Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth College, USA. **Makeda J. Williams**
(PhD, MPH) is Chief of the Center for Global Mental Health Research at
the National Institute of Mental Health, USA. **Magda Cepeda** (MD, PhD)
is a research coordinator in the Department of Clinical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics at Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Colombia. **Carlos
Gómez-Restrepo** (MD, MSc) is Dean of the Faculty of Medicine at
Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, and Professor in the Departments of
Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, and Psychiatry and Mental
Health at Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Colombia. **Lisa A. Marsch**
(PhD) is Director of the Center for Technology and Behavioral Health at
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth College, USA.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.35.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

L.C. collaborated in the literature search, compiled the tables and
figures, and wrote the first draft. L.C., J.N., W.C.T., C.G.-R. and
J.M.U.-R. outlined the aims and purpose of this review and reviewed the
search criteria, studies for inclusion and preliminary data tables.
L.C., S.M.B., D.T.J. and L.A.M. reviewed the study protocol and final
list of included studies. L.C., S.M.B., W.C.T., J.M.U.-R., C.G.-R.,
J.N., M.J.W., S.C.D. and D.T.J. completed data extraction, arbitered and
constructed the tables. L.C., S.M.B., C.G.-R., M.J.W., M.C. and D.T.J.
reviewed the study protocol, list of included studies and the data
included in the summary tables. All authors contributed to the revision
of the typology of integration models. All authors contributed to the
revision of multiple drafts. All authors reviewed the final list of
included studies, contributed to the structure and ideas presented in
this manuscript, and reviewed and approved the final version. The
corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and
had final responsibility for the decision to submit.

Research reported in this publication was funded by the National
Institute of Mental Health of the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
under award number 1U19MH109988 (multiple Principal Investigators: Lisa
A. Marsch, PhD, Dartmouth College, USA; Carlos Gómez-Restrepo, MD,
Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Colombia). The contents are solely the
opinion of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the
NIH or the United States Government.

W.C.T., S.C.D., D.T.J., C.G.-R. and L.A.M. received grants from the
National Institute of Mental Health of the National Institutes of
Health, USA during the conduct of the study.

ICMJE forms are in the supplementary material, available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.35.

.. [1]
   WHO Global Index Medicus search did not include low- and
   middle-income countries concept. DSR, Database of Systematic Reviews;
   EconEval, economic evaluations; WHO, World Health Organization;
   LILACS, Latin American & Caribbean Health Science Literature; WPRIM,
   Western Pacific Region Index Medicus; IMEMR, Index Medicus for the
   Eastern Mediterranean Region; IMSEAR, Index Medicus for the
   South-East Asian Region; AIM, African Index Medicus.

.. [2]
   PHC, primary health center.

.. [3]
   Those strategic options deemed essential for each model are marked
   with a ‘Yes’ sign. LHW, lay health worker; PHW, primary health
   worker; MHW, mental health worker.
