=========================================================================================================
PsychStart: a novel mentoring scheme for supporting and valuing medical students interested in psychiatry
=========================================================================================================

Thomas Hewson
Nikki Thomas
Kate Lovett
Helen Bruce
Derek K. TracyCorrespondence to Dr Thomas Hewson
(tomhewson@doctors.org.uk)
:Date: 2021-12

:Abstract:
   We describe the establishment and evaluation of a career-based
   mentoring scheme (PsychStart) for medical students interested in
   psychiatry. Medical students reported multiple benefits of mentoring,
   including enhanced personal and professional development, increased
   career and clinical knowledge, and broadened exposure to psychiatry.
   The mentoring scheme was also found to promote and sustain interest
   in the specialty. Further evaluation is required to determine the
   long-term effects of mentoring and how this may compare with other
   undergraduate enrichment activities. We conclude that mentoring in
   psychiatry could offer innovative solutions for improving recruitment
   and retention, and for supporting and valuing medical students who
   demonstrate an early interest in the specialty.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Increasing the number of doctors choosing to enter and remain in
psychiatry has been a key health policy priority in the UK over the past
3 years.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)`

The proportion of graduates from each medical school entering
immediately into psychiatry post-foundation training varies widely, from
0.1 to 0.4%.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Overall, approximately 5% of foundation
year 2 (F2) doctors who enter directly into specialty training are
appointed to core psychiatry training each year.\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.d)`
However, increasingly large numbers of junior doctors are delaying their
progression into specialty training, for multiple complex
reasons.\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.d)` Although recruitment to core training
has improved more recently, almost 10% of core and consultant posts
still remained unfilled in 2019.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)`

Recruiting and retaining sufficient doctors to fill these gaps requires
multifaceted, long-term approaches. As well as increasing the number of
doctors entering medical school, policy has recently focused on
improving the exposure and experience of psychiatry training at
undergraduate level.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Prior research has demonstrated
that regular early undergraduate exposure to psychiatry (through the
Psychiatry Early Experience Programme, PEEP) can sustain positive
attitudes towards psychiatry and challenge preconceptions about the
specialty.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` However, little is known about the value of
mentorship for medical students interested in psychiatry, despite this
demonstrating clear value for students and doctors in other specialties
and the broader literature.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)–(n.d.j)`

This paper describes and evaluates the establishment of an undergraduate
enrichment programme that combines opportunities for mentorship with
additional clinical exposure to psychiatry. To our knowledge, this is
the first paper to explore the potential role of undergraduate
mentorship in improving recruitment to the profession. We also evaluate
the potential utility of mentoring for supporting, and promoting the
development of, the future psychiatric workforce.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

PsychStart, a career-based mentoring scheme for medical students
interested in psychiatry, was co-founded by two of the authors (T.H. and
N.T.) at the University of Nottingham in January 2018.

Medical students from all year groups were recruited to the scheme via
communication through the student-led psychiatry society Mind Matters,
social media advertising (Facebook and Twitter) and signposting during
lectures and psychiatry teaching.

There are approximately 280 students in undergraduate years 1 and 2 of
the Nottingham medical course, and 100 students in graduate-entry years
1 and 2. The undergraduate and graduate students merge during year 3,
with approximately 380 students in years 3–5 of the medical programme.
The psychiatry module is taught in year 4, and approximately 45 students
complete this module at any one time.

Mentors were recruited from three local healthcare trusts that provide
clinical psychiatry placements, as well as from the University of
Nottingham and the university's Institute of Mental Health, facilitating
the involvement of both academic and clinical psychiatrists. Mentor
recruitment was limited to registrars (specialty trainee year 4 and
above, ST4+) and consultant psychiatrists across a wide range of
psychiatric subspecialties.

Places on the scheme were allocated on a first-come-first-served basis
when appropriate mentors became available. Medical students were matched
1:1 or 2:1 to registrar or consultant psychiatrist mentors according to
three main criteria: subspecialty interests, geographical location of
mentors’ workplaces and students’ placements locations, and other career
interests (e.g. in research, management or education).

All mentors and mentees were invited to attend a 2 h training session,
with scheduled time incorporated for the initial ‘meet and greet’
between mentors and mentees. The mentor training was led by a consultant
psychiatrist with experience of medical education and the Nottingham
psychiatry module (N.T.), with input from the Director of Student
Wellbeing. Mentor training topics covered the role of a mentor, theories
of mentoring, characteristics of positive and negative mentorship, the
structure and scope of the PsychStart scheme, the context of psychiatry
at Nottingham medical school, and student welfare and support. Mentee
training was coordinated by a junior doctor (T.H.) and/or the President
of the student-led PsychStart committee, with oversight from a
consultant psychiatrist (N.T.). Mentee training topics included the role
of a mentee, characteristics of positive and negative mentoring
interactions, the structure and scope of the PsychStart scheme, and
career pathways and opportunities in psychiatry.

No minimum or maximum restrictions were placed on the frequency of
mentor–mentee contact, but monthly email contact was recommended
initially to promote engagement.

A generic email account was created for general communication and
administrative queries. A separate email account monitored by a
consultant psychiatrist (N.T.) was used for communication of any
mentoring difficulties or issues requiring senior input.

Regular surveys were distributed to mentees to evaluate the different
mentoring relationships and identify any requiring extra support. Any
failing or inactive mentoring relationships, as identified by survey
data and communication with the scheme's co-founders, were discussed
with the concerned mentors and mentees. Where appropriate, some
mentoring relationships were subject to reallocation.

To celebrate successes on the scheme and support the network, annual
awards evenings were established where mentoring achievements were
formally recognised. Awards were selected using information from regular
feedback surveys, and mentors and mentees were also given the
opportunity to submit nominations.

The data presented in this paper are from the 12- and 18-month
evaluation surveys in January and June 2019 (Appendix 1 in the
supplementary material, available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.107) and other feedback, including
nominations for the annual scheme awards. All participants gave informed
consent for their anonymised data to be included in future research and
promotional materials. As this was a service evaluation to help improve
a novel mentoring scheme, ethical approval was not required.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

In mid-2020, there are currently 66 active mentoring relationships
participating in the PsychStart scheme at Nottingham University. Of
these, 36 are 1:1; the remaining 30 students are matched 2:1 to mentors.
There are also 20 medical students on the reserve list awaiting mentor
allocation.

.. _sec2-1:

Mentee demographics
-------------------

Of the current mentees, in mid-2020, 50 (75.8%) are women and 16 (24.2%)
are men. Just under half (29; 43.9%) are in the pre-clinical phase of
the medical course, with the rest in years 3 and above (37; 56.1%)
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). The scheme is most popular among fourth year
students (14; 21.2%) (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Table 1Year groups of
medical students on the PsychStart scheme across the East Midlands in
mid-2020Year groupPsychStart mentees, *n* (%)Undergraduate year 15
(7.6%)Graduate-entry year 19 (13.6%)Undergraduate year 28
(12.1%)Graduate-entry year 27 (10.6%)Year 3\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ 12
(18.2%)Year 414 (21.2%)Year 510 (15.2)Foundation years1 (1.5%) [1]_

.. _sec2-2:

Psychiatric subspecialties
--------------------------

In mid-2020, there are 51 registrar and consultant psychiatrists
participating in the PsychStart scheme across the East Midlands. The
mentors span a range of specialties, from forensic to perinatal
psychiatry, with most mentors in general adult and child and adolescent
mental health services (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). Fig. 1Specialty
distribution of mentors on the PsychStart scheme across the East
Midlands in mid-2020.

.. _sec2-3:

Survey responses
----------------

We received responses from 31 out of 44 mentees (70.5%) in the 18-month
survey and 47 out of 68 (69.1%) in the 1-year survey, creating a
cumulative total of 78 responses from 68 mentees; 18 students completed
both surveys.

Most students had participated in the PsychStart scheme for over a year
at the time of survey completion (46; 59.0%); 14 students (17.9%) had
participated in the scheme for 6–12 months; and 18 (23.1%) for less than
6 months.

.. _sec2-4:

Subjective ratings of scheme experiences and mentoring relationships
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Including all 78 survey responses, over 90% of students described their
overall scheme experience as ‘good’ or ‘excellent’ (`Table
2 <#tab02>`__). The organisation of, and support available on, the
PsychStart scheme were also rated as ‘good’ or ‘excellent’ by 93.6 and
89.8% of mentees respectively, with no student rating these as ‘poor’ or
‘very poor’ (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). Table 2Subjective mentee ratings of
their experiences on the PsychStart schemeRating categoryProportion of
mentees selecting each rating, %ExcellentGoodAveragePoorVery poorOverall
PsychStart experience38.552.67.71.30Organisation of
PsychStart56.437.26.400Support available through
PsychStart46.243.610.300Quality of individual mentoring
relationship34.647.412.86.10

Over 80% of students subjectively rated the quality of their mentoring
relationships as ‘good’ or ‘excellent’ (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). Only 6.1%
of students reported poor mentoring relationships (`Table
2 <#tab02>`__).

Over 80% of mentees ‘agreed’ (48.2%) or ‘strongly agreed’ (35.7%) that
they had been well-matched to their mentors; 14.3% of responses were
neutral and 1.8% disagreed.

.. _sec2-5:

Frequency of mentee–mentor contact
----------------------------------

Two-thirds of survey responses indicated a frequency of mentee–mentor
contact of every 3 months or more often (52; 66.7%), of which just under
a quarter (18; 23.1%) reported monthly contact with mentors (`Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__). Over 80% (66; 84.6%) were in contact with their mentors
every 6 months or more often (`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__). Fig. 2Frequency of
mentor contact reported by mentees on the PsychStart scheme.

.. _sec2-6:

Mentoring activities
--------------------

Students reported a range of mentoring activities on the PsychStart
scheme. The most popular activities were receiving careers or medical
school advice, engaging in clinical shadowing, discussing psychiatry
topics with mentors and being signposted to opportunities in the
specialty (`Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__). Some students reported attending
events, such as conferences, with their mentors, arranging clinical
psychiatry electives, and engaging in audit or quality improvement
projects and research (`Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__). Fig. 3Frequency of
mentoring activities reported by mentees on the PsychStart scheme.

.. _sec2-7:

Effects of mentoring and the PsychStart scheme
----------------------------------------------

A majority of mentees reported improved personal (71.4%) and
professional (75%) development, clinical knowledge about psychiatry
(60%) and knowledge about careers in the specialty (83.6%) (`Table
3 <#tab03>`__). Table 3Reported effects of the PsychStart mentoring
schemeStatementProportion of mentees selecting each response, %Strongly
agreeAgreeNeutralDisagreeStrongly disagree‘My mentor has supported my
personal development’23.248.228.600‘My mentor has supported my
professional development’28.646.42500‘PsychStart has increased my
knowledge about careers in psychiatry’41.841.816.400‘PsychStart has
increased my clinical knowledge about
psychiatry’29.130.934.55.50‘PsychStart has created positive publicity
for psychiatry within the medical school’52.730.916.400

Over 80% of mentees felt that PsychStart had created positive publicity
for psychiatry within the medical school, with over half of students
strongly agreeing with this statement (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__).

.. _sec2-8:

Potential links to recruitment
------------------------------

Approximately one-third of mentee responses (21; 32.3%) reported that
PsychStart had increased their interest in psychiatry as a career. All
but one of the remaining responses (43; 66.2%) reported that PsychStart
had maintained their interest in a career in the specialty.

The one mentee who reported that PsychStart had decreased their interest
in psychiatry as a career rated their overall scheme experience as
excellent. On further clarification, this mentee had been deciding
between careers in general practice and psychiatry, and through further
experiences of both specialties had decided to pursue primary care. They
claimed that PsychStart had helped them to make an ‘informed decision’
and that they were hoping to complete a foundation post in psychiatry.

.. _sec2-9:

Qualitative feedback
--------------------

In total, 57 participants provided comments on their favourite aspects
of the PsychStart scheme, from which 10 key themes were identified
(`Table 4 <#tab04>`__). Most commonly, respondents cited their
individual mentoring interactions and relationships as their favourite
scheme component. Table 4Major themes identified from qualitative
analysis of mentees’ reported favourite aspects of the PsychStart
schemeThemeExample quotePositive mentoring interactions(My mentor is)
‘easy to contact and replies thoroughly and fast to my questions about
psychiatry and medical school in general’Self-development‘I feel the
personalised aspect of having a one to one mentor is very useful for
self-directed learning and attaining personal outcomes’Feeling
supported‘Feeling it's a safe space to ask absolutely anything without
being judged’Early/enhanced clinical exposure(I like) ‘how the scheme
gives medics an early exposure to psychiatry’Career planning‘It has
helped me feel like my decision to do psychiatry is well
informed’Extra-curricular opportunities‘Gives me the opportunity to see
areas I would not be able to see during my studies’Scheme flexibility‘I
like the independence in choosing what I want to gain from the
scheme’Networking‘A great way to make links with people within
psychiatry’Scheme organisation‘The consistent follow-up from the
committee to see how the relationship between mentors and mentees is
going. I think that's really important’Annual awards evening‘I loved the
awards ceremony and hearing about what everyone was doing’

Six key themes were identified from the answers of 39 respondents who
offered suggestions for scheme improvement (`Table 5 <#tab05>`__). The
most popular suggestions included greater provision of locally available
mentors, more scheme publicity/advertisement and more communication
prompts to mentors/mentees. Table 5Major themes identified from
qualitative analysis of mentees’ suggested areas of improvement for the
PsychStart schemeThemeExample quoteDistance from mentors‘My mentor is
quite far away. I understand that not all mentors can be close but if I
didn't have a car it would be hard to meet’Difficulty contacting
mentors‘I haven't had much contact with my mentor due to my exams/my
mentor not being contactable’More publicity‘More advertisement of
research and conference opportunities’Regular communication prompts‘It
might be useful to have a regular email prompt to give advice or ideas
for activities and prompt mentees/mentors to reflect on what they have
discussed/done together’More events‘There could be more events that are
open to everyone on the scheme to aid networking
opportunities’Structured activities‘More structured things for mentors
and mentees to do together’

.. _sec2-10:

Leaving the scheme
------------------

In total, 40 mentees have left the scheme since it began, most commonly
because they graduated medical school or moved location (22; 55%). Other
reasons have included other commitments 3 (7.5%), wanting to explore
other specialties (2; 5%) and taking a year out of medical school (1;
2.5%); 7 mentees (17.5%) left the scheme without any specific reason and
5 (12.5%) left because of poor engagement.

Of the mentors, 9 have left the scheme since its inception for various
reasons: moving geographical location (3; 33.3%), other commitments (3;
33.3%), difficulty meeting their mentees owing to travel distance (2;
22.2%) and retirement (1; 11.1%).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The General Medical Council (GMC) mandates that all medical students
must have access to educational and pastoral support and career
guidance.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` Medical schools provide extensive educational
networks for students to support academic progress, career development
and well-being.

In the medical literature, the most frequently cited definition of
mentoring is that provided by the Standing Committee on Postgraduate
Medical and Dental Education (SCOPME), who describe it as: ‘A process
whereby an experienced, highly regarded, empathetic person (the mentor)
guides another (usually younger) individual (the mentee) in the
development and re-examination of their own ideas, learning, and
personal and professional development’.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` The role of a
mentor is sometimes confused, and occasionally overlaps, with that of
several others, including a tutor, supervisor, counsellor, advisor and
role model.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)–(n.d.n)` The main distinctions are the highly
personal and active nature of the mentoring interaction and the focus on
the individual mentee's personal and career goals, instead of
professional skills.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)–(n.d.o)`

Over 90% of medical students perceive mentoring to be important and are
keen to engage in mentoring relationships.\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.q)`
Despite this, only one-third of medical students report having a
mentor.\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.q)` Furthermore, there is a lack of
mentoring schemes in most countries’ medical schools, including the
UK.\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.s)` This lack is surprising given the evidenced
widespread benefits,\ :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.r)` although it could be argued
that there has been uneven support and guidance for potential mentors to
enable them to adopt such roles.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)`

Mentors provide strong role modelling for careers and can have a
significant impact on specialty choice.\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.u)` In a
study including over 9000 medical students, mentors and role models were
identified as the most or second-most influential factor in determining
specialty selection; for ‘controllable lifestyle’ specialties, of which
psychiatry was included, their influence was exceeded only by ‘lifestyle
factors’.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)`

.. _sec3-1:

Potential student gains from PsychStart
---------------------------------------

Our project has demonstrated that a mentoring scheme for medical
students interested in psychiatry can be delivered alongside the
standard curriculum and is popular among students at a large UK medical
school. Participants reported several benefits from mentoring, including
enhanced personal and professional development, improved careers and
clinical knowledge, and feeling well supported. These benefits could
apply to all students and to mentoring in other specialties, with the
broader literature demonstrating similar benefits from other mentoring
schemes.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)`

It is interesting that many of the qualitative comments by students
highlighted generic aspects of the mentoring relationship, such as
receiving personalised support, careers advice and assistance in their
personal and professional development, as their favourite components of
the PsychStart scheme. All students already have a personal tutor
throughout the medical course, and clinical supervisors for each
placement, who are also able to deliver these functions. It may be that
students particularly enjoy receiving such support in the context of
their desired specialty or accessing this from somebody to whom they
have been closely matched on the basis of shared interests.

Many of the observed mentoring activities fulfil several selection
criteria for core psychiatry training applications.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` For
example, involvement in audit and quality improvement, completion of
research, and demonstration of commitment to the specialty through
arranging further clinical exposure and clinical electives with mentors.
Hence, mentoring opportunities may increase employability and help
students to maximise their chances of successful future training
applications. This is likely to be an important attraction to the scheme
as recruitment to core training becomes more competitive.

.. _sec3-2:

Potential specialty gains from PsychStart
-----------------------------------------

Mentoring may also facilitate increased and broadened clinical exposure
to a specialty, with many students arranging shadowing opportunities
with their mentors and accessing subspecialties that are less
established within the standard curriculum. This is particularly useful
within psychiatry, where many subspecialties, such as forensic and
perinatal psychiatry, are optional or seldom taught in medical school.
The Psychiatry Early Experience Programme (PEEP) has previously
demonstrated the benefits of increased psychiatry exposure for young
medical students, including sustained positive attitudes towards the
specialty.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` It is unclear whether such positive attitudes
extend beyond those students who engage in psychiatry enrichment
programmes, but over 80% of mentees felt that PsychStart had created
positive publicity for the specialty within the wider medical school,
suggesting that these may permeate throughout the student body. Ajaz et
al previously reported that medical students often experience
‘badmouthing’ or ‘bashing’ of psychiatry,\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` which can
deter them from entering the specialty; this highlights the importance
of fostering positive attitudes and prompted the Ban the Bash campaign
by the RCPsych, which aimed to identify and discourage disparaging
comments about psychiatry.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` More recently, the College
has focused on emphasising positive ‘pull factors’ that promote
selection of psychiatric careers.

The most common year for students to sign up to PsychStart is year 4,
which coincides with the clinical psychiatry module; hence, clinical
exposure to a specialty may prompt involvement in extra-curricular
opportunities. The mentoring scheme was much more popular among women
students, with 75.8% of mentees being women. This is considerably larger
than the approximately 55% women on the Nottingham medical course (This
information was obtained by T.H. through contact with Dr Pamela Hagan at
the University of Nottingham Medical School. Permission was granted from
the University of Nottingham Dean of Medical Education Professor Gill
Doody). It is not clear why this discrepancy exists. Prior research has
associated female gender with preferential selection of psychiatry at
undergraduate level;\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` however, women have historically
been less likely to receive mentorship, and to become mentors, in
medical fields.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa),(n.d.ab)`

Our scheme data provide further evidence to support the utility of
mentoring in improving specialty recruitment, with over one-third of
students reporting an increased interest in psychiatric careers. Our
data also suggest that mentoring may help to retain, as well as promote,
students’ interests in particular specialties, with just under
two-thirds of students reporting a sustained interest in psychiatry on
the PsychStart scheme. This is particularly important given that 22% of
medical students who exhibit an early interest in psychiatry lose this
interest throughout their studies.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` There is evidence
that these benefits also exist outside of psychiatry; for example,
Dorrance et al reported that a mentoring and research initiative
showcasing a career as an internist in primary care settings resulted in
a higher proportion of graduates opting for internal medicine
training.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)` Furthermore, mentoring has been found to
increase interest in academic careers.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad),(n.d.r)` Holt et
al reported no significant difference in specialty choice at baseline
and at their 3-year follow-up for students participating in the
Psychiatry Early Experience Programme;\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` this may suggest
that, although clinical shadowing may be useful, other opportunities
provided by mentorship may have a greater influence on career selection.
However, further follow-up and evaluation is required to determine the
long-term effects of mentoring and early clinical exposure on decisions
to pursue psychiatry.

.. _sec3-3:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

Our scheme data have several strengths. First, to our knowledge, this is
the first published report to evaluate a formal mentoring scheme for UK
medical students interested in psychiatry. Second, the high response
rates to the two surveys (69.1 and 70.5%) assures us that we have gained
a representative sample of students on the PsychStart programme. Third,
the broad range of survey responses covering all year groups at
Nottingham medical school gives strength to the generalisability of our
findings.

However, we recognise that these data have the following limitations.
First, they are subjective, based on students’ written reports and
ratings of their mentoring relationships. The nature of the design of
the evaluation did not allow for further probing about the students’
perceptions and experiences of the scheme. Furthermore, students’ stated
interests may not necessarily predict future actions and result in core
psychiatry training applications. Second, our data were derived from a
self-selecting sample of students participating in the PsychStart
scheme. We were therefore unable to draw any comparisons between
students who do and do not receive mentoring in psychiatry and determine
whether the scheme ‘adds value’ for those already interested in a career
in the specialty. Finally, the maximum duration of mentoring
relationships at the time of survey completion was just over 18 months;
hence, we are unable to comment on the long-term effects of mentoring
for this cohort.

.. _sec3-4:

Research recommendations
------------------------

We recommend that future research should examine the long-term effects
of mentoring and its impact on the quantity and quality of applications
to core psychiatry training. Given prior research associating mentoring
with improved medical school performance and training
outcomes,\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.ae)` it would additionally be useful to
examine the effects of mentoring in psychiatry on exam performance in
the specialty. Delineating what motivates students who do and do not
sign up to such mentoring schemes, and potential logistical barriers to
taking part, could provide useful insights into factors both promoting
and hindering engagement with psychiatry and mentoring. Further
attention should be given to the experience of mentors, especially given
that the concept of ‘reverse-mentoring’ is becoming increasingly
recognised in the medical literature; this describes a process whereby
junior medical professionals can mentor their senior colleagues,
providing benefits such as enhanced understanding of digital
technologies and online platforms, and improved workplace
culture.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` Critically, it important to understand whether
receiving mentoring from a psychiatrist rather than other doctors
positively influences later career choice. Comparison of the impact of
mentoring with other medical student enrichment activities, such as
shadowing\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` or participating in Balint
groups\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` or medical student psychotherapy
schemes,\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)` needs further evaluation.

We thank the following organisations and groups for their support in
establishing the PsychStart mentoring scheme: University of Nottingham
School of Medicine, University of Nottingham Students As Change Agents
Programme, Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, University
of Nottingham Institute of Mental Health, Lincolnshire Partnership NHS
Foundation Trust, Mind Matters Society, and the PsychStart student
committee.

**Thomas Hewson**, BMBS, BMedSci, is an Academic Clinical Fellow in
Psychiatry with Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Nikki Thomas**,
MBChB, MRCPsych, PGCME, FHEA, is a consultant psychiatrist and
undergraduate clinical tutor at Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
Foundation Trust, and an honorary consultant psychiatrist at
Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Kate Lovett**,
BSc, MBChB, MSc, FRCPsych, Cert Clin Ed (Dist), is a consultant
psychiatrist with Livewell Southwest, Plymouth, and Dean of the Royal
College of Psychiatrists, London, UK. **Helen Bruce**, MBBS, BSc, MA,
FRCPsych, SFHEA, is a consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist at
East London NHS Foundation Trust, Professorial Teaching Fellow at the
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College
London, and Associate Dean for Recruitment into Psychiatry at the Royal
College of Psychiatrists, London, UK. **Derek K. Tracy**, MBBCh, BAO,
MSc, FHEA, FRSA, FFFMLM, FRCPsych, is a consultant psychiatrist and
clinical director with Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust, and senior lecturer
at the Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, UK.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.107.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

All authors were involved in data interpretation, manuscript preparation
and proof-reading of the final article.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

ICMJE forms are in the supplementary material, available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.107.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.ah.

.. [1]
   The graduate-entry medicine (GEM) students merge with the
   undergraduate students from year 3 onwards.
