=======================================================================================================================
When self-harm is about preventing harm: emergency management of obsessive–compulsive disorder and associated self-harm
=======================================================================================================================



Erika Palombini
Joel Richardson
Emma McAllister
David Veale
Alex B. ThomsonCorrespondence to Alex B. Thomson (alex.thomson@nhs.net)
:Date: 2021-04

:Abstract:
   Mental health staff may have limited exposure to emergencies
   associated with obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) during
   postgraduate training. The first time they encounter a person in the
   midst of severe obsessions, or one who has compulsively self-harmed
   in response to such obsessions, might be when working on call
   covering the emergency department. This educational article presents
   the lived experience of one of the authors as a clinical scenario.
   The scenario is then used to illustrate the severity of disability
   and the rates of self-harm and suicide-related mortality caused by
   OCD. The recognition and assessment of OCD is described, along with
   what helps in emergency situations. Written informed consent was
   obtained for the publication of clinical details.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Scenario
========

.. _sec1-1:

Doctor's perspective
--------------------

You are the doctor on call for psychiatry. The emergency department
registrar has referred a 37-year-old professional who is in resus with
police in a state of extreme distress, with self-inflicted chemical
burns from corrosive alkali on her arms and torso, and haemoptysis
caused by the associated fumes. This is her 133rd attendance in 4 years.
She is repeatedly saying, ‘It's all contaminated, I need to go’. A
member of the crisis team has advised you to refuse the referral,
because seeing the patient would reward her attention-seeking behaviour.
When you access her records, there is a ‘yellow flag’ advance plan which
states she attends the emergency department frequently and should not be
seen by psychiatry.

.. _sec1-2:

Patient's perspective
---------------------

*I am the patient. I don't want to be here. The police restrained me,
put me in a cage in the back of a van and brought me to hospital
‘voluntarily’, after finding me walking down the street coughing up
blood on my hands and clothes. I'm terrified. I've been worrying for
several days that I've hurt or killed people. I've had worries like this
since primary school, but things have got worse again lately. Because I
keep thinking I've killed someone, when the police stopped me I thought
they were arresting me for murder. Now I'm in resus, I'm worried the
other patients here are hurt because of me. I can feel contamination
under my skin that is hurting people, and I have been trying to get it
out. I used to use soaps and bleaches, but they didn't work, so I now
use corrosive alkali to try to remove the contamination. I needed to go
to the shop to buy more when the police stopped me. I'm scared the staff
will get contaminated too, and I don't want them to touch me. They want
me to take off my clothes, and they're holding me down to try to put a
line in my arm, and I can't. I just need to go. I need to sort out the
contamination and I don't want anyone else to be hurt*.

Question 1: How would you respond to the emergency department registrar?
(a)Refuse the referral because seeing the patient would reward her
attention-seeking behaviour.(b)Refuse the referral because there is a
care plan saying the patient should not be seen.(c)Accept the referral
and go to assist the emergency department staff as soon as
possible.(d)Accept the referral and tell the emergency registrar that
you will see the patient only after she has been ‘medically cleared’.

Answer: (c)

Best practice guidance is clear: people attending hospital after an
episode of self-harm should all receive a biopsychosocial assessment by
a clinician with adequate skill and experience, and this should not be
delayed by waiting for medical treatment to be completed.\ :sup:`1–4`
Although the last health service contact for many people who die by
suicide was with a general hospital, only around half of people
attending emergency departments with self-harm receive a psychosocial
assessment.\ :sup:`5,6` Pejorative terms such as ‘attention-seeking’
persist in clinical practice; they do not justify the withholding of
psychiatric assistance, may be related more to animosity and shaming
directed by healthcare staff towards people who self-harm, and have no
place in advance care planning.\ :sup:`7` Advance care planning for
people who have attended emergency departments frequently should be
co-produced, should never be used to exclude a person from treatment,
and must include a preventive care plan as well as a response plan if it
is to be effective.\ :sup:`8` Mental health flagging should be used
cautiously: in some settings it has been found to harm rather than
help.\ :sup:`9` In reality, each occasion offers an opportunity to
engage, to support, to advocate, to challenge stigma and discrimination,
and to play one's part in establishing a trusting, compassionate and
respectful relationship with healthcare services.

.. _sec1-3:

Doctor's perspective
--------------------

You go to see the patient as soon as you can. She is clearly distressed,
still coughing up blood, asking staff to leave her alone and repeatedly
saying ‘I need to go, it's all contaminated’. The medical team recommend
a chest X-ray to assess haemoptysis, and transfer to the burns unit.
Although she is in no state to give a coherent psychiatric history, she
is clearly in need of help and your emergency department colleagues are
reassured that you have come to assist. You offer her lorazepam and she
declines, saying ‘I need to go, I'm hurting people’. You assess her
capacity to decide whether to stay or go and conclude that she cannot
currently use or weigh information about her health, and that it is in
her best interests to stay for emergency medical treatment. By remaining
with her to explain what is happening, listening to her concerns and
encouraging your emergency department colleagues to be patient, you are
able to gradually help her calm down sufficiently to accept medical
attention without restraining or sedating her.

.. _sec1-4:

Patient's perspective
---------------------

*Turning up to advise the medical staff and to help me makes a huge
difference. When I'm worried about contamination and in a cycle of
compulsions, being in the emergency department is terrifying. ‘Medically
cleared’ is unhelpful: if I leave hospital as soon as I can for fear
that I am contaminating and killing the staff and other patients, there
will never be a point where I become sufficiently ‘medically cleared’ to
receive psychiatric help. There is an element of immediacy in what is
needed, in guiding medical staff to help and to consider my capacity.
Looking back now at the injuries I have and how they have affected my
ability to work in my profession, I wish more had been done to
understand how much I could weigh information when I had serious
injuries, but I was also feeling I needed to decline treatment and leave
because I was contaminating people*.

.. _sec1-5:

Doctor's perspective
--------------------

On mental state examination, she has repetitive intrusive thoughts that
she has unintentionally hurt or killed people, and a deeply unpleasant
crawling sensation just beneath her skin, which she believes is an
unexplained contamination that can spread to others without physical
contact. The purpose of chemically burning her skin is not to address
emotional distress, nor to inflict pain or injury, but to neutralise
this contamination, thus ensuring the safety of others. She describes
the risk of dying or losing a limb as ‘collateral’ for ensuring others
are safe. On systematic enquiry, you identify that she eats minimally
and only from sealed packets for fear that food is contaminated. She
spends long periods walking or running outdoors until she has reached a
‘safe’ (prime) number of miles. She has significant anxiety associated
with non-prime numbers, which feel ‘unsafe’ and may somehow harm others.
In the past she has deleted entire dissertations and research
manuscripts before submission because she feared that making a mistake
might cause people to die. It is clear from the absence of emotional
dysregulation and her history of stable long-term relationships in the
social domains of professional work, friendship and personal
relationships that she does not have a personality disorder. It is also
clear from the absence of hallucinations and the fact that her fears are
obsessional rather than delusional that she does not have a psychosis.
Therefore you believe that she has obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD).

Question 2: What is your role in this scenario? (a)Advising medical
staff on capacity to make decisions about medical
treatment.(b)Diagnostic assessment alongside assessment of needs and
risk.(c)Explaining the nature of OCD to the patient, offering hope and
ensuring she can access effective treatment following discharge.(d)All
of the above.

Answer: (d)

.. _sec2:

Severity of OCD
===============

Severe mental illness is not defined by diagnosis but by the degree of
distress, disability and interference in a person's life. Without
treatment, OCD can be severe, disabling and enduring, with major effects
on physical health; as well as self-harming, people with OCD may
restrict fluid or food intake because of either neglect or obsessions
about contamination. Others may have excessive slowness or be ruminating
all day and unable to function. Although most people respond to
community-based treatment, some people with OCD may need admission to a
psychiatric ward to engage in specialist cognitive–behavioural therapy
(CBT) and for supervision of pharmacotherapy. The World Health
Organization has classified OCD among the top 10 most disabling
illnesses in terms of lost income and decreased quality of
life.\ :sup:`10` People with OCD may experience significant delays to
diagnosis, both from a fear of asking for help and also from delays in
healthcare staff identifying the condition.\ :sup:`11` One study found
that the average time to receiving first treatment for OCD was more than
17 years from the onset of first symptoms, and more than 11 years after
fully meeting diagnostic criteria.\ :sup:`12`

.. _sec3:

OCD and self-harm
=================

In clinical practice, self-harm may be erroneously viewed as always
being a means of coping with emotional distress. Self-harm accompanies a
wide range of psychiatric disorders, including psychotic,
neurodevelopmental, affective, anxiety and personality disorders. People
who have self-harmed sometimes encounter prejudice and discrimination
from healthcare staff, which inhibits access to effective assessment and
treatment.\ :sup:`13,14` A key issue in formulation and diagnosis is
understanding the circumstances, precipitants, intention and motivation
behind the self-harm.

Despite commonly experiencing ego-dystonic obsessional fears about
causing harm, people with OCD rarely harm others.\ :sup:`15` On the
other hand, self-harm is common in OCD, with an estimated prevalence of
7.3%, and takes many forms\ :sup:`16`; it is usually ego-dystonic and
compulsive in nature. The manifestations can be encountered by many
other specialties, especially dermatology; it has been estimated that
between 9 and 35% of patients with OCD will present for treatment of
complications related to skin damage.\ :sup:`17` Compulsive washing or
decontamination with irritant substances such as disinfectants or bleach
are among the most commonly recognised compulsions, and people with OCD
may present with atopic dermatitis, irritant toxic dermatitis or dry
skin eczema.\ :sup:`18` Compulsive self-cutting and decontamination by
chemical burning are less common; understanding the intention behind the
behaviour is important in making the diagnosis.

Excoriation disorder (skin-picking or dermatillomania) is relatively
frequent, with a prevalence between 1.4 and 5.4%;\ :sup:`19,20` it has
gained increasing attention and has been defined as a specific type of
obsessive–compulsive and related disorders in the DSM-5 and the proposed
ICD-11.\ :sup:`21` Excoriation disorder can lead to serious
complications including infection, physical disfigurement and physical
disability.\ :sup:`22,23` Trichotillomania (hair pulling disorder) has a
point prevalence of 0.5–2.0% and predominantly affects female
patients;\ :sup:`24` similar to excoriation disorder, it has been
identified as an OCD type. Rarely, self-surgery such as autocastration
has been described as a complication of OCD.\ :sup:`25`

.. _sec4:

OCD and suicide
===============

It is important to recognise that people with OCD are at increased risk
of suicide.\ :sup:`26` A Swedish population-based study found that
suicide attempt rates were five times higher and suicide mortality rates
ten times higher in people with OCD compared with the general
population.\ :sup:`27` A systematic review found median rates of
suicidal ideation and suicide attempts of 27.9% and 10.3%, respectively,
in people with OCD.\ :sup:`23` Comorbid conditions such as harmful or
dependent use of alcohol or other drugs, personality disorders or
affective disorders increase suicide mortality rates in OCD to between
40 and 82%; however, the risk remains high when OCD is the only
condition present.\ :sup:`22,28`

.. _sec5:

Assessment of obsessions and compulsions
========================================

Obsessions are thoughts which come into one's head over and over again,
and will not go away. Often experienced as paralysing and terrifying,
they can be about apparently mundane things, such as the idea that
something is not clean or that an appliance has been left on. They can
also be more obviously upsetting, such as believing that one might stab
someone (despite not wanting to) or might have unintentionally killed or
harmed someone. Inappropriate sexual thoughts may take a similar form
but be difficult to disclose in view of the associated shame. Obsessions
can be about one's own body – for instance, having an infectious disease
or something dangerous under the skin – and can be associated with
intense physical sensations such as a visceral feeling of disgust,
crawling skin, feeling contaminated or unclean, or intense physical
anxiety or shame.

As well as physical contamination from direct contact with dirt or
perceived contaminants, a person may experience mental contamination –
feelings and fears that arise without physical contact.\ :sup:`29` The
source of contamination is human rather than inanimate, and the feelings
of dirtiness may come from the individual with OCD. Mental contamination
is often associated with another person having abused, betrayed or
humiliated the patient. The self may be regarded as ‘bad’ or ‘immoral’,
and the essence of this badness may be transferred to objects and then
passed to others. In this case, the patient's motivation is to
decontaminate her ‘self’ to prevent harm being transferred to others;
she also has an over-inflated sense of responsibility and influence in
believing herself responsible for this harm.\ :sup:`30` Compulsive
washing is often less effective in mental contamination, hence in this
case the escalation to chemical burning.

Obsessions can follow convoluted paths to extreme consequences. For
example, a worry that a light was not turned off might lead to
obsessions that a spark of electricity could start a fire and kill
people inside the building. A worry that one has left the door unlocked
may lead to obsessions that a murderer could break into the house and
kill one's family. Common features of obsessions are is that they are
unpleasant, upsetting and cannot be ignored. A key feature is the
recognition that these ideas are not correct, do not make sense or are
about something which the person does not want to do; they are
‘ego-dystonic’. A patient may say that the rational part of their brain
can see that it does not make sense, but that does not stop them from
experiencing intense fears that the thought may be true.

Compulsions are repetitive, purposeful physical or mental actions that
the individual feels compelled to engage in according to rules or until
it feels ‘safe’, ‘comfortable’ or ‘just right’, in order to quell the
anxiety, fear, disgust or terror associated with an obsession.
Compulsions can involve checking, touching, arranging, decontamination,
walking, counting or other physical actions. Alternatively, compulsions
may involve mental actions such as praying, reciting or making number
patterns. Compulsions are linked to obsessions in that they are used to
try to get rid of them or fill the need they create. Compulsions can be
resisted temporarily or deferred but almost always end up being
performed, as the distress from not doing them is great and continuous.
They feel voluntary to the person; they are not being controlled. This
means people with OCD often blame themselves or are seen as acting
irrationally but with capacity by healthcare staff. Although performing
compulsions leads to temporary relief of distress, in the longer term it
maintains distress by reinforcing the need to act to seek relief.

When differentiating obsessions, ruminations, delusions and thought
interference, it is important to enquire about the nature of the
thought. Some people with severe OCD refer to obsessions as ‘voices’ or
speak about compulsions as though they are being ordered; it is
important not to assume that these are command hallucinations without
detailed examination of phenomenology. In addition to asking whether a
patient recognises thoughts as their own, ask how easy it is to distract
themselves, whether the thoughts are repeatedly intrusive or ruminative,
and whether they fear worse consequences if they do not perform a
certain act. When enquiring about compulsions, ask what will happen if
the patient doesn't do the action, and how they feel once they have done
the action.\ :sup:`31` Becoming familiar with a symptom checklist such
as the Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale will help in developing a
systematic approach to enquiry about obsessions and
compulsions.\ :sup:`32`

.. _sec6:

Practical management of OCD
===========================

When someone is in the midst of terrifying obsessions, calm listening
and explanation will help the obsessions and associated anxiety pass. If
severe, this may take several hours. In an emergency situation,
anxiolytic drugs may help to alleviate anxiety and allow a person to
accept medical care, although they may also cause disinhibition and
exacerbate compulsions. Anxiolytics should not be used routinely for
obsessions outside emergencies.

Although there is discussion about the pros and cons of diagnosis in
some psychiatric conditions, OCD is a condition where diagnosis allows
for a clear explanation and treatment plan. When meeting a patient whom
you suspect has OCD, it is important to confirm the diagnosis; ask for
senior help if you are not sure. Once confirmed, you can give the
patient hope: explain that it is a treatable condition, give written
information about self-help, and ensure that follow-up and access to
effective treatment are available. If OCD is identified while on call
and an immediate management plan made, the patient should be handed over
to the liaison psychiatry team for ongoing support in hospital,
initiation or review of drug treatment, and arrangement of appropriate
aftercare.

It is essential to ensure that appropriate follow-up and treatment are
arranged, including specialist CBT for OCD that includes exposure and
response prevention (ERP). Longer-term treatment should follow the
recommendations in the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
guidelines::sup:`33` treatment with CBT for OCD that includes ERP, plus
the maximum tolerated dose of two trials of selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors or clomipramine for at least 12 weeks each. If a patient
still has clinically significant symptoms interfering with functioning,
a multidisciplinary review should be undertaken, and the patient should
be referred to a multidisciplinary team with specific expertise in the
treatment of OCD for assessment and further treatment planning,
including augmenting drug treatment and intensive CBT for OCD.

.. _sec7:

Reflections and considerations
==============================

We have used the lived experience of OCD, self-harm and mental health
services to illustrate a scenario which may be encountered by mental
health staff working on call in emergency departments. This highlights
several learning points about OCD, self-harm and on-call working. When
on call, working collaboratively alongside other medical specialties is
of benefit to patients. When seeing people who have self-harmed,
retaining compassion, curiosity and hope for change, and ensuring a
skilled assessment every time, can improve both patient experience and
clinical outcomes. The recognition and diagnosis of OCD are essential
elements of mental health staff's clinical skills; identifying and
treating OCD can alleviate significant suffering and disability, and can
save lives.

.. _sec8:

Patient's reflections and considerations
========================================

*What matters to me in the emergency department isn't just about
‘assessment’ but is about providing help. There is a longer-term element
in considering my ability to recover and to continue working: ensuring
that I receive effective long-term treatment for OCD. Being correctly
diagnosed with OCD has been life-saving for me. Until that point I was
caught in a cycle of obsessions and compulsions which were causing me so
much harm as to become life-threatening. I couldn't see a way out other
than taking my own life to prevent me hurting or killing other people,
but the correct diagnosis has improved things in ways I wouldn't have
believed were possible. In the 4 years up to that point I had been
brought to the emergency department over 133 times. I nearly died and
was ventilated in intensive care after taking overdoses. The police
arrested and prosecuted me when I was suicidal and afraid because I
couldn't get the right help, and the chemical burns which I believed
were necessary to stop the contamination spreading and killing others
have caused permanent physical disability, ending my
career.*\ :sup:`34,35` *In the 2 years since I received the right
diagnosis, explanation and drug treatment, although I am still waiting
for specialist cognitive behaviour therapy and still spend hours every
night terrified I have killed people, I have completely stopped
compulsive chemical burning, I have not tried to kill myself, I have not
been brought back to the emergency department at all and I have
developed an alternative career*.

*In this context I am the patient, but I've been called worse: ‘Frequent
Flyer’, ‘A Waste of Valuable Clinical Time and Resources’, ‘Very Clever
and Manipulative’ (written in my notes while I was unresponsive in resus
following an overdose), ‘That’ (as in, ‘I'm not touching That’).
Self-harm, particularly repeat self-harm, attracts stigma that is
unacceptable, along with stereotypes and assumptions which can distract
from the clinical picture. What I need from you is not only your
clinical expertise, but your clinical leadership in modelling respect
for me and challenging discriminatory behaviour. Your work may be hard,
but it is crucial; the difference your attitude and assistance makes can
be life-saving and life-changing*.

**Erika Palombini** is a Core Specialty Registrar in Liaison Psychiatry
at the Department of Psychological Medicine, Northwick Park Hospital,
Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Joel
Richardson** is a Foundation Doctor in Liaison Psychiatry at the
Department of Psychological Medicine, Northwick Park Hospital, Central
and North West London NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Emma McAllister** is a
Lived Experience Advisor, UK. **David Veale** is a Consultant
Psychiatrist in Cognitive Behaviour Therapy at South London and Maudsley
NHS Foundation Trust, and Visiting Professor at the Institute of
Psychiatry Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, UK.
**Alex B. Thomson** is a Consultant Liaison Psychiatrist at the
Department of Psychological Medicine, Northwick Park Hospital, Central
and North West London NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

E.P. co-ordinated the drafting of the manuscript and wrote the sections
on OCD, self-harm and suicide. J.R. wrote the section on assessment of
obsessions and compulsions. E.M. wrote the patient's perspective
sections. D.V. wrote the sections on severity of OCD and practical
management. A.B.T. supervised the manuscript and wrote the doctor's
perspective vignettes. All authors edited the manuscript and contributed
equally to the remaining sections.

None.

.. _sec9:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.70.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
