---
abstract: |
  This article explores how 'wicked problems' such as climate change
  might force psychiatry to rethink some of its fundamental ideas and
  ways of working, including clinical boundaries, understandings of
  psychopathology and ways of organising. We use ethnographic evidence
  to explore how mental health service 'survivor' activists are already
  rethinking some of these issues by therapeutically orienting
  themselves towards social problems and collective understandings of
  well-being, rejecting 'treatment as usual' approaches to distress. In
  this way we provide an example of the potential of activists to help
  psychiatry negotiate the climate crisis.
author:
- Neil Armstrong
- Keira Pratt-BoydenCorrespondence to Keira Pratt-Boyden
  (<kzp2@kent.ac.uk>)
date: 2021-08
institute:
- 1Magdalen College, University of Oxford, UK
- 2School of Conservation and Anthropology, University of Kent, UK
- 3SOAS University of London, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
title: "Silver linings: how mental health activists can help us navigate
  wicked problems"
---

pmc

In *Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World,*
Timothy Morton suggests that the climate emergency is a 'wicked
problem.'^1^ Problems might be described as wicked in cases where their
complexity, our lack of knowledge or the absence of stable, defined
goals make them extremely difficult (or even impossible) to solve.
Wicked problems are often highly entangled and interdependent, such that
addressing one area leads to unwanted consequences in another. When
dealing with a wicked problem, the answer does not lie in a single
solution. Wicked problems require broad perspectives, which examine
social processes and systems and are responsive to phenomena that may be
marginal or poorly understood. Morton argues that the wicked problem of
the climate crisis is placing an intense and transformative pressure on
our patterns of reasoning and that it demands an overhaul of some of our
key ideas and values. As Boulton notes, climate change 'renders
*vulnerability* \[our italics\] as the tangible human experience of
environmental degradation and destabilizes our sense of existence' to
the extent that it challenges 'human-scale understandings of personhood,
planetary existence, and cognition in general'.^2^

We suggest that psychiatry cannot be left out of any overhaul of key
ideas or values, not least when they pertain to vulnerability and our
understanding of the person. There are at least two aspects to this.
First, we suggest that the climate crisis disrupts ideas about
psychopathology that draw on notions of autonomy, independence,
functioning, goal orientation and economic activity. Second, we note how
the crisis unsettles critical but unexamined assumptions about how
individuals and institutions should be organised by questioning the
values of orderliness, preparedness and managerial rationality often
found within organisations such as the UK\'s National Health Service
(NHS) and Department for Work and Pensions. To investigate this we draw
on ethnographic fieldwork with mental health service 'survivor' activist
networks in London, who reject 'treatment as usual' and challenge some
of the main premises of mental illness and what it means to live
healthily. We explore interlocutors' preferences for 'dis-organisation'
and disorder in group meetings as a therapeutic act. We also present how
activists reframe their inability to work and to receive sickness
benefits as a means of community engagement, collective ethics and
undertaking social 'goods'. Ethical approval for the fieldwork cited in
this article was approved by the University of Kent. Verbal informed
consent was obtained from all participants.

# Mental health service survivor activists: the Challenge Mental Health network {#sec1}

Mental health service survivor activists have iatrogenic and traumatic
experiences of NHS mental healthcare. As a collective, they draw their
alternative understanding of what it means to be a valuable member of
society away from individual 'functions' and towards socioenvironmental
concerns. Global phenomena such as the climate emergency are used by
activists to think through how mental distress is conceptualised in
mental health services. They find that it no longer makes sense to work
within a framework and discourse of individual responsibility when the
climate emergency shows how profoundly interconnected our lives really
are. In this article, we provide ethnographic material to think these
issues through, suggesting not solutions but ways that psychiatry might
begin to respond to the climate crisis in a more inclusive and holistic
manner.

Survivor groups such as Challenge Mental Health (CMH) network meet
across London to campaign for better understandings of mental distress
and improvement of local and national mental health services and
treatments. One of CMH\'s main premises is that psychiatry
underestimates the social causes and treatments of 'mental illness' (or
what they term 'distress'). They argue that undervaluing social
processes in this way contributes to poor mental health. As a group, CMH
are opposed to thinking in terms of individual vulnerabilities or
pathologies. Instead, they emphasise social attitudes, collective
pathologies and systemic barriers that impede recovery. They concentrate
on collectively alleviating social influences of distress and support
one another by telling personal stories of distress and discussing ideas
around illness beliefs and causes. They also allow individuals to
experience distress in the presence of the group without intervention or
treatment.

The way survivor groups organise themselves reflects an ambivalent
relationship with bureaucratic working; this in part involves a
conscious construction of a meeting space which is entirely 'other' from
places such as the clinic or the hospital. At first glance, these
preferences might appear at odds to those with training in goal-oriented
therapeutic approaches. CMH have particular ways of approaching their
meetings for example. They reject orderly, rule-governed practices and
behaviours which are rooted in planning and preparedness and which might
remind them of NHS 'treatment as usual'. CMH meet according to consensus
in spaces all over London -- responding to members' needs at the time.
Meetings can last for hours and involve complete strangers. I have often
witnessed people walking in off the street, or straight from a hospital
discharge for example. The meetings are informal and are conducted
without set procedures or agendas. Meetings are reactive -- responsive
to personal stories, events or news -- and topics of discussion are
changeable and unpredictable. Official leadership or facilitation in
meetings is rare and they are typically initiated by whoever wants to
speak at the time. All are welcome, but there are rarely introductions
-- it is up to individuals to introduce themselves; sometimes members
sit for hours together and never find out who one another are. There are
no expectations of turn-taking, as in more conventional group therapy
settings.

These arrangements have their difficulties -- interlocutors sometimes
express frustration about the lack of structure in meetings and, when
there is a disagreement, there are no procedures in place to ask members
to leave. But it is telling that these arrangements cannot just be read
in the negative, as absences of positive qualities. Rather, they are
consciously curated and challenge many assumptions about trusting
therapeutic interactions needing to occur in contexts that are safe,
'contained', stable, orderly, predictable and familiar. Here, it is the
very lack of order that is therapeutic, felt by participants to be
empowering and healing, where rational institutional working had been
found to be alienating, demoralising and stigmatising. Through certain
ways of being-in-place, activists resist processes and relations that
might in other contexts be seen as organisational virtues that define
the gold standard of conventional healthcare -- such as professionalism
and expertise, impersonal institutionally defined roles and processes,
and the standardised relationship, even the 'routinised intimacy', that
characterises contemporary mental healthcare.^3^ Activists instead rely
on spontaneity, mutual attentiveness, responsivity and informal group
working.

Interlocutors speak about medical procedures associated with
bureaucratic rationality, planning and accountability as
countertherapeutic. During a meeting, one newcomer asked members of CMH
why there were no meeting minutes, because then others could contribute
remotely. One reply was, 'If we took minutes, everything we say would be
documented, get out of context and we would feel scrutinised'. Many
interlocutors expressed a specific dislike of documentation (and
particularly, being 'written about'), especially those with experiences
of being detained under the Mental Health Act ('sectioned') and/or
claiming benefits (something that the majority of activists experience).
Interlocutors described how it felt alienating and disempowering to not
know what is written (or spoken) about them (i.e. in medical notes),
particularly being unable to read or understand what the notes say when
shorthand or medical terminology is used. Thus, meetings do not run
according to agendas and the group do not write manifestos; rather, they
operate on the principle that to have any 'rules' evokes those systems
and modes of behaviour they specifically reject.

## How does this relate to the climate crisis? {#sec1-1}

For those for whom 'therapeutic' places provided by service providers
are often harmful and exacerbate or elicit unwellness, making spaces
according to these sensitivities requires flexibility. Therein lies
Morton\'s 'overhaul'; this rejection might be understood by
psychiatrists and service managers in negative terms as an absence of
organisation, or an inability to generate efficient ways of working.
Understanding recovery collectively as activists do may even be read as
a sign of dependence. Yet the climate crisis might suggest a different
frame. A distaste for planning, organising and preparing reflects an
awareness that these forms of organising (and the values and
sensibilities that drive them) are discredited because the ecological
crisis is driven by them. The production of pollutants on such a scale
that they threaten life on earth demands industriousness, discipline and
rational organisation on a huge scale. But as Bouton reminds us, we are
all interdependent and interconnected and 'all vulnerable'.^4^ Not
acting in accordance with conventional psychotherapeutic thinking
concerning relationships and ways of behaving enables mental health
activists to have more control and ownership over their recovery, as
does questioning the logic underpinning certain clinical 'goals'
pertaining to health and wellness. Recovery for many survivor activists
is relational, flexible and agentive and creating meeting spaces to
behave in 'disorderly' ways is part of this process.

## Boundary objects {#sec1-2}

Psychiatric categories are an example of what Bowker & Star call
'boundary objects' -- concepts that work across different institutional
settings and contexts.^5^ Star & Griesemer define boundary objects as
'objects which are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and the
constraints of the several parties employing them, yet robust enough to
maintain a common identity across sites'.^6^ Boundary objects are terms
that allow cooperation and communication between individuals (say,
within an organisation) even if they do not necessarily agree with the
precise meaning and definition of the terms. They have different
meanings for different people. An example of such a term might be
'recovery': it is contested but also has a generalisable meaning in
mental healthcare. Clinical terms designed to guide treatment decisions,
for example, also guide access to benefits and relate to legal
responsibility, capacity and disability. In this way psychopathology is
tied to conformity and deviance as conceptualised in the context of the
welfare state. But we can only take deviance as a sign of ill health and
conformity as a marker of health if we think that society is more or
less healthy. The climate crisis challenges that. Our collective
inability to respond to emerging climate science looks compulsive and
irrational, perhaps even delusional. It is functional people who produce
and consume and thereby drive the production of greenhouse gases and
undermine food security, while the economically inactive have the
lightest carbon footprint.

## 'Unemployment' as mental illness or an enabler of social 'goods'? {#sec1-3}

Survivor activists can be sceptical that good 'health' is so easily
mapped onto capacity, function and ability to find and keep work. Many
of CMH\'s campaigns revolve around the idea that people on benefits for
mental illness are being pushed into work as part of new benefits
changes and government targets related to financial management and
(post)austerity measures and that this is harmful to claimants' sense of
autonomy and agency. CMH hosts film nights as opportunities to air
concerns and grievances around such topics. One evening, Lissa, one of
the founding members, stood in front of the small group of CMH members,
therapy students and passers-by and announced that, 'The government is
trying to persuade us that unemployment is a mental illness. This
driving force telling us we should all be in and doing productive work
alters the sense of *who* and *what* we are'.

The discourse around 'getting into work' affects those in distress.
Members discussed the connections between mental health services and the
welfare system anxiously. Will, for example, a young activist in his
20s, feels guilty about his inability to work. He says he has never been
in the position where 'they thought enough of me to get to work', even
though he has tried. Will has spent most of his adult life living in
supported accommodation and has been in hospital under various Mental
Health Act sections. He was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome in school
and had other mental health difficulties. He explains that he has
undergone a work capability assessment and is waiting for the results.
He feels as though he has to constantly justify why he has not worked
and struggles with feeling illegitimate for never having had a job. At
the job centre Will asked a receptionist whether he could just get
'normal jobseeker\'s allowance' instead of sickness or disability
benefits. She was surprised and told him that he would receive more
money by accepting illness benefits. Yet Will insisted on claiming
jobseeker\'s allowance, lamenting that he 'just wants to be like
everyone else'.

At the film night, the group reflected on how people on benefits are
treated with hostility and that they have the added disadvantage of
having psychiatric diagnoses. 'I don\'t want to go around being seen as
the victim', remarks one, 'especially when we already have a
self-blaming culture'. Julie raises a recent comment made by George
Osborne about people on benefits lying in bed with their curtains drawn
while others go out to work and that they remain closed when workers
come home again.^7^ 'We are trying to change this narrative,' she says.
Lissa adds that she cannot stand the perception that people on benefits
for mental illness do not do much all day because they don\'t 'work'.
Her community psychiatric nurse (CPN) asked her what she 'actually
*does* all day'. So, she presented him with a list, 'I get up early,
check on my elderly mother, take my disabled sister to her hospital
appointments, do her grocery shopping, call people up as part of my
mental health support group mutual aid chats. Campaign for the end of
workfare, write letters and articles. Lobby MPs, attend seminars in
Westminster, draft responses and initiate public inquiries ...'.
Lissa\'s CPN was surprised, 'It seems like you do more than me!'.

Julie explains that receiving benefits has meant that she gets to choose
what she does with her life. She volunteers in the community, is a
trained co-counsellor, runs literary events for mental health service
survivors, supports benefit claimants with their claims and letters, and
sanctions and lobbies Parliament to increase spending in mental health
services in her free time. She supports as many friends and peers in
mental distress as she can. She explains that, rather than running in
'the rat race', she has time to take action on behalf of those who are
working. Employment caused her to have breakdowns. Implicit in her
understanding is the idea that not working allows you to think, reflect,
act collectively and undertake altruistic social 'goods'; it gives you
the time and energy to consider things that are bigger than you, to
support others and gives you purpose and meaning.

# Conclusions {#sec2}

Wicked problems such as the climate crisis force us to rethink our
understandings of what mental health is, how mental healthcare should be
organised and what its goals should be. What we have learned from mental
health service survivors is that, for them, it is healthy to challenge
ideas about individual functioning and social responsibility. Resisting
the pressure of working employment or assuming the role of a
'productive' member of a society by resisting workfare can be healthier
for recovery than what is desired according to the psychiatric model of
mental health. For activists, recovery outcomes are not connected to
gaining employment. In fact, the push towards function via
work/employment can exacerbate stress, feelings of stigma and of low
self-worth. Therapeutic activities for activists instead involve
creating environments for exploration in group settings, where the
unpredictability and uncertainty of distress is given space. By
interrogating the social causes of distress but refraining from seeking
solutions to it, activists avoid attempting to fix or resolve problems
and instead allow for 'not knowing'. Thus, they suggest that the model
of mental illness needs to be more flexible -- it needs to allow for
debate around what is classified as 'healthy' behaviour, to make room
for dialogue and the open exploration of wicked problems, and to be
reactive and responsive to the moment we are living in.

We thank the anonymous reviewer and acknowledge Tom Bell and Brian Pratt
for providing informal feedback on this article.

**Neil Armstrong** is a stipendiary lecturer in anthropology at Magdalen
College, University of Oxford, UK. **Keira Pratt-Boyden** is a PhD
candidate in social anthropology at the School of Conservation and
Anthropology, University of Kent, UK. She is also a part-time research
assistant for the Anthropology of Open Dialogue (APOD) Project, SOAS
University of London, UK.

# Data availability {#sec-das1}

The data are not publicly available because they contain information
that could compromise the privacy of research participants.

Both authors were equally involved in the production of this article.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

# Declaration of interest {#nts5}

None.
