=========================================================================================
Making the case for the family model in in-patient child and adolescent mental healthcare
=========================================================================================

Lesley Cousins
Joanne HolmesCorrespondence to Lesley Cousins
(lesley.cousins@cpft.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2021-10

:Abstract:
   Within paediatrics, young children experiencing physical and
   emotional distress are admitted to hospital with their parents as a
   matter of course, recognising the trauma associated with parting
   children from their carers. Much of this practice is underpinned by
   our understanding of attachment theory, which also sits as a
   fundamental tenet of child psychiatry. Yet the culture in psychiatric
   in-patient hospitals remains to admit young children without their
   parents, often to units that are geographically distant from the
   family home. We argue that the practice of admitting lone children to
   psychiatric in-patient units is likely to be traumatising as well as
   less effective. We believe this culture requires challenge and
   change.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
There are currently only seven child and adolescent mental health (CAMH)
in-patient units admitting children under the age of 13 in the UK. Of
these, just one admits children along with their parent or carer as a
matter of course.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` We believe this standard practice of
admitting children without an accompanying parent/carer to be outdated
and detrimental to both child and family.

Enter a paediatric ward today and the sight of a parent accompanying
their sick child would be commonplace. Indeed, for children of primary
school age, and especially those requiring extended treatment over weeks
or months, if a parent or carer were not present for much of the
admission there would be concerns raised about the adequacy of the care
they were receiving from the family. Over the past 60 years, our
paediatric colleagues have increasingly recognised the value of parents
accompanying their child in order to minimise the child's distress and
to improve overall outcomes.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Yet we in CAMH in-patient
services continue to admit lone children, often to facilities that are a
considerable distance from the family home.

The initial recognition of the trauma caused to children separated from
their parents by hospital admission, and the resulting movement to allow
parents to stay alongside their children, was significantly led by John
Bowlby.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Bowlby's work in the development of attachment
theory has been integral to our understanding of child emotional
development and underlies much of our current practice of child
psychiatry. Many research studies have confirmed the association between
insecure relational family attachment patterns and childhood emotional
and behavioural difficulties,\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` and it is therefore not
surprising that we see an increased prevalence of insecure attachment
patterns in the clinical population of the children we care
for.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)` Given this, it seems illogical that
in-patient CAMH practice continues to admit unaccompanied children,
placing children at risk of the double trauma of separation from parents
and admission to a mental health setting.

Children exist within and respond to the wider system around them, of
which the family is the predominant part. Often the journey that brings
a child to an in-patient admission involves the breakdown and disruption
of this family system.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Any therapeutic intervention must
take this into account and address it. The attachment relationship
between a parent and child is a dynamic process that we believe can only
be really understood by directly observing their interaction. Admitting
the parent and child together allows clinicians to assess attachment
patterns directly and to establish to what extent disruption in
relational security is driving and/or maintaining the child's mental
disorder. It is not uncommon for a parent's own emotional difficulties
to affect their attachment relationship and we know that a parent's
mental health represents the most important correlate for all domains of
the child's potential mental health difficulties.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Many
parents of children in in-patient CAMH services have significant
backgrounds of trauma and it is common to see the effects of
intergenerational trauma displayed in a child's behaviour or for a
traumatic response to be triggered in the parent by this behaviour. This
understandably can make it impossible for any parent to implement any
behavioural strategies suggested by professionals. If parents are part
of the admission, this helps the team to develop the trust required to
undertake the therapeutic work needed and address these issues more
readily.

We should not be surprised that some parents understandably find the
idea of abandoning their distressed, frightened child with professionals
in an institution far from home for a potentially prolonged period
unacceptable. This may mean that the family refuse the admission that
they need. By preventing parents from accompanying their children are we
denying families the potential to get the help they require?
Alternatively, some parents, exhausted by the challenge of trying to
care for their child, may be eager to accept an admission to hospital,
thus gaining respite from the responsibility of care. However, a
hospital admission can strengthen the medicalisation of the child's
difficulties, and handing over the care of the child to a clinical team
may further promote a family's belief that the child needs to be ‘fixed’
by professionals or disempowers parents if the child's symptoms
dissipate once they are in a hospital setting.

Even if a child's mental disorders are not driven by disrupted
relationships, it is vital that the parents/carers can be fully involved
in their child's care, as they will become the child's care team on
discharge. In all cases the parents/carers of a young child need to
become part of the solution for that child rather than continuing to
fuel the problem or to believe that only professionals can help.

.. _sec1:

Are we denying children the opportunity to get the help by not routinely admitting parents with them?
=====================================================================================================

Although we strongly believe that the benefits of parents being admitted
with their children to in-patient CAMH settings are clear and
meaningful, we recognise that, given this is not routine, there are
clearly arguments opposing it.

There is evidence that the practice of admitting lone children and
focusing on individual work with the child alone is
effective.\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.i)` It may therefore be argued that the
additional admission of the parent is unnecessary. A study measuring the
outcomes of child in-patient admissions in England and Wales
demonstrated their effectiveness and calculated the average cost of a
child in-patient admission, but it did not compare the units that do not
admit parents with the one that does.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` We therefore do
not know whether this assumption is correct and clear evidence exists
that more can be achieved when children are admitted with their parent
or carer than when the child is admitted alone.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)`

We note that some children with emotional or behavioural difficulties
can benefit from time away from the family home, particularly when
ongoing stress in the child–parent relationship is the main source of
their distress. We would argue that removing the child from the home
temporally is unlikely to address the difficulties long term and
intensive work is required with parents to make the systemic change that
will be required for the child to benefit when discharged. Although this
family work can, and does, happen on an out-patient basis, it is often
difficult for parents to attend regularly,\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` particularly
when children are admitted a long way from home.

Finally, we also recognise the considerable financial implications as
well as disruption to family life for siblings at home when a parent is
admitted with their child.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Again, we would argue that
the long-term consequences of having a child with significant
behavioural and emotional problems is in itself disruptive and costly,
with long-term negative consequences if not addressed. We would,
however, also argue that the family's financial needs could be more
actively addressed societally and appropriate reimbursement made
available.

.. _sec2:

Clinical implications and future plans
======================================

We have argued that a clinical model that promotes parents accompanying
their child during an in-patient CAMH admission is beneficial,
therapeutic and should be considered normal practice. We believe the
current practice of admitting lone children under the age of 13 to be
outdated and anti-therapeutic. We recognise that no specific clinical
trials have been undertaken to support this model in mental health
settings but we note that our paediatric colleagues have not been
required to provide such evidence for their culture and the acceptance
of parents on their wards to change; common sense has prevailed by
itself. Admitting a child to an in-patient ward is a radical treatment
option and including parents in this approach significantly adds to the
intensity. We argue, however, that the involvement of parents or carers
is fundamental to making the most of this period of family upheaval and
is in the best interests of both the child and the family.

**Lesley Cousins**, MB, BChir, MRCPsych, DPhil, is a Year 6 Specialty
Trainee (ST6) in child and adolescent mental health (CAMH), currently
working at the Croft Child and Family Unit, Fulbourne, Cambridge, UK.
**Joanne Holmes**, DM, MRCPsych, PG Cert MedEd, is a consultant CAMH
psychiatrist based at the Croft Child and Family Unit, Fulbourne,
Cambridge, UK.

Both authors contributed equally to the conceptualisation and writing of
this paper.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.
