================================
Response to Dr de Silva's letter
================================



Gethin Morgan

:date: 2021-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
02 December 2020

Dr de Silva's wide-ranging review of suicide prediction strategies is
very welcome: it includes a number of useful new ideas on how our
predictive efforts can be taken forwards. I do not wish to take issue
with any of them. My own paper, however, focuses more narrowly on two
specific issues. The first highlights the way in which ongoing variation
in severity of intent, usually due to the random and unpredictable
occurrence of stress-related events, can confound our predictive
efforts, and I suggest how we might circumvent this. The second aims to
show that, in spite of attempts to dismiss its value, the assessment of
suicidal ideation can have a useful role in the prediction process,
provided it is applied correctly and used appropriately. My approach is
in the nature of risk assessment, which has been criticised by some as
being too dependent on negative issues. I hope I have shown that by
helping to identify future hazards and so anticipate ways of dealing
with them, this is not just a negative process. A capable clinician
should surely be able to ensure that such assessment does not compromise
the establishment of a good trusting relationship with the patient. My
overall hope for the future of suicide prevention is that polarised
views, in which different approaches are seen as either good or flawed,
will not prevail. Good points from each and every approach can then be
incorporated into an overall synthesis of preventive strategy that can
be used in clinical practice.
