---
abstract: |
  The past 20 years have seen the disappearance and degradation of
  biodiversity on earth at unprecedented rates. This phenomenon shares
  similar drivers to those behind climate change yet requires its own
  solutions. The twin catastrophes of climate change and biodiversity
  loss demonstrate how our health is bound up in the vitality of this
  planet. There has been an increasing effort on the part of healthcare
  professionals to appreciate this relationship, as evidenced by the
  growing influence of planetary health as a discipline. However, the
  health impacts of biodiversity loss have been less focused on than
  those brought on by climate change. Psychiatry\'s appreciation of the
  interface between environments and our health, alongside the evidence
  for the connection between nature and mental health specifically,
  prompt psychiatrists to ensure that the institution of healthcare
  throws its influence equally behind solutions to climate change as
  well as biodiversity loss.
author:
- Jacob KrzanowskiCorrespondence to Jacob Krzanowski
  (<jacob.krzanowski@nhs.net>)
date: 2021-08
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
- 2Royal College of Psychiatrists, London, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
- id: ref38
- id: ref39
- id: ref40
- id: ref41
- id: ref42
- id: ref43
- id: ref44
- id: ref45
- id: ref46
- id: ref47
- id: ref48
title: "The need for biodiversity champions in psychiatry: the entwined
  crises of climate change and ecological collapse"
---

pmc

This article is both a provocation and a call to action for psychiatry
to champion biodiversity while raising awareness of the risk of
ecological collapse. Although the connection may not at first be
intuitive, our influence as healthcare professionals, appreciation for
health as a concept defined by wellness rather than an absence of
disease and understanding of how sick environments create illness, both
seen and unseen, place responsibility firmly at our table to advance the
cause of all life on earth.^1^

These arguments are underscored as international organisations such as
the World Health Organization (WHO) increasingly recognise the causal
links between our health and biodiversity loss.^2^ This is particularly
important because framing the crisis through the lens of health may
prove to be instrumental in shifting the tide towards the unified action
needed.

In fact, new evidence is rapidly verifying that the loss of biodiversity
in both quantity and quality has real impacts on our health, both mental
and physical.^2,3^ This evidence is finally catching up with
associations between nature and healthfulness that exist across many
cultures, and the knowledge central to many indigenous cultures.^4^ ,
While this is an important development we should respect that gaps in
our knowledge and apprehension regarding specific correlations should
not preclude action.

We have been slow to respond to climate change and must bear this in
mind. At the same time, in the face of uncertainty we should allow
ourselves to be compelled by a change to life on earth described as the
sixth planetary extinction, marked by a rate of extinction nearly 1000
times pre-human levels.^5,6^ It therefore falls to healthcare
professionals to mitigate not only the consequences of climate change
but also the equally concerning trend of ecological destruction.

# Climate change: one driver of biodiversity loss among many {#sec1}

The planetary crisis we are facing is more complicated and worse than
was first imagined. For decades, scientists have understood that the
planet is getting hotter.^7^ As the temperature rises, we are facing
changes to the climate that are difficult to predict and harder to
control. Climate change looks like rising water levels, protracted and
intensified heat waves, changes to water composition and the degradation
of ecosystems.^7^ These changes to the 'weather' are directly tied to
increasing food and water scarcity, which in turn lead to displacement
through forced migration and armed conflict.^8^

The consensus among those studying this phenomenon is that climate
change is a product of changes to human behaviour since the industrial
revolution.^9^ Through unregulated extraction and consumption of
carbon-based fuels, the global temperature has steadily increased, long
after this association was first suspected in 1896 by Swedish scientist
Svante Arrhenius. The establishment of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) by the United Nations in 1988 cemented a global
commitment to better understand the development and implications of
climate change.

As we grapple with the scale of the crisis, the need to unify climate
change with social justice is increasingly underscored. People who have
experienced and will continue to experience the greatest impacts of
climate change on health are the least responsible for greenhouse gas
emissions.^10^ To date, the vast proportion of total historical
emissions has been produced by a proportionally small number of wealthy
countries.^10^ However, in the past 20 years we are now coming to the
sobering fact that climate change and its injustices are not all we must
confront.

The year 2020 marked the end of a 10-year period designated the 'UN
decade on biodiversity'. The stated aim of the effort was to live in
harmony with nature. This commitment was in part brought on by alarming
reports such as the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment in 2005, which noted
that humans had changed ecosystems more rapidly in the previous 50 years
than at any point before.^11^

Biodiversity is a contraction of biological diversity and simply put is
the stuff of life itself. The 2005 report defines biodiversity as
variability among living organisms from all sources, including
terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems, and the ecological
complexes of which they are part.^11^ Biodiversity itself is the basis
of the complex of plants, animals and microorganisms that make up an
ecosystem.^11^ The accumulation of all of our planet\'s ecosystems is
encapsulated by the biosphere.^12^

To help us understand our dependence on these systems the concept of
ecosystem services was created. This model looks to explain all the ways
in which we are connected in the web of life and outlines that
ecosystems: (a) provide resources such as food, water, timber, medicines
and fibre, (b) regulate climate, foods, disease, waste and water
quality, (c) contribute to cultural experiences such as recreation,
aesthetic enjoyment and spiritual fulfilment and (d) support soil
formation, photosynthesis and nutrient cycling.^11^ The truth has been
plainly described by the environmental activist Satish Kumar in the
following stark terms: 'We are nature. What we do to nature, we do to
ourselves'.^13^

Since the mid-2000s, global efforts to address the collapse of
biodiversity have emerged, most notably with the establishment of the
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services (IPBES). Its 2019 Global Assessment Report describes a
biosphere transformed and degraded by human activity, whereby
'seventy-five per cent of the land surface is significantly altered, 66
per cent of the ocean area is experiencing increasing cumulative
impacts, and over 85 per cent of wetlands (area) has been lost'.^14^ It
identifies climate change as just one among several drivers -- albeit
one with a multiplying effect -- that have an impact on both nature and
human well-being, alongside habitat change, invasive alien species,
overexploitation and pollution.^11,14^ The thing that cannot be
forgotten is that many of these losses, in particular of species and
biodiversity, are irreversible.^15^

The pivotal importance of attending to the loss of biodiversity is
reflected in its inclusion within the UN\'s sustainable development
goals and the UN\'s choice to designate the 2020s as the 'decade for
eco-system restoration'.^16,17^ Biodiversity loss and climate change
share human behaviour as their root cause, but while their solutions are
mutually beneficial, they demand distinct strategies. The centrality of
biodiversity to the survival of all life, coupled with its demand for
solutions apart from ones that address sustainability or climate change
per se, is why biodiversity loss specifically requires champions among
healthcare professionals.

# Planetary health: an opportunity for healthcare\'s growing role {#sec2}

Why has change been so slow to come? Resistance has been in large part
cultivated by corporations, politicians and the interests of the wealth
that entwines them.^18^ In our own community, David Pencheon, a former
head of the NHS Sustainable Development Unit, has referenced a kind of
'moral offset' that means health professionals feel less motivated to
act on the climate crisis because their work already improves lives.^19^
Health services also prioritise acute illness over prevention,
discounting future risk in favour of short-term medical
responsibility.^19^

At the start of the millennium, the importance of an interdisciplinary
approach to health and climate change was recognised. Institutions such
as the *Lancet* sounded the need to frame the crisis in terms of its
effects on health. Although not a new term at the time, the concept of
planetary health was fully endorsed in 2015 by a joint effort between
the *Lancet* and the Rockefeller Foundation, a sign that healthcare as
an institution had begun to throw its weight behind a response to the
planetary crisis.^20^

Planetary health in the simplest sense makes the assertion that human
health is inextricably linked to the health of the planet. It can be
understood as a discipline that borrows from public and environmental
health but is bold and explicitly political. Richard Horton,
editor-in-chief of the *Lancet*, described planetary health in 2018 as
'an inquiry into our total world. The unity of life and the forces that
shape those lives'.^21^

At the heart of planetary health lies a paradox that many of the gains
to health have come from an untold exploitation of the environment.^22^
The field does not shy away from this uncomfortable fact and indeed is
based on the belief that a more balanced relationship wherein both
humans and the planet thrive is possible and essential. It suggests that
acting as stewards of the biosphere, humans can move from an exploitive
to a nurturing role.^22^ As a whole, the discipline and its advocates
seek to bring the influence of healthcare, as an institution, into the
centre of discussions and campaigning around the climate and ecological
crises. Such aspirations are in line with the increasing anticipation
that casting planetary change through the lens of our own health may be
instrumental in helping to inspire the type of action urgently
needed.^23^

Alongside this developing approach, in October 2020 the National Health
Service (NHS) made the impressive commitment to become the first
carbon-neutral national health service.^24^ Yet the report leaves the
issue of biodiversity loss behind. This trend towards focusing on
climate change is similarly reflected in the *Lancet*\'s countdown on
health and climate change,^25^ and as of February 2021 four NHS trusts
have declared climate emergencies since Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust first did so in July 2019.

Although the field of planetary health is premised on a connection
between health and nature, clinicians are only beginning to grapple with
its implications. This may reflect the fact that the impacts of
biodiversity loss on humans are dizzying in their scope but also, with
respect to mental health particularly, can be harder to understand and
therefore measure. Moreover, although the emphasis on climate change has
created a focus point for action, it unintentionally creates a
conceptual blind spot whereby the broader threat of ecological collapse
can feel like an 'add-on' and therefore harder to address or even a
distraction.

# Biodiversity and human health {#sec3}

The concept of ecosystem services underlines how essential biodiversity
is to life on earth. Without pollinators many plants cannot reproduce
and without plants no oxygen is made. Links between health and
biodiversity have been clearly drawn and are now continuously emerging
in greater breadth and resolution.^2^ In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic
highlighted the connection between biodiversity loss and infectious
disease, while research elsewhere highlighted the role of ecosystems in
sequestering carbon.^26,27^ Moreover, a growing evidence base recognises
that our well-being and mental health are tied to the health of our
ecosystems. Similarly, the destruction and loss of natural spaces is
increasingly shown to affect our mental, emotional and spiritual health.

## Carbon capture {#sec3-1}

The links between climate change and biodiversity are increasingly
clear. Rising global temperatures degrade our richest ecosystems, yet
these also represent essential storages of carbon. A recent paper by
Dinerstein et al states that nearly all of the remaining native
ecosystems will require preservation to keep the global average
temperature rise below 1.5°C.^27^ The paper brings together startling
facts, including that intact forests sequester twice as much carbon as
planted monocultures, and highlights that diverse systems from peatlands
to mangroves are also important carbon storehouses. They make clear that
it is the rich biodiversity of these natural spaces that allows carbon
to be stored in such amounts. This understanding motions at the need to
consider climate change and biodiversity loss in the same breath with
efforts to 'pair nature and climate deals which are mutually
reinforcing'.^27^ We are in a race against time where every piece of the
puzzle is connected for better and worse.

## Pandemics {#sec3-2}

Pandemics act on our physical and mental health through both direct and
indirect mechanisms resulting in immediate but also far-reaching changes
to individuals and societies. The origins of COVID-19 and its
development into a global pandemic are closely tied to ecological
destruction.^26^ It is a double tragedy that the experience of
lock-downs and quarantine have highlighted the importance of natural
spaces for many.^28^ Concerns about the impact of biodiversity loss were
made as early as 2005, when Paul Epstein noted that 'widening social
inequalities and changes in biodiversity have apparently contributed to
the resurgence of infectious diseases.'^29^ The 2020 IPBES workshop on
biodiversity and pandemics is clear about the drivers behind COVID-19,
stating that 'pandemics have their origins in diverse microbes carried
by animal reservoirs, but their emergence is entirely driven by human
activity \[...\] The underlying causes of pandemics are the same global
environmental changes that drive biodiversity loss and climate
change'.^26^

More sobering is the warning that, without changing these underlying
drivers, we can expect more frequent pandemics. Indeed, there are an
estimated 1.7 million undiscovered viruses, 631 000--827 000 of which
could have the ability to infect humans. Averting further pandemics
rests on a reversal of the unsustainable exploitation of the environment
driven by demand from wealthier countries and emerging economies.^26^

## Nature and well-being {#sec3-3}

There is a growing recognition of the impact of nature on
well-being.^30^ Exactly how exposure to nature benefits humans is not
entirely clear. Theories such as that proposed by Kaplan & Kaplan in
1989 suggest that exposure to nature acts on well-being by modulating
stress through restoration of our attention.^31^ Nature is also believed
to enhance our well-being by supporting health-promoting activities such
as physical activity and social interaction.^30,32^ Astonishingly, from
the view of public health, green spaces have also been found to be
equigenic, a term referring to interventions that disrupt the normal
health disparities arising from socioeconomic inequality.^33^ In urban
environments, such spaces provide further mental health benefits as they
mitigate heat islands, improve air quality and prevent floods, leading
to longer-term and more holistic health benefits.^34^

Crucially for psychiatrists, links have also been made between natural
spaces of high value and improved mental well-being.^3,32,34^ A 2014
literature review by Lovell et al, however, offers caution about drawing
definitive associations between increased biodiversity and health and
encourages further research on this relationship.^35^ Recently, a study
of the impact of biodiversity across Europe added the finding that the
diversity of birds in an ecosystem improved people\'s life
satisfaction.^36^ Irvine et al, in a review of spirituality and
biodiversity, offer that 'there is suggestive evidence that biodiversity
appears to contribute to spiritual outcomes'.^37^ They note that these
sorts of observation are critical in making clearer links between
conservation of biodiversity and human well-being.

## Eco-distress and solastalgia {#sec3-4}

During the 2019--2020 Australian bushfire season, it was estimated that
3 billion animals were affected.^38^ This is an unspeakable tragedy for
the life lost and those living in the areas affected by the fires.
However, it was also witnessed by many abroad, eliciting feelings of
helplessness, confusion, guilt, grief and anxiety. Much like the loss of
these ecosystems, it is unclear how the growing presence of such
emotions will affect people. An increasing interest in such questions
has been seen with the emergence of concepts such as eco-distress and
solastalgia.^39^ For the moment, these constructs do not describe mental
illness but rather proportional reactions to traumatic ecological
events. The term solastalgia specifically describes the distress
resulting from the transformation and degradation of one\'s home
environment. Although such concepts are relatively new, they underscore
the role that mental health professionals play in raising awareness
about ecological collapse and its psychological toll.

# How to respond? {#sec4}

Recognising biodiversity loss, and ecological collapse more broadly,
does not necessarily mean dividing attention from climate change.
Indeed, one of the best ways healthcare systems can address ecological
collapse is by mitigating their greenhouse gas output: if they were a
nation, healthcare systems globally would constitute the fifth largest
greenhouse gas emitter.^40^ What is key is understanding the crisis
holistically, so that psychiatrists work against the conceptual
fragmentation that prevents bold systemic solutions.

Within mental health services, pharmaceuticals contribute around 20% of
our total carbon footprint.^41^ The development and adoption of
sustainably informed prescribing practices provide a concrete way for
institutions and individual clinicians to play their part.^42^
Sustainable prescribing would need to take into account the
environmental implications of common prescribing practices, including
polypharmacy, unclear durations of treatment and exceeding recommended
dose ranges.^43^ Such considerations would create greater space to offer
non-medication-based complementary therapies, including those that are
nature-based.

Beyond the ethics of accurately representing the broader ecological
crisis, this holistic approach also makes it more likely that policies
that tackle greenhouse gas emissions alongside other drivers of
ecological collapse will be found and implemented. For example, a green
rooftop developed by a hospital to reduce air conditioning could also
then be cultivated with plants favoured by local pollinating insects. If
tended or enjoyed by psychiatric in-patients, this becomes an
intervention in which climate change, biodiversity and therapeutic
impacts are married.

Part of the difficulty in knowing how psychiatrists should most
effectively lend their voices to the crisis of biodiversity loss is the
immensity that the term implies. How do we go about saving the
biosphere? The Global Deal for Nature proposes a firm target of
protecting 30% of the earth by 2030, which lays the ground for global
action.^27^ This clearly stated goal, much like the limit of 1.5°C
warming for climate change, helps us to believe that, in spite of
overwhelming complexity, conceptually simple strategies such as
conservation can work.

With this as a foundation, psychiatrists could focus on two kinds of
strategic action. First, psychiatrists should support and initiate
further research into the relationship between mental health and the
natural world. In the UK, this effort could be advanced by innovative
collaborations between mental health institutions and wildlife
organisations such as Natural England and the Wildlife Trusts.
Psychiatrists should also engage with knowledge and practices developed
by colleagues in the field of ecopsychology, including giving
consideration to concepts such as nature connectedness.^44^ Supported by
a more robust evidence base, psychiatrists will better identify
ecology-related causal factors in mental illness, as well as potential
avenues of support. This sensitivity, in turn, will increase patient
awareness of how mental health is entwined with natural spaces.

In adopting the cause of biodiversity, new research would be
complemented by expanded clinical experiences and opportunities for
first-hand observation of the nature--mental health interface.
Psychiatrists, for example, can help make more immediate changes to the
environments of our health services. This includes championing public
green spaces and supporting trusts and hospitals to tend their own
natural spaces. NHS Forest, for example, is a programme that has
promoted planting trees on NHS grounds.^45^ The conservation of areas
close to health services more easily allows for the integration of
sustainable green care options within mental healthcare. A project such
the Green Walking initiative, which has seen eight trusts introduce
green walking programmes for psychiatric in-patients, shows how easily
local green spaces can be integrated into clinical care and generates
insights into best practice that complement ongoing research.^46^

The second kind of action would see psychiatrists advocate, campaign and
highlight the mental health implications of ecological collapse in their
organisations and communities in a way that bridges people\'s lived
experiences with the aspirational scale of planetary health.

The American Psychological Association has made recommendations for how
mental health professionals can highlight the relationship between
health and climate change, identifying education, awareness,
communication and motivating climate solutions as important areas of
action.^47^

Although these areas are humble it should be remembered that
healthcare\'s involvement in campaigning against climate change began
with the premise that simply sharing information can lead to a change in
perspective. Developments such as the NHS net-zero plan, the
establishment of planetary health institutes around the world,
publications focused on planetary health, the *Lancet* countdown and the
UK Health Alliance on Climate Change (UKHACC) all emerged as a result of
passionate voices calling for action.

Speaking eloquently and listening carefully are skills that mental
health professionals use every day. As leaders within mental health,
psychiatrists should speak to the government and the health sector
broadly to ensure that the relationship between biodiversity and health
is heard. Advocating for the inclusion of instruments that take into
consideration the impact on mental health of developments and changes to
land usage, for example, would be a clear and effective demand. In
summary, all of these suggested actions offer important steps in
conceiving of a sustainable mental health service that champions a more
preventive style of patient care.

# Conclusions {#sec5}

At the heart of psychiatry is the appreciation that our health and
experience are influenced by a complex web of interactions. Carrying
this knowledge has allowed psychiatrists to make bold observations on
the very real impact of social inequality on people\'s mental
health.^48^ This ability to understand how influenced people are by
their environments is also why psychiatrists should see the growing
threat to nature as entwined with climate change and ultimately with
mental and physical well-being for everyone.

I thank Daniel Maughan, Phil Davison, Alan Kellas, Lisa Page, Katherine
Kennet and the entirety of the RCPsych Sustainability Committee for
their knowledge, inspiration, energy and clarity of vision. Thanks also
to Frances Mortimer, Rachel Stancliffe and Benjamin Whittaker at the
Centre for Sustainable Healthcare. Thank you also to my partner Baillie
Card for her generosity and wisdom.

**Jacob Krzanowski** is a specialist registrar in general adult
psychiatry with South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, an
Associate Registrar in Sustainability for the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, London, and an Associate of the Centre for Sustainable
Healthcare, Oxford, UK.

# Data availability {#sec-das1}

Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were
created or analysed in this study.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

# Declaration of interest {#nts4}

J.K. is an Associate Registrar in Sustainability for the Royal College
of Psychiatrists and an Associate of the Centre for Sustainable
Healthcare.
