---
author:
- Kamaldeep Bhui
date: 2021-04
institute:
- "Professor of Psychiatry at the University of Oxford, and honorary
  consultant psychiatrist at the East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
  Email: <kam.bhui@psych.ox.ac.uk>"
---

The contributors to this refreshing, courageous and remarkable book
break the silence about young people living with parental mental illness
and the distress they and their immediate and future families
experience. The central theme is to enable conversations about difficult
experiences of parents and children. Airing personal reflections and
experiences risks rejection, stigma, hurt and isolation. Traumatic
experiences are often associated with avoidance of reminders and a
desire to imagine the world to be different and just, rather than the
more abrupt reality of moral fractures in a world where fragile and
vulnerable minds are overwhelmed. Parents wanting so much for their
children find themselves unable to live up to their own expectations,
and at the same time lament that they may be hurting their children
inadvertently, just by living with mental illness. Yet, these sentiments
are not easily realised, and much time is spent by parents and children
in evading or not knowing how the other feels and sees the world,
including in their relationships.

The contributors include young people who were raised by people with
mental illnesses, some of whom have gone on to become parents and enter
the professions that work with children not dissimilar to their past
selves. Additionally, in the book, parents offer commentary and children
in return reflect on their parents' dilemmas and distress. Although it
is painful to confront such realties, all contributors are optimistic,
full of gratitude, being mindful of how the world looking back seems so
different from how it felt in the moment.

Through a network of conversations, observations, reflections and
counter-reflections, the editors provide a form of scaffolding that
helps. They create and display the very process that needs to take place
between parents and children facing fears and isolation that come with
parental mental illnesses. They reveal how intimate and important
sentiments surfaced and were discussed in a reflective fashion by
families to arrive at what seems like a more settled and peaceful
coexistence, an appreciation of each other\'s strengths, and ultimately
the enduring respect and love that evolve as they show they care so much
for each other. That they matter more than they realise.

There is much here for professionals, parents and children, as well as
commissioners and policy makers. The first-person accounts are
invaluable, articulate and perhaps even a little refined and polite,
having been worked at for some time. This makes it easier to hear about
some very harrowing moments in the lives of those bearing witness to and
living with the silent struggles. I do hope that those affected will
read the book and discover they need not be alone and have much to give
and have more courage than they might realise.
