======================================================================================================================================================
Electroconvulsive therapy for severe depression, psychosis and chorea in a patient with Huntington's disease: case report and review of the literature
======================================================================================================================================================



Walied Mowafi
Jon MillardCorrespondence to Walied Mowafi (wmowafi20@gmail.com)
:Date: 2021-04

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The psychiatric manifestations of Huntington's disease are myriad and
   difficult to control. The use of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is
   not commonly considered for this condition. We describe a patient
   with severe depression, psychomotor retardation, delusions and weight
   loss who responded to ECT with good control of her symptoms.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Both our case and the literature appear to confirm the efficacy of
   ECT in the treatment of depression in Huntington's disease and
   suggest that other psychiatric manifestations of Huntington's are
   also responsive.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   ECT is an effective and safe treatment that should be considered
   earlier in the course of the disease in cases that show limited
   response to pharmacological therapy. It should also be considered as
   an adjunct to medical therapy that may simplify polypharmacy and
   allow better control in patients with debilitating psychiatric
   manifestations of the disease. There is limited and conflicting
   evidence for its efficacy in chorea.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Case report
===========

Seven years ago, a 57-year-old woman with a family history of
Huntington's disease presented with depression, changes in personality,
apathy, anxiety, poor memory and clumsiness. Her genetics confirmed
Huntington's disease, with a CAG repeat number of 17/46. Over the
subsequent 4 years, her condition was marked by psychiatric symptoms and
mild chorea, which responded well to tetrabenazine 25 mg once daily,
reaching 25 mg twice daily by 2014. Her mood was controlled with
citalopram followed by sertraline. Her main complaints were bouts of
introversion and tearfulness, but she remained socially engaged with
friends. By early 2015, her swallowing had ostensibly become
problematic. However, a speech and language assessment and a gastroscopy
determined that her swallowing was normal. By spring 2016, she was
starting to fall often, with worsening athetoid movements and increased
somnolence. These changes led to a switch in medication to olanzapine at
15 mg per day and an increase in her dose of sertraline to 100 mg a day.

By summer of 2017, her choreoathetoid movements had worsened and were
accompanied by weight loss and a deterioration in her mood. She required
a short in-patient stay for fluids via a nasogastric tube. A psychiatric
review diagnosed her with a depressive psychosis with retarded affect,
mood-congruent delusions and auditory command hallucinations. She
believed she did not deserve to eat and drink, and the command
hallucinations ordered her not to do so. She had extracampine
hallucinations, sensing people at the end of her garden. In light of her
clinical state of emaciation and the requirement for support, a trial of
bilateral electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) was suggested for her
depressive psychosis. A twice-weekly regimen was started, with the aim
of optimising seizure length to between 30 and 60 s. In winter of 2017,
she received an initial 12 courses of biweekly bilateral ECT treatments
using between 75 and 150 mC. Her initial response was favourable and she
became euthymic, with remission of her psychomotor retardation, but her
psychotic symptoms persisted in the form of command hallucinations
despite developing insight. Her delusion of guilt also resolved and, by
the tenth dose of ECT, she started to eat and drink again. The initial
course of treatment was complete by early February 2018 and, with the
exception of her hallucinations, her psychiatric symptoms ceased and
insight was retained.

However, the persistence of psychotic symptoms in the absence of a
significant mood component led to an additional 12 sessions of bilateral
ECT (administered biweekly with 150–225 mC; maintenance treatment
consisting of bilateral 150–300 mC treatment biweekly continued into
late 2019) with the aim of eradicating the hallucinations. She then
developed a respiratory tract infection, which led to a relapse in her
psychiatric symptoms with agitation, hallucinations, and marked
choreoathetosis and dyskinesia that led to the reintroduction of
tetrabenazine. Despite this setback, she did improve following the last
12 doses of ECT. This course was completed in late spring 2019. She was
kept on maintenance ECT once per week, with partial remission of the
auditory hallucinations, which had reduced in frequency and no longer
distressed her. There was a subsequent increase in the frequency of the
hallucinations, with preservation of insight, and a corresponding
reduction in ECT to fortnightly. She has remained stable on this regimen
to date. Her involuntary movements have also improved over that time,
although she remains on tetrabenazine, haloperidol and sertraline.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

A literature search of PubMed for ‘Electroconvulsive therapy and
Huntington's’ and ‘ECT and Huntington's’ led to the discovery of 20
papers, 18 of which were in English. Six publications were based on *in
vitro* studies and animal studies, leaving 12 publications for review. A
further three papers that were not listed in the PubMed search were
sourced from references in papers from earlier years. All publications
were either single-case reports or retrospective case series; there were
no randomised controlled trials or prospective studies.

.. _sec2-1:

Consent for publication
-----------------------

Signed informed consent was obtained from the patient described in our
case report.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

`Table 1 <#tab01>`__ shows a breakdown by demographic and disease
characteristics of the 37 patients described in 15 studies. `Tables
2–5 <#tab02 tab03 tab04 tab05>`__ summarise the predominant psychiatric
complaints, the effects of ECT on the number of medications used during
ECT treatment, the CAG copy number, ECT treatment and seizure duration.
Supplementary Table 1 (available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.51) summarises individual patient
details from the literature, including our aforementioned case. Table
1Summary of patient characteristics and ECT
treatmentCharacteristicMedianSex43% female (7 N/A)Age at
presentation20–6547Length of psychiatric symptoms (years)0–222.5Time
from diagnosis to ECT (years)0–173Number of courses of ECT3–418Seizure
duration (s)5–12040Dose delivered (mC)25–504–Lead position (out of 22
documented)54% right unilateral [1]_ Table 2Breakdown of main presenting
symptomsMajor presenting complaint\ *N*\ Depression\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ 26
(18)Chorea\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ 14 (1)Suicidal
ideation13Psychosis\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ 12
(6)Dysphagia/dysarthria10Hallucinations7Aggression6Catatonia4Psychomotor
retardation4Inappropriate sexual behaviour2Pain/dystonia1 [2]_ Table
3Treatment before, during and after ECTStudyBefore ECTChanges during
ECTAfter ECTEvans et al\ :sup:`11`\ Chlorpromazine,
diphenhydramineHaloperidol, trazodoneBenztropine, desipramineRanen et
al\ :sup:`1`\ Patient 1NortriptylineFluoxetine,
lithiumDesipraminePatient 2NortriptylineDesipramine, haloperidolPatient
3Amitriptyline, carbamazepineNortriptyline added (6 weeks)Droperidol,
ChlorpromazinePatient 4Nortriptyline, haloperidol, carbamazepine,
lorazepam (catatonia)LithiumLewis et
al\ :sup:`14`\ HaloperidolAmoxapineBeale et al\ :sup:`3`\ Haloperidol,
pimozide, benztropine, diphenhydramine, Reserpine, propranolol, Diazepam
(all for chorea)haloperidol, carbamazepineMerida-Puga et
al\ :sup:`4`\ Risperidone, lorazepamClozapine, olanzapineAmantadine,
lorazepam, levodopa, carbidopa (catatonia)Nakano et
al\ :sup:`5`\ Risperidone, olanzapineN/ACusin et al\ :sup:`2`\ Patient
1Clonazepam, haloperidol, levetiracetam, lorazepam, quetiapine,
risperidone, tizanidine, trazodoneDuloxetinePatient 2Chlorpromazine,
citalopram, phenytoinChlorpromazine, citalopram, lorazepam, olanzapine,
phenytoinPatient 3FluoxetineAripiprazole, fluoxetinePatient 4Clonazepam,
duloxetine, risperidone, trazodoneClonazepam, duloxetine, olanzapine,
trazodone, valproic acidPatient 5Clonazepam, duloxetine, olanzapine,
trazodone, valproic acidClonazepam, duloxetine, fluoxetine, haloperidol,
lorazepamPatient 6Clozapine, duloxetine, fluoxetine, haloperidol,
lamotrigine, lorazepam, methadone, milnacipran, trazodone,
zolpidemChlorpromazine, duloxetine, fluoxetine, haloperidol,
lorazepamPatient 7Duloxetine, olanzapineAmantadine, clonazepam,
paroxetine, risperidone, sertraline, trazodone, valproic acidMagid et
al\ :sup:`8`\ Olanzapine, chlorpromazine, aripiprazole, risperidone,
haloperidol, fluphenazineCitalopram, mirtazapine, sertraline,
trazodoneLorazepam, clonazepam, buspironePetit et al\ :sup:`9`\ Not
mentioned but patient refractory to neuroleptics, antidepressants,
atypical antipsychotics and mood stabilisersClozapineMirtazapineShah et
al\ :sup:`15`\ Buspirone, divalproex, lorazepam, paliperidone,
quetiapine, venlafaxineQuetiapine, olanzapineAdrissi et
al\ :sup:`10`\ Patient 1Nortriptyline, quetiapine,
tetrabenazineAmantadine, sertraline, quetiapinePatient 2Haloperidol,
lorazepamLorazepam, venlafaxinePatient 3Amantadine, baclofen,
chlorpromazine, clozapine, gabapentin, lithiumChlorpromazine, clozapine,
diazepam, gabapentinPatient 4Bupropion, clonazepam, escitalopram,
levothyroxine, lithiumBupropion, clonazepam, escitalopram,
levothyroxine, trazadoneOur caseCitalopram, sertraline,
tetrabenazineOlanzapineTetrabenazine, haloperidol, sertraline [3]_ Table
4Number of trinucleotide repeats, age of diagnosis, ECT treatments and
length of psychiatric symptoms prior to ECTCasesCAG repeat copy
numberAge at diagnosis of Huntington's disease (years)Cumulative number
of ECT treatmentsPsychiatric symptoms (years)Adrissi et al\ :sup:`10`
patient 4394572Petit et al\ :sup:`9`\ 41591820Adrissi et al\ :sup:`10`
patient 24251270.5Magid et al\ :sup:`8`\ 435737Adrissi et al\ :sup:`10`
patient 14445293Nakano et al\ :sup:`5`\ 445940Lewis et
al\ :sup:`14`\ 446581Merida-Puga et al\ :sup:`4`\ 4526425Beale et
al\ :sup:`3`\ 46561119Adrissi et al\ :sup:`10` patient 34631416Our
case4650407 Table 5ECT seizure length in seconds and treatment
characteristicsCasesSeizure duration (s)MeanECT characteristicsDose
(mC)Ranen et al\ `a <#tfn5_1>`__,1Patient 140–12060Patient
220–5037Patient 3 5–352170 Hz pulse width 1 s, duration 2 ms112Patient
420–5539Patient 525–4530(MECTA SR1)Patient 640–5546Lewis et
al\ :sup:`14`\ 24–140–90 Hz pulse width 1–1.6 ms, 33.3–57.5 J (MECTA
SR1)–Beale et al\ :sup:`3`\ 57–19–(MECTA SR2)72–233Merida-Puga et
al\ :sup:`4`\ 42–80–25% (Thymatron DGx)\ `b <#tfn5_2>`__\ 126Cusin et
al\ :sup:`2`\ 90 Hz pulse width 1 ms,
2–4 s\ `c <#tfn5_3>`__\ 180–360Adrissi et al\ :sup:`10`\ Patient
125–48–Patient 230–75–10–140 Hz, pulse width 0.25–1 ms, 5–50% (Thymatron
IV)\ `d <#tfn5_4>`__\ 25.2–504Patient 321–84–Patient 421–42–Evans et
al\ :sup:`11`\ 239/6 treatments–(MECTA apparatus)–Our
case30–60–(Thymatron IV)75–300 [4]_ [5]_ [6]_ [7]_

The time to ECT treatment after the diagnosis of Huntington's disease
was between 0 and 17 years, with a median of 3 years and mean of 4.42
years. However, the sixth patient of Ranen et al. had previously had ECT
for depression before she was diagnosed.\ :sup:`1` The age of
psychiatric symptoms at presentation for ECT varied from 0 to 22 years
prior, with a median of 2.5 years and a mean of 5.73 years.

It should be noted that the diagnostic confirmation of Huntington's was
solely clinical prior to 1993; however, despite the availability of
genetic testing after 1993 (Huntington disease Collaborative Research
Group), diagnosis only preceded presentation in this group of patients
after 2013 (Cusin et al's first patient\ :sup:`2`). Prior to 2013,
patients first presented on average 7.4 years *before* the diagnosis of
Huntington's was made. After 2013, all patients with psychiatric
complaints who went on to have ECT presented an average of 6.6 years
*after* the diagnosis of Huntington's had been established. Six patients
in total were diagnosed at the time of presentation, although five of
them were diagnosed prior to 2013. For example, Beale et al's patient
had choreiform movements (and no psychiatric manifestations) from the
age of 35, but was not diagnosed until the age of 56 in 1995.\ :sup:`3`
However, this apparent lag after the introduction of genetic testing is
likely to reflect the 16-year gap between Beale et al's paper in 1995
and those of Merida-Puga et al and Nakano et al in 2011 and 2013,
respectively.\ :sup:`3–5` Merida-Puga et al's patient was diagnosed
following postpartum psychosis and a family history suggestive of
Huntington's in her father; she went on to have ECT for catatonia.
Nakano et al's patient was diagnosed owing to his brother's recent
diagnosis with Huntington's at another hospital, having already received
ECT for treatment-refractory psychosis.

.. _sec3-1:

Reason for referral for ECT
---------------------------

`Table 2 <#tab02>`__ shows a breakdown of the main characteristics of
the clinical presentations; 48.6% of patients were referred for
depression alone without psychotic features, and psychosis was the main
cause of referral in 16%. Many of the referrals for depression alone
were from some of the earliest reports, which lacked a clear description
of the referral characteristics.\ :sup:`6,7` The remainder of patients
had numerous coexisting factors such as paranoia, delusions and other
manifestations of psychosis, including
hallucinations\ :sup:`1,2,4,5,8–11`.

Coexistent motor symptoms were present in 20
patients\ :sup:`1–3,5,9,10,12–15` (including our case), with chorea
being the most commonly used term. Involuntary movement and impaired
gait were also terms used without further clarification (e.g. Cusin et
al uses both terms for different patients within the same
series\ :sup:`2`). Psychomotor retardation was reported in four
patients\ :sup:`1,2,10` (including our case), with one patient being
described as having neurovegetative symptoms (Cusin et al,\ :sup:`2`
patient 3), and coexistent dysarthria/dysphagia in two patients.
Catatonia was mentioned in four patients\ :sup:`1,2,4` (fourth and fifth
patient of series,1 postpartum4 and the second patient of series2) but
was the primary focus of treatment only in Merida-Puga et al\ :sup:`4`;
see Supplementary Table 1.

.. _sec3-2:

Effects on psychiatric symptoms
-------------------------------

The primary reason for prescribing ECT in all but seven patients (six
for psychosis and one for chorea) was depression (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__
and Supplementary Table 1). There were universally favourable outcomes
in the use of ECT for this purpose. It was reported to be successful in
most cases, and the patients who were reported to relapse did so on
shorter courses of ECT.\ :sup:`12,13` However, these were early reports,
and there have been numerous subsequent reports of relatively short
courses with no relapse. For example, Ranen et al's third patient, who
had depression, psychosis and catatonia, only needed five ECT treatments
to achieve symptom resolution.

Psychosis responded to ECT in all six patients\ :sup:`2,4,8,11` who were
reported to have it as the primary presentation, which included our
case. When coexistent disease such as depression was considered, 12
patients in total had prominent psychosis, and all responded to varying
degrees, including our case.\ :sup:`1,5,9,10` Merida-Puga et al reported
refractory psychosis thought to be due to use of depot dopamine
antagonists, although the focus of their treatment was the refractory
catatonia.\ :sup:`4`

Hallucinations, either auditory (three cases including our
case),\ :sup:`1,11,13` visual (two cases)\ :sup:`2,10` or both visual
and auditory (two cases),\ :sup:`4,8` also responded well to treatment.
The exception was Ranen et al's fourth patient, where this was unclear,
although the hallucinations probably improved with the patient's other
symptoms.

There were four cases of reported psychomotor retardation, including our
patient\ :sup:`1,10,12` (in addition, speech retardation was reported in
Nakano et al); all were described as improved following ECT without
further clarification. Benson and Blumer's first patient had a
‘temporary recovery’.

Catatonia (second and fourth patients of Ranen et al; second patient of
Cusin et al\ :sup:`1,2,4`) was described in four patients and improved
in all. This improvement often paralleled the response to ECT of
depression, suicidality and psychosis. Two of these cases were resolved
by relatively short courses of ECT (five treatments for Ranen et al's
fourth patient – though their condition was, surprisingly, described as
refractory – and seven treatments for Cusin et al's second patient).
However, the presence of catatonia was refractory in the remaining two
patients. Both Ranen et al's second patient (who relapsed repeatedly)
and Merida-Puga et al's patient\ :sup:`4` (who required withdrawal from
long-acting antipsychotics) needed extended ECT courses (4 years for
Ranen et al's patient but just over 3 months of an in-patient stay for
the latter) to resolve the catatonia, with 35 and 42 ECT treatments,
respectively. Merida-Puga et al's patient had a Busch–Francis catatonia
score of 26 (total severity) on first admission, falling to 4 after a
second hospital admission and discharge.

Our patient required repeated doses of ECT following a relapse of
psychosis over 2 years. Eventually, she showed a partial response, with
improvements in her mobility and psychomotor retardation. She started to
gain weight, although her delusions persisted. Improved gait was
reported in six cases, including Lewis et al and the first, fourth,
fifth and sixth patients of Cusin et al, who had bilateral
frontotemporal and right unilateral (RUL) placement,
respectively.\ :sup:`2,14`

Disorders of eating and/or speech were mentioned for a total of ten
patients. Dysphagia was mentioned in two cases (Cusin et al's\ :sup:`2`
second patient and ours) and dysarthria in another two (Cusin et al's
third and sixth patients). Both dysarthria and dysphagia were reported
for two patients (Cusin et al's fourth and fifth patients). For all six
of these patients, their symptoms were described as resolving or
dramatically improved. Refusal to eat was described in two patients
(Ranen et al's second patient and Magid et al's patient\ :sup:`1,8`),
while poor appetite was described in another two (Ranen et al's sixth
patient and Adrissi et al's second\ :sup:`10`). Both of Ranen et al's
patients were described as improved, but there was no further
clarification regarding outcome for the remaining two.

Aggression,\ :sup:`1,2,10–12,15` inappropriate sexual
behaviour\ :sup:`2,15` and agitation\ :sup:`15` were also mentioned and
described as improved.

Only two reports documented improvement using psychiatric rating scales,
with the BPRS-E (Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, Expanded) score
dropping from 88 to 38 after 12 ECT sessions in Petit el al's patient,
and BPRS dropping from 139 to 68 in Nakano et al's patient (the PANS
(Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale) score fell from 139 to 68 in the
latter).\ :sup:`5,9` Both Beale et al and Lewis et al documented
improvement in the Hamilton rating scale for depression from 36
pre-treatment to 13 post-treatment in Beale et al and 36 to 10
post-treatment in Lewis et al.\ :sup:`3,14`

.. _sec3-3:

Effects on motor symptoms
-------------------------

Chorea was mentioned in 14 cases,\ :sup:`1–3,5,9–11,13–15` including our
case (three patients of Cusin et al and two of Adrissi et
al\ :sup:`2,10`). Improvement was documented in three cases (Beale et
al, Petit et al and Shah et al), although five were described as showing
no change (Ranen et al, Lewis et al, Nakano et al, Cusin et al's fifth
patient and Adrissi et al's first patient). In two cases, chorea was
described as worse (Adrissi et al's second patient and Evans et al). In
the remaining four patients, no details were given, despite this symptom
initially having been described as present.

Only one patient was treated with ECT specifically for chorea. This
patient demonstrated improvement initially and, despite worsening, their
chorea never returned to the original level and was sustained at the
improved level for a year.\ :sup:`3`

Our patient showed some response with respect to the choreoathetoid
movements, which had become unresponsive to tetrabenazine. The
medication had been withdrawn given her depression and fears of
worsening those symptoms. Olanzapine, however, did not lead to any
improvement in her chorea or psychiatric symptoms. Following a
favourable response of the chorea to ECT, a low dose of tetrabenazine
was reintroduced with good effect and had no further influence on her
mood. Her gait and mobility also improved.

The use of rating scales for motor function was mentioned in only three
cases. The Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale (UHDRS) motor score
was recorded before and after only for Adrissi et al's second patient
(27/31 out of a total of 124; their first case had an initial score of
49 with no follow-up score), while Petit et al's patient's UHDRS score
decreased from 47 to 37 after 12 treatments and then rose to 57 after 1
year.\ :sup:`9,10` For most cases, there was no mention of any response,
which is not surprising because this was the focus of the treatment in
only one of the studies. Surprisingly, despite admitting their patient
specifically for the treatment of chorea (there were no psychiatric
manifestations), Beale et al used no rating scales to document
improvement.\ :sup:`3`

.. _sec3-4:

Effects on cognition
--------------------

Many of the case reports mentioned problems with cognition, but few
documented it with formal scores either before or after treatment.
Scores were recorded before and after treatment by Nakano et al
(Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 27/26), Lewis et al (MMSE 23/24)
and Ranen et al (second and fourth patients; MMSE 20/30 rose to 26 by
discharge in the former and was 20/30 rising to 24–26/30 (administered
twice) in the latter\ :sup:`1,5,14`). Cusin et al used the Montreal
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scale for their patients and described the
scores as improved, although they did not publish the values.\ :sup:`2`

Ranen et al's third patient showed a drop in MMSE from 26/30 to 18/28,
with an episode of delirium after his eighth ECT treatment. No further
scores were recorded, but the patient was described as ‘not completely
recovered cognitively’.\ :sup:`1` Adrissi et al's second patient had an
initial MoCA of 17/20, but no further score was documented.\ :sup:`10`

.. _sec3-5:

Effect on medication used
-------------------------

`Table 3 <#tab03>`__ documents the treatment at admission; changes, if
any, that occurred during the course of treatment for the psychiatric
manifestations of disease; and discharge medication for those patients
where it was recorded.

In those patients who required a number of drugs to treat the
psychiatric manifestations of Huntington's disease, implying difficulty
in management, there was not necessarily a requirement for more ECT
doses or prolonged ECT treatment. However, in patients with
pharmacological treatment resistance and the requirement for many drugs
to manage symptoms, there does appear to be scope for significant
rationalisation of pharmacological therapy when ECT is used
adjunctively. Beale et al's patient and Cusin et al's first and sixth
patients all presented between 10.5 and 19 years after diagnosis but
responded well to limited ECT treatments and were discharged on much
less medication.\ :sup:`2,3` Only Adrissi et al's third patient, Ranen
et al's second patient and ours required extended ECT. It is not clear
why there was resistance to conventional treatment in these
cases.\ :sup:`1,10`

However, this was not a consistent outcome; for example, Cusin et al's
seventh patient was discharged on more medication after ECT than prior,
and Adrissi et al's third and fourth patients were discharged on a
comparable number of drugs to those given on admission.\ :sup:`2,10`

.. _sec3-6:

Effect of CAG copy number on disease or treatment
-------------------------------------------------

The earliest reference to CAG copy number, and therefore genetic
confirmation of the diagnosis, comes from Lewis et al in 1994 – in
keeping with testing, which became available after the discovery of the
trinucleotide repeat a year earlier by the Huntington Disease
Collaborative Research Group. Copy numbers of trinucleotide repeats have
no effect on the severity of the disease, but the age of presentation is
inversely correlated with increasing copy number.\ :sup:`16`

`Table 4 <#tab04>`__ shows copy number, number of ECT treatments and
length of psychiatric symptoms for cases where this information was
documented. Although those requiring more cumulative ECT treatments may
appear to be clustered with those with higher repeat copy numbers, Petit
et al's and Adrissi et al's second and first patients represent evidence
to the contrary.\ :sup:`9,10` Given that there was only a difference of
seven CAG repeats among the 11 patients, there appears to be no
significance to this. In keeping with this, the youngest patient in the
review, who at 20 years old was likely to have had genetic testing,
although the results of this were not documented, responded well to ECT,
with his symptoms described as resolved after only seven treatments
(Cusin et al's second patient\ :sup:`2`).

.. _sec3-7:

ECT treatment course
--------------------

Treatment courses varied between three and 42 treatments in total, with
a median of eight. Relapse was mentioned in seven cases (Cusin et al's
fifth and sixth patients).\ :sup:`2,4,12,13,15` For Heathfield's patient
(who had three treatments) and Benson and Blumer's patients, relapse was
described in general terms, with no description of the treatment course
in the latter's series.\ :sup:`12,13` In the remaining patients, it is
not clear why they relapsed, except for having received relatively short
courses of between five and nine ECT treatments. Merida-Puga et al's
patient had treatment-resistant catatonia exacerbated by dopamine
antagonists prescribed for her psychosis; this led to relapses and an
extended in-patient stay.

Most patients had treatment for up to 1 year (22 patients), although our
patient has been undergoing continuing maintenance treatment at
increasing intervals for more than 2 years to date. Ranen et al's second
patient required treatment for 4 years and Petit et al's patient for
more than 1 year.\ :sup:`1,9` Those requiring extended treatment
presumably did so because of continued symptoms\ :sup:`1,10` (see
below).

Patients who had an extended course, arbitrarily taken to be more than
20 treatments (seven patients including ours\ :sup:`1,4,9,10`), did not
have different characteristics from patients with similar symptoms but
much less cumulative ECT treatment. Characteristics such as the nature
of symptoms, length of time from diagnosis, length of time of
psychiatric symptoms, age and sex did not appear to affect the number of
ECT treatments. However, refractory catatonia complicating psychosis may
have been a factor in extended treatment, with Ranen et al's second
patient and Merida-Puga et al's patient\ :sup:`4` requiring 35 and 42
treatments, respectively.

The four patients who had ECT more than 10 years after
diagnosis\ :sup:`1,2` (Ranen et al's sixth, Cusin et al's first, fifth
and seventh patients) also showed excellent responses to ECT with
between 8 and 13 treatments.

.. _sec3-8:

Length of seizure in seconds
----------------------------

`Table 5 <#tab05>`__ shows the seizure duration in the cases where it
was recorded.\ :sup:`1,3,4,10,11,14` Only Beale et al mentioned a
reduction in seizure time from 57 s at the beginning of treatment to
19 s by the end. This was for the sole case in which ECT was
administered for chorea.\ :sup:`3` Our patient required ongoing
treatment with increasing doses of ECT, although control of delusions
was eventually achieved with seizure lengths between 30 and 60 s.

.. _sec3-9:

Dose of ECT treatment
---------------------

It was not always possible to discern the dose of treatment given, as
doses were rarely documented and were not necessarily consistent with
other reports.\ :sup:`1–4,10,11,14` For example, Beale et al's patient
was stated as needing 72 mC initially, rising to 233 mC, with a
corresponding drop in seizure duration from 57 s initially to 19 s at
the end.\ :sup:`3` When recorded, the frequency and pulse width varied.
Alternatively, descriptions of percentage of maximum charge, where
stated, together with the machine used (and its specifications), allowed
for calculation of this figure where it was not explicitly stated
(`Table 5 <#tab05>`__).

There did not appear to be any factors to explain why five patients,
including our patient, required higher cumulative ECT treatments (Ranen
et al's second patient, Adrissi et al's first, second and third
patients).\ :sup:`1,10` More generally, most patients were started on
relatively low doses of ECT and titrated as treatment progressed, though
this was not always documented. Only Adrissi et al's third patient was
started on maximum charge dose of 100% (504 mC) due to refractory
psychosis. This was later cut down to 50% (252 mC) owing to a bout of
delerium that was subsequently felt to be due to medication. The
presence of catatonia in Merida-Puga et al and Ranen et al's second
patient may be considered a proxy for severity, but this was not the
case for the other two catatonic patients (see above). Likewise, short
treatment courses were reported in the earlier studies to be more likely
to lead to relapse, but this was not borne out by later studies (see
above). Getting the dose and the induced seizure length right appears to
take more time in the out-patient setting, as may be expected. The three
intense in-patient stays for our patient, Merida-Puga et al's patient
and Adrissi et al's third patient (3 months in the latter two cases)
allowed this to be achieved more rapidly, but the cumulative doses were
all high.\ :sup:`4,10` Overall, there appear to be no overt factors that
predict who is likely to respond quickly or otherwise, although most
patients will not require extended treatment based on this review.

.. _sec3-10:

Lead positioning
----------------

The predominant positions were RUL in 12 patients, one RUL unilateral
and bilateral (unspecified), four bilateral (one bilateral
frontotemporal, three bilateral) and two bitemporal (Supplementary Table
1).

.. _sec4:

Conclusion
==========

The diagnosis of Huntington's disease is usually preceded by psychiatric
symptoms in cases where family history is absent, sometimes by
years.\ :sup:`17` However, as we found in this review, patients are now
likely to have an established diagnosis of Huntington's by the time they
are considered for ECT. Although a CAG repeat number greater than 36 in
the Huntington gene confirms the disease, an increased number of repeats
is negatively correlated with age at presentation rather than severity
of disease.\ :sup:`16`

Psychiatric manifestations of Huntington's disease vary according to the
stage of the disease; apathy, for example, is found in 50% of patients
by stage four on the UHDRS. Also present are obsessive–compulsive
behaviour, irritability and aggression. Depression also increases over
time, with only psychosis remaining consistent throughout at
11%.\ :sup:`18`

The prevalence of depression is about 50%, compared with anxiety at
17–61%, irritability at 35–73%, obsessive–compulsive disorders at 7–50%
and psychosis at 3–11%. The prevalence of hypersexuality is between 2.1
and 30% and is slightly lower in women, whereas the prevalence of
hyposexuality is higher at 63% in men and 75% in women.\ :sup:`19` The
use of ECT, however, is recommended only for depression on the basis of
two of the above series.\ :sup:`1,14,20`

There appeared to be little in the way of any effect on cognition with
the use of ECT, although this was not a primary concern in this patient
group. In the few reports where cognition was mentioned, the patients
responded well and appeared to retain comparable pre-treatment scores
over time, although the numbers were too small for us to draw any firm
conclusions. However, Nakano et al's patient, despite comparable pre-
and post-treatment MMSE scores (and significantly improved PANSS and
BPRS scores), had greatly decreased 99 mTc uptake in the basal ganglia,
cingulate gyrus and thalamus on SPECT after 21 ECT treatments compared
to pre-treatment SPECT.\ :sup:`5`

There is little consistent evidence regarding the use of ECT for the
motor manifestations of the disease. Chorea, a hyperkinetic movement
disorder, shows variable response. In the studies considered in this
review, chorea often responded to ECT (including for our patient), but
this finding was not always documented and thus it cannot be
extrapolated to a recommendation given the small number of patients.
However, psychomotor retardation and catatonia, which are manifestations
of psychiatric disease, all responded favourably, although the presence
of catatonia may require more protracted ECT treatment. The reported
swallowing issues and weight loss in our patient and others responded
well. A situation that appeared terminal in our case has been managed
effectively for the patient and her family with good control, for over 2
years following the first dose of ECT.

All the studies considered in the current review were either single-case
reports or retrospective case series. There were no comparison or
prospective studies. The most striking aspect of this literature was how
the choice of ECT as a treatment came to be prescribed. In nearly all
cases, ECT was a last resort when all else had failed, with the
exception of one case in which it was used for the specific management
of chorea.\ :sup:`3` Consequently, strict psychiatric criteria were
lacking prior to the decision to start ECT. The main concern in using
ECT was related to controlling the manifestations of psychosis or
depression/suicidality, with concerns regarding other manifestations,
such as outward aggression, in only a few cases. Clinical success was
documented by a general clinical sense of improvement, serving as an
indication of efficacy, with no clearly defined end points. Similarly,
the cognitive and motor scoring of patients was haphazard and
inconsistent, with only limited numbers of patients having clear
objective scoring on any scales – motor, cognitive or psychiatric
performance – either before or after ECT was administered in order to
monitor patient responses.

It is clear that the preliminary though limited evidence from this
review supports the use of ECT for relieving depressive symptoms.
However, this is often considered as a last resort when all other
interventions have failed. The current review suggests that additional
consideration be given to the use of ECT as an adjunct in conventional
treatment-resistant cases of depression, as well as for wider
psychiatric manifestations of the disease, especially where depressive
and psychotic symptoms coexist. These wider psychiatric manifestations
and complications, which include psychomotor retardation and
hallucinations, appear to respond well to the use of ECT. Where there
are wider psychiatric manifestations of Huntington's disease, ECT may
not only control these more effectively but could also lead to
rationalisation of polypharmacy. Chorea may be less likely to respond to
ECT, and so its use for this cannot be recommended based on the current
review. Further investigative work with clear criteria and monitoring
may lead to ECT being considered earlier and more often for patients
with difficult-to-manage psychiatric manifestations of Huntington's
disease.

.. _sec5:

About the authors
=================

**Walied Mowafi** is a Consultant Neurologist at the Department of
Neurology, Calderdale Royal Hospital, West Yorkshire, UK. **Jon
Millard** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at South West Yorkshire
Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, Wakefield, UK.

.. _sec6:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.51.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

None.

ICMJE forms are in the supplementary material, available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.51.

.. [1]
   N/A, not available.

.. [2]
   In total (sole reason); see text for details.

.. [3]
   N/A, not available.

.. [4]
   Double stimulus was administered in Ranen et al’s patients, but no
   further details were provided.

.. [5]
   Assumed to be the USA version with 0.9 A and charge of 504 mC. The
   lowest percentage given to Merida-Puga et al’s patient was calculated
   according to the half-life method. While no figure was given for the
   lowest percentage, 25% was the maximum stated.

.. [6]
   Text does not state machine used or charge or current characteristics
   but states 'stimulus intensities comparable to patients without HD'.
   0.8 A is presumed for the purpose of calculation.

.. [7]
   As per specification sheet from the manufacturer, the maximum output
   is 504 mC with the range calculated based on quoted percentage
   delivered. This machine is capable of double stimulus, but this was
   not mentioned in Adrissi et al's paper.
