=====================================================================================
Patients in mental healthcare should be referred to as patients and not service users
=====================================================================================



Stefan Priebe
:Correspondence: Stefan Priebe (s.priebe@qmul.ac.uk)

:date: 2021-12

:Abstract:
   Over the past few years the term ‘service users’ has been
   increasingly used to describe patients in mental healthcare. This
   paper argues that the term ‘service user’ in this context should be
   avoided and outlines four reasons: the term is discriminating,
   cynical, patronising and detrimental. Of course, none of these
   effects is intentional, but that does not change them. The term
   ‘patient’, however, describes appropriately a temporary role in
   healthcare, provides parity of esteem with patients in physical
   healthcare and reflects the reasons why large parts of society are
   willing to fund healthcare, in solidarity with those who are sick.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The terms with which we name similar objects and roles can change over
time. One reason may be that a term is seen as devaluing or linked with
connotations that one would like to change. Psychiatry has a long
history of examples of this. Terms such as ‘madness’ have been replaced
by more medical terms such as ‘mental disorders’ to emphasise that one
is dealing with a health problem. Another example is seen in the former
asylums, which tended to change their names to avoid the negative
connotations associated with a previous name that had been built up in
the population over time. For example, the Karl-Bonhoeffer-Nervenklinik
(last of the changed names) in Berlin changed its name four times within
a period of only 100 years.\ :sup:`1`

Recently, there has been a shift in the National Health Service (NHS)
towards calling patients in mental healthcare ‘service users’ instead of
patients. The term is used in guidelines published by the National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE),\ :sup:`2` in
publications of voluntary organisations\ :sup:`3` and in prestigious
scientific journals.\ :sup:`4` Of course, every individual should be
entitled to be addressed in any way they like, but the question is
whether the term service user should be generally used when referring to
patients.

I will argue that the term service user should be avoided, for four
reasons: because it is discriminating, cynical, patronising and
detrimental. Of course, these effects are not intentional, but that does
not prevent their ultimate harm.

.. _sec1:

Discriminating
==============

The term patient describes a temporary and context-dependent role. When
I see my general practitioner (GP) in their clinic, I am a patient. When
I see the same person in a different context, we have different roles. I
may be a neighbour, a fellow passenger on the same bus, a father of a
child that goes to school with their child, or the GP may even be a
patient in my clinic. There are endless possibilities. However, the term
patient is a precise description of a temporary role in a professional
health service, without any negative connotation. Health services have
patients, whereas lawyers, insurance companies and restaurants have
clients or customers or consumers, but never patients. The term patient
applies to all types of health service and has only rarely been
challenged outside mental health. If mental health services now diverge
from other health services and decide to call their patients by another
term, they turn their patients into something different. Parity of
esteem – defined as ‘valuing mental health equally with physical
health’\ :sup:`5` – is undermined when mental health services use terms
that distinguish their patients from patients in other services and,
thus, discriminate against their own patients.

.. _sec2:

Cynical
=======

Service user, as a term, suggests that the people in question either
‘use’ the services actively or that the service has been of ‘use’ to
them. Neither of these assumptions necessarily applies. In England
alone, more than 50 000 times a year patients are treated involuntarily,
i.e. against their wishes and involving specific legislation that allows
such coercion.\ :sup:`6` One can hardly claim that those people ‘use’
the service, just as prisoners are not ‘prison users’. Also, although
mental healthcare is hopefully beneficial to many patients, it would be
grandiose of professionals and others to believe that mental healthcare
helps everybody. Thus, it is not universally of ‘use’ and there is no
question that in some cases – despite the best intentions of all people
involved – it might even be harmful. Thus, both suggestions of the
meaning of ‘use’ that are inherent in the term service user may be
regarded as cynical.

.. _sec3:

Patronising
===========

A number of surveys have asked patients in mental health services which
term they prefer to be used. The results of these surveys are
consistent. The majority of patients prefer the term patient, and this
applies across studies that have been conducted at different times and
in different settings.\ :sup:`7–9` Insisting on a term that most of the
patients explicitly do not want may be seen as patronising.

.. _sec4:

Detrimental
===========

This may be the most complicated of the four points. Healthcare – at
least in most European countries – is paid for through the solidarity of
the population, either by sharing contributions and benefits through
health insurances or in tax-funded healthcare systems. With respect to
the NHS in the UK, most people in the population have little problem
with paying their taxes so that people who suffer from illnesses can
receive proper healthcare when they need it. This may be motivated by
the expectation that each taxpayer will also receive tax-funded care
when they need it, but is also based on cultural values (e.g. of
Christianity and Enlightenment) and the compassion for those who suffer.
As a society we accept that some people are sick and need professional –
and potentially expensive – treatment for as long as they are sick. This
is reflected in the term patient (originating from the Greek ‘pathos’
and Latin *patiens*, which denote suffering). When mental healthcare
providers expect the population to fund their work, then the term
service user is not helpful. It rather evokes the idea of a ‘service’
that someone decides to use or not to use, instead of the professional
care that some people receive because they are so seriously distressed
that they need that care.

.. _sec5:

Conclusions
===========

I would therefore argue that the term patient should be re-established
in mental healthcare in the NHS. In this brief paper, the argument
focused on the alternative term service user. Similar arguments could be
made about other terms, such as ‘client’ and ‘consumer’. Those arguments
would overlap in parts with the ones put forward here (see
ref.\ :sup:`9`).

I have personally experienced the strong views and feelings of present
and former patients in NHS mental health services who prefer the term
service user. As noted at the beginning, such views should be respected,
as long as the requested terminology applies to those people themselves
and not to everybody else. However, the general terminology that is used
in mental health services should not be determined by the specific views
of a minority of patients and/or professionals. Mental healthcare is
based on shared values and scientific evidence. Both require precise
thinking, and precise thinking requires an exact and consistent
terminology.

**Stefan Priebe**, Dipl Psych, Dr. med. habil., is Professor of Social
and Community Psychiatry in the Unit for Social and Community Psychiatry
at Queen Mary University of London. The unit is a World Health
Organization (WHO) Collaborating Centre for Mental Health Service
Development, based at the Newham Centre for Mental Health, London, UK.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
