================================================================================================================================================
Scaling-up Health-Arts Programmes: the largest study in the world bringing arts-based mental health interventions into a national health service
================================================================================================================================================



Carolina Estevao
Daisy Fancourt
Paola Dazzan
K. Ray Chaudhuri
Nick Sevdalis
Anthony Woods
Nikki Crane
Rebecca Bind
Kristi Sawyer
Lavinia Rebecchini
Katie Hazelgrove
Manonmani Manoharan
Alexandra Burton
Hannah Dye
Tim Osborn
Lucinda Jarrett
Nick Ward
Fiona Jones
Aleksandra Podlewska
Isabella Premoli
Fleur Derbyshire-Fox
Alison Hartley
Tayana Soukup
Rachel Davis
Ioannis Bakolis
Andy Healey
Carmine M. ParianteCorrespondence to Carolina Estevao
(carolina.estevao@kcl.ac.uk)
:Date: 2021-02

:Abstract:
   The Scaling-up Health-Arts Programme: Implementation and
   Effectiveness Research (SHAPER) project is the world's largest hybrid
   study on the impact of the arts on mental health embedded into a
   national healthcare system. This programme, funded by the Wellcome
   Trust, aims to study the impact and the scalability of the arts as an
   intervention for mental health. The programme will be delivered by a
   team of clinicians, research scientists, charities, artists, patients
   and healthcare professionals in the UK's National Health Service
   (NHS) and the community, spanning academia, the NHS and the charity
   sector. SHAPER consists of three studies – Melodies for Mums, Dance
   for Parkinson's, and Stroke Odysseys – which will recruit over 800
   participants, deliver the interventions and draw conclusions on their
   clinical impact, implementation effectiveness and cost-effectiveness.
   We hope that this work will inspire organisations and commissioners
   in the NHS and around the world to expand the remit of social
   prescribing to include evidence-based arts interventions.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The field of arts and mental health is a constantly and rapidly
expanding area of research. We now have numerous publications, in the UK
and globally, suggesting a strong link between arts-based interventions
and improvement in mental and physical health outcomes.\ :sup:`1–9` This
invaluable body of research has shown the clinical effectiveness of the
arts for the treatment of an array of mental and physical health
problems, as diverse as anxiety, depression, cancer, cerebral palsy and
stroke, among others. However, such research has yet to offer solutions
that are readily scalable, implementable and cost-effective, and that
can be employed in primary and secondary care settings in the National
Health Service (NHS) or equivalent health services in other countries.
Furthermore, these art interventions face limitations, including the
lack of a continuous stream of funding, limited partnerships with
commissioners and funders, insufficient clinical evidence and
difficulties in their implementation in existing clinical pathways.

.. _sec1:

The SHAPER project
==================

The Scaling-up Health-Arts Programmes: Implementation and Effectiveness
Research (SHAPER) project aims to start addressing the above gaps in the
evidence base. SHAPER is a multidisciplinary programme funded by the
Wellcome Trust, and is being run by the Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience at King's College London and by the Department
for Behavioural Science and Health and the Institute of Mental Health at
University College London. The project aims to scale up three existing
community arts interventions: Melodies for Mums (for women with
postnatal depression), Dance for Parkinson's, and Stroke Odysseys. These
three interventions have been developed and piloted on a small scale,
offering promising results within their rehabilitation
scopes.\ :sup:`10–14`

SHAPER was designed following an intensive 6-month scoping process
involving stakeholders at different levels, including artists,
clinicians, patients, researchers and commissioners. The aims were to
create a programme that meets specific needs in the healthcare sector,
to scale up interventions that already had promising efficacy pilot data
and to involve high-quality arts interventions led by experienced
partners (e.g. Breathe Arts Health Research, the English National Ballet
and Stroke Odysseys). It has the ambition to be inclusive of the larger
patient population (including those not already engaged in the arts)
and, importantly, to be scalable and commissionable by the healthcare
sector.

The ambition of the programme is thus to embed arts interventions within
a large academic health science centre, King's Health Partners (KHP),
establishing their delivery in the medium- to long-term future. As an
academic health sciences centre, KHP's academic and clinical partners
(King's College London, Guy's and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust,
King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, and South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust) bring together research, education and
clinical practice for the benefit of the patients. SHAPER's objective is
to study the three arts interventions embedded within existing clinical
pathways in order to scale them up to reach larger numbers of people
across KHP and the community, examine possible mechanisms of efficacy
and provide implementation evidence.

The SHAPER programme intends, ultimately, to enable clinical
commissioning groups (CCGs; i.e. the ‘payers’ in the NHS) to commission
the three interventions, so that they can continue to be delivered in
the future. To attain the aims mentioned above, three levels of
effectiveness must be assessed: (a) clinical effectiveness, considering
the real-world impact on health outcomes and whether these are
meaningful to clinical practice; (b) implementation effectiveness, in
terms of uptake, suitability, acceptability and feasibility of the
interventions; and (c) cost-effectiveness, to develop strong business
plans for commissioners. Since the interventions selected are at
different developmental stages, an additional ambition of SHAPER is that
the implementation science methodologies developed in this programme
will allow the creation and evaluation of an implementation model that
could be used across future arts interventions, tailored to different
stages of development and delivery.

The adopted research, a three-pronged hybrid type II
effectiveness-implementation evaluation, is the gold standard of modern
implementation science that blends components of clinical effectiveness
and implementation research.\ :sup:`15` This strategy will allow the
research team to simultaneously test the clinical intervention and the
implementation strategy, and our team has used it successfully in
previous scale-up research at King's College London.\ :sup:`15,16`

The programme is in the process of obtaining ethics committee approvals.
Consent will be sought from all research participants and stakeholders
involved in these studies.

.. _sec2:

Cross-cutting implementation and health economics evaluation
============================================================

An innovative aspect of the SHAPER programme is that, in addition to the
clinical effectiveness of the interventions, a systematic approach will
be taken to simultaneously evaluate their implementation effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness. Implementation effectiveness refers to the
uptake, suitability, acceptability and feasibility of the interventions.
This will help us to identify not just ‘if’, but also ‘why’ and ‘how’
the interventions work and for whom, and will support our understanding
of how they can be successfully delivered within clinical pathways. This
approach of simultaneously assessing clinical, implementation and
cost-effectiveness of an intervention is supported by the recently
emerged ‘hybrid’ research designs – which offer a framework for these
different elements of effectiveness to be assessed in
parallel.\ :sup:`15` Overall, the SHAPER programme is conceptualised as
a hybrid type II design, in which the clinical and implementation
effectiveness are given equal weight in the design of the evaluation
across the three focal interventions.

The evaluation of how the interventions are implemented within clinical
pathways will further capture barriers and drivers of implementation as
well as unintended consequences for patients and providers. Existing
implementation theory and direct work with a wide group of stakeholders
of the interventions (including patients, arts and clinical providers)
will inform the implementation evaluation throughout the
programme.\ :sup:`17,18` Along similar lines, the cost-effectiveness
evaluation will cover health economic evaluations of the implementation
and delivery costs and associated savings, service utilisation and
related analyses. Implementation and cost data will be captured through
a mixed-methods approach comprising a variety of qualitative and
quantitative data collection techniques, including structured interviews
and psychometrically established measurement scales.\ :sup:`19`

In bringing these three studies together, the SHAPER programme aims to
bridge the gap between small-scale arts interventions and their
large-scale implementation into pathways within the NHS for improved
physical and mental health in people with postnatal depression,
Parkinson's disease and stroke.

Here, we offer an overview of the three interventions and of the
implementation and cost-effectiveness evaluation adopted within SHAPER.

.. _sec3:

Melodies for Mums (arts partner: Breathe Arts Health Research)
==============================================================

Postnatal depression affects at least 12.9% of new mothers, with
symptoms including fatigue, anhedonia, insomnia and
irritability.\ :sup:`20,21` However, challenges surround the fact that
there is still no complete treatment solution: although pharmacological
treatments have had positive results, these are hampered by low uptake
and adherence among mothers.\ :sup:`22–24` Psychotherapy has also
produced mixed results, as well as similar challenges regarding low
uptake or delayed treatment.\ :sup:`21,25–27` However, many mothers
engage in community group activities with their babies, such as
attending mother–infant play groups. These activities have been
identified as ways of relaxing mothers, providing good sources of social
interaction, decreasing the monotony of each day and providing a sense
of personal fulfilment.\ :sup:`28`

Moreover, there is a growing body of evidence demonstrating the effects
of community group singing on mental health.\ :sup:`29,30` Singing to
new babies is practised in cultures around the world, and research has
demonstrated valuable benefits, such as improving mother–infant
interaction and reducing distress in babies.\ :sup:`31–33` Listening to
music during pregnancy is also associated with higher levels of
well-being and reduced symptoms of postnatal depression in the first 3
months post-birth, while daily singing to babies is associated with
fewer symptoms of postnatal depression and higher levels of well-being,
self-esteem and perceived mother–infant bond.\ :sup:`10` Consequently,
there is a strong theoretical background indicating that singing could
support mothers with postnatal depression.

Breathe Arts Health Research's Melodies for Mums offers free,
community-based singing sessions to women with symptoms of postnatal
depression in London boroughs (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). A previous study
led by researchers in the SHAPER team has shown that this intervention,
already implemented in some London boroughs, results in faster
improvements in symptoms when compared with usual care.\ :sup:`11`
Specifically, the study recruited 134 women with symptoms of postnatal
depression and found that, in women with moderate to severe depression,
there was significantly faster improvement in symptoms in the singing
group than in the group play workshops for mothers and babies. Fig.
1Melodies for Mums session delivered by Breathe Arts Health Research.
Image credit: Richard Eaton.

The planned two-arm randomised clinical trial (SHAPER-PND) aims to
establish effectiveness in a larger sample (400 participants) and to
analyse the factors affecting economic and implementation potentials for
this intervention. Participants will be assigned to either a 10-week
singing intervention or a 10-week active waiting-list control group,
where they will be encouraged to attend community mother–baby
activities. Singing sessions will be delivered in children's or
community centres and each group will have 8–12 mothers and their
babies. Mothers and their babies will be invited to sit in a circle and
learn songs from all over the world, from vocal ‘motherese’ style noises
to lullabies and more complex songs. They will be invited to hug or
stroke their babies while singing and to add simple musical instruments
(maracas, drums, hand chimes and others) to increase mother–baby
interactions. Mothers will also be invited to develop their own songs
about motherhood and their babies, creating a shared experience with
other participants, thereby increasing their sense of inclusion.

A package of demographic, mental health, biological and social measures
will be collected from mothers and babies at set time points throughout
the intervention, and up to 36 weeks post-randomisation. In addition to
the clinical effectiveness outcome (an improvement in depressive symptom
score according to the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale), we will
put equal weight on the implementation science and economic data
assessments. For biological outcomes, we will collect saliva and hair
samples to assess stress and hormonal markers, including cortisol,
oxytocin and cytokines. We will also conduct qualitative interviews with
a subgroup of mothers who self-report particular risk factors for
postnatal depression, to explore how singing interacts with specific
contexts.

.. _sec4:

Dance for Parkinson's (arts partner: English National Ballet)
=============================================================

Parkinson's disease is a chronic neurodegenerative condition affecting
over 145 000 people in the UK alone, with a prevalence expected to rise
by around 18% between 2018 and 2025, to over 168 000, and to double by
2065.\ :sup:`34` Parkinson's disease is a complex disorder characterised
by a range of motor symptoms, including slowness of movement
(bradykinesia), tremor and gait impairment, and non-motor symptoms such
as anxiety, depression, sleep dysfunction, autonomic problems, mood
disturbances and cognitive decline, with a profound negative effect on
quality of life.\ :sup:`35` Although there are no treatments that can
affect the progression of this condition, evidence is emerging that
physical activity and certain types of exercise, including a range of
dance-based exercise, can improve motor symptoms, functional mobility
and stability, and result in some cognitive improvements, reduced pain,
depression and anxiety, decreased social isolation and improved quality
of life.\ :sup:`36–38`

Dance for Parkinson's is an existing programme delivered by the English
National Ballet (ENB) for people with Parkinson's disease (`Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__) across multiple venues in the UK, including London,
Ipswich, Cardiff, Liverpool and Oxford. The sessions are being delivered
by ENB-trained dance artists and currently host people with Parkinson's
and carers. These sessions are popular and lend themselves to the
requirement of a large-scale randomised study so as to provide robust
evidence of dance being accepted as a potential therapeutic option in
the pathway of care for Parkinson's disease. Fig. 2Dance for Parkinson's
session delivered by the English National Ballet. Image credit: Laurent
Liotardo.

As part of the SHAPER project, the study will be supported by the
Wellcome Trust and will take place at the internationally renowned
Parkinson's Foundation Centre of Excellence at King's College Hospital
and King's College London. It will be a two-arm randomised controlled
trial (SHAPER-PD-Ballet) to investigate the clinical efficacy of the
intervention in a larger sample (160 participants), graded by the
severity of their Parkinson's (mild, moderate and severe). Participants
will be randomly allocated to receive 12 weekly ballet classes delivered
by a team of ENB-trained dance artists and musicians, lasting
approximately 75 min and incorporating live music, dance, rhythm and
voice. A comparator group will continue on conventional treatment
regimes. Participants will be followed up for up to 6 months
post-intervention, and those allocated to the comparator group will be
offered participation in the ballet sessions at the end of the project.

The clinical aspect of the study will, for the first time, use a range
of clinically validated outcome measures, including the comprehensive
version of the Non-Motor Symptom Scale developed at King's College
Hospital. Secondary outcome measures include assessments of both motor
and non-motor symptoms, such as cognitive decline, mood, sleep and pain.
Additionally, wearable sensors will provide an objective measure of the
Parkinson's signs as well as mobility and balance. Assessment quality
will be checked by a ‘masked/blinded’ rater.

A unique aspect will be that all participants will be offered
participation in a substudy of electrodiagnostic measures, which will
employ transcranial magnetic stimulation coupled with
electroencephalography and electromyography to investigate the effects
of the intervention on neural networks and brain activity.

Implementation and economic data will be collected to assess
acceptability, appropriateness and feasibility of the intervention on a
large scale and its potential to be adopted and sustained as a
cost-effective and beneficial adjuvant therapy. All measurements will be
conducted at baseline (before the start of the intervention),
immediately post-intervention between 3 and 6 months post-intervention
to explore the acute and chronic benefits.

To our knowledge, this is the first randomised controlled trial
investigating the effects of ballet dancing on people with neurological
disorders.

.. _sec5:

Stroke Odysseys (arts partner: Rosetta Life)
============================================

Stroke is a leading cause of disability in the UK and worldwide, and
approximately two-thirds of stroke survivors leave hospital with
disability.\ :sup:`39` There are over 1.2 million stroke survivors in
the UK, projected to exceed 2 million by 2035. Stroke costs the UK an
estimated £25.6 million annually.\ :sup:`40` Recent data from the
Sentinel Stroke National Audit Programme shows that nearly 40% of
patients between August and November 2017 left hospital with moderate to
severe disability (modified Rankin scale, 3–5).\ :sup:`41` Indeed, the
transition from hospital to home after a life-changing event such as a
stroke is extremely difficult both for the individual concerned and for
their family, friends and caregivers. Fragmentation of health services
often means that information provision relating to discharge is poor,
which may also contribute to delays in discharge from hospital.

Stroke Odysseys, a post-stroke performance arts intervention, has been
co-designed by artists and developed by the organisation Rosetta Life in
a unique partnership with south London stroke communities. It is an
intervention using performance arts to support recovery, agency and
well-being in stroke survivors (`Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__). The intervention
was initially developed and funded by King's and Guy's and St Thomas’
Charity and has been delivered in four London boroughs.\ :sup:`13` Fig.
3Stroke Odysseys tour performance. Image credit: Rosetta Life.

Stroke Odysseys has three stages – clinical intervention, community
intervention and stroke ambassadors – all of which will be replicated in
this study. During the clinical intervention, while the patient is in
hospital, the sessions will run for 60 min for groups of 6–8 patients in
neuro-rehabilitation wards. These sessions will be led by a trained
movement artist and a singer, and will involve movement, performance
exercises, vocal warm-ups and singing. Dance practices will be rooted in
improvisation, somatic dance theory and carnival/folk dance. Then, in
the community stage, patients will be invited to perform their own
stories in a 12-week performance intervention, working with performance
arts towards creating a new perception of their own identity
post-stroke. The performance is based on skills acquired in movement,
music, song and spoken word, which has not only demonstrated benefits on
perception of disability and cognition, but also aims to manage the
anxiety and depression that affects one-third of stroke
survivors.\ :sup:`42,43` Finally, in the third stage, participants who
complete the community intervention will be invited for training to
become advocates for life after stroke: ‘stroke ambassadors’. Stroke
ambassadors support the running of the programme in hospitals, assisting
artists, recruiting participants and performing. Stroke ambassadors also
speak at conferences and at regional stroke association groups and are
members of an integrated performance company that create performance
works to advocate for life after stroke. The study aims to recruit 75
new ambassadors. The main aim of the study is to evaluate the
implementation, impact and experiences of a community-based performance
arts programme (Stroke Odysseys for stroke survivors) using mixed
methods (interviews, observations and surveys) prior to and after each
programme stage, and carry out non-participant observations during the
workshops. A series of implementation measures will be used as well as
clinical outcome measures, including the Oxford Participation and
Activities Questionnaire, a patient-reported outcome measure that
assesses patients experiencing a range of health conditions. In
addition, a health economic evaluation will be performed to cost the
resources used in implementing the programme, and to evaluate wider
service utilisation and associated costs before and after participants
complete the programme and any changes in their quality of life profile.

.. _sec6:

Conclusions
===========

Our ambition is that the SHAPER programme will not only provide
conclusive clinical and mechanistic evidence on the three studies
described above, but also offer an invaluable resource to shape the
future of arts interventions within the realm of rehabilitation for a
range of other mental and physical health conditions.

SHAPER also presents as a unique opportunity to build a strong evidence
base on the clinical effectiveness, implementation and mechanisms of
arts interventions. Such a knowledge base will bring arts interventions
into mainstream psychiatric care and put them on an equal footing with
other pharmacological and psychosocial approaches.

**Carolina Estevao** is a Postdoctoral Research Associate and Clinical
Project Manager in the Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute
of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience (IoPPN), London, UK. **Daisy
Fancourt** is an Associate Professor of Psychobiology and Epidemiology
and Wellcome Research Fellow in the Psychobiology Group in the
Department of Behavioural Science and Health, University College London
(UCL), London, UK. **Paola Dazzan** is the Professor of Neurobiology of
Psychosis in the Department of Psychological Medicine, IoPPN, London,
UK. **Ray Chaudhuri** is the Professor of Neurology/Movement Disorders
in the Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, King's College
London and Medical Director of the Parkinson Foundation International
Centre of Excellence, King’s College London, UK. **Nick Sevdalis** is a
Professor of Implementation Science & Patient Safety in the Centre for
Implementation Science, Health Service and Population Research
Department, IoPPN, London, UK. **Anthony Woods** is the SHAPER Programme
Manager in the Department of Psychological Medicine, IoPPN, King's
College London, UK. **Nikki Crane** is the SHAPER Programme Lead in the
Culture Team, King's College London, UK. **Rebecca Bind** is a
Postdoctoral Research Associate and Clinical Trial Manager in the
Department of Psychological Medicine, IoPPN, London, UK. **Kristi
Sawyer** is a Doctoral Student in the Department of Psychological
Medicine, IoPPN, London, UK. **Lavinia Rebecchini** is a Research
Assistant in the Department of Psychological Medicine, IoPPN, London,
UK. **Katie Hazelgrove** is a Postdoctoral Research Associate in the
Department of Psychological Medicine, IoPPN, London, UK. **Manonmani
Manoharan** is a Consultant Psychiatrist with the South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Alexandra Burton** is a Senior
Research Fellow in the Department of Behavioural Science and Health,
UCL, UK. **Hannah Dye** is the Head of Programmes with Breathe Arts
Health Research, The Clarence Centre, London, UK. **Tim Osborn** is a
Project Manager with Breathe Arts Health Research, The Clarence Centre,
London, UK. **Lucinda Jarrett** is the Creative Director in the Rosetta
Life Head Office, Chipping Norton, UK. **Nick Ward** is the Professor of
Clinical Neurology and Neurorehabilitation in the Department of Clinical
and Motor Neuroscience in the Clinical Neuroscience Centre, London, UK
and Honorary Consultant Neurologist at the National Hospital for
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, UK. **Fiona Jones** is
the Professor of Rehabilitation Research in the Faculty of Health,
Social Care and Education, Kingston University and St George's,
University of London, UK. **Aleksandra Podlewska** is a Doctoral Student
in the Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, King's College
London, UK. **Isabella Premoli** is a Postdoctoral Researcher in the
Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, King's College London, UK.
**Fleur Derbyshire-Fox** is the Director of Engagement with the English
National Ballet, London, UK. **Alison Hartley** is the Head of Creative
Programmes with English National Ballet, London, UK. **Tayana Soukup**
is a Postdoctoral Researcher in the Centre for Implementation Science,
Health Service and Population Research Department, IoPPN, London, UK.
**Rachel Davis** is a Senior Research Fellow in the Centre for
Implementation Science, Health Service and Population Research
Department, IoPPN, London, UK. **Ioannis Bakolis** is the Senior
Lecturer in Biostatistics and Epidemiology in the Centre for
Implementation Science, Health Service and Population Research
Department, IoPPN. **Andy Healey** is a Senior Health Economist in the
King's Health Economics, Health Service and Population Research
Department, IoPPN, London, UK. **Carmine M. Pariante** is the Professor
of Biological Psychiatry in the Department of Psychological Medicine,
IoPPN, London, UK.

C.M.P. and D.F. conceived the main conceptual ideas for the programme.
C.E. took the lead in writing the first draft of the manuscript. All
authors provided critical feedback and helped shape the research outline
and the final version of the manuscript.

This research is supported by the Wellcome Trust (award reference
219425/Z/19/Z). N.S., I.B., A.H. and R.D. are supported by the National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Applied Research Collaboration
(ARC) South London at King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. N.S.
and A.H. are members of King's Improvement Science, which offers
co-funding to the NIHR ARC South London and comprises a specialist team
of improvement scientists and senior researchers based at King's College
London. Its work is funded by King's Health Partners (Guy's and St
Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, King's College Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, King's College London and South London and Maudsley NHS
Foundation Trust), Guy's and St Thomas’ Charity and the Maudsley
Charity. I.B. is part supported by the National Institute for Health
Research's (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King's College London and the National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Applied Research Collaboration
South London (NIHR ARC South London) at King's College Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust. The views expressed in this publication are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the Wellcome Trust, the NIHR or
the Department of Health and Social Care.

D.F. is a non-executive board director for Breathe Arts Health Research,
for which she receives no financial compensation.

.. _sec7:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.122.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
