==========================================================================================================
Unequal effects of climate change and pre-existing inequalities on the mental health of global populations
==========================================================================================================



Shuo Zhang
Isobel Braithwaite
Vishal Bhavsar
Jayati Das-Munshi

:Correspondence: Shuo Zhang (shuo.zhang@kcl.ac.uk)

:date: 2021-08

:Abstract:
   Climate change is already having unequal effects on the mental health
   of individuals and communities and will increasingly compound
   pre-existing mental health inequalities globally. Psychiatrists have
   a vital part to play in improving both awareness and scientific
   understanding of structural mechanisms that perpetuate these
   inequalities, and in responding to global calls for action to promote
   climate justice and resilience, which are central foundations for
   good mental and physical health.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Climate change is affecting the physical and mental health of human
populations through direct and indirect mechanisms including population
displacement, forced migration, and economic and food system
instability.\ :sup:`1` Global action and ‘a robust response [to climate
change] … will improve human health and wellbeing’\ :sup:`2` and reduce
associated psychological consequences.\ :sup:`3`

We suggest that by addressing mental health inequalities, psychiatrists
can contribute to addressing climate change and its health effects. We
highlight the interconnectedness of inequality, climate and ecological
destruction, and adverse mental health outcomes. We go on to propose a
model for mental health practice and research that promotes climate
justice and resilience in the context of increasingly complex
geographical, economic and sociocultural factors.

.. _sec1:

Climate change and mental health: unequal effects, but not by chance
====================================================================

The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that minoritised and indigenous
communities are at heightened risk from combined social and ecological
shocks, including adverse weather events and pandemics, owing to
vulnerability resulting from pre-existing factors such as
discrimination, exclusion, poverty, land dispossession and
malnutrition.\ :sup:`4` There are also inequalities in exposure to
ecological hazards. A study on associations between air pollution and
neighbourhood characteristics in England and The Netherlands found
higher concentrations in the most deprived 20% of neighbourhoods in
England, with higher concentrations in both countries in neighbourhoods
with >20% non-White populations, after adjustment for urbanisation and
other variables.\ :sup:`5`

On a global scale, there is increasing recognition that climate change
is compounding many health inequities and undermining pre-existing
support structures which protect against poor mental health.\ :sup:`6`
The climate crisis has been called a racist crisis, reflecting both its
disproportionate effects on Black communities and people of colour
globally, as well as its evident unequal effects within
countries.\ :sup:`7,8` Following Hurricane Katrina, for example, Black
New Orleanians faced greater stress than their White counterparts, even
after adjustment for demographics, parental status, evacuation timing,
home damage and job status; income had no clear effect.\ :sup:`9` There
was a similar pattern for post-traumatic stress disorder, which was
partly but not fully explained by greater baseline mental
distress.\ :sup:`10`

In recent years, campaigns for international action on climate change
have highlighted how unjust social and economic systems, including
legacies of colonialism, structural racism, and other exclusionary
forces such as sexism and ableism at all levels shape vulnerability to
the effects of climate change on mental and physical health. We contend,
as argued by Leon Sealey-Huggins and colleagues (2018), that ‘we can
only properly understand the harm being wrought by weather events and
climate change by directly connecting it to broader social and political
processes, of which structural racism is a central part’.\ :sup:`7`

Future research must further clarify the mechanisms as a result of which
people with severe mental illness are more vulnerable to the adverse
effects of climate change. This should include a recognition of closely
interwoven vulnerabilities due to social exclusion, stigma and direct
consequences of their illness or medications, as well as the effects of
unequal distribution of resources at local, national and international
levels, all of which affect people's and communities’ capacities to cope
and adapt.

.. _sec2:

Intersections between urban health inequalities and climate change effects
==========================================================================

Cities are the places where most people live globally – 56% of the
global population as of 2018\ :sup:`11` – and are the places where
people are most exposed to the adverse effects of climate change. For
example, the urban heat island effect means that higher temperatures are
experienced in urban areas than in more rural ones nearby, and access to
places for people to cool off in, such as shady green spaces or
waterways, is often more limited. The health effects of rising exposure
to high temperatures are not only physical but have also been associated
with increased risks of mental ill health\ :sup:`12` and with
suicide.\ :sup:`13`

Cities are also a key focus for research into mental health
inequalities, particularly in relation to differences in urban versus
rural rates of schizophrenia. The spatial distributions of other mental
health outcomes such as suicide and self-injury are less clear cut,
suggesting a greater need to further understand the influence of
sociocultural and environmental characteristics of particular
neighbourhoods.\ :sup:`14` One example of this is how qualitative
methods have begun to unpack the paradoxically low rates of direct
self-harm in highly deprived areas in London.\ :sup:`15`

People in cities often experience the greatest exposure to some of the
key contributors to climate change, including air pollution from fossil
fuels and degradation of green space. Further, increased exposure to
poor-quality air and green spaces often mirrors and compounds
pre-existing socioeconomic inequalities. Evidence on the lifelong
effects of air pollution on mental health outcomes such as depression
continues to emerge.\ :sup:`16,17` Exposure to air pollution and traffic
noise are similarly unequal for different neighbourhoods with regard to
both socioeconomic status and ethnicity, with those least likely to own
a car often most likely to live in traffic-clogged and polluted
areas.\ :sup:`18` At the same time, good access to urban nature can help
to partially mitigate the harmful effects of socioeconomic
inequalities.\ :sup:`19`

Further, there has been greater awareness of the urgent need for more
urban green space\ :sup:`20` and a recognition of strong disparities in
access to green space in European cities.\ :sup:`21` Access to green
space has been linked with reduced depression risk,\ :sup:`22,23` and
there is increasing recognition that social factors affecting both
availability\ :sup:`24` and levels of use\ :sup:`25` seem to mediate the
mental health effects of green and blue spaces such as parks, forests,
rivers and beaches.

There is increasing evidence of biologically plausible explanations of
associations between urban environmental exposures and mental health.
These include the effects of traffic and air population exposure on
neurodevelopmental pathways in children,\ :sup:`26` neuroinflammation
across the life course,\ :sup:`17` and changes in arousal and stress
responses associated with time spent in green space.\ :sup:`27` Proposed
mechanisms through which the green space's benefits may be manifest
include a shift in attention, promoting curiosity, social networks,
group cooperation and physical activity. However, methodological and
interpretation challenges remain, for example, in understanding the
importance of confounding factors such as noise pollution and general
neighbourhood deprivation.\ :sup:`17` Limited studies have translated
these observations into robust evidence for improved mental
health.\ :sup:`28`

There is also a lack of research from low- and middle-income countries
(LMICs) on the effects of climate change on mental health. This is
urgently needed to inform policy action in these contexts. In LMIC
contexts, forced migration due to climate change – with the destination
locations often being cities – is a significant challenge, and studies
have highlighted that dislocation from one's home compromises emotional
well-being related to happiness, life satisfaction, optimism for the
future and spiritual contentment, even despite well-intentioned
relocation programmes focused on material compensation and livelihood
re-establishment.\ :sup:`29`

.. _sec3:

Challenges in conceptualising complexity
========================================

For mental health, ‘the risks and impacts of climate change … are
already rapidly accelerating, resulting in a number of direct, indirect,
and overarching effects that disproportionally affect those who are most
marginalised’.\ :sup:`30` Our ability to fully appreciate and act on
these vulnerabilities has been constrained by complexity on multiple
levels, from the geographic scale to the interrelated nature of the
underlying causal mechanisms.

These constraints have limited research into the effects of climate
change on mental health, to date. Quantitative approaches have tended to
focus mostly on proximate causes, which can obscure important structural
and political drivers of the distribution of mental health effects of
climate-related heatwaves, floods, wildfires and droughts.\ :sup:`31`
Studies which have found associations between heat and mental health
outcomes such as suicide have also cautioned about the difficulties of
ascertaining causal effects using an ecological study design.\ :sup:`13`

Berry et al (2018) proposed that a systems approach that accounts for
interrelated and interdependent factors, forming a complex whole, is
important for future research thinking and leadership around climate
change and mental health.\ :sup:`32` We argue that this approach should
also accommodate a structural and intersectional understanding of
pre-existing inequalities in mental health. This may come from
approaches which address broader inter-penetrative global socioeconomic
processes such as globalisation,\ :sup:`33` and the syndemics model of
health that focuses on ‘interacting, co-present or sequential diseases
and the social and environmental factors that promote and enhance the
negative effects of disease interaction’.\ :sup:`34`

.. _sec4:

The role of psychiatry in understanding and addressing climate change
=====================================================================

In 2015, our Australasian colleagues\ :sup:`35` proposed the ‘CARM’
approach – to collaborate, advocate, research (and educate) and mitigate
– as a framework for psychiatrists to join with a growing number of
medical entities to act on climate change. We have proposed our
recommendations within this same framework (`Box 1 <#box1>`__), and with
the emphasis that interventions need to be ‘coordinated and rooted in
active hope’ to tackle the problem in a holistic and effective
way.\ :sup:`30` Alongside growing recognition that we should practice
psychiatry more sustainably,\ :sup:`36` we should acknowledge it as our
professional and ethical responsibility to address the environmental,
social and economic determinants of mental illness.\ :sup:`35` Box
1Framework for psychiatrists to act on climate change (adapted from the
‘CARM’ approach\ :sup:`32`). Collaborate Work with disadvantaged
communities so that their voices and priorities are better heard, and
help them influence policy decisionsBuild on existing multidisciplinary
work across specialties, and with patients and the public, to drive
meaningful change on key issues relevant to climate and mental
healthAdvocate For patients and communities’ mental health and
well-beingFor actions that strengthen local community resilience and
tackle global injusticeFor policies and funding for appropriate and
evidence-based interventions to support and protect mental health
following climate-related extreme eventsResearch (and educate) To
improve understanding of mental health in relation to the causes of
inequalities, climate vulnerability and resilienceContinue to build the
evidence base for action, including through participatory and action
research methods, and using mixed methods and systems approaches that
recognise the interconnectedness and complexity of these
subjectsAdvocate for increased funding for research to improve
understanding of how both structural inequalities and climate change
affect mental health, including when they intersect and how we can
address them in tandemMitigate Prioritise primary prevention for mental
health across the life courseStrengthen mental health systems and links
between healthcare services and local communitiesImprove equity of
access to quality careAct within local services to reduce carbon and
improve mental healthcare

.. _sec4-1:

Collaborate
-----------

Psychiatry should work with disadvantaged communities to help them
influence policies that may be linked to climate change, including
empowering indigenous communities, implementing processes for equitable
access to resources and ensuring inclusivity in long-term sustainable
development policies. We should build on our multidisciplinary work with
colleagues across specialties, with patients and the public, and with
other health organisations. For example, psychiatrists can make use of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ membership of the UK Climate and
Health Alliance to collaboratively communicate the urgency of the
situation and the case for action, and to influence policy makers,
community organisations and other stakeholders to deliver meaningful
change.

.. _sec4-2:

Advocate
--------

Climate change is a global problem which needs global cooperation and
local action. As advocates for patients’ and communities’ mental health
and well-being, psychiatrists can help to drive these objectives
forwards. There is already strong evidence that the psychiatric
community can use in advocating for policies and interventions which can
build local community resilience and tackle global injustice. These
could include but are not limited to urban planning and regeneration;
increased green space; cleaner air; community food growing; liveable
streets; and high-quality, low-carbon housing. Importantly, they should
also include national and international policies for urgent action on
climate change and protection for those harmed or displaced by it, which
may further exacerbate pre-existing mental health inequalities. With an
already increasing frequency of adverse weather events, there is also an
important role for the psychiatric community in advocating for policies
and funding support for appropriate mental health interventions in the
wake of climate-driven events such as floods, major storms and
wildfires, and to strengthen resilience to them.

.. _sec4-3:

Research (and educate)
----------------------

A better understanding of the causes of inequalities, vulnerability and
climate resilience as they relate to mental health is clearly needed,
requiring changes to both research and education. Alongside more
established quantitative epidemiological approaches, this is likely to
benefit from qualitative and narrative methods, as well as systems
approaches that recognise the complexity of these interlinked causal
relationships and policy challenges.\ :sup:`32` We should continue to
build the evidence base for action, including through participatory and
action research methods that emphasise the voices, needs and priorities
of those who are most climate vulnerable and which seek to tackle
structural injustices. We should also advocate for increased funding for
research focused on understanding and addressing the effects of
structural inequalities and climate change on mental health.

.. _sec4-4:

Mitigate
--------

There are a number of areas where we can intervene early in addressing
unequal climate change effects, for example, through prioritising
primary prevention for mental health disorders across the life course
and working upstream to address drivers of mental ill health and
intervene early; strengthening mental health systems, particularly in
areas of high deprivation; and strengthening links between clinical
services and local communities. Against a backdrop of both national
health service and governmental carbon reduction initiatives,
psychiatric services must also both reduce their own emissions and
improve mental healthcare, to avoid contributing further to the root
causes of climate-related mental distress.

.. _sec5:

Conclusion
==========

The time is now for concerted action to better understand and intervene
in the structures and policies that create and perpetuate social and
ethnic inequalities globally and harm planetary health. Working together
to create the conditions for good mental health, such as enabling
equitable access to resources, services and healthy environments, will
also strengthen climate resilience and health equality across society.
We can no longer overlook the interconnected ecological and social
crises, and psychiatrists can play a critical part in defining the
fairer and healthier society of tomorrow.

.. _sec6:

About the authors
=================

**Shuo Zhang** is a Core Psychiatry Trainee at South London and the
Maudsley NHS Trust, London, UK; **Isobel Braithwaite** is an Academic
Clinical Fellow in Public Health and ST4 Public Health Registrar at UCL
Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, London. UK;
**Vishal Bhavsar** is a Women's Mental Health and Violence Reduction and
Consultant Psychiatrist at Lambeth Council and the Department of Health
Services and Population Research, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology
and Neuroscience (IOPPN), King's College London and the South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; and **Jayati Das-Munshi** is
a Clinician Scientist & Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist at the
Department of Psychological Medicine, IOPPN, King's College London &
South London and the Maudsley NHS Trust, London. UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were
generated or analysed.

S.Z. conceived the initial idea for the article and wrote the first
draft. I.B., V.B. and J.D. were involved in developing the outline and
contributed to revisions of the draft. All authors were involved in
finalising the final manuscript.

I.B. holds a National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Academic
Clinical Fellowship at University College London. J.D. is part supported
by the ESRC Centre for Society and Mental Health at King's College
London (ESRC Reference: ES/S012567/1) and by the NIHR Biomedical
Research Centre at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and
King's College London and the NIHR Applied Research Collaboration South
London (NIHR ARC South London) at King's College Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust. V.B. is part supported by the Department of Health Services and
Population Research via a secondment to Lambeth Council. The views
expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
ESRC, NIHR, the Department of Health and Social Care, University College
London or King's College London.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

S.Z. is on the sustainability committee of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists. This is a voluntary role with no financial remuneration.
I.B. is an active voluntary member of the grassroots advocacy group
Health Declares Climate & Ecological Emergency
(https://healthdeclares.org/).
