=========================================================================================
Fluctuation of suicide intent and other matters in psychosocial assessment post self-harm
=========================================================================================



Prasanna de Silva

:date: 2021-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Professor Morgan's article rightly focuses on the fluctuations in
suicidal intent among mentally ill people undergoing the various crises
and vicissitudes of life. He emphasises the importance of repeated
assessments, rather than relying on the initial one, to accommodate
these fluctuations in intent.

He appears to have given up on prospects of predicting longer-term
suicide risk but has not commented on the emerging body of evidence
suggesting the effectiveness of combining an app-based questionnaire
with inflammatory biomarkers such as interleukin subtypes, SAT1 and
Toll-like receptor subtypes.\ :sup:`1` These biomarkers probably reflect
the degree of underlying stress which Professor Morgan describes, with
some quantitative features provided in addition. These types of hybrid
assessments should cover both the short- and longer-term risks but will
not predict when (or under what circumstances) the lethal behaviour
could take place. Consequently, mitigation needs simple strategies such
as Dr Cole-King's suicide safety plan, a brief document co-produced with
the patient, held by the patient and carer, describing what to do and
who to contact if suicidal intent reaches a climax.\ :sup:`2`

Brief hybrid assessments might also be less intrusive and distressing to
patients compared with the standard ‘psychosocial assessment’ carried
out in emergency room settings, typically by junior psychiatric liaison
staff and often under time pressure (including the 4 h wait and
expectations of prompt bed clearance and discharge as the person is
deemed ‘medically fit’). Often both the assessor and patient are aware
that this is likely to be the only contact between them, further
reducing the likelihood of frank disclosure of trauma and abuse; this is
strongly associated with invalid assessments and completed suicide in
the future.\ :sup:`3`

Patients also find repeated disclosures of personal details to multiple
mental health staff frustrating and traumatic,\ :sup:`4` along the lines
of ‘why don't you look up the notes before speaking to me?’. Similar to
the experience of repeated police interviews under implied caution
(‘anything you say might be used for a future Mental Health Act
assessment’), patients are (perhaps rightly) suspicious that the
assessors are looking for discrepancies in the history to undermine the
reliability of the person's account leading to suicidal thinking and/or
self-harming behaviour, thereby making it easier to discharge (or
dismiss) the patient seeking help.

Professor Morgan touches on in-patient (‘never event’)
suicides,\ :sup:`5,6` mainly involving patients who have either
absconded or been given planned home leave, as major improvements to
ward design (including shaving off door edges and securing windows, door
handles and toilet equipment) have now taken place. He does not,
however, suggest practical changes in ward policy, for example, the
potential benefit of a face-to-face review within 24 h of being placed
on home leave in order to check on basic needs (elegantly summarised by
Maslow), as well as potential toxic relationships with close family
members, who might be either over-controlling or otherwise pessimistic
on the prospects of the patient moving from being a burden (a variation
on therapeutic nihilism and malignant alienation, not often discussed in
the literature).

Finally, the issue that I, as a clinician, struggle most with when
debriefing assessors or looking at longer-term suicide mitigation is
that suicide risk assessment is used primarily as a defensive tool by
the assessor, possibly aided by the patient, who does not wish to upset
the assessor or get him/her into trouble in the future. So, the
‘protective factors’ often highlighted in the assessment are documented
without due diligence on how stable or permanent these are.

On occasion, a suicidal person will ‘blurt out’ a suicide plan he/she
has been considering. Often, this communication is with a staff member
of low rank, for example, a ward domestic or student nurse, simply based
on their compassionate nature and their not being part of the
‘assessment brigade’. Typically, these patients will subsequently deny
that they will carry out this plan, and at times they will deny ever
having disclosed such a plan, but, given the circumstance or
opportunity, they may use the plan. Alternatively, a person who has
failed with a plan will deny wanting to repeat the action (for example,
an overdose) but could use this as a learning experience to organise a
variation or plan more violent methods such as jumping or hanging.

As Professor Morgan rightly states, an assessor needs to compassionately
(and non-judgementally) ask whether alternative means have been
considered following a failed suicide attempt. This is genuinely hard
work and especially emotionally draining. Therefore, it is essential for
staff assessing suicidal patients to be debriefed supportively and given
sufficient time off (at least undertaking other duties) to regain their
emotional composure.
