=========================================================
Introducing the new culture section of *BJPsych Bulletin*
=========================================================



David ForemanCorrespondence to Dr David Foreman
(david_foreman@doctors.net.uk)
:Date: 2021-02

:Abstract:
   This editorial launches the new culture section in the journal.
   Without any unchallengeable definition of ‘culture’, potential
   contributors may consider submissions under four headings: the arts
   and humanities relating to practice; regulatory culture; becoming a
   cultured practitioner; and psychiatry's cultural context. A new
   article type, ‘Cultural reflections’, has been created, and
   submissions may reflect any appropriate methodology, including those
   from the arts. Peer review (from methodologies outside psychiatry if
   appropriate) will assure quality. Our objectives are to establish
   *BJPsych Bulletin* as the ‘journal of record’ for cultural studies
   relevant to psychiatric service delivery and demonstrate equivalent
   quality between them and scientific studies.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The ‘mission statement’ of *BJPsych Bulletin* appears at the top of its
Instructions for authors. It reads, ‘\ *BJPsych Bulletin* prioritises
research, opinion and informed reflection on the state of psychiatry,
management of psychiatric services, and education and training in
psychiatry’.

We try to provide what psychiatrists need to practise well. With our
daily professional lives governed by scientific evidence and policy
delivery, the utility of audits, guidance reviews, clinical
recommendations and service-related research is obvious. However, we
believe that psychiatrists also need excellent cultural understanding
and culturally informed practice to deliver what our patients need from
us. We have therefore created a new Cultural Section, with an associated
article type, ‘Cultural reflections’, to allow submission of articles
that do not fit the currently available Journal frameworks.

.. _sec1:

What do we mean by culture?
===========================

Like baldness or serious professional misconduct, culture is something
we have little trouble recognising but great difficulty defining. Jahoda
observed that the definitions of culture commonly used in psychological
science are mutually incompatible, not amenable to empirical testing and
suggests that we define it by usage rather than semantically.\ :sup:`1`
As editors of the journal, if someone wishes to submit something they
consider ‘cultural’, we recommend that they think in terms of four
headings: the arts and humanities concerning practice; regulatory
culture; the cultured practitioner; and the cultural context within
which psychiatry operates.

.. _sec1-1:

The arts and humanities concerning psychiatric practice
-------------------------------------------------------

The arts and humanities are what we usually think of when ‘culture’ is
discussed. However, while a vibrant psychiatric literature on these
topics continues, a historical perspective suggests that mutual
engagement and understanding between these worlds has declined. The
famous painting of Pinel unchaining the inmates of the Salpêtrière,
painted in 1895, illustrates not a consequence of the French Revolution
but the benefits of an empirical psychiatry based on observation that
prioritises patient benefit without presuming prior theory.\ :sup:`2,3`
This active, empirical approach still characterises
psychiatry.\ :sup:`4` Nevertheless, psychiatrists are now represented as
theorisers, more interested in investigation than benefiting our
patients,\ :sup:`5` and sometimes entirely indifferent to them.

As the humanities’ awareness and understanding of psychiatrists has
diminished, so has our involvement with them. The conjunction of
psychiatric, surrealist and philosophical thought between the 1920s and
1960s contributed to the development of both postmodernist thinking and
antipsychiatry.\ :sup:`6` Yet, even the memory of those connections now
seems lost to us, and we are invited to consider them as if they are
alien to our tradition and we had never responded.\ :sup:`7,8`

To encourage a rapprochement and interchange that takes into account the
progress made since the middle of last century, we will seek to publish
not only cultural thinking by psychiatrists but also work by
practitioners of other methodologies. It is often forgotten that the
visual arts, music, poetry and literature are also methods for exploring
the world, especially our subjectivities. For psychiatry, the
subjectivity of our patients is part of our core business, and we are no
longer so restricted by the limits of paper and physical printing. We
therefore do not necessarily require that a submission to the culture
section is in the form of a conventional academic paper, provided that
it addresses a cultural issue that has an impact on psychiatric practice
and meets our quality standards.

.. _sec1-2:

Regulatory culture
------------------

The arts and humanities are often seen as a counterpoise to excessive
regulation. However, there is also regulatory culture, which operates to
deliver the intentions of a regulatory regime when circumstances are
indeterminate and discretion is essential.\ :sup:`9` It can be thought
of as the set of explicit or implicit attitudes and intentions expressed
through norms, routine policy and everyday practice. It has become an
explicit part of financial regulation, and firms are reviewed to ensure
that their management structures deliver it.\ :sup:`10` Within the
National Health Service (NHS), regulatory culture is much more variably
instituted\ :sup:`11` and an audit model may not capture many of its
necessary components.\ :sup:`12` We therefore wish to publish articles
relevant to improving the regulatory culture of psychiatric care, as the
level of variation found suggests an ongoing and urgent need.

.. _sec1-3:

The cultured practitioner
-------------------------

The mission of *BJPsych Bulletin* focuses on topics that affect what we
do in our daily practice. The norms and values that our culture instils
do precisely this. For example, social constructs such as masculinity
and societal power gradients predict the balance between a response
style of decisiveness versus accommodation.\ :sup:`13` The concept of
specifying moral principles in practical, situational terms is
well-established in biomedical ethics.\ :sup:`14` The same is needed for
cultural influences, as professional practice cannot be detached from
its cultural environment.\ :sup:`15` Patient (service user) groups have
begun developing this from an antipsychiatry perspective.\ :sup:`16` We
believe that practitioners need explicit accounts of how psychiatrists
should express our discipline's best culture in daily practice. We will
seek articles that relate the practice of psychiatrists to aspects of
culture, applied to the benefit of their patients.

.. _sec1-4:

Culture and society
-------------------

Psychiatrists are taught their discipline as applied science. However,
it is also one of society's institutions, tasked with performing an
essential role. The Parthenon can be described entirely in engineering
and aesthetic terms, but those perspectives do not explain how the
Parthenon functioned. We also need to know that it was a Greek temple to
Athena, the tutelary goddess of ancient Athens. To properly understand
what our discipline delivers, and why, we need to be aware of how it is
situated in our culture, how it maintains itself and the drivers that
shape the services it delivers. Science is but one of these, and funding
not only limits policy but also follows it. We are therefore interested
in publishing articles that will let us map psychiatry's ‘cultural
geography’, for example patterns of influence with other institutions,
such as the law and politics, cultural drivers of research or service
prioritisation, or the role of the relationship between psychiatrists
and patients in shaping our clinical culture. We believe that having a
clearer account of these will enable our profession to develop and
deliver more effective services.

.. _sec2:

Quality assurance
=================

Cultural commentary from many perspectives is becoming increasingly
widely distributed (e.g. `medium.com <https://medium.com>`__;
`quillette.com <https://quillette.com>`__) and, without expertise,
quality can only be judged on its language and plausibility. Even
‘fact-checking’ may fail when, as often occurs in cultural scholarship,
accuracy lies in the awareness of multiple interpretations, rather than
allegiance to one. *BJPsych Bulletin* has two great strengths as a forum
for cultural research and scholarship in psychiatry. Being open access,
it has a potential reach similar to that of the online commentaries just
mentioned. However, it also has a mature peer-review system. This
combination gives it the potential to become the cultural ‘journal of
record’ for our profession, as peer review will be applied to all the
section's submissions, and articles and correspondence can be published
from outside the profession. As we have seen above, at present, our
cultural memory may be too short. Given the section's intended scope,
psychiatrists will not be in a position to judge the quality of all
potential submissions. Therefore, we plan to create a panel of reviewers
covering the full range of methodologies, including the arts, to ensure
that all articles will be evaluated by a respected peer in the field, as
well as receiving a psychiatric review.

.. _sec3:

Submitting articles
===================

Articles should be submitted as ‘Cultural reflections’. Since the
section is new, as the Culture Editor I will be pleased to discuss
possible submissions at an early stage with potential authors. The
purpose of such discussions is to ensure that the submission is in a
form that meets the goals of the section and is suitable for forwarding
for peer review.

.. _sec4:

Our hope for the future
=======================

I have argued above that psychiatry needs to engage with culture to
deliver best practice. I hope that the new section will support this by
helping to establish cultural studies of all kinds as being of practical
value to service delivery and demonstrating that the evidential quality
of these studies is comparable with the best of scientific research.

**David Foreman** is an affiliate senior lecturer in the Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, UK. He is
a member of the editorial board of *BJPsych Bulletin* and the editor of
the new culture section.

None.
