====================================================
Psychiatrists should investigate their patients less
====================================================



Matthew Butler
Fraser Scott
Biba Stanton
Jonathan Rogers
:Correspondence: Matthew Butler
(matthew.butler@kcl.ac.uk)

:date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   Psychiatrists often order investigations such as blood tests,
   neuroimaging and electroencephalograms for their patients. Rationales
   include ruling out ‘organic’ causes of psychiatric presentations,
   providing baseline parameters before starting psychotropic
   medications, and screening for general cardiometabolic health.
   Hospital protocols often recommend an extensive panel of blood tests
   on admission to a psychiatric ward. In this Against the Stream
   article, we argue that many of these investigations are at best
   useless and at worst harmful: the yield of positive findings that
   change clinical management is extremely low; special investigations
   are a poor substitute for a targeted history and examination; and
   incidental findings may cause anxiety and further unwarranted
   investigation. Cognitive and cultural reasons why over-investigation
   continues are discussed. We conclude by encouraging a more targeted
   approach guided by a thorough bedside clinical assessment.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ *Standards for Inpatient Mental
Health Services* require a ‘comprehensive physical review’ to be
initiated within four hours of admission to a psychiatric inpatient
unit, which is to be completed within one week.\ :sup:`1` In practice,
this means that inpatients are often subjected to a battery of admission
blood tests that are directed without regard for the presentation.
Routine blood tests on admission remain a requirement in local trust
policies,\ :sup:`2` and clinical evaluations indicate that the majority
of patients receive them.\ :sup:`3` In addition, selected psychiatric
patients may have further investigations, such as a magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) of the brain for those with a first psychotic episode, or
an electroencephalogram (EEG) to rule out seizures.

In this article, we consider some of the reasons why investigations
might be requested by psychiatrists and why they are often
inappropriate, and suggest an alternative approach.

.. _sec1:

The case for investigating
==========================

There are several (non-exhaustive) reasons why investigations might be
requested for psychiatric patients: to screen for contributing physical
factors in the acute presentation, including concern that rare but
serious causes are not missedto provide baseline levels that may be
relevant when starting particular psychotropic medicationsto screen for
a range of chronic physical illnesses that might otherwise be missed
because psychiatric patients may not present as often to healthcare
professionals or are treated differently when they doto screen for
health problems that are more common in those with severe mental
illness, such as diabetes and liver disease.

Here, a distinction should be made between screening tests and
diagnostic tests. Screening tests are those performed at population or
subpopulation level to detect presymptomatic disease with the aim of
early intervention. An example of this may be routine prediabetes
screening in a patient on chronic antipsychotic treatment. Screening
tests have been used in medicine since the middle of the 20th century
(an early example being the successful screening and treatment of
syphilis) and have undoubtedly improved diagnosis rates for medical and
psychiatric patients.\ :sup:`4` Despite this, there are a number of
strict criteria that a screening test must meet before it is acceptable
for use, including prior implementation of cost-effective primary
prevention, a validated test, agreement on further investigation, good
evidence for intervention at the presymptomatic phase, and evidence that
benefits outweigh harms.\ :sup:`5`

Screening tests are distinct from diagnostic tests, which aim to
accurately diagnose a condition for which there is clinical suspicion.
An example of this may be positive antineuronal antibodies in the
cerebrospinal fluid of a patient with clinically suspected autoimmune
psychosis.

Although there are undoubtedly many cases where screening and diagnostic
tests are entirely justified, we believe that investigations are often
inappropriate because they have a low yield, poor sensitivity and
specificity, limited interpretability without clinical correlation, and
the potential to cause serious harm.

.. _sec2:

The case for not investigating
==============================

.. _sec2-1:

Tests may miss what they are looking for or not alter management
----------------------------------------------------------------

For an investigation to be useful, it should have high sensitivity (the
ability to correctly identify patients with a given disease) and
specificity (the ability to correctly identify patients without said
disease). Distinct but related clinically useful concepts are those of
positive predictive value (the probability that someone with a positive
test has the disease) and negative predictive value (the probability
that someone with a negative test does not have the disease). It is of
note that even when tests do have high reported sensitivity and
specificity, there may be additional complexities in real-world
settings. This is in part because when developing tests, figures of
diagnostic accuracy are calculated in a specific context, which is often
obviously symptomatic individuals compared with obviously healthy
controls.

Many diagnostic investigations used by psychiatrists fail to meet these
criteria, and many have such a low probability of a clinically relevant
result that it is hard to justify their routine clinical use. Systematic
reviews have found that routine blood tests rarely alter the management
of patients due for admission to psychiatric hospital, even when
abnormal results are found.\ :sup:`6,7` In one of the included studies
of 500 patients, only one individual had an abnormal result that
mandated urgent medical intervention. Notably, this patient was
obviously symptomatic.\ :sup:`8`

Imaging and physiological investigations may not fare better. EEGs show
interictal epileptiform discharges (IEDs) in only 29–55% of people with
epilepsy,\ :sup:`9` so it is inappropriate as a rule-out test for
complex partial seizures presenting with psychotic symptoms. In
contrast, EEG abnormalities (broader than just IEDs) occur in 19% of
those treated with antipsychotics, so an abnormal EEG is not specific to
a neurological cause of psychiatric symptoms.\ :sup:`10` Similarly, one
study found that 6% of healthy controls have at least one abnormality on
an MRI of the brain, so the presence of an abnormality *per se* has a
poor specificity for determining a neurological cause for psychiatric
symptoms. This same research also concluded that none of 349 individuals
with first-episode psychosis had MRI findings that necessitated a change
in clinical management.\ :sup:`11`

.. _sec2-2:

Investigations are no substitute for history taking and physical examination
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Psychiatric patients invariably present in complex and myriad ways. In a
minority, there is a recognisable physical cause for the psychiatric
symptoms. For a physical illness to lead to psychiatric symptoms, there
must either be a pathophysiological process (e.g. neoplastic, endocrine,
autoimmune, metabolic, epileptiform, infective, neurodegenerative or
metabolic) that is affecting the central nervous system and/or
psychosocial mechanisms resulting from the physical illness. In each of
these cases, it is very unlikely that a patient would present as
entirely physically asymptomatic to an appropriately curious and
observant clinician.

To put it another way, we might be surprised to see such physical
illnesses presenting ‘occultly’, in the sense that a case would be
missed after a thorough history and examination but picked up on a
routine blood test or other untargeted investigation. Where psychosocial
mechanisms predominate, these generally occur via experience of symptoms
or via knowledge of a diagnosis, both of which can be elicited through
an appropriate history or examination. In the specific case of
functional disorders (such as functional neurological disorders), these
are diagnosed through eliciting positive clinical signs, rather than
being ‘diagnoses of exclusion’ which require investigation to exclude
other causes.\ :sup:`12`

Even for tests with extraordinarily high sensitivity and specificity,
there are further interpretative difficulties that arise in the absence
of clinical suspicion. If a condition is very rare, then an abnormal
investigation result may not be as diagnostic as is intuitively
suspected. This is known as the ‘false-positive paradox’, or the ‘base
rate paradox’, and occurs when the prevalence of a condition is lower
than the test's false-positive rate (in these cases, the test will give
more false positives than true positives). Crucially, the calculation is
entirely different in populations who are already suspected to have the
disease based on history and examination. In these cases, the pre-test
probability (and thus the post-test probability after a positive test)
would be much higher, and a resulting abnormal test much more clinically
useful.

Take hypothetical blood test A which has a specificity of 99% for
condition X. If condition X has a population prevalence of 1% and there
are no additional features to increase the clinical suspicion of the
condition (e.g. the patient has not been examined), we can assume the
pre-test probability is 1%. In this case, an abnormal result from blood
test A translates to a chance of having the condition (i.e. post-test
probability) of only 50%. Most physicians, including us authors, would
probably overestimate the post-test probability following a positive
result on blood test A.

.. _sec2-3:

Investigations can be harmful
-----------------------------

Investigations often have attendant risks, which are seldom adequately
considered. In some circumstances, taking blood can be painful or
uncomfortable (particularly in a distressed, paranoid or disoriented
patient), risking injury for patient and clinician. The noise and
enclosed environment of an MRI scanner can be frightening for an anxious
patient. Over-investigation may also contribute to the development or
perpetuation of health anxiety, as it can serve to confirm a patient's
fears about a serious undiagnosed illness.\ :sup:`13` This may be
particularly pertinent for individuals with somatoform or
hypochondriacal disorders, who psychiatrists may encounter more often
than might clinicians in other specialties.

A further important consideration is the impact of false positives. When
tests are ordered in the absence of a clinical suspicion or hypothesis,
a positive result inevitably returns the question: what next? In many
cases, this might be further investigation, leading to a non-negligible
potential of harm. Take the case of creatine kinase (CK), which is
sometimes recommended as an admission blood test for psychiatric
in-patients,\ :sup:`2` despite being incidentally and benignly raised in
many patients, and even being a poor discriminator for neuroleptic
malignant syndrome.\ :sup:`14` When faced with a raised CK in an
asymptomatic patient, most of us feel that we should do something, so
patients are frequently subjected to further blood tests and sometimes
intravenous fluids for a test that should never have been done. More
dramatically, if ten people are treated with endovascular coiling for an
incidental unruptured intracranial aneurysm detected on MRI, one will
end up disabled or dead within one year, all for a lesion that probably
would not have caused any harm.\ :sup:`15`

Readers may be familiar with ‘incidentalomas’, an all-encompassing term
for non-specific lesions seen on medical imaging. Incidentalomas have
dubious clinical relevance, but often prompt further investigations and
cause anxiety to patients and professionals alike. Relatedly, the
phenomenon of non-specific abnormal results also occurs with blood
tests. One study of healthy adults receiving a routine battery of blood
tests found that over one-third had at least one abnormal result, of
which only 7% were deemed to require a medical review (none of them
urgently).\ :sup:`16`

Finally, in the context of limited healthcare funding, expensive
investigations divert resources from more worthwhile causes. Discounting
the cost of staff time, a simple routine battery of blood tests is
likely to cost in the region of £15–20.\ :sup:`17` The number of
psychiatric admissions needed to screen to find a positive serum free
thyroxine (FT4) is in the region of 127, which corresponds to a cost of
around £400 per abnormal result.\ :sup:`18` MRI brain scans cost in the
region of £200. Cost-wise, there is likely more benefit from a five
minute clinical history and examination.

.. _sec3:

Cultural and psychological factors
==================================

Psychiatry is a medical discipline and there are, without any doubt,
physical causes of psychiatric presentations. In addition, patients with
severe mental illness are far more likely to die early, in part owing to
huge over-representation of physical comorbidities such as
cardiovascular disease. Psychiatrists should be attuned to physical
health problems in in-patients as much as mental health problems, and we
should feel confident in routinely performing thorough physical health
histories and examinations.

The historical and ongoing divide between mental and physical healthcare
is also likely to be a factor in over-investigation of psychiatric
patients. Psychiatrists do not always have easy access to opinions from
other specialties, and it is unusual for a physician to be integrated
into psychiatric services. Psychiatrists may utilise unnecessary
investigations when they are worried about patients, instead of being
able to access a clinical opinion from specialist physicians. If
physical and mental health services were better integrated, this could
be avoided.

However, the overuse of investigations is a common theme in much of
medicine and often functions more as a ‘psychological comfort blanket
for clinicians’ rather than providing any tangible benefit to our
patients.\ :sup:`19` It may also stem from ‘addition bias’, the human
tendency to try to solve challenging problems by adding something in
rather than taking something away.\ :sup:`20` Ordering an investigation
may make us feel as though we have addressed the problem we were trying
to solve, when in fact we might not have. For instance, if the problem
is poor physical health outcomes in people with severe mental illness,
admission blood tests are unlikely to be an answer. Focusing on this
superficial attempt at joined-up healthcare perhaps distracts from other
solutions, such as addressing stigma and reducing inequalities.

Furthermore, the familiar feeling that we must ‘do something rather than
nothing’ may stem from a human tendency towards action, which is also
known as intervention bias.\ :sup:`21` Of course, as we have seen, there
are scenarios where doing nothing is just as good, or even better, than
doing something. The Hippocratic oath reminds us that our primary role
as doctors is to first do no harm.

Overuse of investigations in psychiatry may also represent part of a
wider risk-averse culture in medicine, which is sometimes referred to as
‘defensive medicine’. Defensive medicine is costly to healthcare
institutions.\ :sup:`22` Many doctors, including ourselves and
three-quarters of all psychiatrists, admit to defensive medicine to some
degree, including the ordering of clinically useless
investigations.\ :sup:`23` The reasons why clinicians may practise
defensive medicine are myriad; however, the most commonly cited reason
is fear of litigation resulting from malpractice hearings, particularly
as the majority of cases of litigation stem from doctors missing
diagnoses, rather than actively causing harm through the use of
treatments.\ :sup:`22` There are some (albeit incomplete) data that some
aspects of defensive medicine may stem from physicians struggling to
tolerate uncertainty in patient diagnosis and care.\ :sup:`24`

.. _sec4:

Concluding remarks
==================

We suggest six points to keep in mind when considering an investigation
for our patients.

Limitations of tests: Have we examined the patient and taken a history?
Without a thorough examination, performing an investigation may not
provide any useful information.Is the disease common enough that this
test will be useful? If the disease or condition is rare, there is a
high probability of false positives.How would we need to act if the test
were to return an abnormal result? Additional interventions or
investigations that may result could be harmful.

Limitations of human psychology: Am I doing this test to resolve my own
anxieties, or will it benefit the patient? Sometimes doing nothing
rather than something is in the patient's best interests.Can I tolerate
the uncertainty of not knowing? Reaching after false certainty is not in
anyone's interest.Is there any chance the test or the results could lead
to negative outcomes for the patient? First, do no harm.

We support attempts to integrate the body into mental health and
illness. We believe that a good means of helping to achieve this is to
ensure that we conduct thorough histories and examinations. This allows
us both to request the appropriate investigations and to know how to
interpret them once we have the results. This approach is supported by
the American Psychiatric Association, which discourages routine
laboratory testing,\ :sup:`25` and by the National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence (NICE), which does not recommend neuroimaging in
first-episode psychosis.\ :sup:`26` However, too often doctors are still
faced with incidental findings on tests that should never have been
requested. Psychiatrists should investigate their patients less and
examine them more.

**Matthew Butler** is a Maudsley BRC Preparatory Clinical Research
Training Fellow at the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London, and a speciality trainee with South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. **Fraser Scott**
is a speciality trainee with South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK. **Biba Stanton** is a consultant neurologist at
King's College Hospital, London, UK and South London and Maudsley NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK. **Jonathan Rogers** is a Wellcome Trust
Clinical Training Fellow at University College London, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were
created or analysed in this study.

M.B., F.S. and J.R. co-conceptualised the paper. M.B. wrote the first
draft, amended subsequent drafts and reviewed the final submission. F.S.
and J.R. reviewed and amended subsequent drafts, and reviewed final
submission. B.S. reviewed and amended drafts and reviewed the final
submission.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

J.R. has received payment from the Alberta Psychiatric Association for a
lecture and has held one unpaid advisory meeting with representatives
from Promentis Pharmaceuticals regarding drug development.
