================================================================================================================================
The sociocultural and behavioural characteristics that patients want in psychiatrists: cross-sectional survey of patients’ views
================================================================================================================================



Richard Laugharne
Stefan Priebe
Agnes Chevalier
Catherine Paton
Rajaei K. Sharma
Allison O'Kelly
Giles RichardsCorrespondence to Richard Laugharne
(richard.laugharne@nhs.net)
:Date: 2021-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   There appears to be no research to date investigating patients’
   preferences for sociocultural characteristics or behavioural
   qualities of psychiatrists. We aimed to assess which are most
   important to patients. Patients (132) in community mental health
   teams across two sites (East Cornwall, East London) completed a
   questionnaire ranking the importance of different sociocultural
   characteristics and behaviours of psychiatrists.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Patients cared more about age and gender than other characteristics.
   Four preferences (from a choice of ten) regarding behavioural
   qualities were clearly identified as important: explaining things
   clearly, dedication to personal treatment, being friendly and polite,
   and being up to date with medical knowledge.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Patients are fairly unconcerned about the age, gender, religion and
   social background of psychiatrists. Characteristics they care about
   most include communication skills, competence, dedication to personal
   treatment and friendliness. Explaining things clearly is particularly
   important. This indicates specific areas of improvement for training
   and further research.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Patient preference is a central principle in healthcare. Both patient
views and satisfaction are recognised as important as expectations of
standards of care rise.\ :sup:`1` Studies on patient satisfaction with
care have shown that the therapeutic relationship between patient and
doctor and the interpersonal relationship with staff are important to
patients.\ :sup:`2`

The evolution of patient-centred care means that patient involvement is
increasingly integral to health services research and development,
demonstrated by a rapidly growing literature base of patient views.
However, there is still a dearth of literature examining patient
involvement for improving professional performance in
medicine.\ :sup:`3` The literature that does exist largely focuses on
communication skills during consultations. This scarcity means that we
cannot yet state whether patient feedback can affect performance and
what the influential factors are.\ :sup:`4`

We know that judgements are made on the basis of initial
perceptions;\ :sup:`5–7` these perceptions are based on easily
identifiable features such as gender or age, and on traits judged to be
important by each individual, such as standing within society. Gledhill
et al found that psychiatric in-patients prefer psychiatrists to wear
smart attire and to call them by their first name, although this
research was conducted in 1997.\ :sup:`8` However, the smart attire may
also lead to patients viewing their psychiatrist as less friendly and
approachable.

Patient preference regarding a doctor's gender is an obvious and better
explored example of consideration of patients’ attitudes. It has been
found that significant gender preference is low but trends for same-sex
doctors are seen in specific scenarios, including choosing a primary
care doctor.\ :sup:`9`

A study undertaken in The Netherlands in 1993 by Kerssens et al used a
general household survey to investigate gender preference for 13
different medical specialties and explored possible reasons for any
preferences arising. They found that gender preference was stronger in
specialties more likely to be engaged in intimate and psychosocial
health problems, such as general practitioners (GPs) and gynaecologists.
They found that individuals who indicated a preference for a female
physician did so on the basis that they found it easier to talk to a
female and felt more comfortable being examined by a female and the same
reasons were cited by those indicating a preference for a male doctor.
For women, 81% had no gender preference for psychiatrists, 4% preferred
a male and 15% a female psychiatrist. For men, 91% had no preference,
with 3% preferring a female and 6% a male psychiatrist. This was a
population, not a patient, survey.\ :sup:`10`

More recently it has been suggested that gender is likely to continue to
influence the doctor–patient relationship more in psychiatry than in
most other specialties. This may be due to the many entrenched social
perceptions and stereotypes that we are still too unaware of.\ :sup:`11`
It has also been found that female psychiatrists are still at an
advantage when it comes to developing a working relationship with their
patients.\ :sup:`12`

Patients are also likely to have strong views on how important various
behaviours and skills of clinicians are. When examining communication,
there is clear evidence that modifiable human behaviours can have
positive or negative effects in consultations. Yet even when
specifically examining empathy, Derksen et al found that, although
widely promoted as a fundamental skill in clinical practice, evidence is
scarce for the effect of greater empathy.\ :sup:`13` A commonly
identified negative characteristic of healthcare professionals is
paternalism. The desire for an equal power dynamic is one theme that
frequently arises in studies examining the patient–medical professional
relationship.\ :sup:`14`

Evidence suggests that patients attending out-patient psychiatric
services are generally satisfied with the care they receive from their
psychiatrists.\ :sup:`1,12` There is some evidence exploring patient
satisfaction pertaining to particular qualities in their psychiatrists,
such as whether they are attentive, caring in demeanour, knowledgeable
about an individual's illness and able to explain conditions
well.\ :sup:`15–17`

There is little literature on any aspect of how the patients’ role is
integrated.\ :sup:`4` Even when patient involvement is promoted, many
assumptions are made as to the scope, such as how, when and on what they
can give feedback. Indeed, it has been seen that there is sometimes a
misalignment between patient priorities and changes put into
effect.\ :sup:`18` For example, as part of the revalidation cycle in the
UK's National Health Service (NHS), doctors are mandated to submit and
evaluate patient feedback. This has been found to have a positive
influence overall although its exact purpose and use remain a point of
contention for many.\ :sup:`3`

It is also important to question why patient involvement in the
development of professional performance has been lacking. Recent
analyses have found that negative attitudes of doctors may in fact be a
key barrier preventing systems development, thus hindering performance
improvement.\ :sup:`3` It is still important to generate the evidence,
as clinical outcomes are likely to be affected.

There is also some indication that a therapist's perception of the
patient's priorities can be incorrect. When there is a developing
relationship, this failure can strongly affect the patient's confidence
in their therapist.\ :sup:`19` However, there appears to be no research
to date specifically investigating patients’ preferences for the
sociocultural characteristics of their psychiatrists.

It can take up to 17 years for research to translate into practice in
the UK health service; by developing and improving patient involvement
we may be able to improve this implementation process and decrease the
time frame.\ :sup:`20`

.. _sec1-1:

Aims
====

This study aimed to explore the characteristics and qualities of
psychiatrists that are most important to patients. We asked the
following research questions: What sociocultural characteristics about
psychiatrists are important to patients?What behaviours are most
important to patients in their psychiatrist?

In addition, we hoped the data would be able to shed light on the
following gender-based question: Are female patients more likely to want
a female psychiatrist?

.. _sec2:

Method
======

.. _sec2-1:

Setting
-------

The study took place in community mental health teams (CMHTs) across two
UK NHS foundation trusts. The sites were a general CMHT and a complex
care and dementia team in East Cornwall and a CMHT in East London. We
therefore approached patients across very different environments – a
deprived rural area in south-east Cornwall, which is predominantly White
in ethnicity, and a deprived urban area in London, which is
significantly ethnically diverse.

.. _sec2-2:

Design
------

This was an exploratory cross-sectional survey of patients’ views.

.. _sec2-3:

Participants
------------

Patients were identified from the team case-loads. They were included if
they were over the age of 18 years, had contact with a psychiatrist
within secondary mental health services and were classified as having a
severe and enduring mental illness, which included patients with a
psychotic illness (for example schizophrenia or bipolar affective
disorder), a severe depressive disorder, a personality disorder or
dementia. Patients were excluded if they were acutely unwell and
therefore lacked capacity to give consent and if they were unable to
speak English.

.. _sec2-4:

Data collection
---------------

In East Cornwall, patients were initially approached via their care
coordinator during a pre-existing appointment or following an
appointment with their psychiatrist. This initial approach resulted in a
fairly low response rate, so an amendment to the study's ethical
approval was sought and patients were also approached by a mail shot. In
East London, patients were approached via a mail shot after they had
been identified by a researcher in conjunction with their care
coordinator.

Participants completed a brief questionnaire which asked them about
several non-modifiable sociocultural characteristics of psychiatrists,
including age, gender, religion, social background and marital status.
They were asked to state whether or not they had a preference with
regard to the gender, age or level of experience of their psychiatrist.
Then the participant was asked to state how important each
characteristic was. Finally, they were asked about modifiable
characteristics. The participant was asked to select and rank the three
qualities/behaviours most important to them from a list of ten: the
psychiatrist is friendly and polite in mannerthe psychiatrist is
recommended as good by other patientsthe psychiatrist is recommended as
good by my GPthe psychiatrist is actively involved in scientific
researchthe psychiatrist is up to date with medical knowledgethe
psychiatrist has a professional appearance and is well dressedthe
psychiatrist is dedicated to my personal treatmentthe psychiatrist is
positive and optimisticthe psychiatrist explains things to methe
psychiatrist has a similar social and cultural background to me.This
list of behaviours was generated from discussions within the research
team and consideration of the literature.\ :sup:`1,13,15`

Researchers then collected sociodemographic details about the patients
from computerised medical records, including their age and gender.

All data collected were strictly anonymised to prevent patient
identification.

.. _sec2-5:

Data analysis
-------------

The overall results were compiled to reveal: preference for
genderpreference for agepreference for experienceimportance of the
sociocultural characteristicsranking in importance for the ten
characteristics.Comparison was then made to see whether female patients
had a preference for seeing a female psychiatrist.

.. _sec2-6:

Ethical approval
----------------

The study received research ethical approval (REC reference number
13/EE/0230) from the National Research Ethics Committee East of England.

.. _sec2-7:

Gratuity
--------

Participants were offered £5 (cash in East Cornwall and a voucher in
East London) as a token of appreciation for their time. This was not
advertised in the patient information leaflet, to reduce potential
response bias.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

We received 132 returns of the questionnaire across all sites (76 from
the East Cornwall CMHT, 28 from the East Cornwall complex care and
dementia team and 28 from the East London CMHT). Participants were aged
over 18 years, treated in secondary mental healthcare and were diagnosed
with a severe and enduring mental illness.

.. _sec3-1:

The sociocultural characteristics important to patients
-------------------------------------------------------

Participants cared more about the age and gender of their psychiatrist
than their religion, background and marital status, but the majority of
participants were not concerned about any of these factors (`Fig.
1 <#fig01>`__). With regard to age, 28% of the total sample expressed a
preference regarding the age of their psychiatrist: 16% preferred a
psychiatrist under 40 years old, 73% a psychiatrist 40–55 years and 11%
a psychiatrist over 55 years. A larger proportion of the total sample
(61%) expressed a preference regarding the level of experience of their
psychiatrist, with 79% of them stating a preference for a psychiatrist
who had been qualified for some time. Fig. 1Participants’ rating of the
importance of their psychiatrist's sociocultural characteristics.

.. _sec3-2:

Behaviours most important to patients
-------------------------------------

When asked to rank the three most important qualities/behaviours from
the list of ten, there were four clear preferences (`Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__): the psychiatrist explains things to me (more than
two-thirds had this in their top three rankings)the psychiatrist is
dedicated to my personal treatmentthe psychiatrist is up to date with
medical knowledgethe psychiatrist is friendly and polite. Fig.
2Participants’ ranking of the top three (out of ten) preferred
qualities/behaviours shown by their psychiatrist.

.. _sec3-3:

Additional results regarding gender preference
----------------------------------------------

In total 73 women completed the questionnaire; 73% expressed no
preference regarding the gender of their psychiatrist (`Fig.
3 <#fig03>`__). A similar percentage was observed among the 59 men who
completed the questionnaire: 75% expressed no preference with regard to
the gender of their psychiatrist. There was no significant difference
between genders at the 5% level on statistical analysis (chi-squared
test of independence, 5% confidence value). Fig. 3Female participants’
preference for the gender of their psychiatrist.

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec4-1:

Main findings
-------------

In this study the characteristics of psychiatrists that patients cared
most about included communication skills, competence, dedication to
personal treatment and friendliness. Being able to explain things to
patients was particularly important. Of note, being recommended by GPs
and other patients was not as important, nor was appearance or being
positive and optimistic. The importance of ‘dedication to personal
treatment’ supports early findings by Johansson & Eklund that a common
priority of psychiatric patients is the development of a therapeutic
relationship.\ :sup:`19`

Participants did not express strong preferences about the age, gender,
religion, social background or marital status of their psychiatrist.

As regards the modifiable characteristics analysed, participants did not
identify optimism as being important. This aspect of the therapeutic
relationship is a quality assessed in some consultant 360-degree
appraisal systems. Our finding may be due to a desire for the clinician
to be realistic and a feeling that being unduly optimistic can give
false hope. As the survey population was patients in secondary care,
there may be contributing factors that were not taken into account.
These might include the chronicity of specific conditions and the amount
of time that the participants have been receiving care.

Another postulation is that the questionnaire asked about a psychiatrist
being positive and optimistic; patients might construe a combination of
positivity and optimism as lacking in empathy and not understanding
their suffering or recognising the impact their presentation/illness is
having on their life.

In terms of non-modifiable characteristics, none were found to have
significant importance. The preference for age and experience was of
note, as it suggests that more senior clinicians have characteristics
desired by patients.

With gender preference, the female participants did not show an overall
preference to see a female psychiatrist. This is a comparable finding to
the population survey undertaken in The Netherlands in which the
majority of both women and men expressed no preference about the gender
of the psychiatrist seen.\ :sup:`10` The conflict with more recent
studies into gender bias among psychiatric patients may be due to the
disparity between preconceptions and outcomes with male/female
psychiatrists. This warrants a focused analysis that could be
instrumental to professional improvement.

.. _sec4-2:

Limitations
-----------

We must consider the potential limitations of the study, in particular
response bias. One of the factors specifically commented on by the
researcher based in East London was the fact that patients were more
likely to return a questionnaire if they had previously met her in an
earlier role running therapeutic groups in a hospital setting. In
conjunction with patient-experience surveys generally having low
response rates, this bias may be notable.\ :sup:`21`

The study was also limited to people who spoke English: although this
may not have had a significant impact on the results in the East
Cornwall sites (nobody on the East Cornwall CMHT case-load required the
use of an interpreter or did not speak English as a first or second
language at the time of the study), there is a considerably more
culturally diverse population in East London who could not then be
approached.

In terms of study design, there is no validated questionnaire specific
enough to the aims of this survey and applicable to the setting. The
behavioural qualities listed in the study were determined through
discussion among clinician-researchers. The list might have been
strengthened with input from patients.

We did not use a mixed-methods approach owing to limited study
resources. Analysing the data by patient characteristics, including
experience of services and diagnosed disorder, would have given more
insight from a patient perspective, and may be an opportunity for future
research.

.. _sec4-3:

Implications
------------

Although we may worry about a patient's perception of us based on
physical, usually unchangeable characteristics, our focus should be on
how we communicate with our patients, as this appears to have more
importance for patients. We should not underestimate the significance of
being friendly in our clinical work, but also remember that patients
value the time-honoured importance of up-to-date knowledge and being
dedicated to their personal care.

This research focused on patients in secondary care, many of whom are
already experienced with regard to psychiatric treatment. With this in
mind, consideration should be given to repeating the research with newly
referred patients.

It should also be considered that, in circumstances where the
relationship between a patient and their psychiatrist has broken down
and a new psychiatrist is to be allocated, attention to matching the
psychiatrist and patient on the basis of sociodemographic
characteristics is not merited by the evidence.

Some of the behaviours that were identified as important can be trained
and regulating authorities such as the General Medical Council and the
Care Quality Commission may wish to consider greater encouragement in
developing these skills. Psychiatrists are already expected to update
their knowledge through continuing professional development, but there
is limited systematic training or supervision on how psychiatrists
should explain treatments to patients. These communication skills are
important to patients.

**Richard Laugharne**, FRCPsych, is a consultant psychiatrist with
Cornwall Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, working in Trevillis House,
Liskeard, UK. **Stefan Priebe**, FRCPsych, is Professor of Community
Psychiatry in the Unit for Social and Community Psychiatry, a World
Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Mental Health Service
Development at Queen Mary University of London, UK. **Agnes Chevalier**,
MSc, is a researcher in the Unit for Social and Community Psychiatry,
Queen Mary University of London, UK. **Catherine Paton**, MRCPsych, is a
consultant psychiatrist with Devon Partnership NHS Trust, UK. **Rajaei
K. Sharma**, BSc(Hons), PgCert, is a medical student at the University
of Exeter Medical School, UK. **Alison O'Kelly**, MSc, is a nurse
consultant with Cornwall Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, working in
Trevillis House, Liskeard, UK. **Giles Richards**, FRCPsych, is a
consultant psychiatrist with Cornwall Partnership NHS Foundation Trust,
working in Trevillis House, Liskeard, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

Data is available from the corresponding author.

Conception and design: S.P., R.L.. Collection and assembly of data:
R.L., A.C., C.P., A.O'K., G.R.. Manuscript writing: all authors. Final
approval of manuscript: all authors.

The small study costs were funded by the research departments at
Cornwall Partnership NHS Foundation Trust and the Unit for Social and
Community Psychiatry, WHO Collaborating Centre for Mental Health Service
Development, Queen Mary University of London.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.115.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
