===========================================================================================================================================================
Evaluation of radically open dialectical behaviour therapy in an adult community mental health team: effectiveness in people with autism spectrum disorders
===========================================================================================================================================================

Peter L. Cornwall
Susan Simpson
Claire Gibbs
Valerie MorfeeCorrespondence to Dr Peter L. Cornwall
(lennycornwall@nhs.net)
:Date: 2021-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Radically open dialectical behaviour therapy (RO DBT) is a
   transdiagnostic treatment designed to address disorders associated
   with overcontrol, including autism spectrum disorders (ASD). To date,
   no studies have reported on the effectiveness of RO DBT for people
   with ASD. Forty-eight patients were referred to a RO DBT programme,
   of whom 23 had a diagnosis of ASD. Outcome was measured using the
   Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation – Outcome Measure (CORE) and
   the Questionnaire about the Process of Recovery.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   The intervention was effective, with a medium effect size of 0.53 for
   improvement in CORE global distress. End-point CORE global distress
   score was predicted from initial severity and a diagnosis of ASD.
   Participants with a diagnosis of ASD who completed the therapy had
   significantly better outcomes than completing participants without an
   ASD diagnosis.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   These findings provide preliminary support for RO DBT as an effective
   intervention for ASD in routine settings.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Society generally holds self-control in high esteem and it can lead to
better health outcomes.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Consequently, high self-control
has not commonly been a focus for psychological intervention. However,
too much self-control, or maladaptive overcontrol, is associated with a
range of problems, including social isolation, poor interpersonal
functioning and mental illnesses such as chronic depression, anorexia
nervosa and obsessive–compulsive disorder.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Radically
open dialectical behaviour therapy (RO DBT) has been developed as an
adapted form of dialectical behaviour therapy to directly target
overcontrol, and is now supported by several controlled clinical
trials.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` The therapy introduces strategies to improve
social connectedness and intimacy and to reduce social isolation by
improving emotional expression and the ability to respond more flexibly.
The primary mechanism of change is through social
signalling.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` In RO DBT, what matters most is how a person
communicates or socially signals their inner experiences to others and
the impact that social signalling has on their experience of social
connectedness. RO DBT has been delivered in a variety of clinical
settings, but there are no published studies of the effectiveness of RO
DBT delivered in an adult community mental health team (CMHT).

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) have also been recognised as disorders
of maladaptive overcontrol, but ASD have not been recorded as comorbid
conditions in the studies of RO DBT to date.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` In the UK,
the Autism Act 2009 requires National Health Service (NHS) trusts to
provide access to services for the diagnosis of autism in adults and
this has resulted in a large increase in referrals of individuals
seeking this diagnosis to explain their difficulties.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`
However, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
guideline on the management of ASD in adults indicates very limited
evidence for psychosocial interventions.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

This study reports on the effectiveness of RO DBT for people with
maladaptive overcontrol in an NHS adult CMHT setting, with a specific
focus on the outcomes of a subsample of these individuals who are
diagnosed with ASD.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Setting
-------

The study was undertaken in an NHS secondary care CMHT in northern
England providing care and treatment for patients with mainly
non-psychotic disorders. The RO DBT programme was open to other adult
patients in the trust because it was the only service offering RO DBT,
but the vast majority of patients came from the local team. The study
used data collected routinely for all patients receiving group therapy
in the service and so did not constitute research requiring ethical
approval or informed consent from participants. The study was approved
by Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust.

.. _sec1-2:

Sample
------

Patients were considered eligible if their lead clinician considered
that they were presenting with maladaptive overcontrol in the context of
their mental health problems or following a team case formulation
meeting. Patients were identified as meeting criteria for overcontrol
using a clinical interview and a range of tools, including the Assessing
Styles of Coping: Word-Pair Checklist, the OC Trait Rating Scale, and
the Brief Overcontrol Scale.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.g),(n.d.h)` We only
accepted patients who acknowledged that they had a coping style
characterised by overcontrol and that they wanted to change it. Patient
diagnosis was identified from the patient electronic record.

.. _sec1-3:

Intervention
------------

The typical RO DBT out-patient format is a 30-week programme and
involves a 1 h weekly individual session and a 2.5 h weekly skills
training session. The primary goal is to decrease behavioural
overcontrol and aloofness, rather than decrease behavioural dyscontrol
and mood-dependent responding, as in standard DBT.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`
Patients are encouraged to practice disinhibition, participate without
planning and to be more emotionally expressive.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.d)`
In this study, regular individual sessions were not possible because of
the limited staffing resource in the CMHT. Occasionally, participants
received additional individual sessions, for example, if they started
late in the programme as a means of catching up. Delivering a group-only
programme is a recognised variation to the standard
approach.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)–(n.d.k)`

Five cohorts of patients over the course of 3 years participated in a RO
DBT programme consisting of 30 weekly skills training classes. Some
started the programme halfway through a cohort and so continued into the
next cohort. The fifth cohort programme was cut short by the COVID-19
pandemic, when all group therapy programmes were suspended.

.. _sec1-4:

Therapists
----------

Four psychological therapists trained in RO DBT delivered the programme
(three psychiatric nurses and one occupational therapist) and they were
supported by one psychiatric nurse in co-facilitating some of the skills
classes. Clinical supervision was provided during weekly consultation
meetings using the model of standard DBT.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`

.. _sec1-5:

Measures
--------

In the first skills class, participants completed the Clinical Outcomes
in Routine Evaluation – Outcome Measure (CORE)\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` and the
Questionnaire about the Process of Recovery (QPR).\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` These
measures were repeated at mid-point (week 15) and end-point (week 30).

The CORE is a 34-item self-report questionnaire measuring the level of
global distress the person has experienced in the previous week,
measured on a five-point scale ranging from 0 to 4, and reported as a
mean score per item. The measure contains four subdomains: subjective
well-being, problems or symptoms, social and life functioning, and risk
of harm to self and others. It has become a standard tool for measuring
outcome in psychological therapy studies and has good psychometric
properties.\ :sup:`(n.d.l),(n.d.n)` The recommended clinical cut-off for
CORE global distress is a mean item score of 1.0, with scores above this
threshold considered to represent ‘clinical caseness’. A mean item score
of 2.0 represents moderately severe distress. Reliable change is
indicated by a global distress score change of at least 0.5, whereas
clinical recovery is indicated by a reduction in the mean global
distress score to <1.0.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`

The QPR is a 25-item self-report measure designed to evaluate the
achievement of recovery goals in severe mental illness. It was designed
collaboratively by clinicians and patients and has been recommended as a
tool to promote engagement and a collaborative clinical approach, but
also as a method of detecting change in recovery in
CMHTs.\ :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.p),(n.d.q)` As such, it can measure whether
the service is meeting the perceived needs of patients irrespective of
their clinical outcome.

.. _sec1-6:

Data analysis
-------------

Data analysis was undertaken using Real Statistics for Excel 365 for
Windows.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` Baseline characteristics were described
comparing differences between those completing the programme to 30 weeks
(the per-protocol sample) and those dropping out early or not attending
at all (the ITT sample). For the intention-to-treat (ITT) analyses we
used the last observation carried forward (LOCF) method. Improvement in
outcome measures at 15 and 30 weeks was examined for per-protocol
(*n* = 21) and ITT (*n* = 35) samples using analysis of variance
(ANOVA). Effect sizes were calculated using Cohen's *d* with 95%
confidence intervals.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` Predictors of outcome at 30 weeks
were examined for per-protocol and ITT samples using stepwise multiple
linear regression. As a *post hoc* analysis, we compared the ASD and
non-ASD participants for per-protocol and ITT samples for continuous
outcomes using the *t*-test and categorical outcomes using the
χ\ :sup:`2`-test.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Sample characteristics
----------------------

Of the 48 eligible participants, 23 had a confirmed or working diagnosis
of ASD, either as the only identified problem (*n* = 3) or as a comorbid
condition (*n* = 20). This was the single most common diagnosis among
the participants. Thirteen patients from this group had the diagnosis
confirmed by the local specialist autism service; the other ten were on
the waiting list for specialist assessment, but the working diagnosis
was an autism spectrum condition. The primary diagnoses were depressive
disorder (*n* = 14), generalised anxiety disorder (*n* = 8), bipolar
disorder (*n* = 6), personality disorder (*n* = 5), post-traumatic
stress disorder (*n* = 4), schizophrenia and related disorders
(*n* = 4), anorexia nervosa (*n* = 3), ASD (*n* = 3) and
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (*n* = 1).

.. _sec2-2:

Participant flow
----------------

The flow of participants through the study is shown in `Fig.
1 <#fig01>`__. In total, 21 participants completed the programme with
outcome data recorded at mid-point (week 15) and at end-point (week 30).
Participants in the fifth cohort were able to complete only 15 sessions
before the sessions were stopped because of the COVID-19 pandemic and so
their data are included in the ITT analysis but not the per-protocol
analysis. Fig. 1CONSORT flow diagram. RO DBT, radically open dialectical
behaviour therapy.

Non-attenders and those who dropped out did not differ from completers
with respect to age, gender, ASD diagnosis or global severity of
problems but reported a higher level of risk and a lower QPR score at
baseline (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). The sample reflected the CMHT's
case-load, with more women than men and overwhelmingly White British in
ethnic origin. Table 1Participant characteristics according to treatment
completionTreatment completers (*n* = 21)Treatment non-completers
(*n* = 27)\ *n*\ %\ *n*\ %Comparison between
groups\ `a <#tfn1_2>`__\ Female1361.901451.85χ\ :sup:`2` = 0.31,
d.f. = 1\ *, P* = 0.58White British21100.0027100.00\ *P* = 1.00Autism
diagnosis1152.381244.44χ\ :sup:`2` = 0.13, d.f. = 1\ *,
P* = 0.72Means.d. (range)Means.d. (range)Age, years40.6713.33
(20–58)36.1113.05 (18–59)\ *t* = 0.71, d.f. = 47, *P* = 0.24Sessions
attended25.813.22 (20–30)5.675.26 (0–18)\ *t* = 14.98, d.f. = 47,
*P* **<** **0.001**\ Baseline CORE global distress score2.060.66
(0.68–3.06)2.480.81 (0.76–3.24)\ *t* = 1.13, d.f = 34,
*P* = 0.10Baseline CORE well-being score2.440.75 (0.50–3.50)3.020.98
(1.00–4.00)\ *t* = 1.62, d.f. = 34, *P* = 0.06Baseline CORE problems
score2.520.86 (0.75–3.67)2.930.85 (1.00–3.75)\ *t* = 0.97, d.f. = 34,
*P* = 0.17Baseline CORE functioning score2.190.67 (1.00–3.17)2.460.84
(0.75–3.42)\ *t* = 0.53, d.f. = 34, *P* = 0.30Baseline CORE risk
score0.640.65 (0.00–2.50)1.270.87 (0–2.33)\ *t* = 2.16, d.f. = 34,
**P** **=** **0.02**\ Baseline QPR score24.679.19 (4–44)15.2711.86
(0–34)\ *t* = 2.06, d.f. = 31, **P** **=** **0.02**\  [1]_ [2]_ [3]_

The mean CORE global distress score at baseline was >2.0 for both
groups, indicating that participants had moderately severe mental health
problems. The lower score on the QPR measure in treatment non-completers
suggests that this group was less well engaged with their care and
treatment at the outset.

The reasons for drop out are reported in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__. External
circumstances included starting a new job and taking on childcare
responsibilities. Illness/therapy factors included feeling too unwell to
continue participation and not being able to grasp the concepts
discussed in the sessions.

Participants with a diagnosis of ASD did not differ from those without
an ASD diagnosis with respect to mean age (35.6 *v.* 40.2 years,
*t* = 0.69, d.f. = 47, *P* = 0.30), female gender (52 *v.* 60%,
χ\ :sup:`2` = 0.30, d.f.= 1\ *, P* = 0.59), mean baseline CORE global
distress score (2.39 *v.* 2.06, *t* = 0.97, d.f. = 34, *P* = 0.18) or
mean baseline QPR score (21.73 *v.* 21.18, *t* = 1.27, d.f. = 31,
*P* = 0.89).

.. _sec2-3:

Outcomes at 30-week end-point for per-protocol and ITT samples
--------------------------------------------------------------

| The intervention was effective in both the per-protocol (*n* = 21) and
  the ITT (*n* = 35) samples (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). In the per-protocol
  sample, five participants (24%) achieved a CORE global distress score
  indicative of clinical recovery (score <1.0) and nine (43%) made a
  reliable improvement (reduction in score >0.5). The effect size for
  change in CORE global distress was medium to large (Cohen's
  *d* = 0.59). The mean improvement at the 30-week end-point was 0.43
  (95% CI 0.09–0.78) for the CORE global distress and the mean increase
  in QPR score was 8.29 (95% CI 3.00–13.57). Table 2Per-protocol and
  intention-to-treat (ITT) analyses of outcomesBaseline,
| mean (s.d.)Mid-point,
| mean (s.d.)Final,
| mean (s.d.)\ *F*\ d.f.\ *P*\ Effect size (95% CI for *d*)Per-protocol
  sample (*n* = 21)CORE global distress score2.06 (0.66)1.78 (0.78)1.63
  (0.81)6.0220\ **<0.01**\ 0.59 (0.57–0.61)CORE well-being score2.44
  (0.75)2.12 (1.05)1.92 (1.00)4.7420\ **0.01**\ 0.59 (0.57–0.61)CORE
  problems score2.52 (0.86)2.15 (0.96)2.00 (0.97)6.5520\ **<0.01**\ 0.57
  (0.55–0.59)CORE functioning score2.19 (0.67)1.85 (0.71)1.74
  (0.83)5.6220\ **0.01**\ 0.59 (0.57–0.61)CORE risk score0.64 (0.65)0.68
  (0.77)0.46 (0.68)2.48200.100.27 (0.25–0.29)QPR score24.67 (9.91)29.68
  (11.83)32.95 (11.59)11.6120\ **<0.001**\ 0.77 (0.75–0.79)ITT sample
  (*n* = 35)CORE global distress score2.23 (0.74)1.98 (0.83)1.85
  (0.93)8.2634\ **<0.001**\ 0.46 (0.45–0.48)CORE well-being score2.67
  (0.88)2.46 (1.11)2.23 (1.18)4.3534\ **0.02**\ 0.40 (0.39–0.42)CORE
  problems score2.69 (0.87)2.36 (1.01)2.21
  (1.12)9.3234\ **<0.001**\ 0.47 (0.45–0.48)CORE functioning2.30
  (0.74)2.00 (0.76)1.93 (0.87)8.6534\ **<0.001**\ 0.47 (0.46–0.49)CORE
  risk score0.90 (0.80)0.86 (0.80)0.68 (0.79)3.3134\ **0.04**\ 0.27
  (0.26–0.29)QPR score21.44 (11.37)25.59 (13.67)28.23
  (14.86)14.8631\ **<0.001**\ 0.52 (0.50–0.53) [4]_ [5]_

In the ITT sample, 9 participants (26%) achieved a CORE global distress
score indicative of clinical recovery and 13 (37%) made a reliable
improvement. The effect size for change in CORE global distress was
small to medium (Cohen's *d* = 0.46). The mean improvement at the
30-week end-point was 0.38 (95% CI 0.02–0.74) and the mean increase in
QPR was 6.69 (95% CI 0.33–13.05).

Seven participants (five with an ASD diagnosis) continued in the therapy
group beyond 30 weeks for clinical reasons. The mean improvement for all
participants (*n* = 28) with outcome at the end of their intervention
was 0.53 (95% CI 0.24–0.82) on the CORE global distress score, which
represents a clinically reliable improvement overall.

.. _sec2-4:

Predictors of outcome
---------------------

We used stepwise regression to examine which factors predicted the
outcome score at 30 weeks in participants completing the programme to 30
weeks (per-protocol, *n* = 21) and the intention-to-treat sample (ITT,
*n* = 35). We entered the following variables into the analysis: age,
gender, initial severity (CORE global distress score at baseline),
diagnosis of ASD, cohort and number of sessions attended.

Initial severity and diagnosis of ASD were entered into the model in
both per-protocol and ITT samples and accounted for a highly significant
amount of the variation in the final outcome score – 60% in the
per-protocol sample and 55% in the ITT sample (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__).
Participants with lower baseline CORE global distress scores and a
diagnosis of autism were significantly more likely to have a better
final outcome score. Table 3Predictors of final Clinical Outcomes in
Routine Evaluation – Outcome Measure (CORE) global distress
scoreModel\ *P*\ Per-protocol sample
(*n* = 21)\ *r*\ :sup:`2` = 0.64adj.
*r*\ :sup:`2` = 0.60\ *F* = 15.76\ **<0.001**\ Variablesβs.e.95%
CI\ *t*\ Constant0.270.39Initial
severity0.850.180.54–1.154.81\ **<0.001**\ Autism0.750.230.34–1.133.27\ **<0.01**\ Intention-to-treat
sample (*n* = 35)\ *r*\ :sup:`2` = 0.57adj.
*r*\ :sup:`2` = 0.55\ *F* = 21.65\ **<0.001**\ Variablesβs.e.95%
CI\ *t*\ Constant0.080.33Initial
severity0.950.140.70–1.196.58\ **<0.001**\ Autism0.370.210.01–0.731.760.09 [6]_

.. _sec2-5:

Comparison between ASD and non-ASD participants at the end of treatment for continuous and categorical outcomes
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Participants with a confirmed or working diagnosis of ASD showed
clinically reliable improvement and showed better outcomes than non-ASD
participants with respect to functioning and perception of recovery
(`Table 4 <#tab04>`__). Table 4Comparison of change in continuous
outcomes between participants with and without a diagnosis of autism
spectrum disorder (ASD)Change in ASD (s.d.)Change in non-ASD
(s.d.)\ *T*\ d.f.\ *P*\ Per-protocol sample\ `a <#tfn4_2>`__\ CORE
global distress score0.79 (0.61)0.04 (0.37)3.0420\ **<0.01**\ CORE
well-being score0.89 (0.90)0.13 (0.58)1.9320\ **0.03**\ CORE problems
score0.94 (0.60)0.06 (0.52)3.2820\ **<0.01**\ CORE functioning score0.83
(0.79)0.03 (0.43)2.4720\ **0.01**\ CORE risk score0.38 (0.45)−0.03
(0.36)1.9620\ **0.03**\ QPR score12.18 (6.97)4.00
(7.29)2.2920\ **0.02**\ ITT sample\ `b <#tfn4_3>`__\ CORE global
distress score0.57 (0.57)0.18 (0.62)1.57340.06CORE well-being score0.54
(0.84)0.28 (0.97)0.26340.40CORE problems score0.67 (0.61)0.24
(0.77)1.46340.08CORE functioning score0.62 (0.69)0.12
(0.55)2.0034\ **0.03**\ CORE risk score0.31 (0.38)0.12
(0.59)0.62340.27QPR score9.53 (7.73)4.18
(8.74)1.46310.08 [7]_ [8]_ [9]_ [10]_

At the end of treatment the ASD and non-ASD participants (*n* = 28) did
not differ significantly in the number who met the clinical recovery
threshold (CORE global distress score <1.0) (χ\ :sup:`2` = 2.01,
d.f. = 1\ *, P* = 0.16). However, participants with ASD were
significantly more likely to have a reliable improvement in CORE global
distress score in the per-protocol but not the ITT sample. In the
per-protocol sample, 73% of participants with ASD showed reliable
improvement, compared with 10% of non-ASD participants
(χ\ :sup:`2` = 8.21, d.f. = 3\ *, P* = 0.04). In the ITT sample, the
figures were 56% for those with ASD and 18% for non-ASD participants
(χ\ :sup:`2`\ = 4.58, d.f. = 3\ *, P* = 0.21).

Among the male participants completing the programme, 4/8 (50%) achieved
clinical recovery (a CORE global distress score <1.0) compared with 2/13
(15.4%) of the female participants. However, the difference between men
and women was not statistically significant (χ\ :sup:`2` = 2.41,
d.f. = 1\ *, P* = 0.12).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The findings from this study provide preliminary evidence for the
effectiveness of RO DBT for mental disorders in routine clinical
practice, and in particular for adults with ASD without intellectual
disability. RO DBT is a treatment for maladaptive overcontrol, which
characterises many individuals with autism, and demonstrating that RO
DBT is a potentially effective treatment for this population is
therefore an important step forward.

There have been three randomised controlled trials of RO DBT for
refractory depression\ :sup:`(n.d.t)–(n.d.u)` and two open trials for
anorexia nervosa.\ :sup:`(n.d.v),(n.d.w)` The only published study in a
mixed diagnostic group is a non-randomised controlled trial in adults
with mental health problems related to overcontrol referred to a
specialist psychological therapy service.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` RO DBT has
been delivered in a variety of clinical settings, including
psychological therapy services, US military veterans services, eating
disorder services and forensic in-patient care.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)`

In psychiatric settings, ASD is almost certainly underdiagnosed as a
comorbid difficulty or misdiagnosed as a psychotic disorder, personality
disorder or obsessive–compulsive disorder,\ :sup:`(n.d.x),(n.d.y)` and
adults with ASD have high levels of psychiatric comorbidity and
dysfunction.\ :sup:`(n.d.z),(n.d.aa)` ASD is also a significant risk
factor for suicidal behaviour.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` Previous studies on
treatment for ASD have generally looked at adapting established
psychological therapies to treat comorbid conditions in people with ASD
as a way of improving their mental health and
well-being.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac),(n.d.ad)` There have been very few studies
designed to improve functioning in autism
itself,\ :sup:`(n.d.ae),(n.d.af)` and the current NICE recommendations
are largely extrapolated from work in adolescent and intellectual
disability populations.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

Our results can best be compared with two open trials that also used the
CORE as a primary outcome measure. A study of modified individual CBT
for people with ASD in a specialist psychological therapy service had a
larger sample (*n* = 81), but with milder baseline severity (mean CORE
global distress 1.79).\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` Of the participants completing
the therapy in that study, 37% showed reliable improvement and 19%
achieved clinical recovery on the CORE global distress score, compared
with 73 and 36% respectively for the participants with ASD in our study.
A study of RO DBT in in-patients with anorexia nervosa had a sample size
of 47 and a baseline severity of 2.21 for CORE global distress, very
similar to our study.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` The mean change in CORE global
distress in the ITT sample was 0.46, with an effect size of 0.71,
thereby showing a more positive outcome overall compared with the
current study.

Social signalling, such as social smiling and prosocial body language,
has been regarded as a core deficit in ASD that is not readily amenable
to change. Our anecdotal impression was that many participants with ASD
were able to learn social signalling, and several gave positive
feedback. For example one anonymous participant commented, ‘I cannot
believe how much it has helped me understand myself, ASD and how to
approach the problems I face with the condition’. Given that the
treatment is designed to treat overcontrol irrespective of ASD
diagnosis, our finding that participants with ASD gained greater benefit
requires further exploration.

.. _sec3-1:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

For any treatment of ASD to be delivered, it must be feasible within the
current clinical practice of mental health service delivery. One of the
strengths of this study is that it was implemented in a
government-funded community treatment team, alongside the routine
delivery of care and treatment for a wide range of mental health
conditions, and without any additional resources. It is also important
to note that the participants treated had an illness of at least
moderate severity and were not selected for the likelihood of responding
to the treatment.

There are several limitations that we recognise. This was an
uncontrolled study and we did not gather data on what other treatment
participants might have received. The study sample was entirely White
British, so the findings may not be translatable to multi-ethnic
populations. The sample size is small, and a large proportion of
participants did not complete the 30 weeks of the RO DBT programme. This
high attrition rate can at least partly be explained by an apparent lack
of motivation and engagement at baseline among the treatment
non-completers, as demonstrated by their lower QPR scores. In addition,
we did not measure the fidelity of the programme to the RO DBT manual.
However, despite the fact that participants in this study received a
more limited version of the recommended RO DBT standard of one-to-one
therapy in addition to weekly skills classes, positive findings were
found in both the per-protocol and the intention-to-treat samples. This
in itself is important to note, as most government-funded community
treatment centres, like the one in this study, would not have the
resources to provide the full programme of RO DBT. Our outcome measures
were limited to self-report questionnaires, which might have been biased
in favour of the treatment received, and we do not know whether the
positive outcomes experienced by the participants were sustained beyond
the 30-week therapy programme. We did not record the severity of
overcontrol at baseline, which is one possible explanation for the
better outcome in participants with an ASD diagnosis.

.. _sec3-2:

Implications for future research
--------------------------------

Future research needs to examine RO DBT in ASD using a randomised
controlled trial methodology and it would be important to record any
additional psychological and pharmacological treatments that
participants receive for comorbid conditions. Follow-up beyond the end
of the therapy programme should also be measured. There are already
modified versions of RO DBT being delivered\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)` and so
studies need to carefully describe the content of the therapeutic
intervention and compare more and less intensive models of RO DBT.
Studies using RO DBT need to report the number of participants with ASD
where the treatment is directed at other disorders, as ASD is likely to
be a comorbid condition in many disorders of overcontrol.

We thank the participants; Kathryn Stevinson and Laura Morrison, who
co-facilitated some group sessions; the clinicians from Redcar &
Cleveland Affective Disorders Team; and staff at Tees, Esk and Wear
Valleys NHS Foundation Trust who supported this work. We are also very
grateful to Roelie Hempel and Kirsten Gilbert for their comments on
earlier drafts of the paper.

**Peter L. Cornwall** is a consultant psychiatrist with Redcar &
Cleveland Mental Health Services, Tees, Esk and Wear Valleys NHS
Foundation Trust, UK. **Susan Simpson** is a psychological therapist
with Redcar & Cleveland Mental Health Services, Tees, Esk and Wear
Valleys NHS Foundation Trust. **Claire Gibbs** is a clinical nurse
specialist with Redcar & Cleveland Mental Health Services, Tees, Esk and
Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust. **Valerie Morfee** is a team manager
with Redcar & Cleveland Mental Health Services, Tees, Esk and Wear
Valleys NHS Foundation Trust.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, [PLC], upon reasonable request.

P.L.C. designed the study, analysed the data and wrote the article. S.S.
helped design the study, delivered the treatment, gathered the data and
helped revise the article. C.G. and V.M. delivered the treatment,
gathered the data and helped revise the article.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.113.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ag.

.. [1]
   CORE, Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation – Outcome Measure; QPR,
   Questionnaire about the Process of Recovery.

.. [2]
   χ\ \ :sup:`2` for frequency variables, *t*-test for continuous
   variables.

.. [3]
   Bold denotes significance at *P* < 0.05.

.. [4]
   CORE, Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation – Outcome Measure; QPR,
   Questionnaire about the Process of Recovery.

.. [5]
   Bold denotes significance at *P* < 0.05.

.. [6]
   Bold denotes significance at *P* < 0.05.

.. [7]
   CORE, Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation – Outcome Measure; QPR,
   Questionnaire about the Process of Recovery.

.. [8]
   Per-protocol sample: ASD, *n* = 11; non-ASD, *n* = 10.

.. [9]
   Intention-to-treat (ITT) sample: ASD, *n* = 18; non-ASD, *n* = 17.

.. [10]
   Bold denotes significance at *P* < 0.05.
