==============================
A portrait of anorexia nervosa
==============================



Lily AstonCorrespondence to Lily Aston (lilyaston5@gmail.com) [1]_
:Date: 2022-04

:Abstract:
   The author draws comparisons between the subjectivity of interpreting
   a work of art and that of experiencing anorexia nervosa. She explores
   her own experiences of anorexia through a portrait depicting the
   duality of the disorder.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
What I like most about art is that it enables me to express complicated
thoughts and emotions that often feel impossible to communicate
verbally. Not only is it expressive, it is also fluid and its effect on
others is completely subjective. It has no concrete rules, methods or
regulations. It is completely versatile, and for a sufferer of anorexia
nervosa, that freedom is certainly relieving. Defining my disorder for
others has often been difficult for me as I find it cannot be
categorised by a standardised list of reasons or symptoms. I believe it
parallels art in that it is subjective to an individual, it has so many
loop-holes and complexities. And so with that, my disorder will be
different to the girl who sits opposite me in class or the boy who goes
to my gym. We are all dealing with our own specialised disorder and that
is something I wanted to express in my artwork.

.. _sec1:

‘It's all inside your head’
===========================

Since finishing this piece (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__) I have listened to a
lot of people's interpretations of it and I love how everyone came up
with a different approach to what it represents. The two sides of the
portrait are meant to represent what is visible of an individual with
anorexia and then the complexities that lie below the surface. While
creating ideas for the visible side of the portrait I thought about what
a typical sufferer of anorexia is perceived to look like. As a society
we automatically assume the individual to be underweight, malnourished,
pale and quite frankly on the cusp between life and death.
Unfortunately, statistical research will show that in a lot of cases
these features are disturbingly common. But I have always held on to the
belief that these visible symptoms are not the determining aspects that
separate a sufferer from a non-sufferer. When I asked my Mum about the
time I was in the deep throes of anorexia she said something that has
stayed with me throughout my recovery. She simply told me ‘there was no
one there’. That idea of an absence of self being a major symptom of
anorexia is definitely something I believe fellow sufferers will
identify with. The defensive remarks, spiteful comments and the extreme
memory loss are all evidence that the person I knew I was, was no longer
present. A lot of sufferers will personify their illness to detach it
from who they are as an individual. In the case of anorexia, this person
is commonly referred to as ‘Ana’ and this double identity was an
important idea that I wanted to feature in my artwork. Fig. 1\ *It's all
inside your head* (2020). Lily Aston.

My personal interpretation of the piece is that the black and white side
represents this ‘absence of self’. The lack of colour and and detail
establishes the loss of personality, it is what others may see when they
face an anorexia sufferer. The coloured side then represents what lies
below the surface, the complexity of emotions: confusion, anger,
sadness, resentment. These all combine to create this explosion of
chaotic colour. They are the emotions that sufferers will tend to hide
from the outside world in order to remain ‘undercover’. That is why many
victims of anorexia will go through a major period of denial, convincing
others and quite often themselves that they are ‘fine’, ‘I couldn't be
happier’, ‘I feel so much healthier now’, ‘oh no thank you, I'm not
hungry’. Humans are emotionally complex beings and expression of these
emotions is necessary to maintain our sanity. So in the case of an
anorexia victim going through denial, it is only a matter of time before
this wall is broken and these emotions come flooding out, quite often
with a vengeance. I remember very clearly when my wall broke down. I
came home from school and went straight to my room to lie on my bed. I
had eaten about 600 calories worth of food in the span of three days and
by that point my body was too weak to feel the hunger pains. I lay there
for a couple of hours until my Mum called me down to say ‘We're going to
order a takeaway’. And I was – furious. My perfect utopian façade had
loosened at the seams and all this hate, fury and fear came bursting out
in all directions as I screamed at these people who I loved more than
anything in the world. I am ashamed to admit that in that moment I
cursed their existence and wished they would disappear.

.. _sec2:

Unlocking the chain
===================

That evening was a turning point for me, it was as if my double identity
had begun to reveal itself to those around me, including myself. And it
was important for me to convey this duality in my portrait. I considered
doing two different faces as I hated the idea of anorexia being a part
of me. But the harsh reality is that it doesn't become a part of you –
it overcomes you. Recovering from an eating disorder is like peeling a
hundred layers of your skin from your body. It is extremely painful,
both physically and mentally. But this shedding of skin is absolutely
essential in order to detach yourself from the grip of anorexia.
Throughout recovery, it is so important to realise that an eating
disorder does not become a permanent part of your skin. I view it as a
locked chain that is wrapped around your body, constricting your
movements. It feels impossible to escape and your situation feels
hopeless for quite a long time. But it is through deep inner strength
and the support of others that we are made to realise that we had the
key in our back pockets all along. However, recovery is not as brief and
straightforward as unlocking a chain. Our chains are quite often tangled
and complicated. It takes a lot of time and patience. But I say from
experience, it is a challenge worth taking.

.. _sec3:

The journey of creation and the journey of recovery
===================================================

The process of making this piece of art was a long and tough journey but
I hope others who are currently battling with their own demons will be
able to identify with it. I welcome and encourage people to interpret it
however they like. For all our journeys are different in their many
complexities, but I hope we will all end up at the same destination.
Content and healthy.

I must also mention an incredible artist called Shawn Coss, whose
interpretations of mental disorders truly touched and inspired me to
create this piece. The haunting figures that are scattered around the
portrait are features of his work. His talent for expressing such
complex emotions encouraged me to express my own, and I hope that others
will be inspired to do the same.

**Lily Aston** is a student currently on a gap year. Due to study
Psychology at Bristol University in 2022 but currently resides in
Eastbourne, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were
created or analysed in its writing.

This article received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. [1]
   See commentary, this issue.
