======================================================================================
Impact of homicide by a psychiatric patient on forensic psychiatrists: national survey
======================================================================================



Gillian Mezey
Renarta Rowe
Gwen Adshead

:Correspondence: Gillian Mezey (gmezey@sgul.ac.uk)

:date: 2021-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To explore the experiences and support needs of consultant forensic
   psychiatrists, whose patients had committed homicide while under
   their care. We circulated a survey to all forensic psychiatrists in
   the UK, through the Royal College of Psychiatrists, asking about
   their experiences of a homicide by a patient under their care.
   Respondents were invited to discuss their experiences further in a
   structured telephone interview and themes were identified from these
   discussions. Data were analysed quantitatively and qualitatively.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   One-third of the 86 respondents had had at least one patient who had
   committed a homicide while under their care. Of these, over
   three-quarters (78%) reported that the homicide had a significant
   impact on their personal life, professional life and/or
   mental/physical health. For some respondents, the impact was severe
   and long term. Respondents generally felt that they would have been
   helped by receiving more support in the aftermath of the homicide.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Greater recognition is needed of the impact on treating psychiatrists
   of homicide by a patient and more support is needed for affected
   clinicians. Further research is necessary, including the effects of
   such events on colleagues in other specialties and examination of the
   costs versus the benefits of mandatory inquiries after homicides.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Homicide by patients receiving psychiatric care is a rare event. Between
2006 and 2016, 11% of all homicide convictions in the UK, a total of 785
homicides, were by mental health patients. This is in stark contrast to
the high rate of suicide by individuals under psychiatric care: during
the same time period, 17 931 mental health patients died by suicide,
representing 28% of all suicides in the UK.\ :sup:`1`

A recent study by Gibbons et al\ :sup:`2` found that the death of a
psychiatric patient by suicide can have a serious impact on the treating
psychiatrist's psychological health, clinical practice and attitude
towards their work. Concerns have been expressed about some of the
unintended and adverse consequences of a patient-perpetrated homicide,
both for the individual clinician and for the organisation,\ :sup:`3`
but there have been no studies examining these effects directly. In the
UK, there have been several cases of psychiatrists being referred to the
General Medical Council (GMC) for allegedly failing to prevent a
homicide, although as far as we know, no referral has yet resulted in
GMC sanction. In France, however, there has been at least one
prosecution of a psychiatrist as a result of their failure to anticipate
and prevent a patient-committed homicide. The psychiatrist was
subsequently convicted of manslaughter, for which she received a
suspended custodial sentence.\ :sup:`4`

A mandatory independent inquiry (which refer as the inquiry) into the
care of any individual who kills and who has been under the care of
psychiatric services at the material time, or the preceding 6–12 month
period, was introduced in the UK in the 1990s, following a number of
high-profile homicides by psychiatric patients\ :sup:`5`. Concerns have
been expressed over the intervening years, about the potential that such
inquiries have for bias and errors of judgement, including the shifting
of responsibility from the system onto the individual clinician, while
failing either to improve patient safety or to reduce risk.\ :sup:`6–9`
Despite this and the acknowledged limitations of accurately predicting
risk in psychiatry,\ :sup:`10–12` the practice of carrying out internal
and external (if the circumstances are sufficiently serious) inquiries
has continued.

This survey set out to examine the impact on their treating psychiatrist
of a patient committing a homicide. Forensic psychiatrists were
targeted, as they work with particularly high-risk patients, who have a
history of serious violence and who are therefore considered to be at
high risk of future violence, including lethal violence.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

In 2017 we conducted a national online survey of consultant forensic
psychiatrists, asking them whether any of their patients had committed
homicide whilst under their care and, if so, how the experience had
affected them. An invitation to participate appeared on the Royal
College of Psychiatrists website. The survey covered the following
areas: impact on personal and professional life, mental and physical
health; support sought or received; experience of the mandatory inquiry
and associated processes and coping strategies. Everyone who completed
the survey was subsequently invited to discuss their experiences further
in a structured telephone interview with one of the three authors. The
telephone discussion was led by a topic guide, at least in part informed
by the areas covered in the quantitative survey. The discussion was
recorded contemporaneously by the interviewer and themes and subthemes
were identified and then discussed and refined by the three authors,
until a consensus was reached. Data from the survey and transcripts are
presented quantitatively and qualitatively, in terms of the main themes
emerging from the interviews.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

In total, 86 consultants completed the survey, of whom 26 had
experienced at least one patient-perpetrated homicide.

.. _sec2-1:

Quantitative data
-----------------

The results of the survey for the 26 respondents are summarised in
`Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Where a respondent had experienced more than one
homicide, they were asked to comment on their worst experience. Table
1Survey data for the 26 respondents who had experienced
patient-perpetrated homicide and their
patients\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ RespondentsConsultant gender, *n* (%) Male19
(74) Female7 (26)Consultant experience at time of homicide (first
homicide if more than one), *n* (%) ≥15 years13 (50) Between 2 and 15
years11 (42) ≤2 years2 (8)Homicides (26 respondents)Number of patient
homicides, *n* (%) One20 (70) Two4 (16) Three3 (12)Gender of
perpetrators, *n* (%) Male23 (92) Female3 (8)Perpetrator location at
time of homicide, *n* (%) In-patient6 (23) Out-patient20 (77)Time since
homicide, range (mean)4 weeks to 30 years (7 years)Relationship with
victim, *n* (%) Family member/acquaintance13 (50) Stranger4 (15) Other9
(36)Consequences of homicide cases, *n* (%)Referral to General Medical
Council2 (8)Media reporting Local media16 (63) National media14
(53) Psychiatrist named in the media3 (11)Required to give evidence in
court, *n* (%)9 (34)Required to give evidence to an external inquiry,
*n* (%)17 (65)Adverse impact on career, *n* (%)10 (38)Adverse impact on
mental health, *n* (%)21 (81)Adverse impact on physical health, *n*
(%)11 (42)Adverse impact on personal life, *n* (%)20 (77) [1]_

The majority of the 26 respondents (*n* = 18; 69%) had experienced one
patient-perpetrated homicide; however, just over one in four reported
more than one homicide. Half of the 26 consultants had been in post for
more than 15 years at the time of the homicide. The homicides had taken
place between 4 weeks and 30 years earlier (mean 7 years). The majority
of perpetrator patients were male and were living in the community at
the time. Half the victims were family members; in only 15% of cases was
the victim a stranger.

Just over three-quarters (*n* = 21; 81%) of the respondents reported
that the homicide and its consequences had affected their mental health,
and around one in four psychiatrists described these effects as having
been ‘very significant’. Almost a half (*n* = 11; 42%) experienced
physical health effects and just over three-quarters (*n* = 20; 77%)
reported a negative impact on their personal life. Half the cases had
been reported in the local and/or national media and three of the
psychiatrists were named in the media. Two individuals were also
subsequently referred to the GMC. Ten psychiatrists (38%) reported that
their career had been adversely affected as a result of the homicide.

.. _sec2-2:

Qualitative data
----------------

Eight of the twenty-six psychiatrists who had experienced a
patient-perpetrated homicide participated in a further qualitative
telephone interview.

The following themes emerged from an analysis of interview transcripts.
Themes were identified through independent coding and discussion among
the three authors, until consensus was reached.

.. _sec2-2-1:

Homicide as a traumatic event
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All consultants recalled the moment they were informed of the killing
and the emotional and psychological impact this had on them at the time.
Recall of this event remained vivid and painful, despite the homicides
having taken place, for the most part, years or decades earlier.
Respondents clearly recalled where they were, what they were doing and
what they had felt on first hearing the news. In most cases, they had
been informed about the homicide through a telephone call. Some
consultants had received the news at work, others while they were at
home or away on holiday: “‘It happened 18 years ago … but I still
remember clearly how it made me feel.’‘My blood ran cold … it was the
most devastating experience of my career … everyone's worst
nightmare.’‘It was harrowing, horrible, the worst experience of my
life.’”

.. _sec2-2-2:

Impact on mental health
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Following the homicide, consultants described a range of emotional and
psychological problems, including: depression, anxiety, anger;
confusion; sleep and appetite disturbance; loss of interest and
enjoyment, poor concentration, social isolation and constant ruminations
about what had happened. For some respondents the emotional and
psychological impact of the homicide had persisted for years: “‘I became
suicidal, low mood, more alcohol, anxiety, high arousal, poor sleep,
anxious.’‘I still feel a strong sense of injustice … bitterness and
resentment.’‘Looking back, I got quite depressed … not knowing what was
going to happen next … assuming the worst … assuming my career was over,
before it had even started … I kept thinking I should have done more …
it was a potentially career-ending event.’”

Symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, including reliving and
re-experiencing symptoms, avoidance and hyperarousal, were common:
“‘Even now if my mobile phone goes off if I'm at home, relaxing with the
children/family … my heart misses a beat … in case someone telling me
that a patient has killed … committed suicide … or escaped.’‘I thought
about this case a lot and for years afterwards … I still have images in
my head of the photos of [the victims] who were killed’.”

Despite very significant distress, none of the doctors interviewed had
sought medical help for their symptoms or been formally diagnosed as
suffering from a mental illness. Few of them had even previously
admitted to themselves the personal toll that the experience had taken
on them.

.. _sec2-2-3:

Impact on relationships and family life
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Respondents described feelings of personal as well as professional
isolation, following the homicide. Most of them had not discussed what
had happened with family members or friends, because of feelings of
shame, or because they feared that they might be blamed or seen as a
failure. Some doctors did not talk about what had happened, out of a
wish to protect their family from such a frightening and distressing
experience and to retain their home as a safe and protected space,
uncontaminated by their work.

Some respondents actively avoided talking or thinking about what had
happened, because it only intensified feelings of distress and
helplessness. However, this avoidance also resulted in them feeling more
isolated and cut off and, in some cases, misunderstood by friends and
family members: “‘The killing … had a more profound effect than I would
have admitted at the time … I only realised what a personal and
professional toll it took on me, my home life and relationship with
colleagues years later.’‘I couldn't really talk to family, I kept to
myself for months.’‘I coped by switching off emotionally … It had a
terrible impact on my relationship with my partner.’”

Increased use of alcohol was also reported in the months following the
homicide, largely as a strategy to block distressing thoughts and to
manage anxiety levels and insomnia: “‘I started drinking too much … and
it got a bit out of control.’”

.. _sec2-2-4:

Impact on clinical practice and career
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some of the direct professional consequences of the homicide included:
being suspended; being referred to the GMC; being named in the local or
national media; repeated appearances at internal and external inquiries
and in court; change of job; and loss of income.

All respondents felt that the homicide had posed a specific challenge to
their professional identity and role, including their clinical
judgement, competence and confidence: “‘I felt isolated and frightened …
but I put on a good show as I had been trained to do.’”

Most consultants considered that their clinical practice, as well as the
way they thought about their work, changed following the homicide. In
most cases these changes were felt to be negative. The most commonly
described changes were: feeling more anxious about and avoidant of risk;
increased caution and lack of confidence in clinical decision-making;
reduced willingness to rely on and trust colleagues; and increased
cynicism about the concepts of multidisciplinary team working and
collective responsibility: “‘It gave me a heightened sense of just how
risky this work is … made me less tolerant of risk.’‘It made me more
twitchy about patients and risk averse.’‘I now cannot delegate and I am
picky about documentation.’”

Respondents frequently expressed a sense of bewilderment about the fact
that they alone, rather than any other member of the multidisciplinary
team, had been held responsible for what had happened:. “‘No other
member of the team was singled out for similar treatment … it was me on
my own … nurses claimed to have been frightened, intimidated, claimed no
role.’‘I felt exposed … and responsible … worried I would be blamed …
that this would affect my career. I felt very alone and vulnerable.’‘As
doctors – we think we ought to be unbreakable … I ended up
professionally isolated.’”

Despite feeling professionally and personally vulnerable and isolated,
all respondents had carried on working and supporting their teams as
usual in the aftermath of the homicide.

.. _sec2-2-5:

Scapegoating and professional isolation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Although some respondents felt that colleagues had been supportive,
others felt that they had been treated like pariahs following the
homicide, which reinforced feelings of shame and stigma. It was not
uncommon for colleagues and managers to decline to discuss the case with
them, ostensibly on the grounds that they might end up a witness in any
future inquiry process or legal action.

.. _sec2-2-6:

Inquiries and hearings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One of the most traumatic consequences of the homicide were the lengthy,
complex and often obscure inquiry processes that followed. These
included not only the internal and external disciplinary processes and
the mandatory inquiry process at trust level, but also frequently a
public inquiry, criminal proceedings or coroners’ courts in which the
respondents were witnesses. Inquiries were experienced as being highly
adversarial and potentially career-ending ordeals, with hidden agendas
and obscure rules of engagement, over which they had no control.

Regardless of the outcome, the various internal and external reviews and
the inquiry process were emotionally and physically draining. Moreover,
the fact that the inquiry processes were commonly extremely prolonged,
with lengthy delays between the hearings and the outcome, made it more
difficult to begin to recover and move on following the experience: “‘I
learned the meaning of the term Kafka-esque … being prosecuted for
something but you don't know what, and … things around you keep changing
in an inexplicable way.’‘The internal inquiry blamed everyone and was
poorly managed. The interview was very traumatic … a panel of 8 people,
arguing with each other … I physically collapsed afterwards … I had no
solicitor, no support.’‘It was like a big dysfunctional family … a
bird's nest of bad relationships … where the abused children turn on
each other.’”

A number of consultants described how they had been being expected to
express remorse and contrition for the homicide, even where there
appeared to be a consensus that the homicide could not have been
prevented or predicted: “‘You had to throw yourself on your sword and go
quietly, rather than whinge or complain … even if you feel you have been
treated unfairly.’‘The whole experience was negative, humiliating,
criticising.’‘Ultimately you are on your own … you need to be prepared
to defend yourself … whatever you think, you have got to say you're
sorry.’”

None of the consultants was able to identify any positive aspects of the
inquiry, in terms of learning for themselves, answers being provided to
the victim's family, righting wrongs, or driving improvements in patient
care and safety: “‘I don't think it changed practice … it was
unpredictable, there was not much more I could have done … I didn't
learn lessons at all, just made me very anxious.’‘… other people picking
over the bones … it was all hindsight bias.’‘I saw them as biased and
unfair … it was not until many years later that I could look at … what
had happened … and think about whether there was something to learn.’”

Respondents frequently referred to the outcome of the inquiry being
entirely and arbitrarily dependent on the individual panel members, over
which they had no say or control. One consultant felt they had been
lucky in having had two psychiatrist members of their panel, whose input
had been helpful and constructive: “‘The saving grace of the independent
inquiry was that there were two psychiatrists on the panel who were well
disposed … the psychiatrist on the panel was a life saver … however, the
outcome could have gone either way.’”

Another consultant, however, described the psychiatric input in a much
more negative way: “‘I was very struck by the medical member's punitive
approach and the rush to judgement. I also thought that there was some
sadistic pleasure in shafting another colleague.’”

The psychiatrist member of the inquiry panel was often well known to the
respondent, thereby increasing unease about the lack of impartiality. A
number of consultants expressed a wish for greater transparency and
clarity about how psychiatric and lay members of homicide inquiries are
appointed and what training they receive prior to performing this role:
“‘There is a need for panel members to have appropriate training for the
role … lack of due process in the homicide inquiry.’”

Respondents who considered the homicide and subsequent inquiry to have
had no significant effect on their clinical practice or approach
described this as being a matter of luck, rather than due to anything
that they personally had done, or had felt able to influence: “‘It had
no effect on my career …but I missed a bullet …it could so easily have
destroyed everything.’”

.. _sec2-2-7:

Support sought, offered and received
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Although a couple of consultants felt that they had been reasonably well
supported by their NHS trust in the aftermath of the homicide, most felt
that that their trust had been more concerned about protecting the
reputation of the organisation, even when this meant blaming the doctor.
Expressions that were frequently employed by respondents were being
‘scapegoated’ or ‘thrown to the lions’ by their employers following the
homicide: “‘employers gave no support … just worried about bad publicity
for the Trust.’‘Some people contacted me spontaneously and offered
commiseration, including unexpected folk … But … managers were defending
the organisation.’‘There was no support of any kind or advice from
colleagues or the employer … I was made to feel like a pariah … the
Trust saw me as a threat … I was not provided with any information about
the Trust response to the SUI [serious untoward incident] or the
inquiry, although … later informed that an inquiry had reported.’”

In general, consultants were left to work out for themselves who to talk
to and where to seek help: “My organisation turned on me … The College's
psychiatrists support network … listened but was not really supportive …
I just had one phone call … no debrief or support within the team … I
just carried on.’”

Only one of the respondents reported being offered time off or
counselling following the homicide.

.. _sec2-2-8:

Coping and how to survive
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When asked ‘What helped you get through this?’, most respondents cited
support from friends, family and close colleagues. However, feelings of
shame and an understandable desire not to have to dwell on distressing
events often stopped consultants from asking for help even where this
might have been on offer: “‘I only got through because I was resilient
and tough … but I also did not talk to anyone about how I was feeling,
and that had negative effects.’”

Most respondents attributed their ‘survival’ to their own personal
resilience and luck: “‘[Psychiatrists] are so tough emotionally – you
have to be very resistant to stress to survive.’‘I learned that how you
are finally dealt with depends on what you do afterwards, how you
conduct yourself in the aftermath. People like a survivor.’”

As regards support during the inquiry processes, good legal
representation was felt to be essential, as well as access to a
sympathetic colleague, who had gone through a similar experience.
Several respondents suggested that it would have been helpful to have
been provided with a ‘road map’ of possible outcomes, to help prepare
them for what was to come: “‘It would help to know what to expect, what
about GMC referral, what do I do to prepare?’‘Need to instruct a
barrister – best you can get.’‘Need for a mentor – someone who has gone
through a similar experience … who will understand what a doctor might
be feeling and give practical advice as well as emotional support.’”

Suggestions were also made about the need to reconsider how homicides by
psychiatric patients are perceived, reported and responded to in the UK:
“‘The [Royal College of Psychiatrists] needs to stand up against a mob
rule mentality … needs to make sure the public understands that
psychiatrists sometimes make mistakes, they do not get it right all the
time and are not infallible … just to understand how complex these
issues are.’”

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The psychiatrists who completed this survey described feelings of
depression, anxiety, guilt and responsibility, shame and self-doubt
following patient-perpetrated homicide. Professional and personal
isolation, including scapegoating, were common.

Although some of these responses and experiences are similar to those
described by psychiatrists following a patient suicide,\ :sup:`2,13`
there appear to be some important differences in the way that
psychiatrists react following a patient-perpetrated homicide compared
with a patient suicide. These differences may reflect the way in which
society views the killing of a third and ‘innocent’ party, as opposed to
self-inflicted harm; the relative rarity of homicide compared with
suicide; and the organisational, societal and legal repercussions
following homicide.

The homicide itself represented a psychological trauma similar to that
following a traumatic bereavement.\ :sup:`14` For many consultants, it
led to a shattering of basic assumptions\ :sup:`15` about the world as
benevolent, meaningful and controllable and about the self as worthy.
Consultants who had previously thought of themselves as being ‘good
doctors’ found themselves defined, judged and found wanting by this
single event. They were transformed overnight from confident and
effective clinical team leaders to negligent, reckless and incompetent,
and clinical liabilities.

As with many victims of trauma, a sense of actual or threatened loss –
loss of job, loss of career prospects, loss of reputation, loss of sense
of professional competence and identity – featured prominently.

The parallels with victims of psychological trauma are stark, and yet
doctors who found themselves in this position were extremely reluctant
to present themselves as vulnerable or distressed. The narrative
commonly adopted was that the only people deserving of sympathy were the
victim and their family members. Any attempt to usurp that role was felt
to be both self-indulgent and distasteful. Moreover, as clinical team
leaders, there was often a sense that they needed to be able to support
and shield their team and to lead from the front.

Many respondents described a disconnect between the widely proclaimed
mantra of multidisciplinary teamwork and collective responsibility and
the way in which, in the aftermath of a homicide, they had been held
responsible, above all others, for what had happened. They frequently
found themselves depicted in the aftermath as dictators and autocrats,
which led to feelings of disillusionment and betrayal.

For our respondents, the homicide represented just the start of what was
experienced as a long, confusing and painful journey of recovery and
redemption, for them as much for the patient perpetrator. Chief among
the post-homicide hurdles to be negotiated and survived were the
numerous legal and quasi-legal proceedings, such as coroner's courts,
perpetrators’ trials, GMC referral, disciplinary hearings and the
inquiry.

The inquiry process and associated processes were generally experienced
as frightening, confusing, punitive and humiliating. Although the
process is understood to be inquisitorial in nature, it was in reality
experienced as highly adversarial, with the outcome appearing to be
entirely and arbitrarily dependent on the experience and beneficence, or
otherwise, of individual panel members.

.. _sec3-1:

The way forward
---------------

The value of post-homicide Inquiries, as currently constituted, has been
repeatedly questioned over the years.\ :sup:`6–9` However, the social
imperative to identify a cause and to be able to hold someone
responsible appears to outweigh any objections on the basis of lack of
fairness or transparency or even due process.

The experience of our respondents suggests that it may be time for NHS
England to carry out a cost–benefit analysis of such inquiries and to
review the mandatory inquiry policy. It is clearly important for the
families of victims to be able to express feelings of grief and anger
and to understand why the killing has occurred and what, if anything,
could have been done to prevent it. However, it is also important to
convey the message that such tragic events are, thankfully,
exceptionally rare,\ :sup:`16,17` that not all of them can be predicted
or prevented\ :sup:`1,7` and that there is rarely any single cause or
individual responsible for them. More consideration could also be given
to alternative ways to help victims’ families, for example using
mediation or restorative justice approaches,\ :sup:`18` although it
should also always be remembered, when thinking about who does the
‘restoration’, that the offender in this case is the patient who killed,
rather than the doctor who was looking after them.

As with psychiatrists whose patients kill themselves, the psychiatrists
in this survey had been offered no or little support following the
homicide.\ :sup:`2` Trusts may need to be reminded that they have a duty
of care to their employees, who require support following an event of
this nature. There needs to be more open discussion about how to weigh
up the doctor's duty of care towards their patient with their
responsibility to protect the public, including the acknowledgement that
the two may sometimes appear to be in opposition.\ :sup:`19` The Royal
College of Psychiatrists could also play a more active role in
supporting its members following a patient-perpetrated homicide, such as
by providing confidential telephone support and advice about where to
get help and identifying colleague ‘buddies’ who have been through
similar experiences and can provide guidance and support through the
process. Early advice from defence unions and identification of senior
legal experts are also clearly essential for survival.

The strength of this study is that we were able to elicit qualitative as
well as quantitative responses from forensic psychiatrists. Although we
focused on forensic psychiatrists, the majority of homicides by
psychiatric patients are carried out by patients who are under the care
of general adult psychiatrists. It is not clear whether responses of
general psychiatrists following a homicide would be any different, and
this survey would be worth repeating with a larger sample of
psychiatrists from all disciplines to explore potential similarities and
differences.

**Gillian Mezey** is Emeritus Professor of Forensic Psychiatry in the
Population Research Institute at St George's, University of London, and
an honorary consultant forensic psychiatrist at South West London and St
George's Mental Health NHS Trust, UK. She is a psychiatrist member of
Practitioner Health, an NHS service to support doctors and dentists who
experience mental health problems, and a specialist member of the
England and Wales Parole Board. **Gwen Adshead** is consultant forensic
psychotherapist at Broadmoor Hospital, West London NHS Trust, and an
honorary consultant forensic psychotherapist at Central and North West
London NHS Foundation Trust, UK. She is a health associate for the
General Medical Council. **Renarta Rowe** is a consultant forensic
psychiatrist and Deputy Medical Director for Quality and Safety at
Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, G.M., upon reasonable request.

The contribution of all three authors is compliant with ICMJE
requirements. All three authors devised the survey, conducted
interviews, carried out the analysis of data and contributed to the
writing of the paper.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

R.R. and G.M. have both had experience of a patient committing a
homicide while under their care. Neither of them completed the survey
and their experiences do not constitute part of the results.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.96.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. [1]
   Data (for both consultants and patient-perpetrators) relate to the
   homicide with the worst impacts on the respondents, if respondents
   experienced more than one.
