====================================================================================================
Religion and mental health: a narrative review with a focus on Muslims in English-speaking countries
====================================================================================================



Ahmed Ibrahim
Rob Whitley

:Correspondence: Dr Rob Whitley (robert.whitley@mcgill.ca)

:date: 2021-06

:Abstract:
   Numerous commentators have noted a historic ambivalence between
   religion and psychiatry. However, a growing body of evidence
   indicates an association between mental health and various religious
   activities, both private and public. As such, there are growing calls
   for greater religious sensitivity among mental health clinicians, to
   help unlock the potentially healing aspects of religiosity. So far,
   most literature from English-speaking countries has focused on
   Christianity and mental health, with little attention paid to Muslim
   mental health. This is the fastest growing religion in
   English-speaking countries, and the mental health of Muslims in these
   countries is under-researched. As such, the present paper summarises
   new directions in the mental health and religion literature, with a
   focus on the mental health of Muslims in English-speaking countries.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Numerous commentators have noted a historic ambivalence between religion
and psychiatry.\ :sup:`1–4` This can be traced back to the writings of
formative figures in the early decades of psychiatry; for example, Freud
argued that religion was a delusional infantilism that could be
disabused through therapy.\ :sup:`5` Other magisterial figures such as
Ellis and Skinner also considered some aspects of religion to be
antithetical to positive mental health.\ :sup:`6,7`

More recent studies indicate that this ambivalence continues to the
present day. For example, one study found low levels of religiosity
among psychiatrists compared with other physicians,\ :sup:`8` while
another study found a lack of integration of religious variables into
psychiatric research.\ :sup:`9` This may signify a continued uneasiness
within psychiatry about incorporating aspects of religion into
psychiatric research and practice.

.. _sec1:

Religion and mental health
==========================

That said, a growing body of research suggests a positive association
between mental health and religious activities, known in the social
sciences as ‘religiosity’.\ :sup:`10` This literature indicates that
religiosity is positively associated with prevention and
recovery.\ :sup:`1,11` For example, a large corpus of research indicates
that religiosity is moderately associated with greater well-being, lower
rates of depression and anxiety, and lower rates of
suicide.\ :sup:`12–14` Similarly, other studies suggest that both public
and private religiosity is associated with recovery from a range of
mental illnesses, including depression, schizophrenia and substance use
disorder.\ :sup:`15–17` Of note, many of the studies examining
religiosity and mental health are cross-sectional, meaning that reverse
causation is possible. However, the consistency of the findings has led
researchers to further investigate religiosity to examine specific
factors that may be associated with mental health.

.. _sec2:

Public and private religiosity
==============================

Some scholars divide religious practice into private (interiorised) or
public (exteriorised) religiosity.\ :sup:`12,13` Private religiosity
refers to factors occurring alone or in the family home, for example,
reading scripture or private prayer. Public religiosity refers to
communal religious activities such as attending a place of worship or
group study of a sacred text. Some religious activities are transversal
across both those domains. For example, adherence to a moral code or a
deep religious faith could manifest in both public and private domains.

Research indicates that these aspects of religiosity are associated with
better mental health. For example, some anthropological literature
indicates that participation in rituals can influence mental health
through release of positive emotions.\ :sup:`18` Moreover, public
religiosity provides a community of believers, which can reduce
loneliness and bring beneficial social support.\ :sup:`12` Private
religiosity can help solidify family cohesion and provide ontological
security during difficult life situations and transitions.\ :sup:`17`
All this can provide a sense of meaning and purpose, as well as a
hopeful yet realistic view of life, which can be an ongoing resource for
resilience, recovery and positive mental health.\ :sup:`19,20`

.. _sec3:

Negative aspects of religiosity
===============================

In acknowledging these positive aspects of religiosity, it is important
to consider other research indicating the potential harmful aspects of
religiosity. For example, some research indicates that religiosity can
lead to excessive feelings of guilt, fear, shame and death
anxiety.\ :sup:`21,22` Similarly, high levels of religiosity may lead
some people to consult religious leaders in lieu of seeking help from a
mental health professional in the presence of mental
distress.\ :sup:`23`

Some religious leaders may encourage such consultation, believing
themselves to be better placed than clinicians in the process of
‘diagnosing’ distress and facilitating mental healing. For example, some
faith leaders may impute mental illness to a spiritual weakness or
insufficient religiosity. Likewise, mental illnesses may be attributed
by these leaders to supernatural forces such as the ‘evil eye’ or
‘spirit possession’. This can lead to religiously inspired actions such
as exorcism and the discouragement of mental health service
utilisation.\ :sup:`23,24` Research on Muslim chaplains in the USA, for
instance, found a low rate of referral of congregants to mental health
professionals among chaplains.\ :sup:`25–28` This indicates the need for
increased understanding in order to build better bridges between Muslims
and mental health services. The next section thus focuses on Islam,
Muslims and mental health.

.. _sec4:

Islam and mental health
=======================

As English-speaking countries become more diverse, with increasing
proportions of the population following non-Christian faiths, the
relationship between mental health and religion becomes more complex.
Most notably, the Muslim population of many English-speaking countries
is rising, with Muslims now making up 3.2% of Canada's
population,\ :sup:`29` compared with 5% in the UK.\ :sup:`30` According
to the Pew Research Center, there were about 3.5 million Muslims living
in the USA in 2017, making up around 1% of the population. By 2040,
Muslims will replace Jews as the second largest religious group in the
USA.\ :sup:`31`

There may be a differential effect on mental health according to
religious affiliation, belief and practice; however, this has been
understudied. For example, religions have many commonalities but also
many differences.\ :sup:`32` These differences manifest themselves in a
variety of ways, including notions of morality, theodicy and
supernatural intervention.

These differences may have a direct influence on seeking professional
mental healthcare, for instance, by channelling people towards religious
solutions to the exclusion of seeking psychiatric help. One broad
difference between religions relates to the notion of spirit
possession.\ :sup:`33` Possession refers to the belief that an
individual has been entered by an alien spirit that controls or alters
their actions, manifesting as an altered state of
consciousness.\ :sup:`33` It is often found among Muslims but less so
among Jews or Christians in English-speaking countries. Possession is
frequently used as an explanatory model in some religious communities
and among religious individuals to interpret illnesses such as epilepsy,
panic and depression.\ :sup:`33,34`

In Islam, supernatural beings that can take possession of humans are
known as jinn, who are conceived as a race of intelligent beings that
possess rational faculties. They marry, reproduce and die. According to
Islamic doctrine, unlike humans, they have extraordinary powers. They
can take different shapes, such as birds, animals and humans, and can
move instantly from one place to another.\ :sup:`35` Jinn are discussed
in Islam's scripture, the Qur'an, as well as in the hadith literature.

Although the majority of Muslims believe in the presence of jinn, there
is heterogeneity of belief regarding how much they can influence the
human world.\ :sup:`35` Conducting ethnographic interviews with East
London Bangladeshis, one study found that the community was split into
two main groups. The older generation believed in the power of jinn and
often attributed sickness to jinn, whereas the younger second- and
third-generation Bangladeshis considered their parents' beliefs to be
superstitious and ‘non-Islamic’. Despite the younger generation's
sceptical comments about the older members of their community, almost
all informants cited instances related to jinn's malevolent
power.\ :sup:`35`

The aforementioned study of Bangladeshi Muslims in East
London\ :sup:`35,36` also indicated that some sufferers of ‘jinn’ and
their families are likely to seek help from their religious leaders
rather than mental health clinicians, even though the latter may be
better placed to diagnose and treat any underlying mental health issues.
This could be because people commonly perceive religious solutions as
the answer to what they perceive to be religious problems.\ :sup:`17` As
such, Littlewood advises psychiatrists to be sensitive to such cultural
beliefs by not contradicting any statements made by the patient and
their family about jinn or spirit possession.\ :sup:`33` Instead, he
recommends involving ‘culture brokers’ such as an imam from the culture
in question to provide contextual information on local beliefs and
practices. This could positively affect the therapeutic alliance when
authorised by the patient.\ :sup:`15`

It is important to recognise that broad religious traditions such as
Islam contain much internal heterogeneity. Anthropologists have tried to
capture this heterogeneity by devising the concepts of Great and Little
Tradition. The Great Tradition in Islam is the textual, intellectual
tradition of the towns, whereas the Little Tradition is the traditional,
ritualistic religion of the countryside.\ :sup:`37` Beliefs in exorcism
and jinn tend to be more prevalent within the Little
Tradition.\ :sup:`38` Importantly, both these traditions may exist among
immigrant and minority communities in English-speaking countries.

This example of belief in Jinn indicates how religious variables can
influence explanatory models and mental health service utilisation.
These religious beliefs and explanatory models often traverse time and
geography. This brings us to the second part of this paper, which
examines practices that can integrate religious variables into clinical
care.

.. _sec5:

Integrating religion into clinical care
=======================================

Clinicians can harness helpful aspects of religiosity to foster recovery
in patients where appropriate. Moreover, clinicians and clergy can
collaborate in the holistic care of patients. However, many clinicians
are understandably wary of engaging in such activities, perhaps owing to
the aforesaid complexities, as well as unfamiliarity with the diversity
of religious experience.\ :sup:`39`

Existing examples of positive collaboration tend to stem from
cooperation between clinicians and Christian clergy. This is not
necessarily because of anything inherently conducive to this form of
cooperation within Christian theology or praxis; it may simply be due to
strength of numbers in English-speaking countries. One example of
clergy–clinician collaboration is Hope Haven, a private agency in Iowa
that has been providing psychosocial rehabilitation services for many
years.\ :sup:`11` The agency combines spirituality with mental health
services in various ways. For example, the Religious Services department
at Hope Haven seeks to engage area churches in welcoming and including
people with psychiatric disabilities into the life of the
church.\ :sup:`40` The agency offers daily devotions for patients, as
well as spiritual support and prayer for those going through difficult
situations. In a similar vein, Muslims in the USA and UK have
established small-scale centres of psychotherapy such as the Khalil
Centre and Ihsan Centre, where Islamic spirituality is integrated into
care.\ :sup:`41` However, such initiatives remain isolated examples.

This raises the question of what can be done to better equip everyday
clinicians in routine practice to deal with religious patients and
religious issues, especially those from minority faiths such as Islam.
Some researchers have speculated whether mental health practitioners
should receive training in the spiritual and religious beliefs of major
religions so that they can better distinguish religious beliefs from
psychopathology.\ :sup:`42,43` This may be impractical, given the
heterogeneity and diversity within and between religions previously
described.

An alternative approach is the adoption of a set of attitudes and
processes that facilitate the integration of spirituality and religion
into clinical care. This could involve working with ‘culture brokers’
such as chaplains or community-based key informants in the treatment of
religious patients, depending on the spiritual profile and wishes of the
patient in question. This is the approach taken by the Cultural
Consultation Service in Montreal, which has a bank of culture brokers
that can be accessed by clinicians facing complex religious issues in
the treatment of patients.\ :sup:`44` These culture brokers can offer
perspectives and interpretations based on their locally grounded
community experience, which may be especially effective if the culture
broker is recommended by the patient and involved in their follow-up
care. This approach can be a useful adjunct to standard clinical care;
however, the provision and training of culture brokers can be a
difficult task, meaning that more practical approaches are often
necessary.

Instead of relying on abstract nomothetic knowledge or the intervention
of third parties, a more practical approach may involve clinicians
making conscious efforts to gain an idiographic understanding of the
patient's religious worldview during the clinical consultation.
Importantly, researchers have developed a number of simple and generic
tools and procedures that clinicians can use to elicit information about
patient religiosity (or lack thereof), sometimes known as a ‘spiritual
assessment’. These tools can be used by psychiatrists in clinical
settings to enhance understandings and decision-making, and can be
applied to Muslims as well as others.

This includes the Outline for Cultural Formulation and the Cultural
Formulation Interview (CFI) contained in the DSM-5.\ :sup:`45`
Supplementary modules to the core CFI include the ‘Spirituality,
Religion, and Moral Traditions’ module, which provides 16 useful
questions for the deep and meaningful probing of religious issues where
appropriate.\ :sup:`46`

Another of these well-known tools is known as the Faith, Importance,
Community, and Address (FICA) instrument.\ :sup:`47` The FICA inquires
into the following four domains: (a) *Faith and belief*, ‘Do you have
spiritual beliefs that help you cope with stress?’; (b) *Importance*,
‘What role do your beliefs have in regaining health?’; (c) *Community*,
‘Are you part of a religious or spiritual community? If so, is this of
support to you and how?’; and (d) *Address* in care, ‘How would you like
me as your healthcare provider to address these issues in care?’.

Importantly, the short and neutrally posed questions allow atheists and
non-religious people to quickly express a lack of interest in these
issues and move onto other topics. Of note, there has been little
research on the use and effectiveness of such tools and instruments
among Muslim patients. This is an important area for future research.

Interestingly, some researchers have proposed specific procedures for
clinicians working with Muslim patients. Abu Raiya and
Pargament\ :sup:`48` proposed a series of recommendations including: (a)
asking about the place of religion in patients’ lives; (b) educating
themselves about basic Islamic beliefs and practices; (c) helping
patients draw on Islamic religious coping methods; (d) referring to a
clergy member if appropriate; and (e) participating in educating Muslims
about mental health. These recommendations overlap with the
above-described generic advice for clinicians dealing with religious
patients and could be a useful tool for working with Muslim patients.

All these tools have the potential to foster what has been termed
‘existential recovery’, defined as ‘having a sense of hope, empowerment,
agency, and spiritual well-being’.\ :sup:`49` For example, clinicians
may refer an isolated patient of faith to a sympathetic chaplain for
spiritual and social support, who may in turn link the patient to a
community of believers. However, such actions must be tailored to
individual need and preferences, and may be more difficult for patients
who are members of minority faiths such as Islam, where access to Muslim
chaplains is more limited.

Indeed, research shows that Muslim chaplains are underutilised in
English-speaking countries such as the USA.\ :sup:`25–27` In Britain,
one study of the provision of spiritual and pastoral care facilities in
a high-security hospital revealed that demand for pastoral care could be
significantly higher among Muslim patients compared to Christian
patients. With one Muslim chaplain employed part-time, the authors
argued that the allocation of chaplaincy resources should be re-examined
in light of the multi-faith nature of modern Britain.\ :sup:`50` This is
an area in need of further discussion and research.

In addition, clergy–clinician collaboration could be better attained by
giving mental health training to clergy and other religious leaders. In
fact, there are now a number of pastoral counselling programmes training
clergy and others to help people with mental health issues, using
evidence-based psychotherapies nested within a religious framework. Such
programmes can be found at prestigious US universities including New
York University and Northwestern University. Again, such initiatives
have predominantly involved Christian clergy; training of Muslim
religious leaders is lacking.\ :sup:`27` Likewise, counselling courses
are offered to the clergy by the Association of Christian Counsellors in
the UK, among others, but not for Muslim clergy *per se*.

Despite these efforts, there is a need for further research and action
in this regard. For example, a study of British clergy representing
Christianity, Judaism and Islam revealed that most members of the clergy
had received little or no training in mental health as part of their
ministry training.\ :sup:`4` The clergy members interviewed seldom
differentiated between psychotic illness and common mental disorders
such as depression and anxiety. Some members of the clergy interpreted
unusual or disturbing behaviour as a religious problem provoked by a
curse, witchcraft or spirit possession. In these cases, prayers and
exorcism were considered an appropriate response.\ :sup:`51`

It is unlikely that mental health training for the clergy will cause
these religious interpretations to disappear, because people may draw
upon more than one explanatory model at a time to explain distress.
However, training may give a more holistic understanding, and research
indicates that people often hold coexisting religious and psychiatric
explanatory models of mental illness, which can lead them to use various
modalities of healing in cases of mental distress.\ :sup:`17,52`

Indeed, it is important to communicate to clinicians and clergy that
religious and psychiatric intervention is not an ‘either-or’ scenario;
both deployed simultaneously could produce effective results. For
example, anthropological research indicates that certain rituals such as
prayer may be beneficial to the healing and recovery of some
individuals.\ :sup:`18` Thus, it is not advisable to reject such
practices out of hand without learning about the preferences and
worldviews of individual patients. This is where ‘spiritual assessment’
tools can be useful, even necessary.

.. _sec6:

Conclusion
==========

There is growing evidence that the influence of religion on mental
health is largely positive. This research supersedes outdated notions
perpetuated by figures such as Freud about the negative effects of
religion on mental health. Moreover, this growing evidence gives impetus
to new models of cooperation between religious leaders and mental health
professionals.

In an ideal world, this would involve a bidirectional system of
cooperation and education. On the one hand, clergy could receive basic
training and education in mental health. This could improve
understanding of mental illness and increase referrals from clergy to
mental health professionals. Similarly, educational and public outreach
campaigns could be targeted at religious and minority communities, with
cooperation and participation from the communities themselves. On the
other hand, there is still a need for better education of mental health
professionals in religious matters. This includes training in areas such
as taking a spiritual history and working with culture brokers and
community religious leaders. Such training could be co-delivered by
clinical experts and religious leaders.

At the policy level, administrators may reconsider their chaplaincy
resource allocation to ensure that minority faiths, whose adherents tend
to have greater religious counselling needs, are proportionately
resourced. Importantly, new action and research that responds to the
growing religious diversity of English-speaking societies is necessary,
with particular focus on the growing and heterogeneous Muslim community
to ensure that policy and practice are based on evidence rather than
stereotypes. This could ultimately lead to more supportive and tailored
treatment options that harness, rather than ignore, patient religiosity
and spirituality, thereby promoting a holistic recovery in religious
patients.

**Ahmed Ibrahim** is an independent scholar in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
**Rob Whitley** is an Associate Professor in the Department of
Psychiatry, McGill University, and a Research Scientist at the Douglas
Hospital Research Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Both authors met all four ICMJE criteria for authorship. A.I. and R.W.
conceived the article together. A.I. conducted the literature review and
wrote the first draft with R.W.'s help. Both authors were involved in
the subsequent revisions, the writing of the final manuscript and
responding to the reviewers' comments.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
