=======================================================================
To travel is to live: embracing the emerging field of travel psychiatry
=======================================================================

Gerard Flaherty
Shang Yuin Chai
Brian HallahanCorrespondence to Professor Gerard Flaherty
(gerard.flaherty@nuigalway.ie)
:Date: 2021-06

:Abstract:
   For a person with mental illness, travelling abroad can be
   challenging but it can be easier when the traveller and healthcare
   practitioner have a clear understanding of the likely impact of
   travel on the illness and of the illness on the travel experience.
   Travel may also precipitate first presentations of mental illness or
   unmask previously undiagnosed mental disorders. We propose that
   mental health problems should receive greater recognition in travel
   medicine and that psychiatrists should collaborate more closely with
   travel medicine clinicians to ensure that their patients benefit from
   the opportunities afforded by international travel.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
“‘To move, to breathe, to fly, to float, to gain all while you give, to
roam the roads of lands remote, to travel is to live.’Hans Christian
Anderson, *The Fairy Tale of My Life: An Autobiography* (1847)”

The psychological benefits of international travel, especially for
tourism purposes, have been largely ignored until relatively recently in
the travel medicine literature, whose focus to date has been on the
mitigation of travel health risks through vaccination and pre-travel
physical health counselling. The unique challenges faced by travellers
with diagnosed mental illness are rarely addressed in the pre-travel
medical consultation. Furthermore, travel may precipitate first clinical
episodes of mental illness in an unfamiliar environment. Travel medicine
physicians without basic knowledge of psychiatry are often poorly
prepared to anticipate the likelihood of decompensation of mental
illness in this cohort of travellers. We propose travel psychiatry as an
emerging area of both research and clinical interest. This article draws
on the sparse available literature and over 40 years of combined
clinical experience in psychiatry (B.H.) and travel medicine (G.F.) to
describe the effects of international travel, both positive and
negative, on people with mental illness, with the aim of advocating for
an integrated approach to supporting individuals with mental illness
when travelling abroad.

.. _sec1:

Mental health challenges of international travel
================================================

Travel, even with a recreational motivation, is inherently stressful and
the perceived stressful impact is likely a product of the travel
itinerary, destination, activities and individual traveller
susceptibility. Felkai & Kurimay reported that 11.3% of travellers
experience some symptoms of mental illness during travel, with 0.3% of
travellers experiencing an acute psychotic episode.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`

Indeed, incidence data reveal that acute psychotic episodes account for
one-fifth of travel-related mental illnesses. Travellers who are deemed
medically fit to travel and who have no history of mental disorder may
develop acute *de novo* psychosis during their trip. The cumulative
effects of travel-induced stress, culture shock, inappropriate alcohol
intake and/or recreational substance use, circadian rhythm disruption,
underlying brain pathology and physical illness have been implicated as
contributing factors in the development of first-time psychosis during
travel.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)–(n.d.b)` Another subgroup of travel-related
psychosis occurs during travel to destinations with high religious,
cultural and aesthetic value, so-called high-valence
venues.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` However, many of these episodes occur against a
background of a pre-existing psychotic illness. Airault & Valk describe
a number of specific destination syndromes, including Jerusalem
syndrome, Stendhal syndrome and Paris syndrome.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` In
addition, travel to high-altitude destinations is increasingly regarded
as an additional risk factor for the development of acute psychotic
episodes and an increased risk of both suicidal ideation and completed
suicide.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

Misuse of alcohol and/or psychoactive substances among international
travellers may be associated with an exacerbation of existing mental
illness and could precipitate an acute psychotic
episode.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.d)` Physicians should consequently be
mindful about their patients travelling abroad for the purpose of
seeking therapeutic or recreational drugs. Drug tourism, whereby
tourists cross international borders for the purpose of obtaining or
using psychoactive substances, is associated with significant adverse
health effects, including drug-induced psychosis, unintentional physical
injury, risky sexual behaviour and criminal acts.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` In
addition to drugs of misuse, medications used in travel medicine (such
as mefloquine for malaria chemoprophylaxis) can potentially trigger
acute psychotic episodes in people with a previous or undiagnosed mental
illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.d)`

Anxiety symptoms are common in individuals engaging in travel. The sense
of uncontrollability and inherent unpredictability presented by travel
may cause travellers to develop anxiety symptoms or worsen an existing
anxiety disorder. Culture shock is a travel phenomenon that exposes
travellers to the risk of anxiety symptoms, in addition to confusion, a
sense of isolation, rejection and deprivation due to cultural
differences experienced while abroad. Patients may feel overwhelmed when
immersed in an unfamiliar destination and struggle to make the necessary
adaptations to acclimatise to local customs and cultural norms.
Moreover, travelling abroad inevitably leads to a lack of daily
structural routine, separation from social supports in some cases and a
lack of support, which can precipitate poor adherence to prescribed
psychotropic medications. Furthermore, there is evidence that jet lag
can exert a debilitating effect on travellers with mental illness, with
sleep loss being demonstrated to increase the risk of episodes of
(hypo)mania in individuals diagnosed with bipolar
disorder.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` This may be significant in international
travel if the patient encounters circadian rhythm disruption and other
stressors that result in sleep disturbance.

Where an individual develops an acute episode of mental illness,
receiving appropriate intervention in a timely fashion can be
challenging for a number of reasons, including problems communicating
health difficulties to clinicians, cultural differences, poorly
established diagnoses and lack of clarity in relation to the psychiatric
history of the traveller. Furthermore, difficulties may arise if there
is delay in the diagnosis of physical illness, such as hypoglycaemia,
epileptic aura or hypothyroidism, which may initially present with
alterations in mental health. Repatriation to the home country where
patients can receive specialised treatment from their multidisciplinary
mental health team in a familiar environment may be the most appropriate
intervention.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` However, repatriation for psychiatric
reasons can be a particularly complex undertaking requiring, in many
cases, medical escort by a suitably trained mental health
professional(s) and stabilisation of the person's mental health before
costly aeromedical evacuation that may not be covered by travel health
insurance.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

.. _sec2:

Is travel advisable for people with mental illness?
===================================================

Although it is reasonable to postulate that leisure activities abroad
may be beneficial for people with mental illness, research is lacking in
this area. One qualitative study from The Netherlands explored how
engaging in travel contributes positively to the mental rehabilitation
of psychiatric patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Material was collected from
participant observation involving eleven travellers with severe and
enduring chronic mental illness who were accompanied by four psychiatric
nurses during two trips. Many positive experiences were reported,
including maintenance of social contact; the opportunity to develop
foreign language skills; enrichment of life resulting from enjoyment and
cherishable memories; positive influence on self-esteem; and a departure
from the monotonies of daily routine life.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` The research
also provided a learning environment outside of psychiatric institutions
for the nurses involved. Some travellers required the nurses’ support in
managing psychotropic medications and some activities of daily living.
We have recently reported similar positive findings from semi-structured
interviews conducted with a series of patients with chronic psychotic
illnesses who engaged in travel independently, on their own or with
friends.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` The putative mental health benefits of
‘prescribed travel’ should be balanced against the risks in
less-supported, lone travellers of developing suicidal ideation or
experiencing exacerbation of mental illness. This may potentially arise
from unexpected travel-related stressors, including, for example,
confrontations at airport security stations.

.. _sec3:

Travel mental health recommendations
====================================

Travel psychiatry has a promising future as an integrated subspecialty
of both psychiatry and travel medicine. Novel research will help to
establish a stronger evidence base for clinical recommendations aimed at
promoting mental health during travel.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` We recommend that
clinicians be aware of the psychological stress and exacerbating factors
that patients encounter during foreign travel and encourage patients to
attend a pre-travel medical consultation in order to agree on preventive
strategies (`Box 1 <#box1>`__). Box 1Preventive strategies in travel
psychiatry: mental health recommendations for patients and
cliniciansPre-travel Attend a pre-travel medical consultation, where
stressful events that might be encountered during travel can be
consideredIdentify significant risk factors (e.g. psychiatric history,
purpose of travel, destination of travel, prescribed medications)Obtain
comprehensive travel health insuranceCarry a brief letter from
healthcare provider about psychiatric historyResearch the destination
and health facilities available locallySchedule a pre-travel psychiatric
assessmentReconsider daily dosages of existing psychotropic
medicationsDuring travel Educate traveller about jet lag effectsIdeally,
travel with family or friendsPrescribe a psychotropic drug with
anxiolytic properties during the flight, e.g. a low-dose antipsychotic
or hypnotic, but avoid benzodiazepinesRemain in contact with medical
practitioner through email or web callEncourage treatment adherence with
support from travelling companionHave a regular, well-planned
scheduleAvoid ‘triggers’ of mental illnessAvoid psychoactive substance
use and caution with use of alcoholSeek medical help if a deterioration
in mental health occursPost-travel Follow up with healthcare
professionalPost-travel psychiatric assessment

Suicide tourism, be it planned or unplanned suicide, is one of the
leading causes of mortality among international
travellers.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` Research, including psychological autopsies,
should focus on investigating risk factors for suicidal ideation during
international travel in an effort to increase the detection of such
motivations in intending travellers, who may not consult a travel clinic
or psychiatrist in advance of travel.

Post-travel psychiatric assessment may be indicated for certain
vulnerable traveller groups, such as volunteers and humanitarian aid
workers exposed to hostile and psychologically challenging environments,
to counter the effects of post-traumatic stress
disorder.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` Consideration should also be given to the
possibility of reverse culture shock, where travellers experience
depressive symptoms and disorientation on returning to their home
country.

Routine coverage of psychiatric disorders in travel insurance policies
should be ensured in order to provide financial security to people with
mental illness travelling abroad. Unfortunately, travellers with
pre-existing mental illness often find themselves excluded from such
policies and this greatly complicates efforts at their repatriation.

.. _sec4:

Conclusions
===========

The lack of research and clinical attention given to travel-related
mental health benefits and risks merits the development of an integrated
subspecialty of travel psychiatry. This would advance our understanding
of the interaction of travel and mental illness in a variety of
traveller groups and travel settings. Travel psychiatry should involve
close cooperation between mental health professionals and travel
medicine practitioners, with ample scope for collaborative
patient-centred research. Travel medicine practitioners should receive
enhanced training on the psychiatric aspects of travel: travel-related
psychological stressors, the impact of travel on pre-existing disorders
and the potential for first-time episodes of mental illness during
travel, as well as the importance of timely consultation with a travel
psychiatrist.

**Gerard Flaherty** is a professor at the School of Medicine, National
University of Ireland Galway, Ireland and an adjunct professor at the
School of Medicine, International Medical University, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. **Shang Yuin Chai** is a final year medical student at the
School of Medicine, National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland.
**Brian Hallahan** is a senior lecturer at the School of Medicine,
National University of Ireland Galway and a consultant psychiatrist at
the Galway Roscommon Mental Health Services, University Hospital Galway,
Ireland.

G.F. was responsible for conception of the work. He contributed
substantially to acquisition, analysis and interpretation of the
literature, drafting the work, revising it critically for important
intellectual content and giving final approval to the manuscript to be
published. He agrees to be accountable for all aspects of the work.
S.Y.C. contributed substantially to acquisition, analysis and
interpretation of the literature, drafting the work, revising it
critically for important intellectual content and giving final approval
to the manuscript to be published. He agrees to be accountable for all
aspects of the work. B.H. contributed substantially to analysis and
interpretation of the literature, revising the draft critically for
important intellectual content and giving final approval to the
manuscript to be published. He agrees to be accountable for all aspects
of the work.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.32.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.
