---
author:
- Abdi Sanati[^1]
date: 2021-06
title: Matthew Large
---

pmc

As psychiatrists, we engage with risk assessment on a daily basis. I
personally have seen an increased emphasis on risk assessment since I
started training two decades ago. The question for me has always been
how accurate our risk assessments are. I then read the works of
Professor Matthew Large and was heartened by his common-sense approach
to risk. We met a few years ago in a Maudsley debate on risk. Professor
Large has written extensively on risk assessment in psychiatry. Although
he holds an academic title, he works in emergency departments and acute
wards. He knows the reality of working as a psychiatrist. He lives and
works in Sydney, Australia.

**Thank you very much for your time, Professor Large. I wanted to start
by asking what do you think the place of risk assessment is in
psychiatry?**

Before answering, I should say a few things. People who read my papers
sometimes think of me as a cloistered academic, but in Australia I am a
full-time clinician. I mostly work in emergency rooms and observation
wards. In the past 2 days I have seen 21 hospital patients, quite a few
of whom were new to me. In the Maudsley debate I was criticised for
being detached from the reality of day-to-day work, but the opposite is
the truth. Perhaps the most fundamental criticism of risk assessment
relates to the very nature of day-to-day psychiatric practice. I don\'t
think any of us really work with low-risk patients -- I am at a loss to
think who these patients even are. Therefore, in our work, risk
assessment must have a modest role. Nevertheless, I acknowledge that we
can moderately differentiate between people at higher risk and lower
risk. My main criticism of risk assessment is not that it gives you no
information, but that the amount of information it provides is so
slight. The vast majority of people classified as higher risk don\'t
engage in seriously harmful behaviour and in most studies about half of
the seriously harmful events occurred in lower-risk people. Taking this
one step forward, if you can imagine an intervention that is effective,
benign and acceptable to high-risk patients (the vast majority of whom
will never experience serious harm), how can such an intervention be
rationally denied to lower-risk patients, among whom half of all serious
harm events occur?

**I remember reading about a paper by Frank Knight published in 1922,
where he distinguishes risk from uncertainty, the former being
quantifiable, the latter not. The paper was in the context of insurance,
but don\'t you think it has a relevance in the practice of risk
assessment in psychiatry?**

Uncertainty is a huge driver of medical diagnostics but we do not think
about it enough. As a concept uncertainty is more fruitful than risk in
psychiatry. Consider the following scenario. A 16-year-old smoker may or
may not develop lung cancer. Here the uncertainty is mostly due to
chance and more information cannot really help you. Aged 50 the same
smoker might develop haemoptysis. Whether or not the person has lung
cancer is now a matter of discernible knowledge. These two types of
uncertainty, sometimes called aleatory and epistemic uncertainty, are
often confused. For example, while we might establish with some degree
of certainty that a patient has suicidal ideas, this means surprisingly
little about the chance of later suicide. More bluntly, while our risk
assessments can tell us something about the patient in front of us, they
are not a meaningful prediction. Unfortunately, this is not always
understood and can and does have bad consequences for patients. I
started thinking about this in relation to mental health law. When a
group of patients are detained on the basis of a perceived risk, all
higher-risk patients, including the majority false-positive group, share
the burden of the resulting interventions. This is actually very
old-fashioned collectivism and most of us would much prefer to carry our
own risk if we were ever in this situation.

**Interesting that you mentioned mental health law. I remember you wrote
about the role of the dangerousness criterion. Could this criterion be
useful in people like a patient who attacks his mother when he is
unwell?**

Sadly, we are stuck with the term dangerousness. To answer your
question, if you had a patient who you knew attacks his mother when he
is unwell this could be considered to be an epistemic dimension for him
and might contribute to a treatment decision. However, I think he could
be treated when he is so unwell as to attack his mother and because of a
lack of mental capacity to refuse treatment. No recourse to risk is
actually required. Further, this sort of specific knowledge about one
patient is hard to generalise to others. Research invariably shows that
if you do generalise a violence risk factor this will only modestly
differentiate between higher- and lower-risk patients. Even when risk
factors are combined, risk assessment does not work very well -- a
recent meta-analysis by Seena Fazel\'s group found that the odds ratio
(OR) for violence among higher-risk patients compared with lower-risk
patients was 6 under optimal research conditions and 3 under more
ordinary circumstances. An OR of 6 sounds high but remember that being
male is associated with an OR for homicide of about 10 and an OR for
suicide of 4 in most countries. What differentiates maleness from
psychiatric risk factors is the negative value or stigma associated with
mental illness.

**You recently co-authored a study on the relationship between suicidal
ideation and later suicide. What intrigued me was that there was not
much difference between the predictive power of risk assessment based on
clinical examination and risk assessment based on actuarial tools.**

I accept the work of Paul Meehl that found that actuarial assessments
are generally a bit more accurate than clinical assessments. What this
does not mean is that actuarial assessments are sufficiently good to be
a basis for clinical decisions. At least a clinical risk assessment
opens some possibility for engagement with the patient and consideration
of their unique qualities and needs. If used sensibly, a clinical
assessment might even lead to a meaningful or helpful dialogue. A
tick-box approach demeans the assessed person\'s human agency and
decision-making and likely does much the same to the risk assessor.
Patients have every bit as much human agency as we do. I always try to
assess the extent to which my patients are risk assessing me as someone
who can harm them by depriving them of their liberty and by enforcing
treatments. I am eager to see game theory applied to risk assessment --
I think there might be some fruitful work to be done in this area.

**One striking feature of risk assessment tools is their poor positive
predictive value (PPV). I wonder how you think tests with such a low PPV
could help clinical decisions?**

Well, I don\'t think they can. Any test with such a high number of false
positives is pretty useless in medicine. I try to focus on clinical
needs. Sometimes needs converge with risk but risk rarely tips my
decisions. An excessive focus on risk can contribute to unnecessary
hospitalisation. Psychiatrists and the media (particularly in the UK)
often focus on the very rare event of a homicide by a patient with
schizophrenia. My colleagues and I did a couple of studies some years
ago and that found that 35 000 patients would need to be detained to
prevent one such stranger homicide. Tangentially to this, what we worry
about is largely a question of our value systems. I have recently been
focusing on the relative risks of suicide and vascular death after
discharge from psychiatric hospital: in reality, the risk of vascular
death exceeds suicide within months of discharge, yet worries us much
less.

**There is also the role of politics. A few years ago, the UK deputy
prime minister spoke of zero suicide and the focus was mainly on mental
health services. Could it be that by putting all the responsibility of
suicide prevention on mental health services, the politicians avoid the
social changes that are necessary for reducing suicide? Changes such as
reducing inequality, helping families, providing meaningful employment,
among others.**

Let\'s look at this objectively. The prevalence of mental illnesses does
not vary that much between countries but the incidence of suicide varies
dramatically. We have made a rod for our own backs by believing that 90%
of suicides are *because* of mental illness. While mental illness is
associated with suicide, this is not always causal and mental illness
and suicide have many common underlying causes, for example social
disadvantage, stigma and substance use. Even if we assume a big role for
mental illness in suicide, where does this lead us? With the possible
exceptions of lithium and clozapine, there is pretty much no evidence
that psychopharmacological treatments reduce suicide, and suicide rates
in hospital and aftercare are very high, suggesting we are not good at
protecting our patients.

**In my own experience, I have witnessed some divergence between
academics and clinicians. I remember once in a debate an academic
quoting research, which I add was not designed to investigate
suicidality, to say all suicide was because of mental illness and no one
can rationally contemplate suicide.**

There is a divide. The question I have is who is a 'suicidal patient'?
It is almost insulting to think that the process of listening to
patients and observing their unique or idiographic characteristics can
be reduced to a few common or nomothetic risk factors. I think risk
assessment should be replaced by risk communication -- a communication
that we must have with patients and their families. We should be open
about the uncertainties and the low power of our predictive tools. We
need to be honest about our limitations.

**One problem that we face is that the inaccuracy of risk assessment
tools has to be communicated to the courts, judges and coroners. How do
you think we can do it?**

The courts can get this very wrong. In the case of Melanie Rabone[^2]
the Supreme Court heard expert psychiatric evidence that overestimated
suicide risk by two orders of magnitude. We need to explain to the
courts that the presence of multiple and statistically valid risk
factors does not equal useful knowledge about the future and that we are
doctors and not soothsayers.

[^1]: **Abdi Sanati meets Professor Matthew Large**, Conjoint Professor
    in the School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, and
    Clinical Director of Mental Health in the Eastern Suburbs Mental
    Health Service, Prince of Wales Hospitals, Sydney, Australia

[^2]: In an important judgment in 2012 concerning the suicide of Melanie
    Rabone, a 24-year-old woman who was an informal patient, the UK
    Supreme Court ruled that the state has a duty to all patients under
    Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights. For further
    information see:
    <https://www.supremecourt.uk/cases/docs/uksc-2010-0140-judgment.pdf>.
