---
abstract: |
  In this article I reflect on my experience of adapting physically,
  mentally and spiritually to a medical trauma that had life-changing
  consequences. I consider how, over 7 years to the time of writing,
  mental difficulties were inseparable from the physical; and how, for
  me, both are aspects of a form of understanding knowable only as
  mystery. Writing from a position of religious faith, I try to convey
  my experiences in a way that will be of interest to others regardless
  of their views. At the end, I reflect on aspects of my care that might
  be particularly relevant for a holistic, person-centred therapeutic
  approach.
author:
- James RamsayCorrespondence to James Ramsay (<ramsay.jas@gmail.com>)
date: 2021-06
institute:
- Diocese of Norwich, Church of England, UK
title: "Sentience and transcendence: personal reflections on physical
  and mental adaptation from a near-death event and life-limiting
  surgery"
---

pmc

In 2012, while working as a vicar in Newham, East London, I suffered an
'abdominal catastrophe' necessitating emergency resection of most of my
small bowel and a portion of colon. I now live on intravenous nutrition
(TPN, total parenteral nutrition, fluids and chemicals pumped direct
into the bloodstream through a tube ‒ in my case a Hickman line ‒
permanently inserted into a central vein, thus bypassing the digestive
system). The crisis occurred out of the blue. I was 60 years old and in
good health.

On the way from Accident and Emergency to be prepared for theatre I had
a cardiac arrest, triggered, it was subsequently concluded, by
disruptive electrical impulses owing to bowel ischaemia. I was revived
after 6 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (for days after the
operation I was puzzled why, in addition to the pain in my abdomen, my
chest hurt so much). From a side room, as she was being warned of a not
very hopeful outcome, my wife Celia saw me being wheeled in an oxygen
tent for a second computed tomography scan.

The operation was completely successful, and physical existence felt
near-miraculous as I came out of the crisis. Over the following months
and years, however, as TPN became normality, my memory of the trauma
lost much of its emotional resonance and life began to feel as mundane
as if nothing had happened. Faith sustained me through physical
challenges and depressive periods, return to work and early retirement,
but I found myself asking age-old questions: Is there meaning to all
this? What is it to 'live' rather than merely 'exist'? How can life be
at once so cruel, so tedious, so beautiful? Far from abstract, this
questioning was visceral: gut experience (recognising the irony of the
image) striving for conceptualisation. Pre-catastrophe faith had to
engage with both a new wilderness of meaninglessness within myself and a
baffling sense of transcendent blessedness ‒ experiential encounter with
the teaching (e.g. *Mark 8.35*) that we must lose our life to find it, a
maxim I return to later in this article.

# The anaesthetist and the chaplain {#sec1}

As I was being prepared for theatre, consciousness was a floating state
anchored to a locus of morphine-dulled pain I knew to be my body. 'I'
was an internal voice observing, joking about signing (scrawling, on my
back) the consent form in such circumstances, and instructing Celia
where the church wardens would find the service sheets I had prepared
for Christmas in 4 days' time.

The anaesthetist chatted to put me at my ease. "'What do you do?' she
asked. 'Your job?''I\'m a vicar.''That\'s nice.''Not everyone thinks
so.''Well, I do! I\'m Orthodox.'"

I tried to sit up, but movement was no longer possible. It was the
beauty of the Eastern Orthodox Liturgy that, years before, had attracted
me back to Christian faith.

My next recollection is of the anaesthetist saying, close beside me,
"'I\'m very worried.''I know.' From the outset she had voiced anxiety
about the situation.'They\'ve told you this is a major operation. But I
don\'t think they have really ... You do realise, don\'t you? It
is ... very serious.'"

The rhetorical question and understated comment were exactly what I
needed: they enabled my instinctive knowledge that I might die to
surface fully into consciousness. Our earlier exchange had (I think)
permitted her to follow her hunch that, although 'the patient' must not
be distressed, 'the priest' would wish to be alerted to the prospect of
dying. "'Can I see a chaplain?' I asked."

The on-call chaplain was Brother Julian, a Franciscan who ran a local
hostel for homeless people, and whom I knew well. His usual beaming
smile brought into the room the whole universe of faith ‒ in which pain,
fear and death are embraced within an infinitely vaster continuum of
grace, compassion and joy. There was neither time nor need for words
beyond thanks, prayer and a blessing. Having come straight to the
preparation room, Brother Julian offered to fetch the oil of anointing
from the multifaith room the other end of the hospital, but I heard
Celia say, 'Can we get on?' and I was happy with this. Were we not 'one
flesh'? Everyone then withdrew for Celia and me to say our
maybe/maybe-not goodbyes. I entered sedation in a state of great peace
and awareness of love, confident that whichever way the operation went,
it was toward life.

# Religious experience, faith and spiritual context {#sec2}

A conventional English private education had ensured I knew my Bible and
Book of Common Prayer. At home, however, although there was no active
hostility to faith, religion had not been part of life. At university I
became gripped by theology, but almost as if 'I' were another person:
real spiritual life was art, music and pleasure, with a lazy inclination
toward Taoism. Then, at 27 years of age, I had an overwhelming inner
experience that rid me of suicidal fantasies I had entertained since
adolescence. Although disliking the phrase 'born again', which I
associated with people who seemed stuck in their conversion experience,
this event felt indeed like re-birth, in line with Jesus\'s dictum: 'I
tell you, unless someone is born from above, he cannot see the Kingdom
of God.' (*John 3.3, The New Testament, A Translation* \[David Bentley
Hart\]).

Spiritually I felt most at home in the mystical tradition of patristic
and Orthodox writers, The Cloud of Unknowing and St John of the Cross.
The theology of the Vedas and traditions of contemplative prayer in all
faiths brought spiritual enrichment. Denominational Christianity seemed
cramping. But hearing my default Anglicanism described somewhere as 'the
most spacious mansion in Christendom', that is where I committed myself.

Ordained at 34 years of age, I had served most of my ministry in
institutionally marginal parishes with wider community commitments: in
Newham, these included work with refugees; and when I was in Accident
and Emergency, stories of people elsewhere in the world suffering
atrociously without medical support played in my mind like a kind of
mantra, sustaining me in my own lesser experience of pain and
powerlessness.

# Short bowel syndrome, TPN and therapeutic context {#sec3}

It transpired my abdominal catastrophe had been caused by a section of
small bowel becoming trapped in a caecal hernia, of which I had been
unaware, starving my whole gut of oxygen. Yet this functionally useful
explanation (no further investigations needed) did not satisfy my hunger
for an explanation at a holistic rather than instrumentalist level.

Through parish work and ministerial training, I was acquainted with the
National Health Service at every grade and had visited nearly every kind
of hospital ward. A patient\'s view is radically different. Nevertheless
the Gospel imperative to visit the sick had prepared me in the sense
that, through empathy and compassion, however partial, I brought better
informed awareness to the experience.

It took time to get the hang of TPN. I now infuse 6 days a week, for 14
hours each infusion. The aseptic procedure for connecting and
disconnecting is fiddly and time-consuming. Of several side-effects, the
most immediately disagreeable and socially awkward is constant diarrhoea
‒ despite having virtually no appetite, I have to eat to maintain other
organ functions (my surgeon had expressed pleasure that, with still just
enough jejunum to connect to my colon, I did not need a colostomy).

Thankfully I can walk about with pump and fluids in a backpack during
infusions. However, with the functions of physical existence taking up
so much time, every day I face the question of what makes existence
*meaningful*. In that confrontation faith is a compass and map, as well
as emotional sustenance, toward an answer that (as, since my conversion,
I no longer give credence to the existentialist Absurd) must necessarily
be greater than existence: God, obviously. Yet the word 'God' has become
so commodified it is ever more incapable of bearing the weight of its
own meaning.

From theological college I had gained outline familiarity with
psychotherapeutic theories and praxis, and over the years had myself
undergone two periods of counselling in relation to stresses present and
past. I also regularly talked with a spiritual director. In the parish I
offered a listening ear to people going through difficult times, some of
whom found the feelings stirred up in clinical therapy sessions hard to
handle (my role being to support a parishioner, not intrude upon
therapeutic ground). However, in the aftermath of abdominal catastrophe
I needed first and foremost to recover a sense of myself simply as a
human being, rather than an *object* of surgical, therapeutic, caring or
technological intervention.

Only gradually did I come to recognise this feeling of being less than
fully human. Poor communications across the National Health Service,
management muddles and homecare company inefficiency compounded mental
stress. Lacking strength to 'think positive', however, I rediscovered a
sense of agency through silent, often wordless prayer. Acknowledging
Christ in all I met, from consultants to cleaners and names at the
bottom of emails, I regained a sense of humanity and joy. Holding
prayerfully in mind the millions around the world enduring infinitely
worse, I outfaced the petty humiliations of dependency.

Curiosity about my condition helped combat spiritual stasis and
temptation to self-pity. Although not disabled, I have lost an essential
organ. A plastic tube sprouts from my chest. I receive artificial
nutrition. Certain activities are now problematic or impossible: risk
management is self-conscious, psychological nervousness or cavalier
overcompensation hard to avoid. After two bouts of septicaemia (the
second time, going into septic shock within hours), I agonise about
carelessness. Having also suffered nerve damage in my right hand and
developed atrial fibrillation and low thyroid on top of normal ageing
problems like arthritis, my body clamours for attention. Yet all remind
me ... I am ALIVE!

# The body as a spiritual organism {#sec4}

Bodily demands are depressing; at the same time, off the flint of faith,
so to speak, they spark amazement (as in 'amazing!', 'wow!' or religious
'Amazing Grace'; but also an inner maze of numinous darkness, struggle
and trust, wilderness and promise). Christianity proclaims 'the Word' ‒
the cohering principle of the cosmos ‒ revealed in the uniqueness of an
individual historically existent human being. Incarnation, sometimes
termed 'the scandal of particularity', defining Jesus as both human and
divine, makes for a faith in which at one level the spiritual is set
aside. In the mystical tradition particularly, the body can become the
entire focus of the transcendent.

Vital to my progress was and is contemplative prayer: a spirituality,
sharing similarities of practice with other faith traditions, in which
the body is not merely a transient vehicle for spirit but, in its very
mortality, a 'temple' (*I Corinthians 3.16*) of glory, of the eternal
nature and identity of the divine indwelling time. Jesus tells his
disciples that to find life they must lose their lives for his sake and
for the sake of the 'good tidings'. The Greek word translated as 'life'
here is *psyche*: meaning not only body (*soma*), but also intelligence,
imagination, feeling, intuition, consciousness, all that constitutes
personal identity ‒ soul (somewhat like Hebrew *nephesh*, not
disembodied Neo-Platonic soul).

My catastrophe made me experientially aware of my disposability.
However, survival brought an intimation, equally intense, of the
transcendent *soma pneumatikon*, the resurrection body of divine
'breath' or spirit, *pneuma* (*I Corinthians 15*). Insofar as faith is
an owned creaturely experience, diverting one, at the level of will,
from unconditional openness to the love of God, I realised that losing
one\'s *psyche* entails losing faith itself.

# Near-death experience and sentience {#sec5}

My cardiac arrest was accompanied by no near-death experience in the
normal sense of extraordinary feeling or vision. Such experiences
inspire considerable popular and research interest. However, any
near-death event (most people who recover from a near death event do not
report a near-death experience) raises important questions about human
*being* at a liminal juncture.

At a brain-conscious level there may be nothing; yet our being in its
wholeness is more than consciousness: the fact of existence is
inseparable from individual and communal *identity*. As a priest, I find
it significant that a body before burial or cremation is (to relatives
and friends) still 'her' or 'him' rather than 'it'. This reflects the
subjective emotions of the living; yet at the same time, disposal of
human remains has archetypal cultural significance, suggesting that a
human corpse cannot be totally reified without violation of some quality
essential to human being. Can that quality be pinned down?

My 6-minute outage from normal existence is a blank to me. However, my
sense of who I am also has an unconscious relational, narrative
dimension. My consultant tells me that the physiological effects of
cardiac arrest are not easily identifiable, and personal realisation of
what I had been through had a psychological effect on me. The event of
which arrest was part had, in its wholeness, a drama incommunicable
through empirical analysis. Comprehension ('grasping together') requires
comprehensive assimilation: epistemic integration of experience at every
level, including that of the basic organic matrix of existence, the
fundamental conditionality of experience.

I had not been dead for 6 minutes, but what had I been? 'Near death'
sounded banally quantitative, avoiding qualitative definition. 'Clinical
death' was portentous, but did not help me understand. 'Understanding'
would require, I felt, not merely an empirical cognitive account, but
some sapiential *event* at the level of my whole being, resonant of the
all-affecting nature of a personal crisis.

It was in remembering back to recovery of consciousness in intensive
care that I came to the notion of sentience. That moment also
represented final return to consciousness from the cardiac arrest:
realisation that I was, indeed, alive.

I had gone into theatre knowing that I might not come out alive. At the
moment of reactivating consciousness, I simply remember a sensory
experience of whiteness, whether from something external or from within,
like a screen coming to life, making me wonder, 'Where am I?' Then I
recalled being told, as I was being wheeled into theatre, that after the
operation I would be taken to intensive care. So ... that must be where
I was. Which meant I must be alive. 'That\'s nice', I thought.

The trite words reflected a two-dimensional state of awareness: the
cognitive intensity of the moment precluding reflective consciousness.
Meanwhile, the felt question 'Where am I?' presupposed, at a purely
sentient level, trust in the fact of my own existence.

Can there be any form of consciousness without that fundamental level of
existential trust? How does simple animate matter relate to the
phenomenon of consciousness? From a position of faith, philosophical
discussions of the nature of mind and consciousness in relation to
matter, in particular the brain, are reminiscent of pre-scientific
attempts to locate the seat of the soul. Confidence in one\'s own
existence seems to me now, at a distance from intensive care, the
pre-condition of any capacity for ideation; a synergy of different
aspects of being that, if it can be conceptualised at all, would require
so to speak quantum rather than Newtonian understanding.

# The body and mystery {#sec6}

Jesus wept. This manifestation of divine vulnerability precedes the
raising of Lazarus from the dead (*John 11.1--44*). In hospital, more
than once in emotional shock I pulled the bedding over my head and
cried. When the Muslim chaplain, whom I knew through interfaith work in
Newham, visited, I cried ‒ and apologised. What is the power and shame
of tears? This purely physical 'welling up', a universal human
experience, brings what is highest and deepest within us unavoidably to
consciousness.

For over a year after leaving hospital, several times a day, without
warning, with no conscious emotional desire to weep, I experienced a
kind of hyperventilation like a child sobbing. Initially these spasms
felt consistent with an underlying emotional state; but as they
continued even after my emotional condition had stabilised, it occurred
to me my body held memories that consciousness had either successfully
processed or, as a result of the anaesthetic, never directly
experienced. My sentient being had suffered more trauma than my 'self'.

Although I had no near-death experience during cardiac arrest, my
'conversion' over 30 years previous had been precipitated ‒ the details
are beyond the scope of this article ‒ by a frightening out-of-body
experience in which I saw my body as a *thing* separate from me. The
thing was discarded and I felt (as I articulated it at the time) that I
had 'jumped into my own body', a new body, the true me.

Sentience may affect us in ways we cannot be conscious of, rather as
cancer or medication are already at work before symptoms manifest. It
may at some point become empirically explorable. Yet, more significantly
for whole-person understanding, we already know it as mystery. Mystery
can become glib, just as certainty, incurious about its own nature, can
foreclose on open-minded experience; but as the liminal zone of our
being, it transcends apprehension, interfaces with the
transcendent ... guiding the anaesthetist\'s hunch, informing the
chaplain\'s smile.

In hospital after my operation a young doctor appeared one day: 'You\'ve
been given a second life', he said, hurrying off. I suspect it was he
who had resuscitated me. The distinction between a second life (of
extended mortality) and new life (qualitatively changed spiritual life)
in Christ became crucial for me. Lazarus was not raised to immortality,
and my bodily survival was a medical success story. So what?

My first near-death event was, in terms of *life*, more significant than
the second; yet the quasi-miracle of physical survival years later
brought life alive to me again. A vehicle of agony and abuse, delight
and wonder, even at its most basic level of sentience the body is to the
eyes of faith a sign (theologically, a sacrament) of a quite other order
of being: a new mortality that is eternal, in tune with angelic
intelligence (the substantiality of inexpressible communications), and
destined for glory (the holistic experiential, philosophical and ethical
ground of dignity of every human life).

In physically ingesting the body of Christ in the bread of the Eucharist
we participate in the Body that is the Church ‒ a communion of minds and
affections, vision and hope, compassion and concelebration, transcending
its own fatal debilities. TPN sustains my second life, but it is the
*mystery* of the body, new life, that makes that life worth living.

# Concluding reflections on care {#sec7}

In risking crossing the clinical boundary to address me personally, the
anaesthetist transformed the crisis for me. The prayer with Brother
Julian meant that I went into a dangerous operation with a sense of
complete preparedness. But had I not myself known about chaplaincy, this
care would not have been offered.

As a patient I was also conscious of the emotions and energy levels of
carers ‒ professionalism cannot eradicate human relationship. I was
touched and intrigued by the young doctor\'s visit, and longed for a
chance to thank him properly.

Patients are the *objects* of medical professionals' care. We are in
their power: most of the time I experienced this as beneficent
objectivity. Equally, however, I felt both we and they were caught in an
under-resourced system that claims too much, creating depersonalising
reification. COVID-19-era precautions will presumably make it even
harder to maintain the personal relational care I found, and still find,
so vital to well-being.

**James Ramsay** is a Priest with permission to officiate within the
Diocese of Norwich, Church of England, UK.

This 'research' received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

# Declaration of interest {#nts4}

The author is an ordained Anglican priest, but has no interest to
declare.

## Supplementary material {#sec8}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.137.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::
