=========================================================================================================================================================================
Difficulties in interpreting patient-reported outcome measures in the absence of a gold standard: the meaning of Clinical Global Impressions scores in liaison psychiatry
=========================================================================================================================================================================

Rajalakshmi Valaiyapathi
Kezia Smith
Ksenia Marjanovic-Deverill
:Date: 2021-06


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
As a part of routine clinical care, the Ealing Liaison Psychiatry
Service (ELPS) uses the Clinical Global Impressions (CGI) scale to
assess patient-reported outcomes. We would like to share our findings
and the challenges in interpreting CGI ratings.

CGI scales in psychiatry were initially used to assess efficacy in
clinical drug trials\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` and have since been adapted for use
in liaison psychiatry as a part of a nationwide evaluation. The
Framework for Routine Outcome Measurement in Liaison
Psychiatry\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` proposed that all liaison psychiatry services
use CGI scales for consistent data collection and national reporting of
outcomes, although there is no guidance on a standard to aim for.

Our methodology involved patients and their ELPS clinicians providing a
CGI rating on whether the patient's mental health had improved, not
changed or become worse after ELPS contact. This study looked at all 205
patients between January 2018 and November 2019 who had filled out a CGI
questionnaire, and the following analyses were made: percentages of
patients reporting changes in their mental health and potential reasons
for this;concordance between patient and clinician ratings.Fifty-nine
per cent of patients reported an improvement in their mental health,
although the reasons for this were unclear, given that the CGI
questionnaire has no section for patients to justify their rating. A
variety of factors may be involved, including having a focused
consultation with a clinician, a decrease in symptom severity, and
improvements in physical or social symptoms during the hospital stay, as
these are often inextricably linked with mental health.

Forty per cent felt there was no change after ELPS intervention, and 1%
(three patients) indicated feeling worse. Of the latter, two patients
had to be admitted to an in-patient psychiatric unit, which could
suggest that their lack of improvement was due to the severity of their
mental health condition itself. There was 91% concordance between
patient and clinician ratings, suggesting that subjective ratings from
patients may not be needed if clinicians’ objective ratings are so
closely tallied.

The CGI scale has been correlated with more time-consuming rating scales
used in psychiatry,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` and its advantages lie in its ease
of understanding by both professionals and lay people, its ability to
track progress across time and its swiftness of application. On
reflection of our findings, we are unable to comment on our performance
given the dearth of literature discussing what constitutes the gold
standard. However, encouragingly, most patients reported improvement
while only a very small minority reported deterioration, indicating that
liaison psychiatry interventions are effective and largely beneficial.

By nature, the liaison psychiatry population comprises patients with
both physical and mental health conditions, causing relative difficulty
in teasing out which of the two issues is better manifested in the
desirable outcome. In addition, the heterogeneity of the liaison
psychiatry population makes it difficult to make direct comparisons of
validity between different psychiatric conditions.

This simple service evaluation suggests that ELPS improves patients’
well-being according to CGI scales. Nevertheless, wider-scale studies
should be performed to elucidate how liaison psychiatry interventions
are beneficial and to inform what the standard of care should be.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.
