---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  To explore the beliefs and understanding of staff and patients at a
  secure mental health unit regarding clozapine monitoring, and to
  identify barriers to and facilitators of monitoring. Qualitative
  semi-structured interviews and focus groups were conducted with 17
  staff members and six patients.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  Six key themes were identified. The key facilitator of effective
  monitoring was the motivation of staff to help patients to become
  independent and facilitate recovery. An important barrier was a lack
  of clarity around the roles of different staff groups in monitoring.
  Staff and patients widely supported the establishment of an in-patient
  clozapine clinic and perceived that it would prepare patients for
  discharge.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  An in-patient clozapine clinic is a robust mechanism for clozapine
  monitoring in secure settings. The barriers and facilitators
  identified here could be applied to other secure units to guide their
  systems of clozapine monitoring.
author:
- Sarah Blagden
- Jane Beenstock
- Natalie Auld
- Steve Noblett
- "Mark LimmerCorrespondence: Dr Sarah Blagden. Email:
  <s.blagden@nhs.net>"
date: 2021-06
institute:
- 1Lancashire and South Cumbria NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 2Health Education North West, UK
- 3Lancaster University, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
title: A qualitative exploration of the barriers to and facilitators of
  clozapine monitoring in a secure psychiatric setting
---

pmc

Clozapine is the only antipsychotic medication with established efficacy
in adults with treatment-resistant schizophrenia and is an important
treatment option in forensic psychiatric settings.^1^ However, it must
be used with caution owing to its considerable side-effect profile.^1^
Most prominently, this includes a risk of neutropenia and fatal
agranulocytosis, cardiac complications and bowel obstruction.^1^
Development of the metabolic syndrome, consisting of obesity, insulin
resistance (often resulting in type 2 diabetes) and lipid derangements,
is common.^1^ Consequently, alongside psychiatric monitoring, close
monitoring of several physical health parameters is required for
patients, as stipulated in the British National Formulary and by
manufacturers ([Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}). Table 1Minimum
physical health monitoring required for patients taking clozapine
(source: BNF, Lancashire and South Cumbria NHS Foundation
Trust^1^)Monitoring for neutropeniaWeeks 1--18Weeks 19--52Ongoing
monitoringFull blood countWeekly[^a^](#tfn1_1){ref-type="table-fn"}Every
2 weeks[^a^](#tfn1_1){ref-type="table-fn"}Every 4
weeks[^a^](#tfn1_1){ref-type="table-fn"}Other physical health
parametersBaseline1 month3 months6 months9 months12
months/annuallyWeight, BMI, waist
circumference[^b^](#tfn1_2){ref-type="table-fn"}✓✓✓✓✓Pulse and blood
pressure[^c^](#tfn1_3){ref-type="table-fn"}✓✓HbA1C or fasting
glucose✓✓✓✓Prolactin✓✓Lipids✓✓✓✓✓ECG[^d^](#tfn1_4){ref-type="table-fn"}✓Liver
and renal functionWhere there are concerns[^1][^2][^3][^4]

Despite being an important line of treatment, it is consistently
reported in the literature that challenges remain around the use of
clozapine. Previous audits have demonstrated incomplete adherence to
physical health monitoring, particularly during the first year of
monitoring when the risk of side-effects is greatest.^2--5^ Even where
abnormalities are identified, this often does not translate into results
being communicated or acted upon.^2,5,6^ A previous evaluation of
shared-care clozapine monitoring found that implementing a different
model of monitoring could feel process-driven and generate anxiety for
staff, with a recommendation to identify facilitators and barriers to
ensure that change is successful and sustained.^7^ Therefore, in this
study, we aimed to explore the beliefs and understanding of staff and
patients at a secure mental health unit regarding clozapine monitoring,
and to use this information to identify barriers to and facilitators of
monitoring.

# Methods {#sec1}

## Setting {#sec1-1}

The study setting was a secure mental health unit in north-west England.
At the time of the study, approximately 30% of all patients were
prescribed clozapine, with an average age of 36 years. This project was
nested within a larger service evaluation of clozapine monitoring at the
unit, which resulted in a clozapine clinic being recommended.

## Data collection {#sec1-2}

### Staff {#sec1-2-1}

Semi-structured interviews and focus groups were conducted with 17 staff
members. Purposive sampling was conducted in order to represent the
different staff groups involved in clozapine monitoring.

First, all junior doctors based at the unit were invited by S.B. to
participate in a focus group; all five agreed to participate. The
physical health team, encompassing two general nurses and two healthcare
support workers, also agreed to participate in a focus group. With
regard to mental health ward staff, S.B. attended a selection of
in-patient wards and opportunistically asked mental health staff (nurses
and support workers) to take part in semi-structured interviews, which
were conducted in a private room at the time of recruitment. Eight
interviews were conducted. Interviews instead of focus groups were used
for ward staff owing to the practical difficulties of multiple staff
being simultaneously removed from clinical duties.

### Patients {#sec1-2-2}

Semi-structured interviews were conducted with six patients. Again,
purposive recruitment was performed to recruit patients from
medium-secure, low-secure and step-down wards. Patients were approached
by a mental health nurse, who introduced the project to the patients and
accompanied S.B. during interviews. Only those patients that ward staff
deemed clinically stable and able to provide informed consent were
approached.

In all cases, the project\'s purpose and voluntary nature were
explained, and verbal consent was obtained. As the primary purpose of
the project was service evaluation, written consent was not deemed to be
required when planning data collection with senior colleagues at the
unit. Verbal consent was witnessed and formally recorded. It was
required that participants spoke English and could provide verbal
consent. Topic guides were used for interviews and focus groups and
encompassed clozapine monitoring in general, with a possible clinic
discussed at the end (see Appendices 1 and 2). The length of interviews
ranged from 5 to 20 min, and focus groups lasted approximately 30 min.

## Epistemology {#sec1-3}

The research was underpinned by an interpretivist approach, which
recognises the subjective nature of knowledge and the need to understand
situations from the perspective of those involved.^8,9^

## Analysis {#sec1-4}

The focus group with doctors was audio-recorded and transcribed
verbatim. All other data collection took place in clinical areas where
it was not permitted to use audio-recording devices. Therefore,
extensive field notes were made, and several quotes from each
interviewee were transcribed verbatim to ensure data capture.
Subsequently, based on field notes, quotes and transcripts, thematic
analysis was utilised in the format described by Braun and Clarke.^8^
Thematic analysis is based on finding and interpreting patterns (themes)
within the data.^8^ Following data familiarisation and immersion, a list
of codes was generated by S.B. Next, themes were searched for, and an
analytical framework was constructed by S.B. Where this framework did
not fit the data, themes were further refined and alternative
explanations sought until a final framework was agreed by S.B., J.B. and
M.L. As well as following standardised topic guides, robust and
transparent analysis was critical to ensuring reflexivity and minimising
the researcher\'s influence on emerging themes.

## Ethics {#sec1-5}

Formal ethical approval was not required as the project formed part of a
clinical service evaluation. Approval for this was provided by the
senior leadership team at the unit.

# Results {#sec2}

The analytical framework is shown in [Table 2](#tab02){ref-type="table"}
and discussed below. Themes are divided into those that facilitate
effective clozapine monitoring, those that act as barriers and those
acting as both facilitators and barriers. Pseudonyms are used
throughout. Table 2Analytical framework to emerge from qualitative data
collection with staff and patientsThemeBarrierFacilitatorClozapine
monitoring as a means of promoting responsibility and independence among
patients✓Staff are highly motivated to help patients and to promote
recovery, despite competing priorities✓The roles and responsibilities of
different staff groups are not well defined around clozapine
monitoring✓Knowledge about clozapine among staff is sometimes
lacking✓There is a lack of formal pathways for clozapine physical health
monitoring✓Patients have varied understanding and engagement around
clozapine✓✓

## Facilitators {#sec2-1}

### Clozapine monitoring as a means of promoting responsibility and independence among patients {#sec2-1-1}

Clozapine care was seen by staff as more than just the therapeutic
compound, and about supporting the holistic recovery of an individual.
Staff believed that a clozapine clinic would increase patients'
knowledge and emphasise the importance of monitoring. Utilising a clinic
arrangement was perceived by staff and stepdown patients as more
equivalent to the community, helping patients to adapt upon discharge.
"*'Service users would feel that clozapine was being taken seriously and
be reassured by this rather than a random person coming to take their
bloods at random time points. It would help them to understand about
clozapine' (Jim, Mental Health Support Worker)'I think it\'s a really
good idea, it\'ll be like what happens in the community' (Matt, stepdown
patient)*"

Staff believed that patients would respond to the routine of a clinic.
Although there might be some pushback initially, it was perceived that
it would quickly become the norm. "*'There may be stumbling blocks at
the start, as there is for any new thing, but once it becomes more
routine, part of every ward\'s day, it\'ll just become normal for
everyone' (Geoff, Mental Health Support Worker)*"

### Staff are highly motivated to help patients and to promote recovery, despite competing priorities {#sec2-1-2}

Although all staff groups faced competing pressures on their time and
worked in sometimes challenging situations, they mutually perceived each
other as well trained, highly competent and motivated. Although ward
staff would be required to facilitate clinic attendance, the benefits to
patients of an organised system and to the wards of being able to
reliably get bloods done were felt to outweigh this. In addition, a
clinic was perceived to have benefits for staff development in terms of
phlebotomy training, where staff struggled to get supervised experience.
"*'It means the right people will be doing it... it\'ll be a separate
department doing it and will stop the communication problems' (Lucy,
Mental Health Nurse)*"

## Barriers {#sec2-2}

### The roles and responsibilities of different staff groups are not well defined around clozapine monitoring {#sec2-2-1}

All staff groups perceived that the roles and responsibilities of
different teams involved in clozapine were not well defined. The
exception to this was pharmacy, who were seen to have a clear role in
delivering patient education at clozapine initiation and coordinating
full blood counts (FBCs) thereafter. No staff group saw themselves as
responsible for cardiometabolic monitoring and were not able to identify
who was. The main barrier to defining responsibilities was that
clozapine monitoring spans mental and physical health. As an
antipsychotic, the physical health team saw clozapine as a psychiatric
responsibility. By contrast, ward staff believed that it was outside the
scope of psychiatry, owing to the physical health monitoring and
extensive side-effects. "*'It\'s a mental health medication and the
responsibility of RMNs. I was always taught that if you\'re prescribing
and administering a medication then it was your responsibility to
monitor it' (Sharon, Physical Health Team)*"

Going forward, it *was* believed that any potential clozapine clinic
should be staffed by mental and physical health colleagues.

### Knowledge about clozapine among staff is sometimes lacking {#sec2-2-2}

It was perceived by some staff that certain staff groups lacked
understanding about areas not viewed to be their responsibility,
particularly cardiometabolic monitoring among ward staff. There was
concern about this among experienced staff, who believed that
undergraduate training around clozapine had declined. They suggested
that robust training was needed for forensic staff, given the widespread
use of clozapine. "*'It was drilled in when I was training that you had
to ask everyone on clozapine about their bowel habit every morning but
I\'m not sure they\'re doing it now' (Steve, Mental Health Nurse)'The
experienced nurses do this very well. They\'re well informed about the
importance of monitoring clozapine. The new nurses really struggle, they
don\'t know the side effects' (Kristina, Doctor)*"

### There are a lack of formal pathways for clozapine physical health monitoring {#sec2-2-3}

Just as it was not clear who was responsible, it was also believed that
pathways for testing and acting upon abnormal physical health results
were lacking. Different wards sometimes had different systems, which
made it difficult to keep track of how and whether things were done.
Staff widely acknowledged that there was a need to organise monitoring,
supported by electronic systems. It was believed that it would be
difficult to train all staff to do this, and that a clinic model would
create a discrete group competent in this. "*'There\'s not any
formalised process and I think that is probably one of the problems as
to why the clinic would be useful I guess' (Tom, Doctor)'The same people
would be doing it all the time and would know what they were doing'
(Carly, Mental Health Nurse)*"

## Both facilitators and barriers {#sec2-3}

### Patients have varied understanding and engagement around clozapine {#sec2-3-1}

Although most patients were aware that some form of monitoring was
required for clozapine, their understanding varied. This was apparent
when discussing the reasons for the regular FBCs. "*'It\'s for
cholesterol isn\'t it' (Kyle, low-secure patient)'It\'s for the white
cell isn\'t it' (Warren, low-secure patient)'It\'s for the green light
isn\'t it?' (Elaine, medium-secure patient)*"

Aside from regular FBCs, patients had minimal awareness of any other
monitoring and were usually only aware of side-effects if they had
experienced them. "*'I can\'t go to the toilet' (Colin, medium-secure
patient)*"

Nevertheless, patients understood why they took clozapine and perceived
it favourably for psychiatric symptoms. "*'Within a few weeks I was more
stable and they \[hallucinations\] disappeared, I sometimes miss them
though. Some of them were my mates' (William, stepdown patients)*"

Patients were used to a model of care that required little effort, and
staff felt that it could be a struggle to engage some. Likewise, some
patients described the convenience of the current system. "*'We struggle
to get patients to go and see the GP. It\'s a challenge just to get
people out of bed and to come to the ward clinic room' (Steve, Mental
Health Nurse)'I\'m quite happy with how it is at the moment... more
convenient' (Kyle, low-secure patient)*"

# Discussion {#sec3}

Effective monitoring of physical health parameters and side-effects is a
must-do aspect of clozapine care to prevent serious incidents in the
short term, as well as the long-term health effects of cardiometabolic
complications. Despite this, studies repeatedly report that adherence to
the required monitoring, in both in-patient and community settings, is
incomplete.^2--6,10,11^ Although clozapine is widely used in forensic
settings, there is very little published literature relating to its use
here. This qualitative study has provided valuable insight into
clozapine monitoring in a secure unit and has identified facilitators
and barriers to effective monitoring. These are displayed in [Fig.
1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"} in the format of Lewin\'s force field
analysis, which depicts change as a state of imbalance between driving
and resisting forces, with change achieved by increasing the
facilitators, reducing the barriers, or both.^12,13^ Fig. 1Force field
analysis of forces driving and resisting change in relation to clozapine
monitoring.^12,13^

The key facilitator was the motivation of staff to facilitate recovery
and prepare patients for discharge. Staff understood the risks of not
effectively monitoring clozapine and were keen to implement a more
efficient model. This mirrors the findings of a previous evaluation of
community shared-care clozapine monitoring, where forensic healthcare
professionals were motivated by enabling patients to develop skills for
independence.^7^ Both staff and patients believed that physical and
mental healthcare were equally important for people taking clozapine.^7^
In our study, there was a range of understanding among patients, with
stepdown patients having greater understanding of the associated
benefits of monitoring. Their engagement is a further key facilitator to
be harnessed. Linked to this, staff noted that patients responded
favourably to routine, and that consistency should be a core component
of clozapine monitoring.

In terms of barriers, an important finding was that roles and
responsibilities for monitoring were not clearly defined and inter-team
communication was sometimes lacking. Spanning mental and physical
health, clozapine monitoring was widely perceived to be outside the
scope of practice of the different teams involved. These factors have
previously been identified as key determinants of psychiatrists'
practice in relation to clozapine, and major contributors to low rates
and inconsistency of follow-up.^11^ Likewise, there was sometimes a lack
of knowledge about clozapine monitoring, particularly aspects that staff
did not perceive as their responsibility. Although the FBC component was
widely understood, as results must be available to enable clozapine
dispensing, some staff perceived understanding of cardiometabolic
monitoring to be limited among ward staff, despite the widespread
prevalence of these complications. Defined roles and responsibilities
must be supported by robust pathways for clozapine monitoring.
Inconsistent documentation, limited knowledge about clozapine and a lack
of communication between teams have previously been shown to limit
improvements when abnormalities are detected.^4,6^ Logistically, access
to phlebotomy-trained staff was a key barrier to on-schedule monitoring,
which has been highlighted in previous audits of clozapine
monitoring.^2,3^ From a patient perspective, monitoring was passive, and
many had little insight into the monitoring requirements. Although there
were more barriers than facilitators with respect to changing the
clozapine monitoring system, the facilitators were strong motivators, so
it is anticipated that they will drive the proposed change and allow the
barriers identified to be overcome.

Although not widely explored in the academic literature, there is some
consensus as to what gold-standard clozapine monitoring encompasses, and
this study adds to this. First, it is essential that staff and patients
perceive clozapine monitoring as a tool for facilitating patient
recovery, independence and safety, and not simply as the process for
supplying a medication.^7^ Patient education should not be a one-off
event but should be repeated throughout treatment, especially as
patients may be unwell at the time of clozapine initiation and have low
health literacy.^14^ Clozapine monitoring must be supported by care
pathways and effective interventions to ensure that, first, monitoring
takes place and, second, that abnormal findings are actioned.^6^
Pathways should be standardised so that they can be easily followed by
busy staff working across wards. Any system of monitoring must be
supported by electronic tools to keep track of monitoring.^6^ An
in-patient clozapine clinic is an effective system for clozapine
monitoring that is widely supported by staff and patients. This provides
FBC monitoring, along with monitoring of other physical health
parameters and side-effects. In terms of staffing, multidisciplinary
representation is likely to be effective, with mental and physical
health co-staffing supported in this study. Several senior staff members
in our study raised concerns about undergraduate training around
clozapine. Given the complex monitoring and severe side-effects, robust
training on clozapine should be encompassed by undergraduate mental
health nursing degrees and a mandatory workplace training module. Where
establishment of a clozapine clinic is not feasible, it is recommended
that, as a minimum, a clozapine pathway is established that defines the
roles and responsibilities of different staff groups and triggers
appropriate communication and actions where abnormal results are
identified. This should be underpinned by an electronic system that
simplifies the process and is accessible by the relevant staff.

## Limitations {#sec3-1}

As with much qualitative work, there were small numbers of participants,
and they were interviewed in a single location. This restricts the
transferability of results, as some may be specific to the individual
setting. However, the findings reinforce those from the wider
literature, and beliefs and challenges have been identified that are
widely applicable to mental health settings.

A further limitation is the possibility that the results were influenced
by recall and social desirability bias. Furthermore, as patients were
approached by a senior nurse, it is possible that patients with a
favourable attitude towards clozapine or a good relationship with staff
were recruited.

## Summary {#sec3-2}

Clozapine is widely used in forensic settings, yet considerable
challenges remain around its use, particularly ensuring on-schedule
monitoring of physical health parameters. The reasons underlying this
have not previously been widely explored, and this qualitative study
adds to the evidence base by identifying facilitators of and barriers to
monitoring. Forensic healthcare staff are highly motivated to promote
skills for independence and recovery among patients, and understand the
role of clozapine care in this. This motivation and enthusiasm is a core
facilitator of positive change and increases the likelihood that change
will be sustained. Formal procedures and pathways must be in place to
underlie clozapine monitoring, supported by electronic systems and
tools. A clozapine clinic is a robust mechanism for providing in-patient
clozapine monitoring in secure settings that is widely supported by
staff and patients, and prepares patients for transition to the
community. These findings can be applied to other mental health units to
optimise their systems of clozapine monitoring.

We thank all of the staff who facilitated this project. Most
importantly, we thank all of the patients and staff who participated.

# Data availability {#sec-das}

The data that support the findings of this study are available upon
reasonable request from the corresponding author, S.B. The data are not
publicly available due to their containing information that could
compromise the privacy of participants.

**Sarah Blagden** is Public Health Specialty Registrar at Health
Education North West, Liverpool, UK, and Lancashire and South Cumbria
NHS Foundation Trust, Preston, UK. **Jane Beenstock** is Consultant in
Public Health at Lancashire and South Cumbria NHS Foundation Trust,
Preston; and the Division of Health Research, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, UK. **Natalie Auld** is Pharmacy Technician at Lancashire and
South Cumbria NHS Foundation Trust, Preston, UK. **Steve Noblett** is
Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist at Lancashire and South Cumbria NHS
Foundation Trust, Preston, UK. **Mark Limmer** is Senior Lecturer in
Public Health at the Division of Health Research, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, UK.

S.B., J.B., N.A. and S.N. were involved in the conception and design of
the study. S.B. was responsible for the acquisition of data. S.B., J.B.
and M.L. were involved in the analysis and interpretation of data. S.B.
initially drafted the manuscript, and all authors were involved in
revising it critically and approving the final version.

# Declaration of interest {#nts3}

None.

## Supplementary material {#sec4}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.100.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::

**Clozapine monitoring -- staff topic guide (interviews and focus
groups)** Can you tell me about your role?Can you tell what you
understand about clozapine monitoring? Prompts: Why do you think
clozapine monitoring is important?What are the risks to patients if
monitoring is not done correctly?Can you tell me about your role with
regards to clozapine?What is your understanding of how clozapine is
currently monitored here? Prompts: Full blood countsPhysical health
parameters, side-effectsPatient educationDo you think the current system
of monitoring works well?Who do you think should be responsible for
clozapine monitoring here? Prompts: Full blood countsPhysical health
parametersSide-effectsWhat do you think is the role of the ward staff,
physical health team, pharmacy, consultant and medical staff?What do you
think is the role of the service user in monitoring their clozapine?
Prompts: Do many patients self-medicate?How are patients on clozapine
prepared for discharge?Do you think service users should be more
involved in monitoring their clozapine?Do you think service users are
given sufficient education about clozapine when they are initiated on it
and throughout their treatment?What do you understand about how
clozapine is electronically monitored? Prompts: FBCsPhysical health
bloods, clozapine levels, ECGs etcSide-effectsHow do you think this
could be improved?Are there any aspects of clozapine monitoring that you
think work particularly well here?Are there any aspects of clozapine
monitoring that you think would benefit from improvement?What barriers
do you think there are to clozapine monitoring here?Can you think of
anything that could be done to improve the system of clozapine
monitoring here?What do you think about the idea of a clozapine clinic
that service users attend for all aspects of clozapine monitoring?
Prompts: Where do you think this should be?Who do you think should run
this?Would this work for all service users?Is there anything else with
regards to clozapine that we haven\'t discussed and that you would like
to mention?

Can you tell me what you understand about clozapine? Prompts: Why do you
think you take clozapine?How long have you been taking clozapine for?Has
clozapine worked well for your symptoms?Did you start clozapine during
this admission or previously?When you started on clozapine, what
information was given to you about it? Prompts: Who gave you this
information?Was this spoken or written information?Can you tell me what
you understand about the side-effects of clozapine? Prompts: Were you
given information about side-effects before you started taking
clozapine?Were you given information about how to prevent any
side-effects?Have you experienced any side-effects from taking
clozapine? Tell me about thisCan you tell me about the monitoring that
you have to have for clozapine? Prompts: How often does this happen?Do
you understand what they\'re monitoring for?Do you receive the results
of your blood tests?Who do you think is responsible for monitoring your
clozapine?Aside from the regular blood tests for the green, amber, red
result, do you have any other monitoring for clozapine? Prompts: Do
staff on the ward measure your weight and ask about your bowels?Do you
have blood tests for other things as part of your clozapine monitoring?
(blood sugar, cholesterol etc)Low secure and step-down only -- can you
tell me what you understand about how your clozapine will be monitored
and dispensed in the community when you leave hospital?What do you think
about the idea of having a clinic on the hospital site where you\'d go
to have your clozapine monitoring done?Is there anything else about
clozapine that we haven\'t mentioned and that you\'d like to discuss?

[^1]: More frequent monitoring will be required if abnormal results are
    obtained.

[^2]: Weight should be measured regularly during the first 3 months of
    clozapine treatment.

[^3]: Blood pressure and pulse must be checked regularly during
    titration of clozapine.

[^4]: If there are clear cardiac risk factors or an established cardiac
    comorbidity, troponin and C-reactive protein (CRP) should also be
    checked at baseline prior to initiation.
