=====================================================================================================
More research needed into long-term medical student mental health during COVID-19 pandemic and beyond
=====================================================================================================

Anusha Mahesh Prabhu
Intishar Rashad
:Date: 2021-06


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The mental health of healthcare professionals has been significantly
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` We believe that more
research focusing specifically on the long-term mental health of medical
students is required. Medical students are an at-risk group, with a
greater incidence of anxiety\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` than the general
population, and a higher prevalence of suicidal ideation than physicians
and nurses.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` The risk is further compounded by being
young,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` having higher awareness of disease severity, and
possessing common personality traits such as maladaptive perfectionism
and difficulty adapting to disruption in routine.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`

Medical students often face a sense of duty to volunteer in hospitals in
times of global health emergencies such as the current pandemic, which
can bring particular emotional challenges. The subsequent higher risk of
transmitting COVID-19 may cause increased social isolation. Uncertainty
around medical education due to cancelled exams and placements also
increases stress.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

Although a recent meta-analysis showed no difference in anxiety during
COVID-19 in medical students,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` isolated studies worldwide
have shown increased anxiety in those whose loved ones had contracted
COVID-19 and who had interacted with COVID-19 patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

Higher levels of baseline stress and depression are negative predictors
of poor mental health,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` so more research must be done to
identify those especially at risk. Those with pre-existing mental health
issues have reported decreased access to the usual support services
during the pandemic.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` To our knowledge, there is no
available literature exploring the impact of COVID-19 on medical
students with pre-existing mental illness. Experiences in previous
pandemics such as SARS show that long-term mental health issues such as
alcohol misuse and post-traumatic stress symptoms can persist for
several years in healthcare workers who have been quarantined or have
worked in high-risk areas.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`

The majority of current studies of mental health in COVID-19 have been
cross-sectional, and few have focused on medical students. Longitudinal,
large-scale, multi-country studies focusing on medical students of all
age groups and investigating more variables, such as pre-existing mental
illness, are required to identify those most at risk and the long-term
effects on this population. The results of these studies could be used
to improve future implementation of targeted medical student-specific
mental healthcare interventions.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`

Both authors have contributed equally in preparing this article.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.
