==========================================================================================================
Root causes of deaths by suicide among patients under the care of a mental health trust: thematic analysis
==========================================================================================================



Opeyemi Odejimi
Kerry Webb
Dhruba Bagchi
George Tadros

:Correspondence: Opeyemi Odejimi
(opeyemi.odejimi@gmail.com)

:date: 2021-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   This study explored the root causes of deaths by suicide among
   patients under the care of a mental health trust. Thematic analysis
   was carried out to identify themes from the serious incident reports
   for patients between 1 January 2017 and 31 July 2018.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   In total, 48 cases were reviewed. Three main themes emerged from this
   study: patient-, professional- and organisation-related factors. The
   majority of the deaths were caused by patient-related factors,
   particularly exacerbation of the patient's mental health condition.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   This study provides insight into perceived causes of death by suicide
   among mental health patients. It is hoped that this will, in turn,
   influence the manner in which decisions, policies and resource
   allocation are carried out to further prevent and reduce the
   incidence of suicide, particularly among mental health patients.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Suicide is a global health problem. It is estimated that every year
about 800 000 people die by suicide worldwide.\ :sup:`1` Previously, the
UK has reported a significant reduction in the rate of suicide. However,
a report in 2018 indicated a marked increase.\ :sup:`2` Furthermore, 28%
of people who died by suicide in the UK were under the care of a mental
health service 12 months prior to their death.\ :sup:`3` This implies
that more than one-quarter of patients who die by suicide have an
underlying mental illness and were known to services prior to their
death. Perhaps, if timely intervention had been in place, the risk of
suicide might have been reduced.

Serious incident reports represent a record of events deemed to have had
untoward consequences for patients, families and/or carers, and the
organisation.\ :sup:`4` The reports are produced to identify areas for
improvement in order to avoid a recurrence of such events, and not to
apportion blame.\ :sup:`4` Any case of unexplained death is classed as a
serious incident and is referred to the coroner for inquest. Following
an inquest, the coroner will make a verdict of accident, natural causes,
suicide, industrial disease, narrative or open.\ :sup:`5,6` A suicide
verdict is only given by the coroner following evidence from the suicide
report indicating that ‘on the balance of probabilities’ the deceased
performed and intended an act of suicide that would result in the end of
life.\ :sup:`7` This new standard for the coroner's ruling has been in
place since May 2019.\ :sup:`7`

.. _sec1a-1:

Predictors of suicide
=====================

In most cases, identifying why patients die by suicide is challenging.
In fact, the Samaritans\ :sup:`8` supported this notion, making it clear
that the causes of suicide are not straightforward but sometimes could
be preventable. In the clinical setting, the SAD PERSONS scale is the
risk assessment tool used to predict the possibility of suicide among
patients.\ :sup:`9` However, there remains insufficient evidence of its
ability to predict suicide, because it fails to provide a comprehensive
understanding of the underlying causes of suicide; however, it continues
to be used globally.\ :sup:`10,11` Thus, an understanding of possible
underlying causes of suicide is imperative.

The root cause analysis within a serious incident report provides
details about possible or perceived causes of suicide. The root cause is
based on systematic investigation of what led to the serious incident.
Root causes of suicide can be multifactorial but are generally classed
as: individual, quality and safety process, organisational, situational
and care-related factors.\ :sup:`12,13` However, in the light of the
complexities associated with suicides, understanding the root causes of
suicide may be a step in the right direction to prevent suicide
globally.

This study aims to explore common themes emerging from root cause
analysis of serious incident reports for mental health patients who died
by suicide under the care of a mental health trust. The research
question is: what are the root causes of suicide among mental health
patients? It is hoped that study will give an indication of the
perceived underlying causes of suicides among mental health patients and
therefore help service providers, researchers and policy makers to
implement policies and strategies to further prevent and reduce the
incidence of suicide, particularly among mental health patients.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

This study took place in a National Health Service trust in the UK's
Midlands. Data were collected as part of a service evaluation within the
trust. The process of reporting a serious incident within the trust is
detailed in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__. In the trust, serious incident reports
are based on evidence gathered independently. Serious incident reports
for patients who died by suicide provide details about the individual,
the intent, and the event leading up to the suicide, with the hope of
learning about the cause(s) of suicide. Fig. 1Serious incident report
process.\ :sup:`4`

Serious incident reports are written by a senior clinician within the
trust who was not involved in the care of the patient. The serious
incident investigations are done soon after the incident to avoid issues
about recollection of events. However, the report is not published until
the coroner's verdict has been established. The aim is for a serious
incident report to be instigated and completed within 3 months of the
event, although the coroner's verdict may take longer to be established.
The serious incident report is based on semi-structured interviews with
the clinicians, the patient's relatives and loved ones, and examination
of the case notes.

The root cause is established by the serious incident review team group,
following the investigation by the senior clinician. A typical root
cause may be about a paragraph consisting of a few sentences and is very
specific about the definitive cause of suicide. The root cause section
is not based on a predefined category, and details reported vary among
patients. Furthermore, in some cases, a root cause may not be
identified, whereas other reports contain more than one root cause. The
root causes and other findings such as shortfalls in service and
delivery within the serious incident report are later disseminated in
team meetings. Actions are then taken based on the recommendations
suggested for the learning process and service changes.

In this study, serious incident reports for patients who died by suicide
while under the care of the trust between 1 January 2017 and 31 July
2018 were reviewed. There were 71 deaths during this period, of which 36
were ruled as suicide by the coroner. It should be noted that the
coroner's rulings of suicide in the serious incident reports reviewed in
this study were based on the old standard of ‘beyond all reasonable
doubt’. A further 16 serious incident reports with a narrative verdict
were considered by the service evaluation team as possible suicides and
were therefore included to increase the scope of learning. This review
was therefore based on 48 cases.

Thematic analysis was carried out inductively by the authors to identify
themes emerging only from the root causes of the serious incident
reports.\ :sup:`14` Thematic analysis was selected owing to its ability
to generate trustworthy and insightful rich data about the root causes
of suicide among mental health patients.\ :sup:`14` Moreover, the use of
an inductive approach helped to create themes directed by the content
and not by preconceived ideas or theory. Braun and Clarke's\ :sup:`14`
six-step procedure was used to identify themes. Familiarisation, coding,
theme development, revision, naming and writing up were carried out by
the main researcher and agreed by two other authors. Any disagreements
were resolved by discussion.

Trustworthiness and rigour were established using Lincoln and
Guba's\ :sup:`15` criteria: credibility, transferability, dependability
and confirmability. Credibility was ensured by member checking and
triangulation. Member checking was carried out by the review team, who
validated the findings of the serious incident reports. Triangulation
was ensured by the main researcher discussing the findings with two
other authors. If there were disagreements, they were resolved by
discussions. Transferability was achieved by providing a detailed
description of the research by all authors such that it could be easily
applied in other contexts. Dependability was attained by clearly
documenting the research process. Confirmability was achieved by
ensuring that the interpretations and findings were derived from the
data, with themes and subthemes supported by quotes.

.. _sec1-1:

Ethical considerations
----------------------

This study was scrutinised and approved by the Research and Innovation
Department of the trust. Information from serious incident reports was
only disclosed to the review team. Data were protected by storing
electronic data on an encrypted USB drive and password-locked computers,
and paper files were stored in a locked cabinet. All materials relating
to this service evaluation will be stored for at least 3 years from the
end of the study in accordance with the trust's research policy.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

There were nearly twice as many deaths in males (*n* = 31) as in females
(*n* = 17). The age range was 15–86 years. The most common method of
suicide was hanging. Two-thirds of the death took place at home
(*n* = 32), and only one death occurred in the hospital on an in-patient
ward. It should be noted that one-sixth (*n* = 6) of the reports had no
identified root cause. Three main themes emerged, each of which had a
number of subthemes. Quotes only from the root cause sections of the
serious incident reports were used to support the subthemes and themes
emerging in this study. Quotes from each serious incident report were
assigned a code. The serious incident reports were labelled in
chronological order (1–48). The three main themes emerging from this
study were: patient-, professional- and organisation-related factors.

.. _sec2-1:

Patient-related factors
-----------------------

The thematic analysis identified three main patient-related factors that
contributed to deaths by suicide: exacerbated mental health conditions,
lack of engagement with services and non-adherence to medications. An
exacerbated mental health crisis was the most common patient-related
factor and also the most frequently recurring subtheme emerging from the
serious incident reports. The exacerbated mental health condition was
often secondary to physical health problems, social and relationship
difficulties, an underlying criminal offence, alcohol and substance
misuse, or sexual offences, especially child pornography.

Furthermore, in some cases where lack of engagement and non-adherence to
medication were identified as root causes, patients also had an
exacerbated mental health condition. This is because these factors could
have a bi-directional effect. For instance, lack of engagement and
non-adherence to medication could result in exacerbated mental illness
and *vice versa*. “‘\ *Patient had a history of being reluctant to come
into hospital. Deterioration in mental health was triggered in response
to an argument with his family; the patient had an argument with a
family member, several days prior to his death’ – Report 24*\ ‘\ *The
patient suffered from paranoid schizophrenia, discontinued depot
medication and thereafter appears to have complied poorly with oral
medication. There was a two month period during which no medication were
taken’ – Report 16*”

.. _sec2-2:

Professional-related factors
----------------------------

These are factors related to the manner in which care and services are
delivered by mental health professionals (usually doctors and nurses).
Five main factors emerged: issues around risk assessment and management,
inadequate clinical enquiries, non-adherence or poor adherence to
policies and procedures, no interprofessional communication and
collaboration, and lack of consultation of carers by clinicians.

Among these five factors, issues around patient assessment and
management were the most common and represented the second most
frequently recurring subtheme in this study. This was an interesting
finding, as most mental health professionals are trained and are aware
of the protocols and practices within the trust. Further exploration
revealed that poor practice, especially improper documentation, was a
major cause. This was noticed more in cases where the patient frequently
presented and the health professional did not update the risk assessment
and management documentation. “‘\ *Early warning signs were not
documented, so it is unclear whether these were identified, known and
shared. Clinical documentation provided wrong information (details were
not updated) about patient current state. It was anticipated that
patient would make a full recovery having presented frequently
previously’ – Report 21*”

Further exploration into cases where professionals did not carry out
enough detailed clinical enquiries shows that clinicians had
misperceptions regarding the seriousness of the patient's presentation.
This clinical enquiry includes patient history and collateral
information from carers and other professionals managing the patient.
“‘\ *The patient superficially appeared to be making some progress and
was fully compliant with care plan and activity schedule and was
engaging well with staff and patients. There was no indication that
progress would not continue. It was anticipated that the patient would
make a full recovery’ – Report 15*”

Consulting carers may help clinicians to corroborate or contradict
patients’ claims about their mental health. Carers may be family,
friends or any loved ones that look after patients in an
non-professional capacity. In this study, one report indicated that the
root cause was the clinician not carrying out detailed clinical
enquiries and not consulting the patient's carer. “‘\ *Patient concealed
information and gave assurance of not been suicidal. This was taken on
face values, despite family expressing concerns and partners assertion
that patient was concealing information’ – Report 43*”

Clinicians mostly did not adhere to the trust's follow-up review
standards. Follow-up is very important as it ensures that a patient
receives continued support whether they are in crisis or not.
“‘\ *Patient was discharged from mental health treatment with no
follow-up or aftercare arrangements despite agreement to liaise with
Hospital X, and despite further episode of self-harm and having been
pending transfer from hospital Y to a mental health bed’ – Report 11*”

Likewise, a lack of interprofessional communication and collaboration
may result in the patient not having the necessary support. This is
particularly important for patients who have comorbid physical and
mental health problems. “‘\ *Given the patient consistently gave
differing accounts of history to a multitude of practitioners, the trust
should have engaged with other agencies involved in patient care and
this will have helped deliver holistic care’ – Report 20*”

.. _sec2-3:

Organisation-related factors
----------------------------

Factors within the organisation identified as root causes included
inadequate psychiatric accommodation, a lack of additional support for
mental health patients (such as drug and alcohol services) and unsafe
wards. At the time this study was conducted, the trust did not have a
drug and alcohol service, although patients were often referred to local
available services. Nevertheless, patients and their carers often
indicated that they were not satisfied with the referred drug and
alcohol services and would prefer one within the trust. “‘\ *Patient
indicated not finding the drugs and alcohol services helpful but was
still signposted. It is highly unlikely patient will make self-referral
and engage with the services’ – Report 9*”

Psychiatric ward bed shortages in the trust can be attributed to high
demand, which may be a result of the trust's location in one of the main
cities within the West Midlands. It should also be noted that in some
cases where psychiatric beds were not immediately available,
alternatives such as daily visits within the community or a short stay
in a general hospital ward or mental health supported accommodation in
the community were provided to patients. Providing such alternatives may
be a safe alternative in the absence of the ideal psychiatric ward
admission; however, the care and support provided in such an environment
may not be suited to the patient's needs. This does not exclude the fact
that suicide occurs in in-patient wards. “‘\ *The patient had a complex
history and had taken overdoses previously, The last contact with the
Trust, patient was expressing concerns about sleep again and was on the
bed list and daily review with HTT but perhaps would have benefited more
as inpatient on the ward’ – Report 36*”

In this study, there were two cases of unsafe wards, one an in-patient
ward within the trust and the other in prison accommodation. It was
further observed that the in-patient death occurred as a result of not
adhering to the trust's observation policy. “‘\ *Patient had serious
mental illness, personality disorder and substance use disorder, There
was no observation in last 24 hour before death and no evidence of
psychiatric and psychological input’ – Report 41*”

Thus, in-patient wards may be a safer option for reducing deaths by
suicide; however, if no other patient- and professional-related factors
are taken into consideration, in-patient wards may not provide the
necessary prevention of suicide among mental health patients.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

This study confirms views about suicide being a complex problem, with
aetiology and predictors that are difficult to
identify.\ :sup:`13,16,17` The root causes considered in this study will
provide a more comprehensive understanding of possible underlying causes
of suicide than the SAD PERSONS scale. This is because the SAD PERSONS
scale appears to focus more on certain patient-related
factors,\ :sup:`9,10` whereas this study identified that underlying
professional- and organisation-related factors can also influence
suicide rates.

The findings are consistent with those of previous studies regarding
acute crisis having a strong association with suicide among mental
health patients.\ :sup:`13,18` Thus, there is a need for continued
assessment and support in mental health services. Often, a patient who
died by suicide deliberately did not give essential information or
denied plans for suicide when assessed by health
professionals.\ :sup:`16,19` This can be particularly difficult, as
those patients are very likely to be frequent attendees with a history
of self-harm, suicide ideation and multiple suicide attempts. Meanwhile,
health professionals want to respect and listen to patients; hence, they
work with the details provided by the patient, which might not give a
true picture of the extent of their symptoms.

A particularly significant finding of this study is the need for
processes, procedures and training that help health professionals to
increase their ability to carry out detailed clinical enquiries while
assessing and managing patients. Also emerging from this study is the
need for an approach to patient and carer involvement that promotes
active participation of patients and their carers (family, friends or
loved ones) in assessment and management of patients. The National
Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and safety in Mental Health
(NCISH)\ :sup:`3` report also supports this view, stating that
clinicians should conduct a robust patient assessment which is person
centred and takes into consideration the stressors, support and
perspectives of family and carers.

Furthermore, involving family members is particularly useful in
corroborating or contradicting the symptoms expressed by
patients,\ :sup:`20` especially when patients do not willingly divulge
information or deny the extent of their mental health crisis. However,
confidentiality and carer rights are two factors that can swerve
professionals in their decision about the extent to which family members
should be involved. Also, clinicians should explore whether family
member involvement in patient assessment and management is a potential
protective or risk factor.\ :sup:`16`

Shortage of beds was not a major reason for deaths by suicide in this
study. Since the closure of asylums in the UK in the 1950s, more mental
service provision now occurs in the community than on in-patient
psychiatric wards.\ :sup:`21` Thus, it can be presumed that community
and outreach services are equally effective in managing mental health
patients and reducing avoidable admissions. It can be argued that
patients in crisis will receive more effective care and support in a
psychiatric unit than at home.\ :sup:`22` Nevertheless, each patient
should be evaluated based on their risk and triggers, and a decision
should be made regarding whether intervention services should be
delivered in the community or in a psychiatric unit.

Adherence by health professionals to policies and procedures is a
crucial aspect of reducing deaths by suicide. For example, where
handover and referral procedures are not adhered to, insufficient
details will be passed on, affecting interprofessional communication and
collaboration. Ultimately, this may result in patient assessment not
being holistic, with a spiral effect on the management of the patient.
Perhaps the reason the discharge and handover policies were not adhered
to was poor clinical documentation. Fowler\ :sup:`16` emphasises the
importance of proper clinical documentation in providing comprehensive
and practical patient assessment and management. Thus, this study
indicates that clinical documentation can have a spiral effect on the
assessment and continuity of care of patients and on suicide prevention.

The NCISH\ :sup:`3` report recommends safe wards and early follow-up as
key ways of reducing suicide incidence. Considering that hanging is the
most common method of suicide in the UK, having safer wards is an
essential priority to reduce incidence on the wards. This view is also
consistent with the study of Meehan *et al*,\ :sup:`23` who suggested
that in-patient wards should be redesigned to ensure safety. However, it
appears that more suicides take place at home than elsewhere, as
revealed in this study. Although it might not be practical to design or
redesign all mental health patients’ homes to be safe, other measures
need to be put in place. For instance, studies have shown that there is
higher risk of suicide in the first 7 days after
discharge.\ :sup:`3,23,24` Thus, carrying out early follow-up should
become a priority in suicide prevention.

.. _sec3-1:

Summary
-------

Suicide prevention remains a priority globally. Investigating root
causes is a step in the right direction in developing strategies that
may be effective in reducing the current suicide rate. It is
acknowledged that root causes are not conclusive evidence of the reason
suicide occurs; nevertheless, they provide an indication of the
underlying causes of suicide.

The three major root causes identified in this study are interwoven, and
the goal should be for suicide prevention strategies to take into
cognisance all three factors. However, it is also recognised that in the
present economic situation, resources are scare. This study adds new
knowledge about suicide prevention by highlighting root causes of
suicide among mental health patients. It provides insight into the two
most likely root causes, which are exacerbated mental health conditions
and issues around patient assessment and management.

Moreover, this study indicates that using a robust person-centred
approach with involvement of carers (family, friends or loved ones) in
assessment and management, especially among frequent attendees, may help
to prevent suicide in mental health patients. Furthermore, this study
highlights the need to carry out a risk assessment each time a patient
presents, in order to have an updated and relevant patient safety plan.
Even in scenarios where patients present on several occasions and no new
risks or triggers are identified, health professionals should document
this, and a rationale for not giving an update should be provided in the
patient record.

A limitation of this study was that it was conducted in one hospital
trust in the West Midlands region of the UK. Therefore, the findings may
not be generalisable to all other mental health services. Nevertheless,
the findings are transferrable and could be applicable to other mental
health services. Another limitation was the flexibility of the thematic
analysis, which allows researchers to use what is deemed applicable to
their research aims and objectives. To minimise this limitation, the
research team have provided justifications for the choice of this
methodology and details of the data analysis, and explained the measures
taken to ensure trustworthiness and rigour.

A suggestion for further research is to identify factors that make
patients more vulnerable to suicide in non-hospital settings and provide
evidence-based strategies to reduce these. Overall, this study provides
insight into perceived causes of death by suicide among mental health
patients. It is hoped that this will in turn influence the manner in
which service providers, researchers and policy makers carry out
decisions, policies and resource allocation and implement strategies to
further prevent and reduce the incidence of suicide, particularly among
mental health patients.

**Opeyemi Odejimi** is a researcher in the Psychiatric Liaison
Department, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health Foundation Trust, UK;
**Kerry Webb** is Suicide Prevention Lead in Acute Care Mental Health,
Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health Foundation Trust, UK; **Dhruba
Bagchi** is Clinical Director at the Birmingham and Solihull Mental
Health Foundation Trust, UK; and **George Tadros** is Professor of
Psychiatry and Dementia at Aston Medical School, Aston University, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

All data generated or analysed during this study are available on
request.

O.O., K.W., D.B. and G.T. were responsible for writing the protocol.
O.O., K.W. and D.B. were involved in the conceptualisation of the study.
O.O. was responsible for the literature search. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.106.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
