=================================================
Being positive on disability in medical education
=================================================



Elliott Carthy
:Date: 2021-06


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The world is a diverse place. The patients we treat are a diverse group.
The same can't be said for the medical profession that represents them.
I would argue that positivity regarding disabilities in medicine starts
with us as educators. My favourite aspect of being a medical educator is
what I as a teacher learn from my students. I, like most doctors and
medical students, do not have a disability. However, I communicate with
and advocate for people with intellectual disabilities, autism and
learning difficulties such as dyspraxia and teach about these topics as
routine practice to students and the wider multidisciplinary team. This
is not just about reducing discrimination and promoting equality but
also about appreciating the value that such people add to society.

General community estimates within the UK suggest the prevalence of
disability in working age adults to be 19% in the UK,\ :sup:`1` yet in
medical schools, it is estimated that only 4.1% of students have a
disability.\ :sup:`2` Even accounting for potential non-disclosure,
these numbers show substantial underrepresentation. The British Medical
Association recently published a report titled *Disability in the
Medical Profession*\ :sup:`3` that highlighted the paucity of doctors
and medical students with disabilities who felt safe to disclose their
condition or felt supported by their institution or colleagues. Despite
widening participation programmes, medicine can still be discriminatory
towards those with disabilities. It would not be unreasonable to suppose
that such reluctance to seek support or have the need for this
recognised could be extrapolated to our patients.

The term disability is broad, both in nature and degree. This is often
poorly reflected in medical guidelines, whereby our lack of
understanding can contribute to the pre-existing stigma. The title of
the General Medical Council's *Welcomed and Valued*\ :sup:`4` guidance
for those with disabilities in the medical profession gives the
impression of framing inclusivity in a positive light. However, the
persistent use of terms like ‘support’, ‘student needs’ or educators and
institutions applying their ‘duties’ means the focus is on reducing
discrimination and making reasonable adjustments to allow for an
assessment of competence. The presumption is that disability may be a
threat to competence and to patient safety. In fact, disability may give
lived experience that improves competency through empathy and
understanding. We need to start focusing on what such students, doctors,
educators and, crucially, patients can add, not simply what they need.

If we provide a safe space for those with lived experience of
disabilities to share their experiences and the impact on their life,
then each one of us can improve our understanding. Indeed, more doctors
being open about their visible and invisible disabilities mean more
positive role models for students. Widening participation can then move
from just implementing anti-discrimination legislation to appreciating
the value that diversity adds and the grassroots barriers to entering
and thriving in the profession of medicine. Every medical educator can
contribute by providing a safe space for disclosure and a willingness to
learn and be educated by our patients and students.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None
