==========================================================================================
Art and psychiatry in the 21st century: here's to more messy – and magical – entanglements
==========================================================================================

Kai Syng TanCorrespondence to Kai Syng Tan (kai.syng.tan@mmu.ac.uk) [1]_
:Date: 2022-04

:Abstract:
   In a volatile world, during a time of multiple crises and amid a
   projected upsurge in mental illnesses as an aftermath of the COVID-19
   pandemic, now is a critical time to consider how art and psychiatry
   can entangle with each other. Submissions like that of Lily Aston can
   create new spaces for conversation, reflection and constructive
   collisions. This can help disrupt and extend the state of psychiatry,
   management of psychiatric services, and education and training in
   mental healthcare, and advance how we understand other bodies and
   minds around us, and how knowledge can be created.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _sec1:

What can anorexia (actually) look like?
=======================================

It has been more than 150 years since ‘anorexia nervosa’ was first
termed.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` But what do we *know* about what anorexia is,
and in what ways could art related to anorexia confirm, complicate
and/or extend this discussion?

For instance, how will someone with anorexia express what anorexia
(actually) feels and looks like in a painting (or poem, rap song, film,
tango dance, etc.)? What do our observations about artworks say about
us? As importantly, what does that which is not depicted and omitted
reveal? How does one's subjective lived experience inform the artwork?
How does this relate to (their and/or the viewers’) learned
(mis-)conception of what ‘anorexia’ *should* be and that of another
person with anorexia or those with other ‘non-standard’ relationships
with food? How does the narrative compare with that created by their
healthcare provider and that which is described/prescribed within
textbooks, papers and policies? What new insights and indeed new
knowledges – including the tacit and embodied – can art that entangles
with psychiatry create?

Art – like culture or baldness\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` – escapes easy
definition. But can art help to raise the visibility of mental processes
– literally and metaphorically – and reveal new insights into them? Can
art open up new spaces for the patient and psychiatrist to engage with
each other beyond the clinical and/or pharmaceutical? How does this
irritate the patient–doctor dynamics and divide? What sort of productive
antagonisms can arise when psychiatry engages with artistic practice and
research? How can this disrupt dominant narratives around (dis-)order
and (ab-)normality? To what extent does artistic quality come into play?

And how can the new culture section in an established platform accessed
by researchers and practitioners in psychiatry entangle with some of the
above-described tensions, to challenge, *and indeed advance*, ‘the state
of psychiatry, management of psychiatric services, and education and
training’\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` in mental healthcare?

.. _sec2:

Fluidity and freedom
====================

The above are some of the questions that Lily Aston's submission can
evoke. Alongside the submitted drawing/painting is a written commentary.
The latter provides a level of contextualisation and what Aston has
described as ‘my own interpretation’ of the painting as a ‘sufferer’ of
anorexia nervosa.

So what can we see, and what does Aston say about what we are looking at
(or looking for)? The artwork is dominated by a face which is divided
diagonally. This illustrates what Aston has described as her ‘duality’.
One side of her face and paper is in an ‘explosion of colours’, in
paint, to depict ‘what lies beneath’ (flowers, pills). The other is in
black and white, drawn in pencil, to depict an ‘absence of self’ and
‘loss of identity’. Yet, this isn't a hard binary the way Descartes
reduces the human body and mind. Instead, like how many understand
gender today, the division is ‘fluid’. Perhaps like the *yin-yang*
symbol, we are looking at complementary, not contrary forces at play.
There are figures in black and white in the side that is colourful,
while butterflies – coloured, in black and white, and some both coloured
and in black and white – punctuate the entire composition.

Indeed, Aston's work is one of contradictions. While ‘surrealistic’
(skeletal figures hovering around the skies), it is enthusiastic about
realism (meticulous facial make-up and follicular luxuriance). It is not
saying much (the subject glances nonchalantly into the distance). At the
same time, it seems overtly literal, as if an illustration, a confession
or a plea to be heard/seen (the words on the wings of butterflies read
‘It's all inside your head’, and words on figures in the foreground say
‘trapped’ and ‘I'm sorry’).

The commentary also includes Aston's thoughts about the role of art.
While the process of making the piece was a ‘long and tough journey’ for
her, what Aston likes most is how art allows her to ‘express complicated
thoughts and emotions’ that ‘lie below the surface’, which are
‘impossible to communicate verbally’. At the same time, she seeks to be
non-prescriptive: ‘I love how everyone came up with a different approach
[to the piece]’. It is the ‘completely subjective’ nature of art,
absence of ‘concrete rules, methods or regulations’, that opens up a
space of ‘freedom’ for Aston.

.. _sec3:

Beyond art therapy, inspiration porn and ‘public engagement’?
=============================================================

There *are* rules and regulations in art – but of course. Like those in
psychiatry – and any other facet of human endeavour – these rules and
regulations are above and below the surface, written and unwritten.
Fortunately, like they are elsewhere too, and especially given the year
of reckoning that was 2020 (with the COVID-19 pandemic exposing endemic
structural inequalities), these rules and regulations are not stagnant.
Instead, they are evolving, questioned and get rewritten, as we learn,
unlearn and grow, as individuals and with others, within and across
disciplines, communities, societies, cultures, species and so on.

More than 170 years have passed since the *BJPsych* dropped ‘Asylum’
from its title. Fewer years have passed since it introduced artworks for
its covers. Still, a lot has happened in the practice and discourse
around the messy – and magical – entanglements of art and mind.

Tropes such as the ‘hysterical female’ – unsurprisingly, anorexia
nervosa was previously known as ‘anorexia hysterica’ among other
terms\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` – and ‘mad artist’ have been popularised, then
troubled. Once mocked and ostracised – as reflected in its name –
‘outsider’ art is now the *lingua franca* alongside double kisses of
arts royalty (Grayson Perry is but one prominent example),
institutionalised (with Headway East London, a charity for people with
brain injury, shown at London's Barbican, and Project Art Works, a
collective of neurodiverse artists, nominated for the 2021 Turner
Prize).

Gone were the days when the only kids on the block were ‘art therapy’
and ‘artistic expression by patients’ and the often-associated
charitable, curative and voyeuristic aspects reminiscent of freak shows
of world expos and circuses of the old world (the late Stella Young's
Ted Talk on ‘inspiration porn’ is a good start for the curious on the
objectification of alterity\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`). Instead, we can now turn
to burgeoning discourses and practice in inter- and transdisciplinary
fields, especially following the All Party Parliamentary Group on Arts,
Health and Wellbeing report proposing ‘creative health’.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`
They include: visual medical humanities\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` and medical
humanities,\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` disability arts (such as the extensive
multidisciplinary artistic practices of The Vacuum
Cleaner\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` and Dolly Sen\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`). There is also
the blockbuster that is ‘arts in health’ (led by Daisy Fancourt, as
reflected in her extraordinary ascent\ :sup:`(n.d.j)`) and critics
pointing out its fatal flaws and blind spots (read the review by Stephen
Clift, Emeritus Professor for the Sidney De Haan Research Centre for
Arts and Health\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` and arts and activism veteran Frances
Williams's sharp comparative analysis across Greater Manchester and
North Wales\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`).

To bring in perspectives that lie beneath, between and behind the
surface, new generations of psychiatrists are increasingly emboldened to
‘out’ their own stories about their mental illnesses and to advocate
new, bold ways of doing psychiatry using art (such as in
PsychArt\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`). Those with hybrid backgrounds are also
finding ways to converge ideas across boundaries (such as
artist-psychotherapist Patricia Townsend's study\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` of the
creative process through psychoanalysis and psychiatry-trained
philosopher Mohammed Abouelleil Rashed on mad activism, anti-psychiatry
and *avant garde* cinema\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`).

Arguments are being made for the need to use art to make
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and other processes
‘more visible, that is, more seen, more heard, more talked about, not
avoided, not dismissed, not spoken about in hushed tones, not just a
specialist subject discussed by experts, and not only spoken ill of,
because there is always more than one side to any
story’.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` So too are proposals to foreground quality,
‘lofty’ art to build cultural intelligence and fuel quality
conversations.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` Artists are increasingly infiltrating
mental health research groups and professional bodies (such as the UK
Adult ADHD Network\ :sup:`(n.d.r)`). Artists are also using artistic and
creative research to engage in critical discourse with psychiatry on the
cultural and medical constructs and pursuits of
‘normativity’,\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` and not just as vehicles of communication
or public engagement to make ‘serious’ research accessible.

Terms have been reclaimed (such as ‘sick’, for Sick! and Sick of the
Fringe festivals). Others have been given new breaths of life, key of
which is ‘neurodiversity’, which will be significant and exciting moving
forward. First proposed by Australian sociologist Judy Singer in the
1990s,\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` the term has, over the years, been contested,
protected, discussed, fought over and championed (including by
researchers of autism\ :sup:`(n.d.u)`). The term is gaining attention as
it is increasingly co-opted and objectified by the global elite as a
‘next business advantage’ and more.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)–(n.d.w)` Fortunately
– and as testament to the inclusive nature of the term – yet other
counter-narratives are surfacing. These include the alignment of
‘neurodiversity’ with ‘biodiversity’.\ :sup:`(n.d.x),(n.d.y)` There are
also countless new narratives and new creative research methods (such as
‘dyspraxic dysco’ and ‘neurodivergent leadership’) by some 300
researchers and artists worldwide who themselves have ‘non-standard’
cognitive modes, in the Neurodiversity In/And Creative Research Network
(of which Singer and several psychiatrists such as ADHD expert Philip
Asherson are also members).\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` With openly neurodivergent
artists increasingly sharing their visions for social
change,\ :sup:`(n.d.aa),(n.d.ab)` it is no wonder that those who had
studied neurodevelopmental processes as medical deficits are
increasingly interested in engaging in the positive
aspects.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac),(n.d.ad)` In a recent keynote presentation, a
well-respected leading clinical psychologist in ADHD even coaxed his
audience of nearly 900 mental health researchers and professionals to no
longer ignore but actively engage in the discourse on
neurodiversity.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)`

Cultural and academic institutions – historically conservative and
slow-moving – are starting to catch up with some of these developments
too. Collections (such as Wellcome and Thackery) are being updated with
‘woke’, more inclusive and decolonised frameworks, and are foregrounding
voices previously deemed to be without agency. Increasingly, there are
arts programmes in medical settings (such as in University College
London Hospital), arts in health enterprises (such as Aesop) and
galleries (such as artist-led Bethlem Gallery, which supports and
exhibits artists who are current or former patients of the South London
and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust\ :sup:`(n.d.af)`). Universities are
training the next generations of ‘boundary spanners’, through new
interdisciplinary arts–(mental) health programmes (such as at King's
College London, Queen Mary University of London, Birkbeck and St
George's University of London; artist Deborah Padfield's health
humanities programme at St George's, for instance, was developed from
her award-winning doctoral and post-doctoral interventions in the
clinical space\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)`).

.. _sec4:

Widening the conversation and extending the possibilities
=========================================================

We are at an exciting juncture of multiplicity, fluidity and new
possibilities with regard to culture, art and psychiatry. *BJPsych
Bulletin*'s entry into the conversation with a new culture
section\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` is belated. This will be critical, particularly
amid a volatile world in a period of multiple crises, and amid a
projected upsurge in mental illnesses globally as an aftermath of the
COVID-19 pandemic.\ :sup:`(n.d.ah),(n.d.ai)` There aren't any magic
bullets – not even art\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` or psychiatry! – for our
challenges, which aren't described as ‘wicked’ for no reason. Works of
art that have continued to intrigue are not those that provide or claim
to provide answers, but those that problematise, interrogate and
provoke.\ :sup:`(n.d.aj)` Submissions like Aston's can thus open up
spaces for reflection, connection and constructive collision to
challenge and extend the state of psychiatry, management of psychiatric
services, and education and training in mental healthcare. This can
advance how we think about and relate to other bodies and minds around
us, as well as advance how we understand how knowledge can be created.

**Kai Syng Tan**, PhD, FRSA, SFHEA, is a hyperactive award-winning
artist, curator, academic and consultant. She is founder and co-chair of
the Global Neurodiversity in/and Creative Research Network.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were
created or analysed in its writing.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref37

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.aj.

.. [1]
   Commentary on … A portrait of anorexia nervosa. See this issue.
