========================================================
Gender equality in academic psychiatry in the UK in 2019
========================================================



Sukriti Dhingra
Helen Killaspy
Sarah Dowling

:Correspondence: Sukriti Dhingra
(sukriti.dhingra23@gmail.com)

:date: 2021-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To investigate whether gender balance in academic psychiatry in the
   UK has improved since a 2005 initiative to encourage career
   progression for female academics in UK universities. We surveyed the
   gender of academic psychiatrists across the UK and compared our
   findings with our previous 2003 London-wide survey and with the Royal
   College of Psychiatrists’ 2001 workforce census.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   The percentage of women in academic psychiatry posts in the UK more
   than doubled, from 20% in 2001 to 40% in 2019, with increases at
   senior lecturer (from 25 to 50%), reader/associate professor (from 29
   to 48%) and professor level (from 11 to 21%). Outside London, men
   occupy 72% of all posts and 89% of professorial posts. Within London,
   men occupy 45% of all posts and 74% of professorial posts.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The representation of women in academic psychiatry has improved but
   men continue to dominate at professorial level. Gender equality
   appears worse outside London. The situation is exacerbated by the
   diminishing availability of posts across the UK.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The percentage of female medical students in the UK in 1963 (the first
year that data were reported) was 29%. It had increased to around 40% by
1980 and, since the mid-1990s, it has been consistently greater than
50%.\ :sup:`1` In 2018–2019, 59% of medical and dental students were
female.\ :sup:`2` However, NHS Digital reported that women made up only
45% of qualified doctors in the UK in 2018 and 64% of consultant posts
were held by men.\ :sup:`3` This suggests that women are more likely to
leave medicine or fail to progress to consultant grade than their male
counterparts. Gender balance also varies between medical specialties: in
psychiatry women held 45% of substantive consultant posts in
2019,\ :sup:`4` reflecting a gradual increase from the 34% reported in
the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ workforce survey in 2004.

Gender balance is worse in clinical academia. A survey published in 2018
by the Medical Schools Council identified 3465 clinical academic posts
in the UK,\ :sup:`5` comprising approximately 2% of the NHS medical
workforce.\ :sup:`6` One-third (31%) of these posts were in London. Most
(41%) were in medicine, followed by surgery (9.1%), psychiatry (7.3%)
and general practice (7.2%). Men held 72% of all clinical academic
posts. Gender imbalance increased with academic seniority, with women
occupying 41% of lecturer grade, 34% of senior lecturer/reader grade and
18% of professor grade posts.\ :sup:`5` In 2003, we conducted a survey
of academic psychiatrists employed in substantive posts in London
universities and found that only 24% were women, comprising 62% of
lecturers, 25% of senior lecturers, 29% of readers and 11% of
professors.\ :sup:`7`

Since 2005, higher education institutions in the UK have been encouraged
to participate in the Athena Scientific Women's Academic Network (SWAN)
charter,\ :sup:`8` which promotes good practice in addressing
inequalities in career progression in fields that have tended to have
poorer gender balance – science, technology, engineering, mathematics
and medicine (‘STEMM’ subjects). The programme has been incentivised by
awarding academic departments, institutions and universities three
grades of charter mark (bronze, silver and gold), with the suggestion
that only those that achieve silver will be eligible to apply for
certain national research funding streams.

The UK Royal College of Psychiatrists’ workforce census of 2019 reported
that women held 29% of clinical academic posts in psychiatry.\ :sup:`4`
However, these data were limited by possible double counting of clinical
and clinical academic posts, missing data and lack of breakdown by
academic grade. We therefore contacted all UK universities known to
undertake research in psychiatry to request information about the gender
balance of their substantive academic psychiatrists. We aimed to
investigate the situation within and outside London universities and to
compare our data with our previous London-wide survey results from 2003
and with data from the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ 2001 UK-wide
workforce census published in our original survey\ :sup:`7` to
investigate whether, in the context of initiatives such as Athena SWAN,
there had been any improvement in gender balance in academic psychiatry.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

We contacted the relevant heads of departments of all 15 UK universities
known to employ psychiatrists in substantive academic or clinical
academic posts (Imperial College London, King's College London, Queen
Mary University London, University College London, the Universities of
Bangor, Cambridge, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Liverpool, Manchester,
Nottingham, Oxford, Swansea and Warwick, and Queen's University
Belfast). We requested data on the number and gender of academic
psychiatrists by grade (professor; associate professor/reader; senior
lecturer; lecturer; research fellow). No other data were requested, no
individually identifiable data were gathered and data were collated
across institutions; therefore no ethical approval was required.
Departments that did not respond to the first email received two further
reminders.

.. _sec1-1:

Analysis
--------

Data were collated using IBM SPSS version 25.0 for Windows. We present
descriptive statistics (frequencies and percentages) on the number and
gender of academic psychiatrists in the UK and within and outside
London. Chi-squared tests were conducted to compare the percentage of
women by grade within and outside London, and the change in percentage
of women by grade across the UK using the Royal College of
Psychiatrists’ workforce census data from 2001, and within London using
the data from our previous survey of London academic psychiatrists
conducted in 2003.\ :sup:`7`

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

We received responses from 12 of the 15 (80%) universities, including
all those in London. The gender of academic psychiatrists by grade is
shown in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Overall, 49% of posts were held by women.
Although there was equal gender balance at senior lecturer and
reader/associate professor level, men occupied 79% of professorial
posts. Table 1Gender balance among UK academic psychiatrists,
2019Academic gradeFemale, *n* (%)Male, *n* (%)Total, *n*\ Research
fellow60 (70)26 (30)86Lecturer34 (64)19 (36)53Senior lecturer36 (50)36
(50)72Reader/associate professor11 (48)12 (52)23Professor21 (21)79
(79)100Total162 (49)172 (51)334

`Figure 1 <#fig01>`__ shows the gender balance by grade of UK academic
psychiatrists in 2001 and 2019. Research fellow posts are not included
as data on these were not reported in 2001. The percentage of female
academic psychiatrists has increased from 20 to 40% overall, with the
largest increase seen at the level of senior lecturer (from 25 to 50%),
a statistically significant increase. Of note, the total number of posts
has fallen from 366 to 248 since 2001. Fig. 1Percentage of UK female
academic psychiatrists, 2001 and 2019.

`Table 2 <#tab02>`__ shows the gender of academic psychiatrists by grade
in universities inside and outside London, including research fellows.
Around three-quarters of all UK posts (252/334) were in London. Women
held the majority of more junior posts (research fellow and lecturer)
within London, whereas the reverse was true outside London (although the
total number of these posts outside London was small). These differences
in junior posts within and outside the capital were statistically
significant. There was equal gender balance within and outside London at
senior lecturer grade, but most professorial posts were held by men (89%
outside London, 74% within London). Women occupied 63% of
reader/associate professor posts outside London and 40% within London,
but, again, the number of these posts was relatively small and thus we
need to be cautious in interpreting this difference. There were no
statistically significant differences in the percentage of women at
these higher grades within and outside London. Table 2Gender balance
among academic psychiatrists within and outside London,
2019LondonOutside LondonAcademic gradeFemale, *n* (%)Male, *n* (%)Total,
*n*\ Female, *n* (%)Male, *n* (%)Total, *n*\ Chi-squared\ *P*\ Research
fellow57 (76)18 (24)753 (28)8 (72)1110.790.001Lecturer32 (74)11 (26)432
(20)8 (80)1010.450.001Senior lecturer27 (50)27 (50)549 (50)9
(50)180>1Reader/associate professor6 (40)9 (60)155 (63)3
(37)81.060.303Professor17 (26)48 (74)654 (11)31 (89)353.180.074Total139
(55)113 (45)25223 (28)59 (72)8218.20<0.001

`Figure 2 <#fig02>`__ shows the gender balance by grade within London
universities in 2003 and 2019. Research fellow posts are not included as
data on these were not gathered in 2003. The percentage of academic
psychiatrist posts in London occupied by men fell from 74% in 2003 to
54% in 2019, with increases in the percentage of women at every grade: a
41% increase at lecturer level, 21% at senior lecturer, 9% at
reader/associate professor, and 8% at professor level. However, only the
increases in the percentage of women at lecturer and senior lecturer
level were statistically significant. Fig. 2Percentage of female
academic psychiatrists, London universities, 2003 and 2019.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

We found 49% of all clinical academic posts in psychiatry to be occupied
by women, compared with the 29% reported in the Royal College of
Psychiatrists’ 2019 census.\ :sup:`4` The disparity may be explained by
the limitations of the census noted previously (double counting and
missing data). Although we did not achieve 100% response from
universities outside London, given that three-quarters of posts were
within London, this finding appears robust as well as encouraging. Our
results also compare favourably with the figure of 28% reported by the
Medical Schools Council for all medical specialties.\ :sup:`5`

Our data suggest that gender equality in academic psychiatry across the
UK has improved since 2001, with increases in the percentage of women at
all grades and a statistically significant increase at senior lecturer
level, where women now hold 50% of posts. This is in keeping with the
gradual increase in women achieving substantive consultant posts (an
equivalent grade to senior lecturer) in psychiatry over a similar
period.\ :sup:`4` However, there has been a comparatively small rise of
only 10% in women at professor grade, with four-fifths of these posts
occupied by men. This is particularly disappointing when comparing these
figures with other medical specialties, where women still only comprise
one-third of senior lecturer and readers/associate professors and 18% of
professors.\ :sup:`5` In other words, the progress made in gender
equality at the lower grades of academic psychiatry has not had the same
rate of impact on the highest grade. This could be due to the fact that
people tend to occupy a professorial post for much longer than lower
grade posts and thus vacancies do not arise as often. It might therefore
be expected to take longer for gender equality to be achieved at this
level than at senior lecturer and reader/associate professor level.
Nevertheless, 18 years is surely long enough to infer that this is not
simply a ‘pipeline’ problem that will correct itself over time.

.. _sec3-1:

London compared with the rest of the UK
---------------------------------------

We also found that the situation within and outside London differed,
with somewhat better gender equality in the capital, where women held
55% of academic psychiatry posts, compared with 28% elsewhere. Outside
London, the majority of more junior posts were occupied by men and,
although there were equal numbers of men and women at senior lecturer
grade and more women than men at reader/associate professor level, there
were very few of these posts. At professor level, men held 31 of the 35
available positions. Within London, although research fellow and
lecturer posts were in greater supply and women held the majority of
these, the *‘pinch point’* in career progression came above senior
lecturer level, with women representing only a quarter of all
professors. Comparing our results with our 2003 survey of London
universities,\ :sup:`7` we found that the percentage of women at all
grades had increased, but statistically significant increases were only
evident at lecturer and senior lecturer level. It therefore seems that,
although the opportunity for progression in academic psychiatry is
improving for women overall across the UK, it remains very challenging
to achieve the highest level of promotion, and the situation may be even
harder for women pursuing their career outside London.

.. _sec3-2:

Barriers to career progression and the Athena SWAN initiative
-------------------------------------------------------------

The barriers to career progression for women in academia have been
described previously,\ :sup:`9` and helpfully summarised by
Howard\ :sup:`10` as including ‘few visible role models and mentors, the
short-term contracts used for relatively senior academic positions, lack
of transparency for pay and promotion procedures, gender imbalance in
the decision-making processes of promotion and organisational policies,
slow setting up and take-up of work life-balance policies and,
particularly challengingly, the intangible cultural factors that seem to
exclude women from the corridors of power’. Others have also emphasised
the importance of unconscious bias as a driver of inequality within
academic institutions.\ :sup:`11`

The Athena SWAN charter established guiding principles to assist higher
education institutions in addressing the many barriers to gender
equality, with the aim of improving the recruitment, retention and
career progression of female academics.\ :sup:`8` Its bronze, silver and
gold accreditation awards provide an incentive to establish and develop
key actions and policies to overcome the specific barriers in a
particular setting, with the aim of changing cultures and processes that
disadvantage female staff. The charter has since been extended to
non-STEMM specialties and been broadened to include other aspects of
diversity as well as gender.

The implementation of the Athena SWAN initiative was evaluated in five
departments of one UK medical school using a qualitative
approach.\ :sup:`12` Although it was felt to have introduced a welcome
mechanism to raise the issue of gender equality within the organisation,
it was also reported to create considerable additional work for female
staff. This included completing the lengthy SWAN application itself, as
well as coordinating actions to address specific barriers, and the
increased burden on the small number of senior women, who had to take on
more committee work to improve gender representation. The authors
concluded that the aims of the initiative were undermined by the
negative impact on female staff.\ :sup:`12` A separate evaluation found
no difference in the career progression of female academics in the 12 UK
medical schools that had been participating in the Athena SWAN programme
from its inception compared with those that joined after the
announcement in 2011 that the award of National Institute of Health
Research (NIHR) funding would be contingent on achieving a silver
award.\ :sup:`13`

The financial incentivising of the Athena SWAN initiative by the NIHR
represents a ‘carrot and stick’ approach which has certainly raised the
consciousness of higher education institutions to the pervasive gender
inequality they harbour. All the universities we surveyed had joined the
Athena SWAN programme and 12 of the 15 held a silver award at the time
of our 2019 survey. Our results suggest that in academic psychiatry
there has been clear improvement in the representation of women at all
grades of academic post since 2001. Nevertheless, even with the support
of a national accreditation process and a financial ‘sword of Damocles’
suspended over these institutions, women in academic psychiatry remain
disadvantaged in their career progression within them, particularly with
regard to the achievement of a professorial post. The ongoing male
dominance at the highest academic grade is, put simply, dispiriting.

.. _sec3-3:

Reasons for the continued inequality
------------------------------------

One possible reason for this continued disparity is that women are not
achieving the key metrics that most universities take into account for
promotion to professor. Women tend to hold more teaching and pastoral
support roles than their male colleagues, areas of responsibility that
tend to be valued less than research activities when considering senior
promotions.\ :sup:`14` As well as research grant income, publications
are a common metric for academic promotion. However, no data are
available allowing us to compare the academic credentials of applicants
for promotion to professor by gender in psychiatry.

Our data raise a further important issue. The Royal College of
Psychiatrists’ workforce census of 2001 identified 218 academic
psychiatrists at senior lecturer grade and above, but only 153 in the
2019 census. Our survey identified 195 at these grades, of whom 134 were
based in London, and in 2003 we identified 165 London-based academic
psychiatrists at the same grades. All these data suggest that the number
of academic posts in psychiatry is shrinking. Across the UK we
identified 248 posts at any grade, representing a total reduction of
one-third since 2001. Although this problem is not limited to
psychiatry, it seems to have been particularly badly affected. The
Medical Schools Council reported a reduction in all senior lecturer and
reader posts of between 25 and 33% across the four countries of the UK
since 2004 and highlighted that psychiatry had seen major losses – 84.4
full-time equivalent (FTE) senior lecturer/reader posts between 2007 and
2017.\ :sup:`5` This clearly adds further pressure and challenge for
those hoping to enter and progress a career in academic psychiatry.

**Sukriti Dhingra** was an MSc student in Clinical Mental Health
Sciences in the Division of Psychiatry, University College London, UK
from 2018–2019. **Helen Killaspy** is Professor of Rehabilitation
Psychiatry in the Division of Psychiatry, University College London, UK.
**Sarah Dowling** is Deputy Manager of the Division of Psychiatry,
University College London, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available on
request from the corresponding author.

All the authors were involved in the design of the study. S.Dh. and H.K.
collected and analysed the data. S.Dh. drafted the manuscript, which was
revised by H.K. and S.Do.; all authors agreed the final version before
submission.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.116.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
