============================================================================================================================
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor functions altered by neuronal PTP1B activation in Alzheimer’s disease and schizophrenia models
============================================================================================================================

Alexandre F. R. Stewart
Hsiao-Huei Chen\* **Correspondence to:** Alexandre F. R. Stewart,
astewart@ottawaheart.ca; Hsiao-Huei Chen, hchen@uottawa.ca.
:Date: 2022-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Glutamate is the main excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain and binds
to two major classes of receptors, the
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) and the
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Unlike AMPA receptors that are
immediately activated by glutamate release, NMDA receptors are blocked
by magnesium and can only be activated by glutamate after membrane
depolarization. Thus, NMDA receptors are only activated after repeated
AMPA receptor activation by glutamate. NMDA receptors are, for the most
part, calcium-permeable channels. Calcium influx through NMDA receptors
modulates synaptic transmission in neurons based on prior history of
excitation, and provides a means of scaling the strength of synapses
required for Hebbian plasticity. NMDA receptors were first characterized
in the post-synaptic membrane, where calcium influx controls AMPA
receptor levels and activity-dependent gene expression. Tyrosine
phosphorylation of postsynaptic NMDA receptors promotes calcium influx,
whereas dephosphorylation of NMDA receptors causes their internalization
and reduces calcium influx through NMDA receptors (Wang and Salter,
1994). More than 10 years ago, the striatal-enriched tyrosine
phosphatase Step61 was tied to NMDA receptor dephosphorylation in the
context of Alzheimer’s disease and amyloid-beta (Kurup et al., 2010).

In recent years, NMDA receptors have also been found in the presynaptic
membrane, where calcium influx regulates neurotransmitter release,
including glutamate. Moreover, NMDA receptors signal not only as calcium
channels (an ionotropic function), but other cell signaling mechanisms
involving protein kinases and phosphatases (a metabotropic function) has
also emerged. Recent reports have highlighted the functional
consequences of the activation of the tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B in
glutamatergic neurons on two NMDA receptor-dependent functions. In one
study, the cellular mechanism of defective plasticity at the CA3:CA1
synapse underlying cognitive deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s
disease were revealed as a deficit in presynaptic NMDA receptors that
could be fully restored by neuronal ablation of PTP1B or by the
selective PTP1B inhibitor Trodusquemine (Zhang et al., 2021). In a
second study, the schizophrenia-like effects of the NMDA receptor
antagonist ketamine were shown to depend on PTP1B. Neuronal ablation of
PTP1B or PTP1B inhibition with Trodusquemine prevented these
schizophrenia-like functional deficits (Qin et al., 2021).

The tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B is expressed in neurons of the
hypothalamus, the hippocampus, and cerebral cortex. Normally, PTP1B is
maintained in a quiescent state by a selective interaction with small
protein inhibitors, including the LIM-only domain protein LMO4 (Pandey
et al., 2013). Under physiological conditions, PTP1B is only transiently
activated to limit signaling by tyrosine kinase receptors. However,
emerging evidence indicates that several cellular stresses including
dietary stress (Pandey et al., 2013), hormonal stress (Qin et al.,
2015), tissue injury, and misfolded protein aggregates (Ricke et al.,
2020) constitutively activate this tyrosine phosphatase causing deficits
in cellular signaling by the insulin receptor (Pandey et al., 2014), the
leptin receptor (Zhou et al., 2012), and the BNDF receptor trkB (Qin et
al., 2020), to name a few.

In a mouse model of congenital Alzheimer’s disease, the hAPP-J20 mouse
that expresses a mutant form of human β-amyloid precursor protein,
neuronal PTP1B is activated and hastens the onset of cognitive and
spatial memory deficits (Ricke et al., 2020). Systemic inhibition with
the selective PTP1B non-competitive allosteric inhibitor trodusquemine,
a compound that crosses the blood-brain barrier, ameliorated cognition
and spatial memory in the Morris water maze test, preventing
inflammation and neuron loss at the CA3 region of the hippocampus of
hAPP-J20 mice. Similarly, hAPP-J20 mice in which PTP1B was selectively
ablated in glutamatergic neurons were spared cognitive and spatial
memory deficits and neuron loss at the CA3 region (Ricke et al., 2020)
despite no marked reduction in inflammation compared to hAPP-J20
littermates. While this study pointed to a critical involvement of
neuronal tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B in the progression of
Alzheimer’s-like deficits in these mice, the functional deficits at the
cellular level remained unknown.

The hippocampus is a brain region important for learning and remembering
spatial cues and long-term changes in the strength of synapses between
neurons of the hippocampus are thought to underlie the formation of
spatial memories. A follow-up study by Zhang et al. (2021) examined
synaptic strength and plasticity from CA3 neurons onto CA1 neurons of
the hippocampus to identify cellular mechanisms disrupted by neuronal
PTP1B activation in the hAPP-J20 mouse. Given that hAPP-J20 mice fail to
acquire spatial memories, hippocampal synaptic plasticity was likely
compromised in these mice. Zhang et al. (2021) found a marked deficit in
long-term potentiation (LTP) of the CA3:CA1 synaptic response that was
rescued by systemic PTP1B inhibition or genetic ablation of PTP1B
specifically in glutamatergic neurons ( `Figure 1A <#F1>`__ ). Bath
application of the NMDA receptor blockers MK801 or
D-2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoate to wild-type hippocampal brain sections
phenocopied the deficit in LTP seen in hAPP-J20 mice and reversed the
benefit of glutamatergic neuron-specific ablation of PTP1B in hAPP-J20
mice. Thus, NMDA receptors were clearly implicated in the process.
However, given that both CA3 and CA1 neurons are glutamatergic, it was
not clear whether PTP1B ablation rescued a pre- or post-synaptic deficit
in hAPP-J20 mice.

.. figure:: NRR-17-2208-g001
   :alt: PTP1B activity impedes NMDA receptor-dependent pre- and
   post-synaptic functions.
   (A) The diagram on top illustrates the effect of PTP1B activation to
   inhibit presynaptic NMDA receptor ionotropic function required for
   LTP. Long-term potentiation (LTP) of the amplitude of evoked
   excitatory postsynaptic currents (eEPSC) at the CA3:CA1 synapse of
   the hippocampus is impaired in hAPP-J20 Alzheimer’s disease mice due
   to hyperactivation of PTP1B that prevents NMDA receptor-dependent
   augmentation of excitatory neurotransmitter release (Zhang et al.,
   2021). LTP in hAPP-J20 mice is restored by chronic Trodusquemine
   administration. Genetic ablation of PTP1B in glutamatergic neurons
   (PKO) increases LTP in hAPP-J20 mice relative to WT. Both
   pharmacological inhibition and genetic ablation of PTP1B prevent
   cognitive decline and neuron loss in hAPP-j20 mice. (B) The diagram
   on top suggests a metabotropic effect of NMDA receptors to suppress
   PTP1B is blocked by ketamine. Ketamine, an NMDA receptor antagonist,
   impairs endocannabinoid (eCB) mobilization in response to the trkB
   receptor agonist 7,8-dihydroxyflavone (DHF) through disinhibition of
   PTP1B in layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons of the prefrontal cortex (Qin et
   al., 2021). trkB activation mobilizes eCB that acts on presynaptic
   CB1 receptors on inhibitory neurons and reduces the amplitude of
   inhibitory (GABA) post-synaptic currents (IPSC) recorded at layer 2/3
   pyramidal neurons Schizophrenia-like effects of ketamine are blocked
   by pharmacological inhibition or genetic ablation of PTP1B. Data
   shown in A and B are modified from studies by Zhang et al. (2021) and
   Qin et al. (2021), respectively. AMPAR:
   α-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor; GABA:
   γ-aminobutyric acid; IPSC: inhibitory post-synaptic currents; J20:
   hAPP-J20; NMDAR: N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor; VGCC: voltage-gating
   calcium channel; WT: wild type.
   :name: F1

   PTP1B activity impedes NMDA receptor-dependent pre- and post-synaptic
   functions.
   (A) The diagram on top illustrates the effect of PTP1B activation to
   inhibit presynaptic NMDA receptor ionotropic function required for
   LTP. Long-term potentiation (LTP) of the amplitude of evoked
   excitatory postsynaptic currents (eEPSC) at the CA3:CA1 synapse of
   the hippocampus is impaired in hAPP-J20 Alzheimer’s disease mice due
   to hyperactivation of PTP1B that prevents NMDA receptor-dependent
   augmentation of excitatory neurotransmitter release (Zhang et al.,
   2021). LTP in hAPP-J20 mice is restored by chronic Trodusquemine
   administration. Genetic ablation of PTP1B in glutamatergic neurons
   (PKO) increases LTP in hAPP-J20 mice relative to WT. Both
   pharmacological inhibition and genetic ablation of PTP1B prevent
   cognitive decline and neuron loss in hAPP-j20 mice. (B) The diagram
   on top suggests a metabotropic effect of NMDA receptors to suppress
   PTP1B is blocked by ketamine. Ketamine, an NMDA receptor antagonist,
   impairs endocannabinoid (eCB) mobilization in response to the trkB
   receptor agonist 7,8-dihydroxyflavone (DHF) through disinhibition of
   PTP1B in layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons of the prefrontal cortex (Qin et
   al., 2021). trkB activation mobilizes eCB that acts on presynaptic
   CB1 receptors on inhibitory neurons and reduces the amplitude of
   inhibitory (GABA) post-synaptic currents (IPSC) recorded at layer 2/3
   pyramidal neurons Schizophrenia-like effects of ketamine are blocked
   by pharmacological inhibition or genetic ablation of PTP1B. Data
   shown in A and B are modified from studies by Zhang et al. (2021) and
   Qin et al. (2021), respectively. AMPAR:
   α-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor; GABA:
   γ-aminobutyric acid; IPSC: inhibitory post-synaptic currents; J20:
   hAPP-J20; NMDAR: N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor; VGCC: voltage-gating
   calcium channel; WT: wild type.

Surprisingly, the inclusion of the membrane-impermeable NMDA receptor
blocker norketamine in the post-synaptic recording electrode silenced
post-synaptic NMDA receptors, but had little effect on LTP in either
wild type mice or in hAPP-J20 mice rescued with glutamatergic
neuron-specific ablation of PTP1B, strongly supporting a pre-synaptic
deficit in NMDA receptor-dependent LTP. Using the coefficient of
variation method, Zhang et al. (2021) further confirmed that the deficit
in NMDA receptor-dependent LTP at CA3:CA1 synapses is largely
presynaptic in hAPP-J20 mice. This result is important, because it
suggests the expression of mutant human amyloid-beta protein
constitutively activates PTP1B in presynaptic terminals, leading to a
deficit in NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic plasticity and learning
deficits in these mice. It should be pointed out, however, that the
study by Zhang et al. (2021) used a paired stimulation protocol that
favors presynaptic LTP and did not address a post-synaptic effect of
PTP1B in hAPP-J20 mice. Future studies using different stimulation
protocols that induce LTP mainly through postsynaptic NMDA receptors
will be needed to adequately address this question. Especially, whether
PTP1B works through Step61 to affect postsynaptic NMDA receptors in the
context of amyloidopathy (Kurup et al., 2010). It is also worth noting
that Thompson’s group recently reported another mechanism whereby
post-synaptic NMDA receptors modulate presynaptic glutamate release via
a retrograde signaling mechanism. Unlike Zhang et al. (2021) who
reported a direct effect on pre-synaptic NMDA receptors to regulate
glutamate release, Bialecki et al. (2020) showed that post-synaptic
metabotropic NMDA receptors activate Src kinase to modulate
post-synaptic pannexin-1 (Panx1) channel-dependent production of
anandamide (an endovanilloid). Anandamide retrogradely activates
pre-synaptic TRPV1 (transient receptor potential vanilloid 1) receptors
that suppress glutamate release (Bialecki et al., 2020).

Zhang et al. (2021) also reported reduced phosphorylation at tyrosine
1472 of the GluN2B subunit of the NMDA receptor that was restored by
Trodusquemine or glutamatergic neuron-specific ablation of PTP1B, while
phosphorylation of tyrosine 1325 or the GluN2A subunit was unaffected.
At first glance, this result suggests that dephosphorylation of
presynaptic GluN2B rather than GluN2A subunits are chiefly responsible
for the LTP deficit. However, GluN2A is phosphorylated at tyrosine 934
and Zhang et al. (2021) did not interrogate this site using a specific
antibody (ThermoFisher PA5-105627) that recently became available. What
is clear is that either pharmacological inhibition of PTP1B or genetic
ablation of PTP1B in glutamatergic neurons restores NMDA
receptor-dependent LTP at the CA3:CA1 synapse in this mouse model of
hereditary Alzheimer’s disease with amyloidopathy. Pressing questions
are whether other models of Alzheimer’s disease (for example, models
with tauopathy like the PS19 mice expressing human mutant Tau P301S
protein) will show a similar response to PTP1B inhibition or ablation
and whether sporadic Alzheimer’s disease will respond to therapeutic
interventions targeting PTP1B.

PTP1B hyperactivity is clearly deleterious to NMDA receptor signaling
and synaptic plasticity important for spatial memory and learning in
Alzheimer’s disease. Another recent study reported that PTP1B
hyperactivity is implicated in schizophrenia-related deficits that are
also tied to impaired NMDA receptor function. Subanesthetic doses of the
NMDA receptor antagonist ketamine produce several schizophrenia-like
behaviors in mice, including deficient sensorimotor gating of the
acoustic startle response, spatial learning deficits, and hypermobility.
These behavioral effects of ketamine can all be reversed by the PTP1B
inhibitor Trodusquemine, while glutamatergic neuron-specific ablation of
PTP1B prevents the sensorimotor gating and spatial learning deficits,
but not the hyperlocomotion (Qin et al., 2021). Thus, PTP1B activation
in glutamatergic neurons contributes to sensorimotor gating and spatial
learning deficits caused by subanesthetic doses of ketamine, whereas
PTP1B activation in non-glutamatergic neurons is responsible for the
hyperlocomotion effect of ketamine. Moreover, this study suggests that
PTP1B activation is a consequence of silencing NMDA receptors with
ketamine ( `Figure 1B <#F1>`__ ).

Intriguingly, a genetic manipulation that removed the endogenous
inhibitor of PTP1B (i.e., LMO4) in glutamatergic neurons also produced a
mouse model with constitutively active PTP1B that resulted in
schizophrenia-like deficits in sensorimotor gating and spatial memory,
but not hyperlocomotion. A consequence of PTP1B activation in
post-synaptic glutamatergic neurons is dephosphorylation and
inactivation of the trkB receptor for brain-derived neurotrophic factor,
a growth factor released from neurons in an activity-dependent manner.
In layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons of the medial prefrontal cortex, trkB
receptors activate phospholipase C and contribute to the production of
the endogenous cannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglcerol that suppresses
γ-aminobutyric acid release from presynaptic inhibitory neurons.
Functionally, sensorimotor gating and spatial memory deficits were
correlated with loss of trkB receptor-dependent endocannabinoid
mobilization to modulate inhibitory inputs to layer 2/3 pyramidal
neurons (Qin et al., 2020). Importantly, these cellular signaling
deficits and schizophrenia-like behaviors could be fully rescued by
simultaneous ablation of PTP1B in these neurons (Qin et al., 2020).

In the ketamine model, sensorimotor gating deficits and spatial memory
deficits were also partly correlated to defective endocannabinoid
mobilization in response to the trkB receptor agonist
7,8-dihydroxyflavone (Qin et al., 2021). Glutamatergic neuron-specific
ablation of PTP1B prevented ketamine’s effect to reduce trkB-dependent
endocannabinoid mobilization from layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons ( `Figure
1B <#F1>`__ ). In light of the report showing that presynaptic NMDA
receptors regulate brain-derived neurotrophic factor release to modulate
post-synaptic trkB signaling (Park et al., 2014), it will be important
to determine how PTP1B at the presynaptic site affects this process in
the context of schizophrenia (and other neurological disorders).

Together, these recent studies reveal novel aspects of NMDA receptor
signaling affected by PTP1B in two preclinical models of neurological
disorders: Alzheimer’s disease and schizophrenia. In the hAPP-J20 model
of Alzheimer’s disease, PTP1B hyperactivity impairs presynaptic NMDA
receptor-dependent LTP at the CA3:CA1 hippocampal synapse ( `Figure
1A <#F1>`__ ). In a model of schizophrenia, the NMDA receptor antagonist
ketamine causes dis-inhibition of PTP1B that impairs trkB-dependent
endocannabinoid mobilization in post-synaptic neurons of the medial
prefrontal cortex ( `Figure 1B <#F1>`__ ). Importantly, these studies
also show the therapeutic potential of PTP1B inhibitors to treat these
disorders.

*This work was supported by grants from the Heart and Stroke Foundation
of Canada (G-13-0002596 & G-18-0022157, to HHC; G-16-00014085, to AFRS),
Ontario Mental Health Foundation (to HHC), the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (201610PJT #376403, to HHC; 201610PJT #376503, to AFRS),
the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(RGPIN/06212-2014, to HHC; RGPIN/2016-04985, to AFRS). HHC is also
supported by a Mid-Career Investigator Award (grant # 7506) from the
Heart and Stroke Foundation of Ontario*.
