==============================================================================================================================
Metabolomic Profiling Reveals Common Metabolic Alterations in Plasma of Patients with *Toxoplasma* Infection and Schizophrenia
==============================================================================================================================

Emelia Osman
Anis Safirah Mohammad Zahariluddin
Shalisah Sharip
Zulkarnain Md Idris
Jen Kit Tan*Correspondence: jenkittan@ukm.edu.my
:Date: 2022-8-19

:Abstract:
   *Toxoplasma gondii* is an opportunistic protozoan parasite known to
   affect the human brain. The infection has been associated with an
   increased incidence of schizophrenia; however, the link between the
   two conditions remains unclear. This study aimed to compare the
   plasma metabolome of schizophrenia and non-schizophrenia subjects
   with or without *Toxoplasma* infection. Untargeted metabolomic
   profiling was carried out by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.
   Elevation of the α-hydroxyglutaric acid level and reduced adenosine
   monophosphate, inosine, hypoxanthine and xanthine were found in the
   subjects with either toxoplasmosis or schizophrenia alone. These
   results suggest that purine catabolism is a common metabolic
   alteration in *Toxoplasma* infection and schizophrenia. The roles of
   these metabolites on the pathogenesis of schizophrenia in relation to
   *Toxoplasma* infection warrant further studies.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _sec1-genes-13-01482:

1. Introduction
===============

Infection of *Toxoplasma gondii* affects approximately 33% of the world
population [(Fuglewicz, Piotrowski, and Stodolak 2017)]. The routes of
infection include contact with cat faeces, the ingestion of contaminated
meat containing *T. gondii* cysts and vertical transmission from mother
to foetus [(McAuley 2014)]. Infection in pregnant women is a major
concern because it can cause spontaneous abortion and stillbirth.
Immunocompromised individuals may develop severe toxoplasmosis, leading
to encephalitis [(Nimir et al. 2013)]. Nevertheless, *Toxoplasma*
infection is usually asymptomatic in healthy people; however, it
persists as a latent infection for life. The parasite prefers to infest
brain tissue and might affect brain functions responsible for emotion
and thought processes [(Fuglewicz, Piotrowski, and Stodolak 2017)].
Numerous studies have shown a positive association between *Toxoplasma*
infection and schizophrenia. A higher rate of *Toxoplasma* infection was
found in schizophrenia patients than in healthy individuals [(Torrey and
Yolken 2003),(Torrey, Bartko, and Yolken 2012),(Emelia et al.
2012),(Flegr and Horáček 2020),(Omar et al. 2015)]. *Toxoplasma*
infection has been shown to change animals’ behaviours and brain
functions; while acute infection has been associated with psychotic
symptoms in humans [(Yolken, Dickerson, and Fuller Torrey 2009)]. In
addition, *Toxoplasma* infection could alter neurotransmitter
metabolisms in the human brain [(Elsheikha, Büsselberg, and Zhu 2016)].

Schizophrenia is a psychiatric disorder with an uncertain cause that
affects nearly 1% of the world population [(Marder and Cannon 2019)].
Genetic factors appear as a major risk for the disorder; moreover,
environmental factors such as infection have been proposed to interact
with the predisposing genes, leading to the development of schizophrenia
[(Fuglewicz, Piotrowski, and Stodolak 2017)]. Given the possible link
between *Toxoplasma* infection and schizophrenia, controlling the risk
factors such as *Toxoplasma* infection might prevent the development of
schizophrenia in later life. However, establishing the link between
*Toxoplasma* infection and schizophrenia remains a difficult task
because both conditions persist over a long period of time and progress
slowly.

Metabolites are the downstream products and mediators of biochemical
pathways in the body. They are often regarded as the closest readout of
physiological status. Identification of the metabolic changes in
*Toxoplasma* infection and schizophrenia might provide novel insights
into the underlying mechanisms of schizophrenia concerning
toxoplasmosis. Therefore, this study aimed to compare the plasma
metabolome of schizophrenia and non-schizophrenia subjects with or
without *Toxoplasma* infection.

.. _sec2-genes-13-01482:

2. Materials and Methods
========================

.. _sec2dot1-genes-13-01482:

2.1. Participant Recruitment and Sample Collection
--------------------------------------------------

Patients diagnosed with schizophrenia were recruited using convenient
sampling when admitted to the psychiatry ward or came for a follow-up at
the psychiatric clinic in Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Kuala Lumpur
from June 2018 to December 2018. The patients were diagnosed clinically
by experienced psychiatrists according to the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-V). Immunocompromised
patients were excluded from this study. Non-schizophrenia volunteers
were recruited from the community. A screening using Mini-International
Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I) version 7.0.2 for DSM-V was carried
out to assess the mental status of the volunteers. All the participants
were screened for *Toxoplasma* infection using serological tests and
divided into four groups of 15 subjects each: (1) *Toxoplasma* positive
and schizophrenia (TP+Sz); (2) *Toxoplasma* positive and
non-schizophrenia (T+NSz); (3) *Toxoplasma* negative and schizophrenia
(TN+Sz); and (4) *Toxoplasma* negative and non-schizophrenia (TN+NSz).
Informed consent was obtained from all the subjects involved in the
study.

A total of 3 mL of blood was taken by venipuncture into an EDTA tube.
Blood samples were then centrifuged at 3000× *g* for 15 min to obtain
plasma and stored at −20 °C until further use. The study was conducted
according to the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the
Research Ethics Committee of the National University of Malaysia (UKM
PPI/111/8/JEP-2018-281). All the participants were provided with written
informed consent.

.. _sec2dot2-genes-13-01482:

2.2. Serological Assay
----------------------

The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (PLATELIA TOXO IgG;
Bio-Rad, Marnes-la-Coquette, France) were used to measure the level of
specific IgG antibodies against *T. gondii*. All the plasma samples were
tested in duplicates following the protocol provided by the
manufacturer. A Multiskan FC Microplate Photometer (Thermo Scientific,
Waltham, MA, USA) was used to measure the IgG antibody titres at 420 nm
with 650 nm as a reference wavelength. SkanIt software (v5.0) was used
to analyse the data. A sample was considered as *Toxoplasma* negative if
the titres for anti-*T. gondii* IgG antibodies were lower than 6 IU/mL,
while values above 9 IU/mL were considered as positive.

.. _sec2dot3-genes-13-01482:

2.3. Metabolomic Analysis
-------------------------

The chemicals used were of mass spectrometry-grade purchased from
Fischer Scientific (Hampton, NH, USA). The extraction of metabolites
from plasma was performed as described previously, with a slight
modification [(Dunn et al. 2011)]. Briefly, cold methanol was added to
200 µL of plasma at 3:1 ratio, vortexed for 15 s, and centrifuged at
15,800× *g* for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was dried with a vacuum
centrifuge (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at room temperature. The
quality control (QC) sample was prepared by pooling an aliquot from each
plasma sample, followed by the metabolite extraction procedure identical
to the plasma samples. The dried supernatant was reconstituted with
water and filtered with a 0.2 µm cellulose regenerated membrane (Fischer
Scientific). Water was used as a blank sample. Liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) was performed using a
UHPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000; Thermo Scientific) and Orbitrap MS
(Q Exactive HF; Thermo Scientific). A C18 column (Synchronis; 1.7 µm;
2.1 × 100 mm; Thermo Scientific) was heated at 55 °C with a flow rate of
0.45 mL/min. Water and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid each were used
as solvent A and B, respectively. The elution gradient for solvent B was
0.5% for 1 min, 0.5 to 99.5% for 15 min, 99.5% for 4 min and 99.5 to
0.5% for 2 min. MS1 was acquired at a resolution of 60,000, while MS2 at
15,000. Fragmentation was performed with a stepped normalized collision
energy (NCE) of 20, 40 and 60. The injection volume was set as 2 µL.
Negative ionisation mode was acquired after the completion of positive
ion mode. The QC sample was injected 5 times in the beginning and once
at an interval of every 4 plasma samples. The plasma samples were
arranged randomly in between the QC injections.

Raw data files were pre-processed with the Compound Discoverer 2.0
(Thermo Scientific) for peak detection and alignment and background
subtraction. Molecular features (MFs) with molecular weight, retention
time and signal intensity were exported as a csv file. Statistical
analysis was carried out by MetaboAnalyst 4.0 [(Chong et al. 2018)].
Briefly, the MFs were grouped based on mass and a retention time
tolerance of 0.025 *m*/*z* and 30 s, respectively. The peaks were
normalised by cube root and log transformation for positive and negative
mode, respectively. All the data were auto-scaled. Differentially
expressed molecular features (DeMFs) were identified by a *t*-test with
a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05. Batch effect was corrected by the
Combat method [(Johnson, Li, and Rabinovic 2007)] using MetaboAnalyst.

DeMFs were annotated by cross-checking with the mzCloud database
(HighChem LLC, Bratislava, Slovakia), Human Metabolome Database (HMDB)
[(Wishart et al. 2018)] and METLIN [(Guijas et al. 2018)]. Metabolites
that matched with the databases at an accurate mass ≤ 5 ppm and MS2
spectrum ≥ 70% similarity were assigned as level 2 confidence annotation
[(Sumner et al. 2007)] and reported in this study.

.. _sec3-genes-13-01482:

3. Results
==========

.. _sec3dot1-genes-13-01482:

3.1. Demographic and Clinical Data of the Participants
------------------------------------------------------

The mean age of the four groups ranged from 32 to 44 years old, with the
youngest being 19 and the oldest at 65 years old (`Table
1 <#genes-13-01482-t001>`__). The age group of TP+Sz (44.1 years) was
significantly higher than TN+Sz (36.3) and TN+NSz (32.4). All the groups
consisted of almost equal gender proportion, with the male participants
ranging from 40 to 53.3%. Schizophrenia patients were presented with
various clinical features. All of them were on medications for their
disorder, with some of them having drugs with anti-toxoplasmic
activities (40% of TP+Sz and 86.7% of TN+Sz). Almost half of the
participants (46.7 to 66.7%) in each group had cat(s) as a pet.

.. _sec3dot2-genes-13-01482:

3.2. Integrity of Metabolomic Data
----------------------------------

One sample of TP+NSz in positive mode was identified as an outlier and
removed from the analysis (`Supplementary Figure
S1A <#app1-genes-13-01482>`__). After removing the outlier, the QC
samples in the positive mode were grouped into two clusters in the PCA
score plot; this indicated the existence of batch effect (`Supplementary
Figure S1C <#app1-genes-13-01482>`__). After batch effect adjustment,
the QC samples were clustered together in the score plot (`Supplementary
Figure S1D <#app1-genes-13-01482>`__). The QC samples of the negative
mode were clustered together with the score plot, except the first QC
sample; this indicated an insufficient equilibrium on the first
injection (`Supplementary Figure S1B <#app1-genes-13-01482>`__). No
plasma samples appeared as an outlier in the negative ion mode.

By comparing the plasma samples without QC, there was no distinct
separation between the compared groups in both the positive (`Figure
1 <#genes-13-01482-f001>`__) and negative (`Figure
2 <#genes-13-01482-f002>`__) modes. These results indicate the
difference in metabolic profiles between the groups was subtle. A total
of 1031 and 611 MFs were detected in the positive and negative modes,
respectively (`Table 2 <#genes-13-01482-t002>`__). Fifty-seven DeMFs
were found between TP+NSz and TN+NSz; however, only six of these were
identified confidently. No DeMF was found between TP+Sz and TN+Sz; while
7 out of 76 DeMFs were identified between TN+Sz and TN+NSz. One out of
the five DeMFs was identified between TP+Sz and TP+NSz.

.. _sec3dot3-genes-13-01482:

3.3. Metabolite Changes in Toxoplasma Infection and Schizophrenia
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Compared with TN+NSz, the hydroxyglutaric acid level was higher; while
adenosine monophosphate, inosine and hypoxanthine were lower in TP+NSz
and TN+Sz (`Table 3 <#genes-13-01482-t003>`__; `Supplementary Figure
S2 <#app1-genes-13-01482>`__). These findings suggest that the metabolic
pathways related to these metabolites were altered by *Toxoplasma*
infection or schizophrenia alone. Compared with TN+NSz, xanthine was
lower in TN+Sz, implying that xanthine was reduced in schizophrenia.

.. _sec4-genes-13-01482:

4. Discussion
=============

Exposure to *Toxoplasma* could be a risk factor for schizophrenia. The
mechanism and multifaceted effects by which toxoplasmosis could be
involved in the onset of the disease are just starting to be understood.
Recently, a study by El Mouhawass et al., (2020) revealed the presence
of a gene polymorphism encoding matrix metallopeptidase-9 (MMP-9)
proteins in patients who presented with both schizophrenia and
toxoplasmosis [(El Mouhawess et al. 2020)]. The study postulated that
the expression of this polymorphism could promote the invasion of immune
cells infected by *T. gondii* and stimulate nerve cells to produce the
neurotransmitters involved; this would result in the occurrence of
schizophrenia. In addition, a metabolomic analysis could be another
approach to ascertain the underlying mechanism of schizophrenia
following *T. gondii* infection. In the current study, we detected
common metabolites present in plasma samples of schizophrenia and
non-schizophrenia subjects with or without *Toxoplasma* infection that
may fill the gap in understanding the pathogenesis of schizophrenia
related to *T. gondii* infection.

The biosynthesis of purine nucleotides in humans can be divided into *de
novo* and salvage pathways [(Yao et al. 2010)]. *T. gondii* is a purine
auxotroph that relies entirely on the latter pathway for the
biosynthesis of purine nucleotides [(Ghérardi and Sarciron 2007)]. The
parasite captures free forms of purine bases from the host and
transports them into its cytosol for the energy-saving salvage pathway.
Although the enzymes in this pathway of the parasite and the transport
of purine bases from the host to the parasite are well-studied
[(De-Koning et al. 2003),(Chaudhary et al. 2004),(Chaudhary et al.
2006)], the alteration of purine metabolism in humans with *Toxoplasma*
infection has not been reported. Intermediates of the host’s purine
catabolism, such as adenosine, hypoxanthine, inosine and xanthine, can
be used by *T. gondii* to synthesise its purine nucleotides [(Krug,
Marr, and Berens 1989)]. Our results show that adenosine monophosphate,
inosine and hypoxanthine levels were decreased in the plasma of
non-schizophrenia subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection compared to
subjects without both conditions; implying that intermediates of purine
catabolism are reduced with *Toxoplasma* infection. The reduction of
these metabolites could be attributed to the consumption of the host’s
purine catabolism intermediates by the parasite for its nutrient
retrieval and energy requirement fulfilment.

The present study also managed to highlight a decrease in the
intermediates of the purine catabolism (inosine, hypoxanthine and
xanthine) in *Toxoplasma*-negative schizophrenia patients when compared
to subjects that did not have both conditions. Xanthine and hypoxanthine
levels are unaffected in first-episode neuroleptic-naïve patients with
schizophrenia [(Steen et al. 2020)]; while the increased level of
xanthine was reported in medication-free patients with schizophrenia
spectrum disorder [(Yao et al. 2010)]. The contradictory findings could
be attributed to the course of the disease on the levels of these
metabolites. The schizophrenia patients in this study were on various
antipsychotic medications, with their effects on purine catabolism
largely unknown. However, it is unlikely that the use of antipsychotic
drugs might account for the altered purine catabolism in these patients
as varying types of drugs were prescribed; this makes it less plausible
that all these medications had the same effect. Therefore, we postulate
that the reduction of these intermediates in purine catabolism was
associated with schizophrenia. Taken together, the down-regulation of
purine catabolism appears to be a common metabolic alteration in
*Toxoplasma* infection or schizophrenia alone. However, the possibility
of the pathway linking *Toxoplasma* infection to the underlying
pathogenesis of schizophrenia requires further investigation. The
alterations of purine catabolism in *Toxoplasma* infection and
schizophrenia patients are shown in `Figure 3 <#genes-13-01482-f003>`__.

An increased level of α-hydroxyglutaric acid is found in 22q11.2
deletion syndrome [(Napoli et al. 2015)]. This syndrome is one of the
risk factors for schizophrenia; it is characterised by neurobehavioral
and cognitive development changes. Moreover, elevated levels of the
compound are also present in patients with bipolar disorder [(Yoshimi et
al. 2016)]. Interestingly, our data showed that the α-hydroxyglutaric
acid level was increased in schizophrenia patients without *Toxoplasma*
infection compared with subjects without both conditions. These
observations indicate that the accumulation of α-hydroxyglutaric acid
might be associated with psychotic disorders due to its effect on brain
functions. The potential of α-hydroxyglutaric acid as a biomarker for
schizophrenia and its mechanistic action requires further investigation.

The association between α-hydroxyglutaric acid levels and *Toxoplasma*
infection has not been reported to date. Our results show that the
α-hydroxyglutaric acid level was elevated in non-schizophrenia subjects
with *Toxoplasma* infection compared to subjects without both
conditions. Due to the possible link of α-hydroxyglutaric acid to
schizophrenia, the relationship between *Toxoplasma* infection and
schizophrenia might be explained by the elevated level of
α-hydroxyglutaric acid. Accumulation of α-hydroxyglutaric acid due to
*Toxoplasma* infection might be implicated in the pathogenesis of
schizophrenia.

In this study, adenosine monophosphate, inosine, hypoxanthine, xanthine
and α-hydroxyglutaric acid levels remained unchanged in subjects with
both conditions compared with subjects with either condition. These
findings suggest a lack of synergistic effect of *Toxoplasma* infection
and schizophrenia on purine catabolism and α-hydroxyglutaric acid
levels. Another possible explanation is that either condition is
sufficient to elicit the maximal alteration to the levels of these
metabolites.

This study contains several limitations. Firstly, the influence of
antipsychotic medications and lifestyle factors, such as having cat(s)
as pet, smoking, consuming alcohol and body mass index, on the metabolic
pathways could not be excluded. Secondly, the sample size for each group
was small. Thirdly, most of the DeMFs were not identified. Hence,
further studies with a larger sample size that consider the
first-episode neuroleptic-naïve patients or medication-free chronic
patients and their lifestyle factors are required to verify our
findings. In addition, targeted metabolomic approaches could be carried
out to complement the results of this study.

Despite these limitations, the current findings support schizophrenia
research in the future to identify the direct connection of
toxoplasmosis with schizophrenia and the mechanisms involved. These
could provide crucial scientific evidence that shifts the paradigms of
diagnosing and treating schizophrenia patients by considering the
infection.

.. _sec5-genes-13-01482:

5. Conclusions
==============

In conclusion, this study reveals that *Toxoplasma* infection and
schizophrenia share some common metabolic alterations. These changes
include the accumulation of α-hydroxyglutaric acid and a decrease of
adenosine monophosphate, inosine, hypoxanthine and xanthine; this
indicates a reduction of purine catabolism. These metabolites might
serve as the link between *Toxoplasma* infection and schizophrenia,
explaining the underlying pathogenesis of schizophrenia concerning
*Toxoplasma* infection as a risk factor.

We would like to extend our gratitude to Wathiqah Wahid and Zuri
Shahidii Kadir for their support and technical assistance in this study.

The following supporting information can be downloaded at:
https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/genes13081482/s1, Figure S1:
Distribution of QC and plasma samples in PCA score plot; Figure S2:
Boxplots of (A) adenosine monophosphate, (B) inosine, (C) hypoxanthine,
(D) xanthine, (E) uric acid and (F) α-hydroxyglutaric acid.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   Click here for additional data file.

Conceptualization, E.O. and J.K.T.; formal analysis, A.S.M.Z. and
J.K.T.; funding acquisition, E.O.; methodology, A.S.M.Z. and J.K.T.;
supervision, E.O., S.S. and Z.M.I.; writing—original draft, E.O. and
J.K.T.; writing—review and editing, A.S.M.Z., S.S., Z.M.I. and J.K.T.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
manuscript.

The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki,
and approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the National University
of Malaysia (protocol code UKM PPI/111/8/JEP-2018-281, on 11 June 2018).

Informed consent was obtained from all the subjects involved in the
study.

Data will be available for others to request.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

.. figure:: genes-13-01482-g001
   :alt: Distribution of the plasma samples from positive mode in PCA
   score plots for different group comparisons. Comparisons were made
   for (**A**) TP+NSz vs. TN+NSz, (**B**) TP+Sz vs. TN+Sz, (**C**) TN+Sz
   vs. TN+NSz and (**D**) TP+Sz vs. TP+NSz. TP+NSz: non-schizophrenia
   subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+NSz: non-schizophrenia
   subjects without *Toxoplasma* infection; TP+Sz: schizophrenia
   subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+Sz: schizophrenia subjects
   with *Toxoplasma* infection.
   :name: genes-13-01482-f001

   Distribution of the plasma samples from positive mode in PCA score
   plots for different group comparisons. Comparisons were made for
   (**A**) TP+NSz vs. TN+NSz, (**B**) TP+Sz vs. TN+Sz, (**C**) TN+Sz vs.
   TN+NSz and (**D**) TP+Sz vs. TP+NSz. TP+NSz: non-schizophrenia
   subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+NSz: non-schizophrenia
   subjects without *Toxoplasma* infection; TP+Sz: schizophrenia
   subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+Sz: schizophrenia subjects
   with *Toxoplasma* infection.

.. figure:: genes-13-01482-g002
   :alt: Distribution of the plasma samples from negative mode in PCA
   score plots for different group comparisons. Comparisons were made
   for (**A**) TP+NSz vs. TN+NSz, (**B**) TP+Sz vs. TN+Sz, (**C**) TN+Sz
   vs. TN+NSz and (**D**) TP+Sz vs. TP+NSz. TP+NSz: non-schizophrenia
   subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+NSz: non-schizophrenia
   subjects without *Toxoplasma* infection; TP+Sz: schizophrenia
   subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+Sz: schizophrenia subjects
   with *Toxoplasma* infection.
   :name: genes-13-01482-f002

   Distribution of the plasma samples from negative mode in PCA score
   plots for different group comparisons. Comparisons were made for
   (**A**) TP+NSz vs. TN+NSz, (**B**) TP+Sz vs. TN+Sz, (**C**) TN+Sz vs.
   TN+NSz and (**D**) TP+Sz vs. TP+NSz. TP+NSz: non-schizophrenia
   subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+NSz: non-schizophrenia
   subjects without *Toxoplasma* infection; TP+Sz: schizophrenia
   subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+Sz: schizophrenia subjects
   with *Toxoplasma* infection.

.. figure:: genes-13-01482-g003
   :alt: Alteration of the purine catabolic pathway in *Toxoplasma*
   infection and schizophrenia. The down arrow indicates a
   down-regulated level. AMP: adenosine monophosphate; GMP: guanosine
   monophosphate; IMP: inosine monophosphate.
   :name: genes-13-01482-f003

   Alteration of the purine catabolic pathway in *Toxoplasma* infection
   and schizophrenia. The down arrow indicates a down-regulated level.
   AMP: adenosine monophosphate; GMP: guanosine monophosphate; IMP:
   inosine monophosphate.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: genes-13-01482-t001

   genes-13-01482-t001_Table 1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Socio-demographic and clinical data of the participants.

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             | TP+Sz       | TN+Sz       | TP+NSz      | TN+NSz      |
   +=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
   | Number (N)  | 15          | 15          | 15          | 15          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | **General** |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Age in      | 44.1 ± 11.5 | 34 ± 7.8    | 36.3 ± 12.5 | 32.4 ± 8.6  |
   | years, mean |             | :sup:`a`    |             | :sup:`a`    |
   | ± SD        |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Max age,    | 60          | 45          | 65          | 50          |
   | years       |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Min age,    | 19          | 23          | 19          | 23          |
   | years       |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Gender, N   |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Male        | 8           | 8           | 7           | 6           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Female      | 7           | 7           | 8           | 9           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | **Clinical  |             |             |             |             |
   | features (N |             |             |             |             |
   | of          |             |             |             |             |
   | part        |             |             |             |             |
   | icipants)** |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Age of      | 0           | 3           | NA          | NA          |
   | onset       | 15          | 12          |             |             |
   | Teenagers   |             |             |             |             |
   | (13–17      |             |             |             |             |
   | years old)  |             |             |             |             |
   | Young       |             |             |             |             |
   | adults      |             |             |             |             |
   | (18–35      |             |             |             |             |
   | years old)  |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Disease     | 1           | 0           | NA          | NA          |
   | onset       | 14          | 13          |             |             |
   | Recent      | 0           | 2           |             |             |
   | onset       |             |             |             |             |
   | psychosis   |             |             |             |             |
   | (≤24        |             |             |             |             |
   | months)     |             |             |             |             |
   | Established |             |             |             |             |
   | (>24        |             |             |             |             |
   | months)     |             |             |             |             |
   | DIP         |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | No. of      | 12          | 12          | NA          | NA          |
   | hospi       | 3           | 3           |             |             |
   | talizations |             |             |             |             |
   | (severity)  |             |             |             |             |
   | 0–6 times   |             |             |             |             |
   | ≥7 times    |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Treatmen    | 1           | 3           | NA          | NA          |
   | t-resistant | 14          | 12          |             |             |
   | sc          |             |             |             |             |
   | hizophrenia |             |             |             |             |
   | Yes         |             |             |             |             |
   | No          |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Family      | 8           | 9           | 0           | 1           |
   | history of  | 7           | 6           | 15          | 14          |
   | psychiatric |             |             |             |             |
   | illness, N  |             |             |             |             |
   | Yes         |             |             |             |             |
   | No          |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Duration of | 3           | 6           | NA          | NA          |
   | illness     | 6           | 4           |             |             |
   | 1–8 years   | 6           | 5           |             |             |
   | 9–16 years  |             |             |             |             |
   | ≥17 years   |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | On          | 15          | 15          | NA          | NA          |
   | medication  | 0           | 0           |             |             |
   | for         |             |             |             |             |
   | sc          |             |             |             |             |
   | hizophrenia |             |             |             |             |
   | Yes         |             |             |             |             |
   | No          |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Drugs with  | 6           | 13          | NA          | NA          |
   | anti-       | 9           | 2           |             |             |
   | toxoplasmic |             |             |             |             |
   | activity    |             |             |             |             |
   | Yes         |             |             |             |             |
   | No          |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Illicit     | 2           | 4           | 0           | 0           |
   | drugs       | 13          | 11          | 15          | 15          |
   | Yes         |             |             |             |             |
   | No          |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | **Lifestyle |             |             |             |             |
   | (N of       |             |             |             |             |
   | part        |             |             |             |             |
   | icipants)** |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Having      | 7           | 8           | 8           | 10          |
   | cat(s) as   | 8           | 7           | 7           | 5           |
   | pet         |             |             |             |             |
   | Yes         |             |             |             |             |
   | No          |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Smoking     | 5           | 6           | 1           | 0           |
   | Yes         | 10          | 9           | 14          | 15          |
   | No          |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Alcohol     | 4           | 2           | 0           | 1           |
   | intake      | 11          | 13          | 15          | 14          |
   | Yes         |             |             |             |             |
   | No          |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

   NA: data not available; DIP: drug-induced psychosis; TP+NSz:
   non-schizophrenia subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+NSz:
   non-schizophrenia subjects without *Toxoplasma* infection; TP+Sz:
   schizophrenia subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+Sz:
   schizophrenia subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection. Data were
   analysed using ANOVA and Tukey post hoc test with *p* < 0.05
   considered as statistically significant; :sup:`a` compared with
   TP+Sz.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: genes-13-01482-t002

   genes-13-01482-t002_Table 2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Number of total, differentially expressed and identified MFs in
      different group comparisons.

   ============================= ====== ===== ====== ======
   Numbers                       TP+NSz TP+Sz TN+Sz  TP+Sz
                                 vs.    vs.   vs.    vs.
                                 TN+NSz TN+Sz TN+NSz TP+NSz
   ============================= ====== ===== ====== ======
   **Total MFs**                                     
   Positive ion mode             1031   1031  1031   1031
   Negative ion mode             611    611   611    611
   **DeMFs**                                         
   Positive ion mode             36     0     46     4
   Negative ion mode             21     0     30     1
   **Total identified DeMFs \*** 6      0     7      1
   ============================= ====== ===== ====== ======

   \* only molecular features (MFs) identified at level 2 confidence
   annotation were reported; TP+NSz: non-schizophrenia subjects with
   *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+NSz: non-schizophrenia subjects without
   *Toxoplasma* infection; TP+Sz: schizophrenia subjects with
   *Toxoplasma* infection; TN+Sz: schizophrenia subjects with
   *Toxoplasma* infection.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: genes-13-01482-t003

   genes-13-01482-t003_Table 3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      List of DeMFs in different group comparisons.

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+-------+-------+
   | M     | Mole  | Rete  | Dat   | Fold  |   |       |       |
   | etabo | cular | ntion | abase | C     |   |       |       |
   | lites | W     | Time  | ID    | hange |   |       |       |
   |       | eight | (min) |       | \*    |   |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       | (FDR) |   |       |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+===+=======+=======+
   | 3,3   | 178.  | 1.77  | mz    | −6.9  | - | −5.2  | -     |
   | ′-Thi | 02893 |       | c3298 | (7.8  |   | (2.1  |       |
   | oprop |       |       |       | ×     |   | ×     |       |
   | ionic |       |       |       | 10\   |   | 10\   |       |
   | acid  |       |       |       | :sup: |   | :sup: |       |
   |       |       |       |       | `−5`) |   | `−4`) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+-------+-------+
   | α-    | 148.  | 0.72  | m     | +2.1  | - | +2.8  | -     |
   | Hydro | 03596 |       | zc372 | (0    |   | (1.8  |       |
   | xyglu |       |       |       | .016) |   | ×     |       |
   | taric |       |       |       |       |   | 10\   |       |
   | acid  |       |       |       |       |   | :sup: |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | `−7`) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+-------+-------+
   | Aden  | 347.  | 0.72  | m     | −2.2  | - | −2.8  | -     |
   | osine | 06249 |       | zc252 | (0    |   | (3.6  |       |
   | mon   |       |       |       | .017) |   | ×     |       |
   | ophos |       |       |       |       |   | 10\   |       |
   | phate |       |       |       |       |   | :sup: |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | `−4`) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+-------+-------+
   | C     | 113.  | 2.86  | mz    | -     | - | +1.9  | +2.0  |
   | aprol | 08415 |       | c2867 |       |   | (5.7  | (2.4  |
   | actam |       |       |       |       |   | ×     | ×     |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | 10\   | 10\   |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | :sup: | :sup: |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | `−8`) | `−8`) |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+-------+-------+
   | Hy    | 136.  | 0.82  | m     | −4.2  | - | −12.3 | -     |
   | poxan | 03832 |       | zc441 | (0    |   | (3.4  |       |
   | thine |       |       |       | .017) |   | ×     |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | 10\   |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | :sup: |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | `−8`) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+-------+-------+
   | In    | 268.  | 1.00  | mz    | −5.1  | - | −     | -     |
   | osine | 08026 |       | c1234 | (0    |   | 148.8 |       |
   |       |       |       |       | .013) |   | (4.7  |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | ×     |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | 10\ : |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | sup:` |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | −10`) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+-------+-------+
   | Trii  | 191.  | 0.95  | mz    | −2.6  | - | -     | -     |
   | sopro | 15198 |       | c2688 | (0    |   |       |       |
   | panol |       |       |       | .002) |   |       |       |
   | amine |       |       |       |       |   |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+-------+-------+
   | Xan   | 152.  | 0.87  | m     | -     | - | −1.7  | -     |
   | thine | 03229 |       | zc781 |       |   | (0    |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |   | .049) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+-------+-------+

   \*: relative change compared to the denominator; FDR: false discovery
   rate of *t*-test; +: up-regulated; −: down-regulated; mzc: mzCloud
   database ID; TP+NSz: non-schizophrenia subjects with *Toxoplasma*
   infection; TN+NSz: non-schizophrenia subjects without *Toxoplasma*
   infection; TP+Sz: schizophrenia subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection;
   TN+Sz: schizophrenia subjects with *Toxoplasma* infection.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B22-genes-13-01482

      Chaudhary, K., J.A. Darling, L.M. Fohl, W.J. Sullivan, R.G.K.
      Donald, E.R. Pfefferkorn, B. Ullman, and D.S. Roost. 2004. “Purine
      Salvage Pathways in the Apicomplexan Parasite *Toxoplasma
      Gondii*.” *J. Biol. Chem.* 279: 31224–27.
      https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M404232200.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B23-genes-13-01482

      Chaudhary, K., M.T. Li, K. Kim, and D.S. Roos. 2006.
      “\ *Toxoplasma Gondii* Purine Nucleoside Phosphorylase Biochemical
      Characterization, Inhibitor Profiles, and Comparison with the
      *Plasmodium Falciparum* Ortholog.” *J. Biol. Chem.* 281: 25652–58.
      https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M602624200.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B13-genes-13-01482

      Chong, J., O. Soufan, C. Li, I. Caraus, S. Li, G. Bourque, D.S.
      Wishart, and J. Xia. 2018. “MetaboAnalyst 4.0: Towards More
      Transparent and Integrative Metabolomics Analysis.” *Nucleic Acids
      Res.* 46: W486–94. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky310.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B21-genes-13-01482

      De-Koning, H.P., M.I. Al-Salabi, A.M. Cohen, G.H. Coombs, and J.M.
      Wastling. 2003. “Identification and Characterisation of High
      Affinity Nucleoside and Nucleobase Transporters in *Toxoplasma
      Gondii*.” *Int. J. Parasitol.* 33: 821–31.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0020-7519(03)00091-2.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B12-genes-13-01482

      Dunn, W.B., D. Broadhurst, P. Begley, E. Zelena, S.
      Francis-Mcintyre, N. Anderson, M. Brown, J.D. Knowles, A. Halsall,
      and J.N. Haselden. 2011. “Procedures for Large-Scale Metabolic
      Profiling of Serum and Plasma Using Gas Chromatography and Liquid
      Chromatography Coupled to Mass Spectrometry.” *Nat. Protoc.* 6:
      1060–83. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2011.335.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B18-genes-13-01482

      El Mouhawess, A., A. Hammoud, M. Zoghbi, S. Hallit, C. Haddad, K.
      El Haddad, S. El Khoury, J. Tannous, S. Obeid, and M.A. Halabi.
      2020. “Relationship Between *Toxoplasma Gondii* Seropositivity and
      Schizophrenia in the Lebanese Population: Potential Implication of
      Genetic Polymorphism of MMP-9.” *BMC Psychiatry* 20.
      https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-020-02683-0.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B10-genes-13-01482

      Elsheikha, H.M., D. Büsselberg, and X.Q. Zhu. 2016. “The Known and
      Missing Links Between *Toxoplasma Gondii* and Schizophrenia.”
      *Metab. Brain Dis.* 31: 749–59.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-016-9822-1.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B6-genes-13-01482

      Emelia, O., R.N. Amal, Z.Z. Ruzanna, H. Shahida, Z. Azzubair, K.S.
      Tan, S. Noor Aadila, N.A.M. Siti, and M.Y. Aisah. 2012.
      “\ `Seroprevalence of Anti-Toxoplasma Gondii IgG Antibody in
      Patients with
      Schizophrenia <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22543615>`__.”
      *Trop. Biomed.* 29: 151–59.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B7-genes-13-01482

      Flegr, J., and J. Horáček. 2020. “Negative Effects of Latent
      Toxoplasmosis on Mental Health.” *Front. Psychiatry* 31: 749–59.
      https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2019.01012.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B1-genes-13-01482

      Fuglewicz, A.J., P. Piotrowski, and A. Stodolak. 2017.
      “Relationship Between Toxoplasmosis and Schizophrenia: A Review.”
      *Adv. Clin. Exp. Med.* 26: 1031–36.
      https://doi.org/10.17219/acem/61435.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B20-genes-13-01482

      Ghérardi, A., and M.E. Sarciron. 2007. “Molecules Targeting the
      Purine Salvage Pathway in Apicomplexan Parasites.” *Trends
      Parasitol.* 23: 384–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2007.06.003.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B16-genes-13-01482

      Guijas, C., J.R. Montenegro-Burke, X. Domingo-Almenara, A.
      Palermo, B. Warth, G. Hermann, G. Koellensperger, T. Huan, W.
      Uritboonthai, and A.E. Aisporna. 2018. “METLIN: A Technology
      Platform for Identifying Knowns and Unknowns.” *Anal. Chem.* 90:
      3156–64. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04424.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B14-genes-13-01482

      Johnson, W.E., C. Li, and A. Rabinovic. 2007. “Adjusting Batch
      Effects in Microarray Expression Data Using Empirical Bayes
      Methods.” *Biostatistics* 8: 118–27.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/kxj037.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B24-genes-13-01482

      Krug, E.C., J.J. Marr, and R.L. Berens. 1989. “Purine Metabolism
      in *Toxoplasma Gondii*.” *J. Biol. Chem.* 264: 10601–7.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9258(18)81663-5.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B11-genes-13-01482

      Marder, S.R., and T.D. Cannon. 2019. “Schizophrenia.” *N. Engl. J.
      Med.* 381: 1753–61. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1808803.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B2-genes-13-01482

      McAuley, J.B. 2014. “Congenital Toxoplasmosis.” *J. Pediatr.
      Infect. Dis. Soc.* 3: S30–35.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/jpids/piu077.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B26-genes-13-01482

      Napoli, E., F. Tassone, S. Wong, K. Angkustsiri, T.J. Simon, G.
      Song, and C. Giulivi. 2015. “Mitochondrial Citrate
      Transporter-Dependent Metabolic Signature in the 22q11.2 Deletion
      Syndrome.” *J. Biol. Chem.* 290: 23240–53.
      https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.672360.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B3-genes-13-01482

      Nimir, A.R., E. Osman, I.A.A. Ibrahim, and A.M. Saliem. 2013. “Is
      It Toxoplasma Encephalitis, HIV Encephalopathy or Brain
      Tuberculoma?” *BMJ Case Rep.* 2013.
      https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2013-008803.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B8-genes-13-01482

      Omar, A., O.C. Bakar, N.F. Adam, H. Osman, A. Osman, A.H.
      Suleiman, M.R.A. Manaf, and M.I. Selamat. 2015. “Seropositivity
      and Serointensity of *Toxoplasma Gondii* Antibodies and DNA Among
      Patients with Schizophrenia.” *Korean J. Parasitol.* 53: 29–34.
      https://doi.org/10.3347/kjp.2015.53.1.29.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B25-genes-13-01482

      Steen, N.E., I. Dieset, S. Hope, T.S.J. Vedal, O.B. Smeland, W.
      Matson, R. Kaddurah-Daouk, I. Agartz, I. Melle, and S. Djurovic.
      2020. “Metabolic Dysfunctions in the Kynurenine Pathway,
      Noradrenergic and Purine Metabolism in Schizophrenia and Bipolar
      Disorders.” *Psychol. Med.* 50: 595–606.
      https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291719000400.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B17-genes-13-01482

      Sumner, L.W., A. Amberg, D. Barrett, M.H. Beale, R. Beger, C.A.
      Daykin, T.W.-M. Fan, O. Fiehn, R. Goodacre, and J.L. Griffin.
      2007. “Proposed Minimum Reporting Standards for Chemical
      Analysis.” *Metabolomics* 3: 211–21.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11306-007-0082-2.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B5-genes-13-01482

      Torrey, E.F., J.J. Bartko, and R.H. Yolken. 2012. “\ *Toxoplasma
      Gondii* and Other Risk Factors for Schizophrenia: An Update.”
      *Schizophr. Bull.* 38: 642–47.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbs043.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B4-genes-13-01482

      Torrey, E.F., and R.H. Yolken. 2003. “\ *Toxoplasma Gondii* and
      Schizophrenia.” *Emerg. Infect. Dis.* 9: 1375–80.
      https://doi.org/10.3201/eid0911.030143.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B15-genes-13-01482

      Wishart, D.S., Y.D. Feunang, A. Marcu, A.C. Guo, K. Liang, R.
      Vázquez-Fresno, T. Sajed, D. Johnson, C. Li, and N. Karu. 2018.
      “HMDB 4.0: The Human Metabolome Database for 2018.” *Nucleic Acids
      Res.* 46: D608–17. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1089.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B19-genes-13-01482

      Yao, J.K., G.G. Dougherty, R.D. Reddy, M.S. Keshavan, D.M.
      Montrose, W.R. Matson, J. McEvoy, and R. Kaddurah-Daouk. 2010.
      “Homeostatic Imbalance of Purine Catabolism in First-Episode
      Neuroleptic-Naïve Patients with Schizophrenia.” *PLoS ONE* 5.
      https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009508.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B9-genes-13-01482

      Yolken, R.H., F.B. Dickerson, and E. Fuller Torrey. 2009.
      “Toxoplasma and Schizophrenia.” *Parasite Immunol.* 31: 706–15.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3024.2009.01131.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B27-genes-13-01482

      Yoshimi, N., T. Futamura, K. Kakumoto, A.M. Salehi, C.M. Sellgren,
      J. Holmén-Larsson, J. Jakobsson, E. Pålsson, M. Landén, and K.
      Hashimoto. 2016. “Blood Metabolomics Analysis Identifies
      Abnormalities in the Citric Acid Cycle, Urea Cycle, and Amino Acid
      Metabolism in Bipolar Disorder.” *BBA Clin.* 5: 151–58.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbacli.2016.03.008.
