====================================================================================================
Kynurenine pathway metabolites are associated with gray matter volume in subjects with schizophrenia
====================================================================================================

Sumiao Zhou
Yuanyuan Huang
Qijie Kuang
Su Yan
Hehua Li
Kai Wu
Fengchun Wu
Xingbing Huang [1]_ [2]_\*Correspondence: Fengchun Wu
13580380071@163.com\ Xingbing Huang hxbing2002@163.com\  [3]_
:Date: 2022-8-09

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background

   There has been growing evidence of the existence of abnormalities in
   the kynurenine pathway (KP) and structural gray matter volume (GMV)
   in schizophrenia (SCZ). Numerous studies have suggested that abnormal
   kynurenine metabolism (KM) in the brain is clearly associated with
   the pathogenesis of schizophrenia and may be one of the pathological
   mechanisms of SCZ. In this pilot study, we investigated whether there
   was a correlation between KP and GMV in schizophrenia patients.

   .. rubric:: Methods

   The plasma levels of KM were measured in 41 patients who met the
   Structured Clinical Interview of the Diagnostic IV criteria for
   schizophrenia and 60 healthy controls by using liquid
   chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, and cortical thickness (as
   measured *via* magnetic resonance imaging) was obtained.

   .. rubric:: Results

   Our study showed no statistically significant differences in the
   concentrations of kynurenine (KYN), tryptophan (TRP), and KYNA/TRP
   (all *p* > 0.05), but kynurenic acid (KYNA) and the KYNA/KYN ratio
   were significantly higher in the schizophrenia subjects than in the
   healthy controls (*F* = 4.750, *p* = 0.032; *F* = 6.153, *p* = 0.015,
   respectively) after controlling for age and sex. Spearman's tests
   showed that KYN concentrations in SCZ patients were negatively
   correlated with GMV in the left front cingulate belt (*r* = −0.325,
   *p* = 0.046) and that KYN/TRP was negatively correlated with GMV in
   the left island (*r* = −0.396, *p* = 0.014) and right island (*r* =
   −0.385, *p* = 0.017).

   .. rubric:: Conclusion

   Our findings appear to provide new insights into the predisposition
   of an imbalance in the relative metabolism of KYN/TRP and KYN to GMV
   in schizophrenia.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _s1:

Introduction
============

Schizophrenia (SCZ), a psychiatric disorder characterized by psychotic
symptoms and results in social and occupational declines, remains an
aetiological and therapeutic challenge ((n.d.a)). The upregulation of
the immune response has been reported to be possibly involved in the
pathogenesis of SCZ ((n.d.b), (n.d.c)). The Kynurenine pathway (KP) is
regulated by the immune system and the levels of KYNA are well regulated
under physiological conditions but may be altered as part of the
activated immune response ((n.d.d)–(n.d.e)). There has been growing
evidence of the existence of abnormalities in the KP in SCZ.

A meta-analysis that included 4,217 participants and 42 studies examined
the KYN pathway in schizophrenia, and the results demonstrated higher
KYN levels in the cerebrospinal fluid and lower plasma KYN levels
((n.d.f)). The kynurenic acid (KYNA)-to-KYN ratio is decreased in major
depressive disorder (MDD) and SCZ, and the KYN-to-tryptophan (TRP) ratio
is increased in MDD and SCZ in blood (plasma or serum) ((n.d.g)). In
contrast to the replicable findings of the elevation of KYNA in the
central nervous system in individuals with schizophrenia spectrum
disorder, plasma levels of KYNA were significantly lower in SCZ patients
than in controls ((n.d.h)). All of the above mentioned studies support
the existence of abnormal KM in the brains of SCZ patients, mainly in
regards to the upregulation of KYN and KYNA levels, thus suggesting that
abnormal KM in the brain is clearly associated with the pathogenesis of
SCZ and may be one of the pathological mechanisms of SCZ.

Kynurenine pathway (KP) is the major metabolic pathway for tryptophan
(TRP) ((n.d.i), (n.d.j)). Within central nervous system, TRP is degraded
to KYN *via* indoleamine-2, 3-dioxygenase and tryptophan-2,
3-dioxygenase ((n.d.j)–(n.d.k)). The decrease in KYN may contribute to
the development of chronic mild inflammation ((n.d.f), (n.d.l)). It has
also been reported that inflammatory factors can also directly or
indirectly affect the metabolic pathways of KYN in patients with SCZ
under the induction of inflammatory states ((n.d.m), (n.d.n)). It can be
mainly metabolized into KYNA *via* kynurenine 66 aminotransferase (KAT)
in neurons, and it can be metabolized into 3-hydroxykynurenine (3-OHK)
*via* kynurenine 3-monooxygenase, which is further catabolized to
quinolinic acid (QA) finally ((n.d.o)–(n.d.p)). KYNA, which is a
neuroprotective tryptophan catabolite, is an antagonist of
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) and is considered to be
protective against excitotoxic and apoptotic effects ((n.d.m),
(n.d.q)–(n.d.r)). However, increased KYNA in the brain may lead to
excessive NMDAR blockade, which is a known trigger of psychotic symptoms
in SCZ ((n.d.q), (n.d.s)). QA is a neurotoxic catabolite that
infiltrates macrophages, activates N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors, and exerts neurotoxic effects as a glutamate
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor agonist ((n.d.n)). An increase in
QA and a decrease in KYNA would result in NMDAR activation to further
release reactive oxygen species under mitochondrial oxidative stress,
thus leading to cell damage ((n.d.f), (n.d.t), (n.d.u)).

The reduction and loss of GMA is a common feature of both early and
chronic phases of SCZ ((n.d.v)–(n.d.w)). Relative to healthy controls,
patients with SCZ had reduced gray white matter in the bilateral
precentral gyrus, right medial frontal cortex, right visual cortex,
right occipital pole, right thalamus, bilateral amygdala, and bilateral
cerebellum, regardless of substance use history ((n.d.e), (n.d.x),
(n.d.y)). Furthermore, SCZ demonstrated some evidence of GMV loss in
cortical areas; however, notable locations included limbic structures
such as the hippocampus, thalamus and striatum, and cerebellum in a
regional first-episode psychosis MRI study ((n.d.z)). In general,
reduced and thinner cortical thickness is more common in patients with
SCZ ((n.d.aa)).

It is of interest that Kyn/3 HK was also significantly associated with
the total volume of the amygdala in the bipolar disorder group
((n.d.n)). The results indicate the possibility that bipolar
disorder-associated abnormalities in KM may impact the structure of the
hippocampus and amygdala. Based on the previously discussed literature,
we hypothesized that the putative neuroprotective index kynurenine
pathway metabolites would significantly correlate with GMV in patients
with SCZ.

.. _s2:

Methods
=======

Subjects
--------

41 SCZ patients (all outpatients) from the Affiliated Brain Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University were recruited during the period from
January 2017 to December 2018. Patients who (1) met the Structured
Clinical Interview of the Diagnostic IV criteria for schizophrenia, (2)
aged 18–50 years, (3) had at least 6 years of education, and (4) were
currently in the acute phase of SCZ with a total PANSS score ≥ 60 were
enrolled.

The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) severe physical diseases,
such as severe heart disease and thyroid disease; (2) previous histories
of brain trauma, mental retardation, and epilepsy, among other
histories; (3) those patients who had used electroconvulsive therapy 6
months prior to enrolment; and (4) those patients with contraindications
to MRI scanning.

Healthy controls were included from the Guangzhou community during the
same time period, from which 60 healthy subjects matched for age, sex,
and education level were screened as the healthy control (HC) group for
this study.

The HCs met the same exclusion criteria except that they had (1) good
physical health with no history of specific physical illness and (2) no
family history of psychiatric disorders.

Plasma KM measure
-----------------

All of the blood samples were obtained from each subject in the morning
on an empty stomach and completed the MRI scan within 48 h. Peripheral
blood specimens were centrifuged and separated into serum, plasma, and
blood cells, after which they were immediately stored in an ultralow
temperature refrigerator at−80°C to be measured. The plasma tryptophan,
kynurenine, and kynurenic acid levels (as assessed by high-performance
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) were blinded to
diagnosis in the central laboratory of the Brain Hospital of Guangzhou
Medical University.

A 1,200 high performance liquid chromatograph and a 6,410 triple
quadrupole tandem mass spectrometer from Agilent (USA) were used for the
determination of the kynurenine metabolites. The chromatographic
conditions: Agilent Eclipse XDB-C18 column (4.6–150 mm, 5um) as
stationary phase, TRP-KYNA mobile phase of methanol-water (45:55,
containing 0.005 mol/l ammonium formate), KYNA mobile phase of
methanol-water (35:65, containing 0.005 mol/l ammonium formate) The flow
rate was 0.5 ml/min, and the column temperature was 35°C. Mass
spectrometry conditions: TRP (m/z 205.1 → 199.1), KYN (m/z 209.1 →
146.1) and deuterated internal standards KYN-:sup:`13`\ C\ :sub:`4`, 15N
(m/z 214.1 → 149.1), KYNA (m/z 190.1 → 144.1) and deuterated internal
standard KYNA-d\ :sub:`5` (m/z 195.1 → 149.1). Linearity range: TRP:
1–50ug/ml; KYN: 0.1–5ug/ml; KYNA: 1–60ug/ml.

Clinical assessment
-------------------

Psychiatric symptoms and severity of schizophrenia were primarily
assessed by two trained attending psychiatrists (Consensus Kappa ≥ 90%)
by using the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS).

Structural MRI data preprocessing
---------------------------------

All 3D T1 structural MRI data were processed on the SPM8 (Wellcome
Department of Imaging Neuroscience Group, UK;
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) based VBM (voxel-based morphometry)
(http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm.html) toolkit for preprocessing.
Structural MRI data preprocessing includes the following steps.

#. Adjustment of origin: the origin of T1 structural MRI data was
   manually adjusted to the anterior joint position or nearby, which
   facilitated a better alignment of the structural image data to the
   MNI standard space.

#. Spatial normalization: we applied the high-dimensional DARTEL method
   to normalize the T1 structural image space to the MNI standard space.

#. Segmentation: after spatial normalization, the image was segmented
   into gray matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid.

#. Modulation: in the spatial normalization process, the segmented gray
   matter images were modulated to eliminate the volume variation due to
   the individual differences in the subject's brain.

#. Smoothing: for the next step of the statistical analysis, a Gaussian
   kernel with full-width at half maximum was used to smooth the
   segmented and modulated data.

Statistical analysis
--------------------

All of the statistical tests that were conducted were two-tailed.
Deviations from normality were tested by using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov
test, and non-normally distributed variables were log normalized. The
data, such as age, education, and course of the disease, conformed to a
normal distribution and were tested by using independent sample
*t*-tests for both groups. Categorical variables were compared between
the SCZ and HC groups by using chi-square tests. An analysis of variance
was used to test for differences in TRP, KYN, KYNA, KYN/TRP, and
KYNA/KYN between the SCH and HC groups after controlling for age and
sex. For kynurenine metabolites that were statistically correlated with
GMV, we subsequently conducted partial correlation to control for
potential confounders (sex, age, and intracranial volumes) in
schizophrenia.

.. _s3:

Results
=======

Demographic and clinical characteristics of the SCZ and HC groups
-----------------------------------------------------------------

A total of 41 patients with SCZ were enrolled in this study, of whom 22
(53.7%) patients were male and 19 (46.3%) patients were female. There
were 60 HC subjects, including 30 (50%) males and 30 (50%) females. No
significant differences were found between SCZ patients and HCs in terms
of age, sex, or education level (*p* > 0.05; `Table 1 <#T1>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Demographic and clinical characteristics of SCZ patients and HCs.

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | **          | **SCH**     | **HC**      | **t/χ\ 2**  | **          |
   | Variables** |             |             |             | p-\ value** |
   +=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
   | Age         | 27.8 ± 7.3  | 30.2 ± 11.5 | 1.286\ `    | 0.238       |
   |             |             |             | a <#TN1>`__ |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Gender      | 22/19       | 30/30       | 0.840\ `    | 0.718       |
   | (m          |             |             | b <#TN2>`__ |             |
   | ale/female) |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | education   | 11.2 ± 2.9  | 10.4 ± 1.81 | −1.50\ `    | 0.232       |
   | (years)     |             |             | a <#TN1>`__ |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Course of   | 44.3 ± 56.3 | NA          | NA          | NA          |
   | disease     |             |             |             |             |
   | (months)    |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | **Ant       |             |             |             |             |
   | ipsychotics |             |             |             |             |
   | (** **n**   |             |             |             |             |
   | **%)**      |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Olanzapine  | 10%         |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Risperidone | 10%         | NA          | NA          | NA          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Amisulpride | 5%          |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Clozapine   | 3%          |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | P subscore  | 24.4 ± 3.7  | NA          | NA          | NA          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | N subscore  | 21.6 ± 6.4  | NA          | NA          | NA          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | G subscore  | 41.9 ± 6.9  | NA          | NA          | NA          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

   Independent samples t-test;

   Chi-square test,. P, positive symptoms; N, negative symptoms; G,
   general psychopathology syndrome; PANSS, Positive and Negative
   Syndrome Scale; NA, Not applicable.

Plasma kynurenine metabolite levels in the SCZ and HC groups
------------------------------------------------------------

After controlling for age and sex, no statistically significant
differences in the concentrations of KYN, TRP, and KYNA/TRP were found
between the SCZ subjects and the HCs. However, `Table 2 <#T2>`__ shows
that the KYNA level and KYNA/KYN ratio were significantly higher in the
SCZ subjects than in the HCs (*F* = 4.750, *p* = 0.032; *F* = 6.153, *p*
= 0.015; respectively) after controlling for age and sex.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Comparison of KM between patients with SCZ and HCs.

   +----------+----------+----------+-------+----------+----------+
   | **Var    | **SCZ (n | **HC (n  | **F** | **p-\    | *        |
   | iables** | = 41)**  | = 60)**  |       |  value** | *Cohen's |
   |          |          |          |       |          | d**      |
   +==========+==========+==========+=======+==========+==========+
   | TRP      | 8376.01  | 8379.69  | 0.005 | 0.943    | −0.002   |
   | (ng/mL)  | ±        | ±        |       |          |          |
   |          | 2340.30  | 1228.73  |       |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+-------+----------+----------+
   | KYN      | 302.58 ± | 312.68 ± | 0.115 | 0.736    | −0.107   |
   | (ng/mL)  | 87.77    | 98.84    |       |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+-------+----------+----------+
   | KYNA     | 6.85 ±   | 5.87 ±   | 4.750 | *        | 0.440    |
   | (ng/mL)  | 2.67     | 1.84     |       | *0.032** |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+-------+----------+----------+
   | KYN/TRP  | 0.04 ±   | 0.04 ±   | 0.014 | 0.905    | −0.026   |
   |          | 0.11     | 0.02     |       |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+-------+----------+----------+
   | KYNA/KYN | 0.03 ±   | 0.02 ±   | 6.153 | *        | 0.508    |
   |          | 0.01     | 0.01     |       | *0.015** |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+-------+----------+----------+

   SCZ, Schizophrenia; HC, healthy controls; TRP, tryptophan; KYN,
   kynurenine; KYNA, kynurenic acid. Bolded values are p < 0.05.

Comparison of GMV between the SCZ and HC groups
-----------------------------------------------

`Table 3 <#T3>`__ shows that the comparison of GMV brain regions in the
SCZ patient groups and the HC group was analyzed by using covariance,
and the gray matter volumes in the left anterior cingulate gyrus, left
insula, right insula, right middle cingulate gyrus, right cingulate
gyrus, and left inferior temporal gyrus were lower in the SCZ group than
in the HC group. After the analysis of covariance and correction for the
false discovery rate, there was still a significant difference between
the schizophrenia subjects and the healthy controls (all *p*-values <
0.01).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      The different brain areas of GMV between SCZ and HC.

   +----------+----------+----------+--------+----------+----------+
   | **Brain  | **SCZ (n | **HC (n  | **F**  | **p-\    | *        |
   | area**   | = 41)**  | = 60)**  |        |  value** | *Cohen's |
   |          |          |          |        |          | d**      |
   +==========+==========+==========+========+==========+==========+
   | Front    | 0.58 ±   | 0.64 ±   | 42.408 | **       | −1.000   |
   | c        | 0.06     | 0.06     |        | <0.001** |          |
   | ingulate |          |          |        |          |          |
   | belt     |          |          |        |          |          |
   | (Left)   |          |          |        |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+--------+----------+----------+
   | Island   | 0.60 ±   | 0.66 ±   | 45.411 | **       | −0.906   |
   | (Left)   | 0.06     | 0.07     |        | <0.001** |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+--------+----------+----------+
   | Island   | 0.49 ±   | 0.55 ±   | 32.795 | **       | −0.825   |
   | (Right)  | 0.06     | 0.08     |        | <0.001** |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+--------+----------+----------+
   | Middle   | 0.55 ±   | 0.62 ±   | 41.356 | **       | −1.167   |
   | c        | 0.06     | 0.06     |        | <0.001** |          |
   | ingulate |          |          |        |          |          |
   | gyrus    |          |          |        |          |          |
   | (Right)  |          |          |        |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+--------+----------+----------+
   | Fusiform | 0.55 ±   | 0.63 ±   | 33.352 | **       | −0.926   |
   | gyrus    | 0.06     | 0.10     |        | <0.001** |          |
   | (Right)  |          |          |        |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+--------+----------+----------+
   | Inferior | 0.64 ±   | 0.71 ±   | 33.385 | **       | −1.091   |
   | temporal | 0.07     | 0.06     |        | <0.001** |          |
   | gyrus    |          |          |        |          |          |
   | (Left)   |          |          |        |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+--------+----------+----------+

   SCZ, schizophrenia; HC, healthy controls. Bolded values are p < 0.05.

The correlation between KM and GMV in SCZ
-----------------------------------------

As shown in `Table 4 <#T4>`__, the biased correlation results showed
that KYN concentrations in SCZ patients were negatively correlated with
GMV in the left anterior cingulate gyrus (*r* = −0.325, *p* = 0.046) and
that KYN/TRP was negatively correlated with GMV in the left insula (*r*
= −0.396, *p* = 0.014) and right insula (*r* = −0.385, *p* = 0.017).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T4

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      The Correlation between KM and GMV in SCZ.

   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | **Vari  |     | **TRP** | **KYN** | *       | **KY    | **KYN   |
   | ables** |     |         |         | *KYNA** | N/TRP** | A/KYN** |
   +=========+=====+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+
   | Front   | *r* | −0.093  | −0.325  | −0.041  | −0.201  | 0.177   |
   | ci      |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ngulate |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   | belt    |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   | (Left)  |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | *p* | 0.579   | **      | 0.806   | 0.227   | 0.289   |
   |         |     |         | 0.046** |         |         |         |
   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Island  | *r* | 0.104   | −0.253  | −0.133  | −0.396  | 0.016   |
   | (Left)  |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | *p* | 0.536   | 0.126   | 0.426   | **      | 0.924   |
   |         |     |         |         |         | 0.014** |         |
   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Island  | *r* | 0.128   | −0.218  | −0.046  | −0.385  | 0.105   |
   | (Right) |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | *p* | 0.444   | 0.189   | 0.783   | **      | 0.529   |
   |         |     |         |         |         | 0.017** |         |
   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Middle  | *r* | 0.005   | −0.161  | 0.03    | −0.163  | 0.091   |
   | ci      |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ngulate |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   | gyrus   |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   | (Right) |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | *p* | 0.976   | 0.334   | 0.859   | 0.328   | 0.587   |
   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | F       | *r* | −0.138  | −0.109  | 0.16    | 0.06    | 0.252   |
   | usiform |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   | gyrus   |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   | (Right) |     |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | *p* | 0.408   | 0.514   | 0.337   | 0.721   | 0.128   |
   +---------+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+

   SCZ, schizophrenia; HC, healthy controls; TRP, tryptophan; KYN,
   kynurenine; KYNA, kynurenic acid. Bolded values are p < 0.05.

.. _s4:

Discussion
==========

In this study, we observed an increase in the neuroprotective index,
KYNA, and KYNA/KYN in the schizophrenia group vs. the healthy controls;
however, TRP and KYN were not altered. The main finding of this study
was that within the schizophrenia group, KYN concentrations were
negatively correlated with GMV in the left anterior cingulate gyrus, and
KYN/TRP was negatively correlated with GMV volume in the left insula and
right insula.

Consistent with our hypothesis and previous studies, we observed
abnormalities in kynurenine pathway metabolism in patients with
schizophrenia, and KYNA concentrations and the KYNA/KYN ratio were
higher in schizophrenia patients ((n.d.c), (n.d.t)). This finding
further validates a disturbance in the relative balance of activation of
the KYNA pathway in schizophrenia ((n.d.ab)). It is hypothesized that
the activity of the rate-limiting enzyme related to KP is abnormal in
schizophrenic patients, and it appears that these two substances with
opposite activities of action may be out of balance and tend to favor
the production of KYNA ((n.d.ac)). The explanation for the increased
KYNA/KYN ratio seems unambiguous because the high levels of
kynurenine-3-monooxygenase and all other cerebral kynurenine
aminotransferases allow for a proportional increase in KYNA formation
when KYN levels rise ((n.d.ad)). Thus, there is evidence supporting the
hypothesis that KP metabolites can be used as peripheral markers of
brain dysfunction in schizophrenia ((n.d.t)).

We found extensive GMV loss in several brain regions, including the left
anterior cingulate gyrus, left insula, right insula, right middle
cingulate gyrus, right cingulate gyrus, and left inferior temporal
gyrus, in schizophrenia patients, which is consistent with a greater
number of previous studies ((n.d.d), (n.d.ae)–(n.d.af)). It has been
reported that individuals with schizophrenia showed reduced GMV in
previously identified areas of the prefrontal cortex, frontal lobes,
cerebellum, and thalamus ((n.d.q), (n.d.ag)). Furthermore, McEwen et al.
((n.d.ah)) noted that total (left and right) prefrontal GMV was
significantly reduced in first-episode schizophrenia. The reduction in
GMV is a common feature of both the early and chronic phases of
schizophrenia.

In the present study, we extended the analysis to include KYNA and GMA.
This is the first study to report on the correlation between KM and GMV
in patients with schizophrenia. Our findings showed that the left
anterior cingulate gyrus, left insula, and right insula are strongly
associated with KP, that KYN concentration was negatively correlated
with GMV in the left anterior cingulate gyrus, and that KYN/TRP was
negatively correlated with GMV in the left insula and right insula.
Intriguingly, this suggests that the activation of the KP with increased
KM activity is associated with decreased GMV in certain relevant brain
regions; additionally, it is further hypothesized that the activation of
KP may lead to an imbalance between neurotoxicity and neuroprotection of
the biochemical pathway of KM, thus causing significant changes in GMV
in these brain regions ((n.d.n), (n.d.ai)).

Similar to our study, Chiappelli et al. ((n.d.aj)) showed that the
KYN/TRY ratio was inversely correlated with frontal white matter
glutamate in a study that included 37 SCZ and 38 HCs to detect levels of
total tryptophan and its metabolite kynurenine. In addition, a study in
which 63 bipolar depressed patients and 48 HCs completed structural MRI
scans and blood samples and were analyzed for canine urinary quinoline
metabolites also found that KynA/3HK was positively associated with
hippocampal volume in the BD group ((n.d.n)). These results provide
preliminary evidence that plasma levels of KYN and KYN/TRP can provide a
readily measurable peripheral indicator of the degree of GMA brain
volume loss in schizophrenia patients.

This study had a number of limitations. For example, this was a
cross-sectional study with a small sample. A small percentage of
patients were on antipsychotic medication, and we failed to limit the
use of the medication. In addition, this study only tested the levels of
KM in the blood and did not test the levels of KM in the cerebrospinal
fluid. Therefore, in future studies, there is a need to further expand
the sample size to include first-ever patients who have never taken the
drug, in order to restrict the enrolment sample more strictly, to test
the levels of kynurenine metabolites in both the cerebrospinal fluid and
blood of patients, and to perform dynamic comparative observations and
evaluations before and after treatment. In this way, more in-depth
analytical studies can be conducted to further validate our proposed
hypothesis.

.. _s5:

Conclusion
==========

Our findings revealed that an altered biomarker of interaction with
cortical structure, and KP is related to GMV integrity in schizophrenia.
All our findings provided new insights to into the predisposition of an
imbalance in the relative metabolism of KYN/TRP and KYN to GMV in
schizophrenia. Although the data in this study are not sufficient to
pinpoint the underlying mechanism of this relationship.

.. _s6:

Data availability statement
===========================

The data presented in the study are deposited in the figshare
repository, https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.20391297.

.. _s7:

Ethics statement
================

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by
the Ethics Committee of The Affiliated Brain Hospital of Guangzhou
Medical University. Written informed consent to participate in this
study was provided by the participants' legal guardian/next of kin.

.. _s8:

Author contributions
====================

XH and FW revised the manuscript. SZ were responsible for interpreting
the data and drafting the manuscript. YH, QK, and SY participated in the
patient recruitment and analysis of all of the data. HL and KW assisted
with the primary study design. All of the authors read and approved the
final manuscript.

.. _s9:

Funding
=======

This research was supported by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China (Grant No. 2021YFC2009403), the Scientific Research
Project of Traditional Chinese Medicine of Guangdong (Grant No.
20192070), the Traditional Chinese Medicine Bureau of Guangdong Province
(Grant No. 20211305), and the Science and Technology Plan Project of
Guangdong Province (Grant No. 2019B030316001).

.. _conf1:

Conflict of interest
====================

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

.. _s10:

Publisher's note
================

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or
those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that
may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B6

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B7

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B8

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B9

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B14

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B15

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B16

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B17

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B18

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B21

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B22

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B24

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B25

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B26

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B27

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B28

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B30

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B31

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B32

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B33

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B34

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B35

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B36

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B37

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B38

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B40

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B41

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B42

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B43

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B44

      n.d.aj.

.. [1]
   Edited by: Elisabetta C. del Re, Harvard Medical School, United
   States

.. [2]
   Reviewed by: Veronica Perez De La Cruz, Manuel Velasco Suárez
   Instituto Nacional de Neurología y Neurocirugía, Mexico; Ling Qin
   Wei, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, China

.. [3]
   This article was submitted to Schizophrenia, a section of the journal
   Frontiers in Psychiatry
