==================================================================================================================================================
Unraveling enhanced brain delivery of paliperidone-loaded lipid nanoconstructs: pharmacokinetic, behavioral, biochemical, and histological aspects
==================================================================================================================================================

Saleha Rehman
Bushra Nabi
Amaan Javed
Tahira Khan
Ashif Iqubal
Mohammad Javed Ansari
Sanjula Baboota
Javed AliCONTACT Javed Ali javedaali@yahoo.com, jali@jamiahamdard.ac.in
Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmaceutical Education and
Research, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi-110062, India
:Date: 2022-5-9

:Abstract:
   Antipsychotics are accompanied by extrapyramidal side effects that
   deter treatment adherence and patient compliance. Paliperidone (PPD),
   an atypical (second-generation) antipsychotic recommended for
   managing schizophrenia presents biopharmaceutical challenges and
   pharmacological constraints which dissuade it from crossing the brain
   barrier. The present research aimed to assess paliperidone-loaded
   lipid nanoconstruct (PPD-LNC) for an improved antipsychotic activity
   for managing schizophrenia. High % cell viability in Neuro-2a cells
   (70–98%) exhibited the safety of PPD-LNC. The pharmacokinetic data
   showed a 3.46-fold improvement in the relative bioavailability in the
   brain for PPD-LNC compared to a drug suspension. The pharmacodynamic
   evaluation demonstrated a significant (*p* < .05) reduction in
   cataleptic behavior, attenuated escape latency, and prolonged stay in
   the open arm with PPD-LNC, thus showing its effectiveness in reducing
   extrapyramidal symptoms. The histopathological images further
   validated the safety of the formulation. Reduction in NF-κB levels as
   identified by immunohistochemical analysis exhibited the
   anti-inflammatory effect of PPD-LNC. The formulation demonstrated
   significant (*p* < .01) improvement in the activity of oxidative
   stress parameters and attenuation of neuroinflammatory markers. Based
   on the study findings, it was observed that formulating LNC of PPD
   would surmount the pharmacological constraints, improve the *in vivo*
   performance, and diminish the associated side effects.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _S0001:

1.. Introduction
================

The preponderance of antipsychotics for treating schizophrenia has been
endured for the past 70 years (Volkan, (n.d.a)). Both first and
second-generation antipsychotics (FGAs and SGAs) have proven effective
in reducing psychotic symptoms. However, SGAs or atypical antipsychotics
are preferred owing to the occurrence of fewer extrapyramidal symptoms
(EPS) at effective doses and improved patient-reported quality of life
(Gründer et al., (n.d.b)). Generally, for a drug to cross the
blood-brain barrier (BBB), it should be lipid-soluble with
low-molecular-weight, which is the opposite in antipsychotics since they
have limited aqueous solubility and cannot reach the target site (brain)
in adequate concentrations. This leads to low bioavailability and
subtherapeutic effects, and increasing their dose might result in
drug-related side effects (Natarajan et al., (n.d.c); Bellettato &
Scarpa, (n.d.d)). Additionally, increasing the dose might not be a safer
option due to the narrow therapeutic window. Despite advancements in the
field, side effects and EPS remain a significant problem that deters
treatment adherence and patient compliance (Sykes et al., (n.d.e)).

Paliperidone (PPD) is an atypical antipsychotic (second-generation)
recommended for managing schizophrenia. The pharmacological action is
mediated by antagonizing central serotonin type 2 (5-HT2A) and dopamine
type 2 (D2) receptors (Dolder et al., (n.d.f)). Additionally, PPD exerts
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities, which play a fundamental
role in managing schizophrenia. Oxidative stress can be attributed to
the enhanced dopamine activity that generates reactive oxygen species
(ROS). The antioxidant defenses perceive a decline which is precedent to
the neuronal damage observed in patients with schizophrenia (Caruso
et al., (n.d.g)). The antioxidant activity of PPD is exerted by
decreasing ROS production and reducing lipid peroxidation. In an
*in vivo* study in rats, the impact of PPD (1 mg/kg for 14 days) on the
redox enzymes, i.e. adenosine deaminase, catalase, and xanthine oxidase,
demonstrated a significant reduction in the enzyme levels, which
subsequently lowered the dopamine levels. This is important in relieving
the patients of positive psychotic symptoms like delusions and
hallucinations (Demirci et al., (n.d.h)). Another *in vivo* study
demonstrated the potential of PPD to regulate the antioxidant and
anti-inflammatory pathways in a rat model of acute and chronic restraint
stress (MacDowell et al., (n.d.i)).

Further, the neuroinflammation in schizophrenia can be ascribed to the
pro-inflammatory cytokines-induced microglial activation that commences
the inflammatory process, which along with the neurotransmitter
dysfunctions, causes neurodegeneration (Aricioglu et al., (n.d.j)). It
is stated that even minor pathological alterations in the brain result
in the microglia-mediated release of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as
interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFα), and
interferon-gamma (El-Sayed El-Sisi et al., (n.d.k)). The
anti-inflammatory effect of PPD is exerted by reducing the activation of
microglia. Overall, PPD improves brain function by augmenting the
antioxidant systems, curbing the microglial activation, and relegating
the levels of pro-inflammatory mediators (Tendilla-Beltrán et al.,
(n.d.l)).

Although PPD holds clinical importance in the management of
schizophrenia, limitations include poor aqueous solubility (0.03 mg/mL),
poor bioavailability (28%), and drug evasion by P-glycoprotein (P-gp)
transporters, and poor permeability dissuade it from traversing the
blood-brain barrier (BBB). They are the chief reasons for its
substandard therapeutic efficacy following oral administration (Rehman
et al., (n.d.m)). Since schizophrenia is a dreadful neuropsychiatric
disorder that warrants treatment adherence, new strategies and
approaches are needed to optimize the existing therapies and reduce the
associated side effects. Amongst these novel approaches, nanotechnology
has been widely investigated for its potential benefits in improving
drug delivery to the brain (Radaic & Martins-de-Souza, (n.d.n)).

Lately, colloidal carriers such as nanostructured lipid carriers (NLC)
or lipid nanoconstruct (LNC), which are the modified form of solid lipid
nanoparticles (SLN), have gained impetus in the effective management of
brain disorders. LNC, after intestinal uptake, is transported via the
lymphatic system to the circulatory system and then crosses BBB to reach
the brain (Miao et al., (n.d.o)). Since LNC targets the drug to the
active site and maintains its concentration for a sustained effect, it
can effectively manage schizophrenia (Praveen et al., (n.d.p); Mandpe &
Pokharkar, (n.d.q)). In addition to this, high drug loading capacity,
high entrapment efficiency, small particle size, long-term storage
stability, evading hepatic metabolism, hampering P-gp-mediated drug
efflux, biocompatibility, biodegradability, administration via the oral
route, simple preparation method, and ease of scale-up are the
well-known advantages associated with LNC (Rehman et al., (n.d.m); Alam
et al., (n.d.r); Fatima et al., (n.d.s)). Therefore, encapsulating PPD
in LNC would improve its bioavailability and penetration across BBB
(Patel et al., (n.d.t)).

To address the biopharmaceutical challenges associated with PPD,
formulations including solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN), microemulsion,
and nanoliposomes have been prepared by the researchers. Still, these
failed to achieve an effective brain delivery due to the inherent
limitations. It was postulated that formulating LNC of PPD would
surmount the pharmacological constraints, improve the *in vivo*
performance, and diminish the associated side effects. Further, none of
the previously reported studies investigated the *in vivo* effects of
PPD-LNC following oral administration. Additionally, the potential of
PPD-LNC in rodent’s model of ketamine-induced psychosis has also not
been investigated so far. Therefore, the present research involved the
assessment of PPD-LNC for these parameters. The success of the *in vivo*
therapeutic efficacy of PPD-loaded LNC was determined by evaluating and
comparing the bioavailability in both plasma and brain samples. The
antipsychotic activity of PPD-LNC was assessed in an experimental model
of ketamine-induced psychosis. Histopathological and immunohistochemical
analysis was performed to determine the neuronal degeneration in the
hippocampus and cortex. The antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effect of
PPD was assessed using biochemical estimation of oxidative stress
markers and neuroinflammatory markers. Lastly, the formulation was
evaluated for its stability for three months.

.. _S0002:

2.. Materials and methods
=========================

.. _S0002-S2001:

2.1.. Drugs and chemicals
-------------------------

Paliperidone was obtained from Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.
(Gurgaon, Haryana, India). Purified water was procured using Milli Q
Plus (Millipore, MA, USA). Acetonitrile, water, and methanol were
obtained in HPLC grades from Fischer Scientific Co. (Mumbai, India). The
remaining reagents were acquired from S.D. Fine Chemicals Ltd. (Mumbai,
India). Rat ELISA kits for estimation of IL-6, NF-κB, IL-10, and TNF-α
were obtained from Krishgen Biosystems (Worli, Mumbai, India).

.. _S0002-S2002:

2.2.. Animals used
------------------

Female adult albino Wistar rats weighing 150-200 g were obtained from
Central Animal House, Jamia Hamdard (New Delhi, India). They were kept
in polypropylene cages in a room maintained at 25 ± 2 °C/ 55 ± 5%
relative humidity, with 12-h light-dark cycle and uninterrupted access
to food and water. Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (IAEC) of Jamia
Hamdard, registered with CPCSEA (Committee for the Purpose of Control
and Supervision of Experiments on Animals) (173/GO/Re/S/ 2000/CPCSEA)
permitted the study on animals (Protocol Number:1458 approved on
10\ :sup:`th` April 2018).

.. _S0002-S2003:

2.3.. Quantification of the drug via HPLC
-----------------------------------------

PPD was quantified in plasma and brain samples by the method reported by
Jones et al. ((n.d.u)) with certain modifications. For this method, an
HPLC instrument accompanied by an ultraviolet-visible detector and C18
column was used. The chromatograms were recorded and analyzed using
Class VP software. The mobile phase was prepared by mixing 700 ml of
0.05 M dipotassium hydrogen orthophosphate and 300 ml of acetonitrile
which was run at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. All the separations were
performed at 237 nm. Stock solutions were prepared in the mobile phase,
and calibration curves were drawn. HPLC method was then validated based
on parameters like linearity, accuracy, precision, and robustness. The
limit of quantification (LOQ) and limit of detection (LOD) for the HPLC
method in plasma were 61.19 ng/ml and 121.34 ng/ml, and in the brain was
65.41 ng/ml and 198.22 ng/ml, respectively.

.. _S0002-S2004:

2.4.. Preparation of PPD-loaded LNC
-----------------------------------

The development and evaluation of PPD-LNC have already been discussed in
detail in our previous research (Rehman et al., (n.d.m)). Briefly,
PPD-LNC was prepared using capmul MCM (liquid lipid), glyceryl
monostearate (GMS) (solid lipid), poloxamer 407 (surfactant), and tween
20 (co-surfactant). The optimized ratio of total lipid: *S*\ :sub:`mix`
(surfactant-cosurfactant mixture) was 3:5, and sonication time was
11 minutes. Two methods, namely, melt emulsification-probe sonication
technique (ME) and high-pressure homogenization (HPH), were employed for
developing PPD-LNC, followed by quality-by-design (QbD)-based
optimization. Based on the Box-Behnken design (BBD), PPD-LNC prepared
using the ME method was selected as the optimized formulation since it
demonstrated a small particle size of 86.35 ± 3.26 nm and high
entrapment efficiency and loading capacity of 90.07 ± 1.65% and
8.49 ± 0.77%, respectively.

Assessing the optimized formulation by transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) showed spherical particles with a uniform size distribution, with
no indication of crystalline drug. The DSC (differential scanning
calorimetry) thermograms also showed a loss of crystallinity, suggesting
a molecularly dispersed state of PPD in the lipid matrix. The shifting
of peaks in FTIR (Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy) spectra also
revealed variation in the molecular environment, which is linked to the
molecular dispersion of drugs inside the lipid matrix. Further, the
optimized formulation was evaluated based on different *in vitro*
parameters. The findings of the *in vitro* release study disclosed that
LNC undergoes burst release, in the beginning, ensued by a sustained
effect. The drug release from LNC was 5, 8, and 9-folds (*p* < .001)
higher in hydrochloric acid buffer pH 1.2, phosphate buffer pH 6.8, and
phosphate buffer pH 7.4, compared to the drug suspension. Stability
studies in simulated gastrointestinal fluids demonstrated that
formulation was stable in fasted state simulated intestinal fluid and
simulated gastric fluid pH 1.2.

Further, enhanced permeation potential of LNC was established via
confocal microscopy and *ex vivo* permeation study. LNC demonstrated
6-fold (*p* < .05) greater drug permeability through rat intestine than
drug suspension. This might be due to the small particle size
(86.35 ± 3.26 nm) since particle size below 300 nm is desirable for
transport across the intestine. Additionally, permeation enhancing and
P-gp inhibiting properties of the lipids, surfactant, and co-surfactant
also improve intestinal permeation. Further, *in vitro* lipolysis study
showed that solubilization was significantly high (*p* < .001) in the
aqueous medium, implying an improved absorption in the body. Based on
these findings, it was deduced that LNC holds the potential of improving
the solubility and permeability of PPD, which justifies its role as a
prospective carrier for delivering PPD for its improved antipsychotic
activity for managing schizophrenia (Rehman et al., (n.d.m)).

.. _S0002-S2005:

2.5.. Cell line studies
-----------------------

The cytotoxic activity of the prepared LNC was assessed using the
Neuro-2a (brain-derived neuroblastoma) cell line to assess the safety of
the developed formulation. In a 96-well plate, 1 × 10\ :sup:`4` cells
were plated in each well with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM),
L-glutamine (2 mmol/L), fetal bovine serum (10%), streptomycin
(100 μg/mL), and penicillin (100 μg/mL). The atmospheric conditions
utilized for incubating these cells were 100% relative humidity, 37 °C
temperature, and 95% O\ :sub:`2`/5% CO\ :sub:`2`. Different
concentrations of PPD suspension, placebo LNC, and PPD-LNC (estimated as
per the *C*\ :sub:`max` of the drug) were used for treating the cells,
followed by treatment with 5 mg/mL 10% w/v methyl thiazole tetrazolium
(MTT) and incubation at 37 °C for 4 h. Lastly, 10% w/v dimethylsulfoxide
was used for the treatment to solubilize the formazan crystals. A
scanning multiwall spectrophotometer measured the absorbance at 570 nm
(Neupane et al., (n.d.v)). The below-mentioned formula was used to
calculate the % cell viability:

.. math:: \%~\mathit{cell}~{viability} = ~\frac{\mathit{Absorbance}~of~\mathit{treated}~\mathit{cells}}{\mathit{Absorbance}~of~\mathit{untreated}~\mathit{cells}} \times 100

.. _S0002-S2006:

2.6.. Pharmacokinetic study
---------------------------

The rats were allocated to three groups which are: (1) control (saline)
(2) drug suspension (1.2 mg/kg PPD) (3) PPD-LNC formulation (1.2 mg/kg
PPD). The formulations were administered using an 18-gauge oral feeding
needle. The carbon dioxide inhalation procedure was used to sacrifice
the rats. Intracardiac perfusion with normal saline was done to remove
the blood from the brain capillaries. Each group was split into seven
time-based subgroups of 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 24, and 48 h, and each subset
comprised three rats. Blood and brain samples were separated at specific
time points. The whole brain was isolated from each rat, rinsed with
isotonic phosphate buffer pH 7.4, and thawed until analysis. For
collecting the blood samples, Eppendorf microcentrifuge tubes (with
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid EDTA) were used. The plasma was obtained
in the supernatant by centrifuging the tubes at 4000 rpm for 15 minutes,
which was stored at −20 °C till the analysis day.

.. _S0002-S2006-S3001:

2.6.1.. Isolation and extraction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The plasma samples were extracted using a 500 µl plasma sample and
adding 0.6 M sodium carbonate-bicarbonate buffer pH 10 (0.25 mL). To
this mixture, 98:2 v/v heptane–isoamyl alcohol (8 mL) was added, and the
centrifuge tube was slowly revolved on a mixer for 15 min. The heptane
layer was decanted and evaporated till it dried, and the remaining
residue was dispersed in the mobile phase (75 μL), 20 μL of which was
analyzed via HPLC (Jones et al., (n.d.u)).

Brain samples were extracted by first defrosting the rat brain and
weighing 1 g of it which is added to phosphate buffer pH 7.4 (2 mL). The
samples were homogenized using a tissue homogenizer, followed by
extraction with ethyl acetate (2 mL). The blend was homogenized for
4 minutes and then centrifuged at 5000 × *g* for 15 min to separate the
organic layer. The extraction was replicated using ethyl acetate (2 mL).
After extraction, all the organic layers were mixed and subjected to
evaporation to dryness under nitrogen, followed by reconstitution of the
residue with mobile phase (200 μL). The mixture was mixed using a vortex
mixer and then centrifuged for 5 min at 10000 × *g*. The supernatant was
filtered through a 0.45 μm nylon membrane filter and injected into the
HPLC system (Le Tiec et al., (n.d.w); Garg et al., (n.d.x)).

.. _S0002-S2007:

2.7.. Pharmacodynamic studies
-----------------------------

The animal model of schizophrenia for pharmacodynamic evaluation of
PPD-LNC was established using ketamine, a noncompetitive and
nonselective N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, was
employed to induce symptoms similar to schizophrenia in rats. Its
repeated administration to rodents imitates positive, negative, and
cognitive symptoms. After an acute administration of ketamine, anomalous
expression of mTOR is detected in the brain tissues linked to
neurological disorders like schizophrenia (Vasconcelos et al., (n.d.y);
Xie et al., (n.d.z)).

PPD-LNC was administered to the Wistar rats via oral route for fourteen
consecutive days. Ketamine (30 mg/kg) was given intraperitoneally as a
single dose on the seventh day. The rats were evaluated for behavioral
activity, such as the catalepsy, Morris water maze, and elevated
plus-maze models. The rats were allocated to five groups (5 rats each):
(1) Control (2) Ketamine (Toxic) (3) PPD-LNC *per se* (4) Ketamine + PPD
suspension (5) Ketamine + PPD-LNC.

.. _S0002-S2007-S3001:

2.7.1.. Catalepsy study
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This was performed by employing the bar test at 1, 4, 8, and 24 h in
each group. For this test, each rat was carefully held by the tail, and
then the forepaws were dropped gently on the bar until the rat could
grasp it. The hind paws were then rested on the floor along with the
tail. The stopwatch recorded the length of time for which the rats held
the position. The time for which the rats had both their forelimbs on
the bar was noted until 30 s. If the rats retained this position for
30 s or more, they were considered cataleptic (Muthu et al., (n.d.aa)).

.. _S0002-S2007-S3002:

2.7.2.. Morris Water maze (MWM) test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is an exteroceptive behavioral model to ascertain learning and
memory. This model is based on swimming and involves learning to escape
to a concealed platform. The study exposes the rats to four repeated
training trials per day, with each trial separated at a gap of 5 min.
The experiment involved a large circular pool (diameter:150 cm; height:
45 cm) filled with water (till 30 cm) and temperature regulated at
28 ± 1 °C. The pool was partitioned into four equal quadrants by fixing
two threads at a right angle on the pool rim. A white platform
(10 cm\ :sup:`2`) was dipped 1 cm underneath the water in the target
pool quadrant. The rats were dropped in the pool, and for each trial,
the drop location was changed. They were allowed to trace the concealed
submerged platform for 120 seconds and then remain on it for 20 seconds.
If the rats were not able to locate the platform, they were escorted
toward the platform and then allowed to stay for 20 seconds. The time to
discover the concealed platform was noted as the mean escape latency
time (ELT) (Nabi et al., (n.d.ab)).

.. _S0002-S2007-S3003:

2.7.3.. Elevated plus-maze model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This study ascertains the fear and anxiety disturbance observed in
schizophrenia. The study involved a cross-shaped maze made of black
plexiglass, which included two open arms (30 × 5 cm) and two closed arms
(30 × 5 × 20 cm) with a central platform (5 × 5 cm) and is placed 40 cm
high above the ground. The open arms represent the insecure sites
stimulating the anxiety-related behavior. The anxiolytics act by
decreasing anxiety and thus increasing the open arm entries of
exploration time. The number of entries and the time spent in each open
and closed arm were noted. The apparatus was cleaned using 70% alcohol
after the completion of each trial (Pınar et al., (n.d.ac)).

.. _S0002-S2008:

2.8.. Histopathological and immunohistochemical analysis
--------------------------------------------------------

The brain of the rats administered with a drug suspension and PPD-LNC
were isolated and fixed in 10% formalin (neutral buffered), followed by
slicing and embedding in paraffin wax. The slide microtone was utilized
to cut transverse slices of thickness 5 μm, then stained using
hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) dye. The percentage of degenerated neurons
was estimated by counting the pyknotic and necrotic neurons present in
brain tissues.

For immunohistochemical analysis, sections of 5 μm thickness were cut,
and paraffin was removed using xylene. The brain sections were
rehydrated with graded ethanol series, washed with double distilled
water, exposed to antigen retrieval using citrate buffer (pH 6), and
lastly allowed to cool at room temperature for 10 minutes. The
background staining was removed by incubating the sections in 4%
hydrogen peroxide for 15 minutes. Sections were washed thrice using
tris-buffered saline and incubated with primary Nrf-2 antibody (1:100)
at 4 °C overnight. After that, sections were rinsed using the buffer and
then incubated for 1 h with a peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody.
The reaction was visualized using diaminobenzidine solution.
Fluorescence motic microscope (Motic AE31) facilitated with Fiji
software was used to observe histological alterations in brain sections
and for the semi-quantification of protein expression using the
reciprocal intensity method. For these immunohistochemically stained
hippocampi and frontal cortex slides, the percentage of positive neurons
was estimated (Iqubal et al., (n.d.ad); Sharma et al., (n.d.ae)).

.. _S0002-S2009:

2.9.. Biochemical estimation
----------------------------

As discussed by Wesołowska et al. ((n.d.af)), since PPD exhibits
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects, biochemical estimation of
various antioxidant and neuroinflammatory markers was performed.

.. _S0002-S2009-S3001:

2.9.1.. Biochemical estimation of oxidative stress markers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _S0002-S2009-S3001-S4001:

2.9.1.1.. Estimation of reduced glutathione (GSH)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This was assessed using the substrate DTNB
[5,5′-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid)], –SH group which interacts with
the thiol group (of GSH) to yield thionitrobenzoic acid. The final
compound produces an intense yellow color, used for ascertaining the –SH
groups at 412 nm. For this experiment, 200 mg of brain homogenate was
mixed with 0.02 M EDTA (2 mL), 50% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (0.4 mL),
and distilled water (1.6 mL). The mixture is shaken for 15 min and
centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 min. The supernatant obtained (2 mL) was
added to DTNB solution (0.1 mL) and 0.4 M Tris buffer pH 8.9 (4 mL) to
yield a yellow-colored complex, whose absorbance was noted at 412 nm.
The amount of reduced glutathione was expressed as μg of GSH/mg protein
(Nabi et al., (n.d.ab)).

.. _S0002-S2009-S3001-S4002:

2.9.1.2.. Estimation of Superoxide Dismutase (SOD)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The activity SOD enzyme was ascertained by applying the approach of
Misra and Fridovich ((n.d.ag)). The basis of the estimation is that at
alkaline pH, SOD inhibits the autoxidation of epinephrine. Brain
homogenate (10 μL) was added to EDTA − 0.05 M sodium carbonate buffer pH
10.2 (970 μL). The reaction was commenced by adding 20 μL of 30 mM
epinephrine. SOD activity was indirectly assessed by adrenochrome, an
oxidized product of epinephrine at 480 nm using 4020 M :sup:`− 1 `\ cm
:sup:`− 1` as the molar extinction coefficient. SOD activity was
expressed as units/mg of protein (Gueroui & Kechrid, (n.d.ah); Mandpe
et al., (n.d.ai)).

.. _S0002-S2009-S3001-S4003:

2.9.1.3.. Estimation of Catalase (CAT)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The catalase activity is measured as per the previously reported method
(Sinha, (n.d.aj)), according to which heating dichromate in acetic acid
in the presence of hydrogen peroxide (H\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`2`) reduces
it to chromic acetate. During this reaction, perchromic acid is formed
as an unstable intermediate. The declining absorbance can detect the
decomposition of H\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`2` at 240 nm. The catalase
activity is measured as the change in absorbance per unit time and is
computed as nmol H\ :sub:`2`\ O\ :sub:`2`/min/mg protein (Mandpe et al.,
(n.d.ai)).

.. _S0002-S2009-S3001-S4004:

2.9.1.4.. Estimation of Thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The malondialdehyde (MDA) level indicated lipid peroxidation and was
determined as per the process reported by Ohkawa and associated with
minor variation (Ohkawa et al., (n.d.ak)). A blend comprising 8.1%
sodium lauryl sulfate (0.2 mL), 20% acetic acid pH 3.5 (1.5 mL), and
0.8% aqueous solution of thiobarbituric acid (1.5 mL) was prepared. This
mixture was transferred to the brain homogenate (0.2 mL), volume made up
to 4.0 mL using distilled water and then heated for 60 min at 95 °C. The
mixture is allowed to cool under tap water, followed by the addition of
15:1 v/v of n-butanol: pyridine (5 mL) and distilled water (1 mL). The
mixture was centrifuged, and the absorbance was recorded for the
supernatant using a UV-visible spectrophotometer at 540 nm. The MDA
content was evaluated as µmol/mg of protein (Nabi et al., (n.d.ab)).

.. _S0002-S2009-S3002:

2.9.2.. Biochemical estimation of neuroinflammatory markers using ELISA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The neuroinflammatory cytokines (IL-6 and TNF-α) in the hippocampus and
frontal cortex of Wistar rats were quantified using rat-specific ELISA
kits (Krishgen Biosystems). The assay was performed following the
process given with the specific cytokine kit. Both the standard and
samples were put in the antibody pre-coated wells and allowed to bind.
This was followed by incubating the wells at the mentioned conditions
and then washing using wash buffer to remove the unbound sample. An
enzyme-linked polyclonal antibody, specific for cytokines, was pipetted
into the wells, then incubated and washed to remove the unbound
antibody. In each well, substrate solution was added, which generated
blue color, which after the addition of stop solution changed the color
to yellow. The spectrophotometric determination of the samples was done
at 450 nm. The color intensity of the sample was proportional to the
quantity of IL-6 and TNF-α, which is calculated from the standard curve
(Zameer et al., (n.d.al)).

.. _S0002-S2010:

2.10.. Stability studies
------------------------

The optimized formulation of PPD was kept at room temperature
(25 ± 2 °C/ 60 ± 5% RH) and elevated temperature (40 ± 2 °C/ 75 ± 5% RH)
for 3 months. The samples were observed for physical appearance,
precipitate formation, phase separation, caking, gas formation,
liquefaction, particle size, polydispersity index (PDI), entrapment
efficiency, and percent drug remained at different time intervals (0,
30, 60, and 90 days).

.. _S0002-S2010-S3001:

2.10.1.. Stability studies as per ICH guidelines
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The stability of PPD-LNC was assessed according to the ICH guidelines.
The formulation in three batches was stored at 40 ± 2 °C and 75 ± 5% RH
for 3 months. After 0, 30, 60, and 90 days, samples were withdrawn,
diluted with methanol, and analyzed for change in drug content by HPLC
(Agrawal et al., (n.d.am)).

.. _S0002-S2010-S3002:

2.10.2.. Accelerated stability study according to WHO for determination of shelf life
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For ascertaining the shelf life of prepared LNC, accelerated stability
studies were done as specified by World Health Organization (WHO). The
formulation was stored at 30 ± 0.5 °C, 40 ± 0.5 °C, and 50 ± 0.5 °C for
90 days. After specified time intervals of 0, 30, 60, and 90 days,
samples were withdrawn diluted with methanol, and the remaining drug
content was determined using HPLC. The log % drug remaining vs time was
plotted. From the slope of the graph, the degradation rate constant (K)
at different temperature were assessed. Further, the log K values were
plotted against the reciprocal absolute temperature, which is the
Arrhenius plot. The shelf life was then computed (Abdelwahed et al.,
(n.d.an); Ali et al., (n.d.ao)).

.. _S0002-S2011:

2.11.. Statistical analysis
---------------------------

The results were reported as mean ± SD, and experiments were done in
triplicate. The pharmacokinetic parameters were estimated using
pharmacokinetic software (PK Functions for Microsoft Excel, Pharsight
Corporation, Mountain View, CA). Graph Pad InStatTM software (GraphPad
Software Inc., San Diego, CA) analyzed the results. One-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) was applied to the results. Statistical significance
was considered at *p* < .05.

.. _S0003:

3.. Results and discussion
==========================

.. _S0003-S2001:

3.1.. Cell line studies
-----------------------

The % cell viability of Neuro-2a cells in the presence of PPD
suspension, placebo LNC, and PPD-LNC was studied (`Figure
1 <#F0001>`__). The study was done at various concentrations, including
the reported *C*\ :sub:`max` (0.26 µg/mL). Data showed that on
increasing PPD concentration from 0.13 to 2.6 µg/mL, % cell viability
for LNC and drug suspension decreased, suggesting
concentration-dependent uptake of the formulation. Cell viability varied
from 70% to 98% for PPD-LNC and from 66% to 100% for drug suspension at
each drug concentration. The placebo exhibited a cell viability of
98.45 ± 1.46% showing no cell cytotoxicity. This confirmed that lipid
excipients utilized in developing LNC or placebo did not present any
toxicity and fit in the GRAS category. This study validated the safety
of LNC as low cytotoxicity was observed at all levels of *C*\ :sub:`max`
(Khan et al., (n.d.ap)).

.. figure:: IDRD_A_2069880_F0001_C
   :alt: % cell viability at different levels of *C*\ :sub:`max`.
   :name: F0001

   % cell viability at different levels of *C*\ :sub:`max`.

.. _S0003-S2002:

3.2.. Pharmacokinetic study
---------------------------

Drug concentration in plasma and brain of Wistar rats is shown in
`Figure 2 <#F0002>`__. The pharmacokinetic parameters are compiled in
`Table 1 <#t0001>`__. At each time point, the brain drug concentration
for the LNC group was significantly (*p* < .01) higher than drug
suspension (`Figure 2A <#F0002>`__). *C*\ :sub:`max` in the brain for
the PPD-LNC group (724.16 ± 84.28 ng/mL) was 2.63-folds greater than the
drug suspension group (275.87 ± 51.93 ng/mL). However, for both the
groups, *T*\ :sub:`max` remained the same, i.e. 2 h. There was also a
substantial increase in AUC\ :sub:`0-48` of PPD-LNC
(19597.11 ± 416.07 ng.h/mL) than drug suspension
(5666.04 ± 81.16 ng.h/mL). The relative bioavailability for PPD-LNC was
3.46-folds greater than the drug suspension. Other pharmacokinetic
parameters also showed a significant increase for LNC, thus signifying
the superiority of LNC in effectively delivering the drugs to the brain.
The molecular dispersion of PPD in the lipid milieu of LNC might be
responsible for the improved drug concentration in the brain (Eleraky
et al., (n.d.aq)). The results are in harmony with the findings of
Eleraky et al. where significantly superior drug concentration in the
brain after oral administration of temazepam was obtained at all time
points, as compared to the drug suspension (*p* < .05) (Eleraky et al.,
(n.d.aq)). Further, higher AUC and sustained effect of PPD-NLC could be
attributed to the steric stabilization effect of the surfactants, which
protects NLCs from opsonization. Yu et al. also reported the reason for
higher AUC and reduced elimination of miltefosine-loaded NLC as steric
stabilization effect of the incorporated stearic acid, leading to the
improved efficacy of miltefosine, which may result in dose reductions
(Yu et al., (n.d.ar)).

.. figure:: IDRD_A_2069880_F0002_C
   :alt: (A) Brain drug concentration and (B) Plasma drug concentration
   of PPD suspension and PPD-LNC.
   :name: F0002

   (A) Brain drug concentration and (B) Plasma drug concentration of PPD
   suspension and PPD-LNC.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: t0001

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Pharmacokinetic parameters were obtained after oral dosing of rat
      PPD suspension and PPD-LNC. Data expressed as mean ± SD (*n* = 3).

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Phar        | Drug        | Drug        |             |             |
   | macokinetic | co          | co          |             |             |
   | parameters  | ncentration | ncentration |             |             |
   |             | in plasma   | in brain    |             |             |
   +=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
   | *C*\        | 354         | 289         | 724         | 275         |
   |  :sub:`max` | .96 ± 59.72 | .95 ± 51.25 | .16 ± 84.28 | .87 ± 51.93 |
   | (ng/mL)     |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | *T*\        | 1           | 1           | 2           | 2           |
   |  :sub:`max` |             |             |             |             |
   | (h)         |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | AUC\        | 6021.       | 3592.       | 19597.      | 5666        |
   | :sub:`0-48` | 83 ± 194.03 | 00 ± 263.75 | 11 ± 416.07 | .04 ± 81.16 |
   | (ng.h/mL)   |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | AUC\        | 6783.       | 3911.5      | 101640.50   | 7006.       |
   |  :sub:`0-∞` | 35 ± 147.54 | 6 ± 4132.62 |  ± 26930.99 | 28 ± 190.35 |
   | (ng.h/mL)   |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

The physiological lipids in the body simulated the fat-rich food, thus
directing the bile secretion in the small intestine, which further binds
with LNC to form micelles. These micelles form chylomicrons after
aggregating with phospholipids and cholesterol. The chylomicrons undergo
intestinal lymphatic uptake and are then transported to the circulatory
system. From here, it traverses the BBB and thus reaches the target
site, i.e. the brain. This mechanism has been depicted in `Figure
3 <#F0003>`__. Inherent characteristics of NLC when orally administered
such as bypassing first-pass metabolism and lymphatic absorption were
also reported by Garg et al. as the chief reasons for the 16.5-fold
increase in AUC of lopinavir as compared to the pure drug (Garg et al.,
(n.d.x)).

.. figure:: IDRD_A_2069880_F0003_C
   :alt: Mechanism of NLC-mediated drug delivery to the brain via the
   oral route.
   :name: F0003

   Mechanism of NLC-mediated drug delivery to the brain via the oral
   route.

Other factors contributing to enhanced brain concentration of PPD were
small particle size and large surface area, protection from degradation
by enzymes, reduced reticuloendothelial system uptake, and prolonged
residence time. Altogether, these factors contributed to providing
targeted delivery of PPD to the brain by increasing their contact time
and drug concentration at the BBB surface (Miao et al., (n.d.o); Misra
et al., (n.d.as); Singh et al., (n.d.at)). The surfactants adsorb the
lipoproteins from blood and facilitate receptor-mediated transport into
the brain. The P-gp inhibition by lipids and surfactants also improves
the drug transport across BBB. NLC also facilitates the process of
endocytosis, transcytosis, and opening of endothelial tight junctions,
thus ensuring improved drug delivery to the brain (Rana et al.,
(n.d.au)).

Similarly, the drug concentration in the plasma was higher for PPD-LNC
than drug suspension (`Figure 2B <#F0002>`__). The *C*\ :sub:`max` was
estimated to be 354.96 ± 59.72 ng/mL and 289.95 ± 51.25 ng/mL,
respectively, for PPD-LNC and PPD suspension. No difference in
*T*\ :sub:`max` was observed, and it remained the same for both the
groups, i.e. 1 h. The pharmacokinetic parameters like AUC\ :sub:`0-48`,
AUC\ :sub:`0-∞`, and K\ :sub:`el` (h :sup:`− 1`) for PPD-LNC in plasma
were also greater than the drug suspension. Higher AUC and
*C*\ :sub:`max` indicated the enhanced bioavailability of the drug, when
administered in NLC (Khaleeq et al., (n.d.av)). The relative
bioavailability for PPD-LNC was 1.67-folds greater than the drug
suspension. Further, it was observed that PPD concentration in the brain
for the PPD-LNC group was more than the corresponding plasma
concentrations at all time points. Khan and coworkers reported a
1.35-folds increase in the brain enhancement factor for
carbamazepine-loaded LNC in contrast to the carbamazepine suspension.
Additionally, the brain concentration of carbamazepine in the brain was
significantly greater than plasma concentrations (Khan et al.,
(n.d.ap)).

.. _S0003-S2003:

3.3.. Pharmacodynamic studies
-----------------------------

.. _S0003-S2003-S3001:

3.3.1.. Catalepsy study
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cataleptic effect of PPD-LNC was observed, as shown in `Figure
4(A) <#F0004>`__. A significant (*p* < .05) reduction in the cataleptic
behavior of the rats administered with PPD-LNC was observed in
comparison to the group administered with ketamine (toxic group) and the
group administered with the drug suspension. PPD-LNC showed significant
(*p* < .05) catalepsy at 4 h (57 ± 4.75 sec), which then underwent
reduction up to 24 h. The increase in cataleptic effect up to 4 h might
be due to the burst release of PPD from LNC, and the decrease thereafter
can be owed to the sustained drug release from LNC. Thus, lesser
fluctuation in drug concentration is observed, which contributes to
prolonged antipsychotic effect and thus reduction of extrapyramidal side
effects (EPS). The toxic group administered with 30 mg/kg ketamine
showed the maximum catalepsy in rats. The group administered with
PPD-LNC *per se* showed no antipsychotic and catalepsy activity and
behaved similarly to the control saline group. The drug
suspension-treated group showed a lesser reduction in cataleptic effect
than the PPD-LNC treated group due to the poor absorption/release of the
drug to the target site. Thus, PPD, when administered in the form of
LNC, proves effective in reducing EPS. Singh et al. also reported a
reduction in cataleptic response by asenapine-NLC due to the sustained
drug release which leads to lesser fluctuation in drug concentration and
thus provides clinical benefits of constant antipsychotic efficacy
(Singh et al., (n.d.aw)).

.. figure:: IDRD_A_2069880_F0004_C
   :alt: Effect of PPD-LNC on (A) Catalepsy in ketamine-induced
   schizophrenia in rats (B) Escape latency time in Morris water maze
   test (C) Time spent in open and closed arm in elevated plus maze
   model. Data are expressed as mean ± SD (*n* = 3).
   :name: F0004

   Effect of PPD-LNC on (A) Catalepsy in ketamine-induced schizophrenia
   in rats (B) Escape latency time in Morris water maze test (C) Time
   spent in open and closed arm in elevated plus maze model. Data are
   expressed as mean ± SD (*n* = 3).

.. _S0003-S2003-S3002:

3.3.2.. Morris Water maze test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This test determines the effectiveness of PPD in preventing memory
impairment. As depicted in `Figure 4B <#F0004>`__, the escape latency
time (ELT) to reach the target platform decreased gradually. The rats
belonging to the toxic group (Ketamine) took the maximum time to locate
the platform indicating cognitive impairment and successful induction of
psychosis, thus showing maximum ELT. PPD-LNC antagonized the
ketamine-induced toxicity effects and significantly (*p* < .01)
attenuated the escape latency, and an improvement in learning and memory
capacities was observed. PPD-LNC *per se* treated group showed similar
effects as the control-treated group (Nabi et al., (n.d.ab)). Vitorino
et al. developed fluoxetine-loaded NLCs for the treatment of depression
and examined its effects in mice using forced swimming tests. The
results displayed greater anti-depressive and anxiolytic effects of NLC
as compared to the drug suspension (Vitorino et al., (n.d.ax)).

.. _S0003-S2003-S3003:

3.3.3.. Elevated plus-maze model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This study determined the efficiency of PPD in reducing the anxiety
associated with schizophrenia. The rats in the PPD-LNC group
demonstrated a reduction in anxiety-related behavior (`Figure
4C <#F0004>`__). The rats in this group spent comparatively more time in
the open arm than the closed arm. It shows that PPD acts as an
anxiolytic compound, thereby increasing the open arm entries of
exploration time. Contrariwise, the toxic group (administered with
ketamine) showed rats in the closed arm for the maximum duration. The
reduction in open arm entries represents a state of anxiety/fear in the
rats administered with ketamine (Rubab et al., (n.d.ay)). A study by
Anand et al. also reported that rivastigmine-loaded NLC caused
noticeable improvements in open arm exploration time in
scopolamine-treated rats. These results were attributed to the better
nasal penetration by NLCs (Anand et al., (n.d.az)).

.. _S0003-S2004:

3.4.. Histopathological and immunohistochemical analysis
--------------------------------------------------------

The histopathological study was conducted using H & E dye to stain the
hippocampus and cortex region of the Wistar rats. The study examines the
toxicological/structural aberrations in the brain following its
administration. As shown in `Figures 5A and B <#F0005>`__, the image
corresponding to the toxic group (administered with ketamine) showed
neurons stained in deep red color, thus confirming the toxicity. The
hippocampus and cortex of the PPD-LNC-treated group showed light red
color following staining with H & E. They showed a prominently visible
nucleus, thus confirming the presence of healthy neurons,
oligodendrocytes, and glial cells.

.. figure:: IDRD_A_2069880_F0005_C
   :alt: (A) H & E stained sections of the hippocampus in rats treated
   with normal saline (control), ketamine (toxic),
   ketamine + conventional formulation PPD suspension,
   ketamine + nanoformulation PPD-LNC, and PPD-LNC per se. (B) H & E
   stained sections of cortex in rats treated with normal saline
   (control), ketamine (toxic), ketamine + PPD suspension,
   ketamine + PPD-LNC, and PPD-LNC *per se*.
   :name: F0005

   (A) H & E stained sections of the hippocampus in rats treated with
   normal saline (control), ketamine (toxic), ketamine + conventional
   formulation PPD suspension, ketamine + nanoformulation PPD-LNC, and
   PPD-LNC per se. (B) H & E stained sections of cortex in rats treated
   with normal saline (control), ketamine (toxic), ketamine + PPD
   suspension, ketamine + PPD-LNC, and PPD-LNC *per se*.

Additionally, there was no observation of chromatolysis, vacuolization,
neuronal damage, or pyknosis in any part of the brain. As observed from
the histological finding, the conventional (drug suspension) group did
not exhibit any signs of toxicity. Thus, it was concluded that the
prepared formulation PPD-LNC is safe for administration via oral route
as no toxicity was observed. Khan et al. showed that no signs of
toxicity or neuronal damage were observed in histopathological images of
atazanavir-NLC. and is thus safe for oral administration (Khan et al.,
(n.d.ap)). Additionally, Rahman et al. also revealed that
histopathological images of Zerumbone-loaded NLC displayed no
degenerative, vacuolar, or hemorrhagic alterations in the brain tissues
(Rahman et al., (n.d.ba)).

In immunohistochemical analysis (`Figure 6A and B <#F0006>`__), when
ketamine was administered alone, a significantly improved NF-κB
expression was observed in both hippocampus and cortex when compared to
the control group (*p* < .001). This might be due to the increased
expression of proinflammatory mediators in the brain tissues. When
ketamine was administered in combination with conventional formulation
(PPD suspension), a mild reduction in the NF-κB expression was seen in
the hippocampus (*p* < .05) and cortex (*p* < .01), respectively.
However, when ketamine was co-administered with nanoformulation
(PPD-LNC), NF-κB expression was significantly reduced in the hippocampus
and cortex (*p* < .001). PPD-LNC thus successfully suppressed
ketamine-induced neuroinflammation by inhibiting inflammatory markers in
the brain. Rubab et al. also reported suppressed expression of
*p*-NF-κB, TNF-α, and COX-2 in brain tissues from histological and
immunohistochemical analysis of curcumin-loaded NLC in
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced depression and anxiety model (Rubab
et al., (n.d.ay)). Additionally, PPD-LNC *per se* was safe and exhibited
a similar effect as shown in the control group.

.. figure:: IDRD_A_2069880_F0006_C
   :alt: (A) Images showing the expression level of NF-κB in the
   hippocampus when rats were treated with normal saline (control),
   ketamine (toxic), ketamine + PPD suspension, ketamine + PPD-LNC, and
   PPD-LNC *per se*. Graphs showing the semiquantitative analysis of
   different treatment groups expressed as % area. The values were
   expressed as mean ± SEM (*n* = 6), and statistical analysis was
   performed using One Way ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison test
   [scale bar- 50 μm]. (B) Images showing the expression level of NF-κB
   in the cortex when rats were treated with normal saline (control),
   ketamine (toxic), ketamine + PPD suspension, ketamine + PPD-LNC, and
   PPD-LNC *per se*. Graphs showing the semiquantitative analysis of
   different treatment groups expressed as % area. The values were
   expressed as mean ± SEM (*n* = 6), and statistical analysis was
   performed using One Way ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison test
   [scale bar- 50 μm].
   :name: F0006

   (A) Images showing the expression level of NF-κB in the hippocampus
   when rats were treated with normal saline (control), ketamine
   (toxic), ketamine + PPD suspension, ketamine + PPD-LNC, and PPD-LNC
   *per se*. Graphs showing the semiquantitative analysis of different
   treatment groups expressed as % area. The values were expressed as
   mean ± SEM (*n* = 6), and statistical analysis was performed using
   One Way ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison test [scale bar- 50 μm].
   (B) Images showing the expression level of NF-κB in the cortex when
   rats were treated with normal saline (control), ketamine (toxic),
   ketamine + PPD suspension, ketamine + PPD-LNC, and PPD-LNC *per se*.
   Graphs showing the semiquantitative analysis of different treatment
   groups expressed as % area. The values were expressed as mean ± SEM
   (*n* = 6), and statistical analysis was performed using One Way
   ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison test [scale bar- 50 μm].

.. _S0003-S2005:

3.5.. Biochemical estimation of oxidative stress markers
--------------------------------------------------------

The effect of PPD-LNC on oxidative stress parameters are presented in
`Table 2 <#t0002>`__. In the toxic group, administration of ketamine
significantly reduced (*p* < .01) the activity of endogenous antioxidant
enzymes like GSH, CAT, SOD and increased the TBARS level in the
hippocampus and frontal cortex compared to the control group. This leads
to the accretion of oxidative free radicals producing oxidative stress
and degenerative effects. The administration of PPD-LNC *per se* showed
no effect on the levels of these endogenous antioxidant enzymes and
behaved similarly to the control group. Conversely, PPD-LNC
significantly (*p* < .01) improved the activity of GSH, CAT, SOD and
reduced the activity of TBARS. Thus, PPD-LNC restored the enzyme levels
to normal, indicating the antioxidant effect of PPD, which imparts
neuroprotective activity (Nabi et al., (n.d.ab); Wesołowska et al.,
(n.d.af); Mandpe et al., (n.d.ai)). Iqbal et al. developed NLC gel of
silymarin for the treatment of skin cancer. An improvement in the level
of biochemical markers of oxidative stress i.e. GSH, SOD, and CAT was
observed with both conventional and NLC gel, however, the antioxidant
effect was more pronounced in the group treated with NLC gel (Iqbal
et al., (n.d.bb)).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: t0002

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Effect of PPD-LNC on different oxidative stress markers in
      ketamine-induced schizophrenia in rats. Data expressed as
      mean ± SD (*n* = 3).

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | G     | GSH   | SOD   | Cat   | TBARS |       |       |       |       |
   | roups | μm    | U/mg  | alase | nmol  |       |       |       |       |
   |       | ol/mg | pr    | nmol  | of    |       |       |       |       |
   |       | of    | otein | of    | M     |       |       |       |       |
   |       | pr    |       | H     | DA/mg |       |       |       |       |
   |       | otein |       | \ :su | of    |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | b:`2` | pr    |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | \ O\  | otein |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | :sub: |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | `2`/m |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | in/mg |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | pr    |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | otein |       |       |       |       |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
   | Co    | 40    | 40    | 21    | 22    | 20    | 24    | 9     | 9     |
   | ntrol | .83 ± | .93 ± | .83 ± | .62 ± | .51 ± | .13 ± | .43 ± | .15 ± |
   |       |  4.12 |  3.12 |  2.04 |  1.86 |  1.83 |  1.46 |  1.12 |  0.35 |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Ket   | 10    | 11    | 7     | 7     | 10    | 9     | 32    | 31    |
   | amine | .54 ± | .38 ± | .63 ± | .88 ± | .27 ± | .24 ± | .65 ± | .36 ± |
   | (T    |  0.94 |  0.27 |  0.41 |  0.79 |  2.47 |  0.48 |  3.61 |  2.49 |
   | oxic) |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | PP    | 39    | 38    | 20    | 21    | 21    | 20    | 10    | 9     |
   | D-LNC | .11 ± | .73 ± | .35 ± | .64 ± | .18 ± | .98 ± | .19 ± | .84 ± |
   | *per  |  2.89 |  2.94 |  1.48 |  1.49 |  2.15 |  2.04 |  0.97 |  0.59 |
   | se*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Keta  | 19    | 21    | 10    | 11    | 14    | 14    | 23    | 22    |
   | mine  | .63 ± | .47 ± | .23 ± | .69 ± | .26 ± | .02 ± | .81 ± | .18 ± |
   | + PPD |  2.05 |  1.71 |  0.74 |  0.35 |  0.91 |  1.25 |  2.63 |  1.37 |
   | suspe |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | nsion |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Ket   | 34    | 33    | 16    | 16    | 19    | 19    | 27    | 26    |
   | amine | .86 ± | .53 ± | .83 ± | .08 ± | .23 ± | .66 ± | .48 ± | .31 ± |
   |  + PP |  3.51 |  2.25 |  1.35 |  1.14 |  1.52 |  1.63 |  1.94 |  2.61 |
   | D-LNC |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

.. _S0003-S2006:

3.6.. Biochemical estimation of neuroinflammatory markers using ELISA
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Schizophrenia is associated with neuroinflammation. The effect of the
various treatment groups on neuroinflammatory cytokines in
ketamine-induced schizophrenia in rats is depicted in `Table
3 <#t0003>`__. The results revealed the enhanced release of both the
neuroinflammatory cytokines (IL-6 and TNF-α) following the
administration of ketamine to the Wistar rats. However, ketamine-induced
schizophrenic rats, when treated with PPD-LNC, resulted in attenuation
of IL-6 and TNF-α in both hippocampus and frontal cortex, thus
signifying the anti-inflammatory activity of PPD. The drug, when given
alone, did not exhibit any significant variation in comparison to the
control group. This anti-inflammatory effect of PPD was more evident
when administered as LNC than when given as suspension since enhanced
brain targeting was achieved through lymphatic uptake of LNC (Wesołowska
et al., (n.d.af)). Iqbal et al. performed the biochemical estimation of
TNF-α and IL-1α in mice treated with silymarin NLC gel and conventional
silymarin gel, and significantly (*p* < .001) lower levels of TNF-α and
IL-1α were detected in the former. Thus, it was observed that the
anti-inflammatory effect of silymarin was more pronounced in NLC
gel-treated mice.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: t0003

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Effect of PPD-LNC on neuroinflammatory markers in ketamine-induced
      schizophrenia in rats. Data expressed as mean ± SD (*n* = 3).

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Groups      | TNF-α       | IL-6 (pg/mg |             |             |
   |             | (pg/mg      | protein)    |             |             |
   |             | protein)    |             |             |             |
   +=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
   | Control     | 183 ± 6.32  | 157 ± 5.66  | 99 ± 2.66   | 94 ± 3.94   |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Ketamine    | 432 ± 13.28 | 404 ± 15.39 | 329 ± 11.42 | 259 ± 11.48 |
   | (toxic)     |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | PPD-LNC     | 179 ± 8.35  | 154 ± 7.46  | 93 ± 4.19   | 90 ± 4.27   |
   | *per se*    |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Ket         | 336 ± 16.29 | 283 ± 5.22  | 248 ± 8.47  | 207 ± 6.18  |
   | amine + PPD |             |             |             |             |
   | suspension  |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Ketamin     | 235 ± 10.41 | 212 ± 6.83  | 165 ± 6.93  | 137 ± 3.94  |
   | e + PPD-LNC |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

.. _S0003-S2007:

3.7.. Stability studies
-----------------------

Based on the results, PPD-LNC was stable at 25 ± 2 °C/ 60 ± 5% RH and
40 ± 2 °C/ 75 ± 5% RH for 3 months. Visually, color and appearance were
the same, and no alteration was observed. As presented in `Table
4 <#t0004>`__, particle size, PDI, entrapment efficiency, and % drug
remained showed no change. LNC showed good redispersibility with no
sediment, caking, liquefaction, gas formation, phase separation, or
degradation. Small particle size and surfactant-mediated stabilization
could explain its stability (Misra et al., (n.d.as); Khan et al.,
(n.d.bc)). According to the ICH guidelines, the formulation PPD-LNC was
stored at 40 ± 2 °C and 75 ± 5% RH for three months. The shelf life of
PPD in LNC as determined from the Arrhenius plot was calculated as
1.54 years at room temperature. The results thus validated that the
prepared formulation was stable at different storage conditions.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: t0004

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Stability of PPD-LNC for three months storage at 25 ± 2 °C/60 ± 5%
      RH and 40 ± 2 °C/75 ± 5% RH. Data expressed as mean ± SD
      (*n* = 3).

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | P     | Par   | PDI   | Entra | %     |       |       |       |       |
   | eriod | ticle |       | pment | drug  |       |       |       |       |
   | (     | size  |       | effic | rem   |       |       |       |       |
   | Days) | (nm)  |       | iency | ained |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
   | 0     | 8     | 8     | 0.2   | 0.2   | 8     | 8     | 99    | 99    |
   |       | 4.1 ± | 3.7 ± | 12 ±  | 32 ±  | 9.8 ± | 9.1 ± | .64 ± | .15 ± |
   |       |  3.14 |  2.84 | 0.031 | 0.029 |  2.23 |  1.82 |  1.36 |  1.22 |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | 30    | 8     | 8     | 0.2   | 0.3   | 8     | 85    | 99    | 99    |
   |       | 5.2 ± | 8.3 ± | 46 ±  | 15 ±  | 9.1 ± | .62 ± | .43 ± | .14 ± |
   |       |  2.37 |  2.54 | 0.027 | 0.031 |  1.75 |  3.12 |  1.15 |  1.26 |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | 60    | 8     | 8     | 0.3   | 0.3   | 8     | 83    | 98    | 98    |
   |       | 7.1 ± | 9.6 ± | 11 ±  | 96 ±  | 7.7 ± | .22 ± | .57 ± | .11 ± |
   |       |  3.36 |  2.91 | 0.041 | 0.053 |  2.41 |  2.75 |  2.14 |  1.32 |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | 90    | 8     | 9     | 0.3   | 0.5   | 8     | 78    | 98    | 98    |
   |       | 7.6 ± | 4.5 ± | 29 ±  | 08 ±  | 6.2 ± | .34 ± | .32 ± | .28 ± |
   |       |  2.18 |  4.76 | 0.024 | 0.069 |  1.84 |  2.19 |  1.26 |  1.35 |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

.. _S0004:

4.. Conclusions
===============

Based on the results obtained, LNC appeared to be a potential vehicle
for brain delivery of paliperidone for its improved antipsychotic
activity for managing schizophrenia. The % cell viability of Neuro-2a
cells validated the safety of LNC formulation as low cytotoxicity was
observed at all the levels of *C*\ :sub:`max`. The pharmacokinetic data
revealed a 3.46-fold increase in the relative bioavailability in the
brain for the PPD-LNC group compared to the drug suspension. Moreover,
drug concentration in the brain for the PPD-LNC group was significantly
higher than the respective groups at all time points. The results of the
pharmacodynamic evaluation revealed the effectiveness of PPD-LNC in
reducing extrapyramidal symptoms. The histopathological images showed
the absence of chromatolysis, vacuolization, pyknosis, or neuronal
damage in the hippocampus and cortex of the PPD-LNC treated group.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed a reduction in NF-κB levels in the
hippocampus and cortex of the formulation-treated group. The biochemical
estimation studies exhibited the antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
activity of PPD. Finally, stability studies showed that the prepared
formulation was stable at different storage conditions. Further clinical
investigation of the prepared formulation is warranted to demonstrate
its efficacy in the patients. A clinical benefit to the risk ratio of
the developed formulation will decide its appropriateness in the
management of Schizophrenia.

The first author is highly thankful to the Indian Council of Medical
Research (ICMR) for providing the Senior Research Fellowship
(45/32/2019-Nan/BMS). The authors are thankful to DST-PURSE and DST-FIST
for providing departmental and instrumental facilities.

.. _S0005:

Institutional Review Board Statement
====================================

The study was approved by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee
(IAEC) of Jamia Hamdard (protocol number:1458 approved on 10th April
2018).

.. _S0006:

Informed consent statement
==========================

Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Govt. of India.

.. _S0008:

Author Contributions
====================

Conceptualization, Saleha Rehman; Data curation, Saleha Rehman; Formal
analysis, Saleha Rehman and Bushra Nabi; Funding acquisition, Saleha
Rehman; Investigation, Saleha Rehman, Amaan Javed, Tahira Khan and Ashif
Iqubal; Methodology, Saleha Rehman; Project administration, Javed Ali;
Resources, Javed Ali; Software, Saleha Rehman, Amaan Javed; Supervision,
Sanjula Baboota and Javed Ali; Validation, Saleha Rehman and Bushra
Nabi; Visualization, Mohammad Ansari, Sanjula Baboota and Javed Ali;
Writing – original draft, Saleha Rehman; Writing – review & editing,
Mohammad Ansari and Javed Ali. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.

.. _S0007:

Disclosure statement
====================

The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0001

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0002

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0003

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0004

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0005

      n.d.az.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0006

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0007

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0008

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0009

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0010

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0011

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0012

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0013

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0014

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0015

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0016

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0017

      n.d.bb.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0018

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0019

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0020

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0021

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0022

      n.d.bc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0024

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0025

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0026

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0027

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0028

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0029

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0030

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0031

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0032

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0033

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0034

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0035

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0036

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0037

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0038

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0039

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0040

      n.d.ba.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0041

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0042

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0043

      n.d.ay.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0044

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0045

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0046

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0047

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0048

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0049

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0050

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0051

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0052

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0053

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0054

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0055

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CIT0056

      n.d.al.
