===================================================================================
Time in schizophrenia: a link between psychopathology, psychophysics and technology
===================================================================================

Maria Bianca Amadeo
Davide Esposito
Andrea Escelsior
Claudio Campus
Alberto Inuggi
Beatriz Pereira Da Silva
Gianluca Serafini
Mario Amore
Monica Gori
:Date: 2022-8-12

:Abstract:
   It has been widely demonstrated that time processing is altered in
   patients with schizophrenia. This perspective review delves into such
   temporal deficit and highlights its link to low-level sensory
   alterations, which are often overlooked in rehabilitation protocols
   for psychosis. However, if temporal impairment at the sensory level
   is inherent to the disease, new interventions should focus on this
   dimension. Beyond more traditional types of intervention, here we
   review the most recent digital technologies for rehabilitation and
   the most promising ones for sensory training. The overall aim is to
   synthesise existing literature on time in schizophrenia linking
   psychopathology, psychophysics, and technology to help future
   developments.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _Sec1:

Introduction
============

From the moment of their birth, newborns are immersed in time,
experiencing a continuously mutating reality and creating temporal
representations that naturally improve and become more sophisticated
through childhood into adolescence (e.g. ref. [(Allman, Pelphrey, and
Meck 2012)–(Brannon et al. 2004)]). Time is a fundamental element of
human awareness and efficiently coding temporal proprieties of the
environment is necessary to be connected with the outer world,
coherently experience events, and produce adaptive behaviours.

During the last decade, research has suggested that time disturbance
plays a role in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia [(Ciullo et al.
2016)–(Andreasen et al. 1999)]. However, since time is not a single,
unitary dimension, literature about time representations in
schizophrenia is heterogeneous, involves different terminology based on
researchers’ background and does not support an easy overview and
comparison between studies. The present perspective review aims at
providing an overall picture of temporal representations in
schizophrenia, showing that the deficit embraces time at different
levels and encompasses low-level sensory alterations that must be
considered when thinking of schizophrenia, its early diagnosis and its
rehabilitation strategies.

.. _Sec2:

The complexity of the concept time
==================================

Time is so intrinsic in human beings that sometimes we forget how wide
the concept of time is [(Wittmann 2013)–(Mauk and Buonomano 2004)]. From
a phenomenological perspective, humans are time-producing organisms,
whose awareness of being is strictly interconnected with the sense of a
lived duration of experience [(n.d.a)]. From a perceptual perspective,
temporal coding is a heterogeneous process, which intervenes every time
an estimation of a time duration is made but also every time
sensorimotor information takes place.

To grasp the concept of time, many definitions and models have been
proposed. The models developed to describe timing functions in humans
can be mostly grouped into dedicated or intrinsic models [(Ivry and
Schlerf 2008)]. On the one hand, according to dedicated models, temporal
coding relies on specialized neural functions of a specific timing
network. On the other hand, intrinsic models consider the timing
functions as an emergent property of neural activity [(Paton and
Buonomano 2018)]. Thus, prototypical dedicated models of time
hypothesize the existence of a centralized internal clock: [(Creelman
1962)–(Gibbon, Church, and Meck 1984)] a pacemaker emits pulses, these
are stored into an accumulator, then transferred to working memory, and
a final decision making stage compares the pulses accumulated in working
memory to those already stored in a reference memory module and
identifies an appropriate outcome. Prototypical intrinsic models
instead, such as the striatal beat frequency model [(Buonomano and Mauk
1994)–(Mauk and Buonomano 2004)], suggest that timing does not rely on
dedicated circuits but it consists of a general computation of most
neural networks [(P. Lewis and Miall 2003b), (Ivry 1996)].

Specific processing circuits have been investigated for at least three
time scales: sub-second, near-second, tens-of-seconds scales. Based on
the main brain areas involved, it has been suggested that sub-second
intervals activate an automatic timing processing (expression of the
right cerebellum activity, left sensorimotor cortex and bilateral
supplemental motor areas [(K. Lee et al. 2007)–(Tregellas, Davalos, and
Rojas 2006)]), whereas supra-second intervals involve a cognitive timing
processing (expression of the activity of right dorsolateral-prefrontal
cortex and right posterior-parietal cortex [(P. Lewis and Miall 2003a),
(Jones et al. 2004)]). Although the evidence of the recruitment of
different circuits between short sub-second and long supra-second
intervals, the mechanisms underlying processing of near-second intervals
and the neural basis for the intrinsic sense of time are still not clear
[(Wittmann 2013), (n.d.b)]. Moreover, time scales do not represent the
only parameter to classify and investigate time processing. The next
section introduces two important concepts to have in mind when
investigating time.

.. _Sec3:

Distinction between perception of time and timing of perception
---------------------------------------------------------------

Traditionally, a distinction has been made between explicit and implicit
level of processing of time [(Piras and Coull 2011), (Coull and Nobre
2008)]. Explicit processing involves explicit judgements about external
stimuli’s temporal properties, such as their duration, order or
simultaneity [(Ciullo et al. 2016)]. On the contrary, implicit
processing is automatically engaged whenever sensorimotor information is
temporally structured, even without the specific instruction to focus on
time [(Piras and Coull 2011), (Giersch, Lalanne, and Isope 2016)]. For
example, it can happen that, although no overt estimates of stimulus or
action duration are required, to make perceptual judgements about
stimulus features or perform a specific motor act any temporal structure
intrinsic in stimulus presentation or motor execution implicitly recalls
timing mechanisms. Implicit and explicit processing have been
dissociated with imaging methods [(Coull and Nobre 2008)]. Explicit
timing engages specifically the basal ganglia, with co-activation of
supplementary motor area, inferior frontal cortex and cerebellum;
implicit timing activates most consistently cortical action circuits,
such as left-lateralized premotor and inferior-parietal cortices.

Stated the existing difference between explicit and implicit timing, we
think that, in order to shed light on the literature about time
perception in schizophrenia, it is important to introduce a new
distinction between two concepts, which are often confused: *perception
of time* and *timing of perception*. Perception of time refers to the
subjective experience of the passage of time and of events duration.
Instead, timing of perception refers to the temporal resolution in
processing events. Indeed, every sensory experience is embedded in time
and there is, unavoidably, a time in which perceived events take place.
From a phenomenological perspective, the distinction between these two
concepts overlaps with the distinction between structure and content.
However, it is important to clarify that the distinction between
perception of time and timing perception does not necessarily coincide
with explicit and implicit temporal processing respectively. As
illustrated in Fig. `1 <#Fig1>`__, both perception of time and timing of
perception can be investigated explicitly and implicitly. Some examples
are presented to illustrate possible experimental paradigms that outline
the difference between implicit and explicit perception of time and
timing of perception:Explicit investigation of perception of time occurs
for instance in duration discrimination tasks, where two time intervals
are presented in sequence and the participant is asked to decide which
interval is longer (e.g. refs. [(Carlson and Feinberg 1968), (Clausen
1950)]);Implicit investigation of perception of time occurs for instance
in tasks that require to evaluate whether moving stimuli will collide
(e.g. ref. [(Coull and Nobre 2008)]). Participants implicitly use
temporal information inherent to the speed of moving sensory stimuli to
predict their eventual locations.Explicit investigation of timing of
perception occurs for instance in the simultaneity judgement task [(van
Eijk et al. 2008)], which consists of evaluating the simultaneity vs.
asynchrony of two stimuli. The specific instruction (“Are these stimuli
simultaneous?”) makes it explicit, the possibility to estimate the
timeframe within which multiple stimuli are highly likely to be
perceived as one makes it a paradigm to explore timing of
perception.Implicit investigation of timing of perception occurs for
instance in the double-flash illusion task [(Shams, Kamitani, and
Shimojo 2002)], in which participants are asked how many flashes they
perceive, and the illusion occurs when one flash simultaneously
accompanied by two beeps is erroneously perceived as two flashes. The
instructions are not about time, but the number of perceived flashes
indirectly gives information about the temporal resolution in processing
the sensory events.Fig. 1The concept of time.Time involves both a
phenomenological and a perceptual level. At perceptual level, it is
possible to distinguish perception of time from timing of perception,
which can both be investigated trough implicit or explicit experimental
paradigms.

In our opinion, a categorization to better unfold the mechanisms
underlying the concept of time and their role in schizophrenia would
discern between perception of time and timing of perception regardless
of the paradigm type, either explicit or implicit (Fig. `1 <#Fig1>`__).

.. _Sec4:

Time representations in schizophrenia
=====================================

Schizophrenia is characterized by positive symptoms (such as
disorganized thinking, speech, delusions, hallucinations), negative
symptoms (such as diminished emotional expression, social withdrawal,
anhedonia) and cognitive dysfunction in several domains (such as
attention, working memory and executive functioning) [(n.d.c)]. Since
Stransky and Bleuler’s classical psychopathology up to Andreasen’s
Cognitive Dysmetria model, the pathogenesis of schizophrenia has been
hypothesized to depend on uncoordinated activity between different brain
areas [(Escelsior et al. 2019)]. The model of Cognitive Dysmetria, in
particular, suggests that impaired temporal information processing may
represent one core deficit that triggers a detrimental cascade of
effects [(Andreasen et al. 1999), (Escelsior et al. 2019)–(Elvevag et
al. 2004)] contributing to the positive and negative symptoms of the
disease.

.. _Sec5:

Phenomenological evidence of time disturbance in schizophrenia
--------------------------------------------------------------

At phenomenological level, patients with schizophrenia report loss of
continuity in the sense of time and temporal fragmentation of
self-experience [(Stanghellini et al. 2016)–(Fuchs 2007)]. For example,
they do not know the time of day, day of the week, month, or even year
[(A. Lewis 1932)], and sometimes they feel time running slower or faster
[(Freedman 1974)]. Abnormal temporal experience has been considered one
key aspect of the basic self-disorder, a core trait-phenomenological
feature of schizophrenia that implies structural instability of the
first person-perspective [(Parnas and Henriksen 2014)–(Martin et al.
2014)]. Time, indeed, is a dynamic component of consciousness and
phenomenological philosophy has interpreted the concept of time as a
basic structure of the human self [(n.d.d)]. Fuchs and Pallagorsi
[(n.d.e)] deeply addressed the phenomenological perspective of time in
schizophrenia and concluded that “key schizophrenic symptoms such as
thought disorder, thought insertion, auditory hallucinations, and
passivity experiences may be described as disturbances of transcendental
constitution of inner time consciousness or of the microstructure of
temporality”.

Beyond the phenomenological evidence of time disturbance in
schizophrenia, experimental psychology provided quantitative evidence of
this temporal deficit showing that it also involves the perceptual level
(see review of ref. [(Ciullo et al. 2016), (Thoenes and Oberfeld
2017)]). These aspects, albeit different, are likely to be
interconnected (Fig. `1 <#Fig1>`__). Clarifying this link is important
to understand the disease deeper and investigate how tailoring
treatments on one ability can affect the other.

.. _Sec6:

Overview of perception of time and timing of perception in schizophrenia
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Experimental psychology demonstrated that perceptual temporal processing
is compromised in schizophrenia. Several reviews have extensively and
successfully addressed this topic [(Ciullo et al. 2016), (Martin et al.
2014), (Thoenes and Oberfeld 2017)]. Here, we argue that the
well-documented temporal deficit in perception encompasses both
perception of time and timing of perception.

Concerning the perception of time, literature is rich of examples (for a
review see ref. [(Ciullo et al. 2016), (Thoenes and Oberfeld 2017)]). To
briefly sum up, temporal precision (i.e. the consistency in perception)
is clearly impaired in patients with schizophrenia, suggesting that the
patients’ explicit and implicit judgements on time are significantly
more variable compared to healthy controls. Patients with schizophrenia
have deficits in explicitly detecting rhythm irregularities and in
estimating durations ranging from milliseconds to several minutes, in a
wide range of tasks, involving both verbal and motor responses, and
affecting different sensory modalities. As stated above, while the
higher time-scale processing is more related to high cognitive
functions, such as attention and memory, the lower time-scale processing
is thought to take place automatically and at low-sensory level [(Ciullo
et al. 2016)]. Selective deficits in perception of time have also been
observed with implicit paradigms. For instance, schizophrenic patients
have problems in using temporal cues implicitly to anticipate target
occurrence during an attention orienting task (e.g. ref. [(Ciullo et al.
2018)]).

Concerning the timing of perception, low-level processing of stimuli’s
temporal features has often been reported altered in schizophrenia too.
For example, tasks investigating the ability to judge the simultaneity
of two events have widely demonstrated an enlarged temporal binding
window in patients with schizophrenia (for a review [(Zhou et al.
2018)]). The temporal binding window is a timeframe within which
multiple stimuli are highly likely to be perceived as one [(Dixon and
Spitz 1980)]. Extended temporal binding window indicates imprecise
temporal coding of sensory stimuli. Most studies on schizophrenia
reported that the temporal binding window is tens of milliseconds wider
in patients with schizophrenia compared to typical adults for unisensory
modalities [(Di Cosmo et al. 2021)–(Stevenson et al. 2017)], and it
widens to hundreds of milliseconds for audiovisual [(Stevenson et al.
2017)] and audiotactile [(Di Cosmo et al. 2020)] stimuli. A larger
audiovisual temporal binding window encompasses both semantic [(Martin
et al. 2013)] and pure non-semantic audiovisual stimuli [(Haß et al.
2017)]. In addition, the patients’ difficulties in the timing of
perception go beyond explicit judgements and deficits have been reported
with different implicit tasks too [(Martin et al. 2013)–(Posada and
Franck 2002)]. For instance, Giersch et al. [(Giersch, Lalanne, and
Isope 2016)] revealed that schizophrenic patients struggle to anticipate
and follow information over time through a Stimulus-Response
Compatibility paradigm [(Simon 1969)], used for the implicit evaluation
of sensory information processing over time. The latter branch of
studies suggests an underlying difficulty exists in how information
itself is processed in time and, consequently, in processing the flow of
events [(Martin et al. 2014)].

.. _Sec7:

Sensory processing underlying time representations at the core of schizophrenia
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The excursus on time representations in schizophrenia highlights a
strong deficit at the perceptual level that encompasses both the
subjective experience of the passage of time (i.e. perception of time)
and the ability to process temporal information intrinsic to any
perceptual events (i.e. timing of perception). As a consequence, one
might hypothesize that low-level sensory abnormalities underlying
temporal processing are, at least partially, responsible for the overall
temporal impairment and contribute to the other symptoms of
schizophrenia.

To date, a growing body of literature supports such hypothesis. Indeed,
overestimation of temporal intervals of both visual and auditory stimuli
have been related to positive symptoms of schizophrenia (for a review
see ref. [(Ueda, Maruo, and Sumiyoshi 2018)],) and similar sensory
alterations in time estimation have been observed in people without a
diagnosis of schizophrenia but prone to visual hallucinations [(Coy and
Hutton 2013)], individuals with schizotypal features [(K.-H. Lee et al.
2006)] and subjects at high genetic risk for developing schizophrenia
[(Penney et al. 2005)], suggesting that the deficit in perception of
time may be an endophenotype of schizophrenia [(Ciullo et al. 2016)]. At
the same time, anomalies in what we refer to as timing of perception
have been proposed as a core deficit in the prodromal phase of
schizophrenia [(Di Cosmo et al. 2021)]. For example, a larger temporal
binding window is associated with disorganisation symptoms [(Foucher et
al. 2007)] and hallucination severity [(Stevenson et al. 2017)], and it
matches higher levels of schizotypy in subclinical populations [(Di
Cosmo et al. 2020), (Ferri et al. 2018), (Ferri et al. 2017)].

Moreover, timing of perception is crucial for multisensory integration,
that is, the human ability to merge different sensory information from
the same perceptual event into a unitary mental representation. The
possibility and strength of multisensory integration depend on the
low-level physical stimuli characteristics such as their timing (e.g. a
pair of stimuli is likely to be integrated if they are closer in time)
[(Dixon and Spitz 1980), (Meredith and Stein 1986), (Meredith, Nemitz,
and Stein 1987)]. Research demonstrated that schizophrenia is
characterized by different alterations in multisensory processing (for a
review see ref. [(Zhou et al. 2018)]). The ability to integrate sensory
information has been associated with the emergence of a sense of self
[(Rochat 2011), (n.d.f)] and, even more interestingly, there is a link
between multisensory disintegration and self-disorders [(Postmes et al.
2014)]. For example, integrating sensory information typically perceived
as independent can cause sensory overload, alterations in sensory
filters and ambiguous perceptual identity, causing a feeling of living
in an incoherent world [(Borda and Sass 2015)]. This symptomatology
recalls what is observed at phenomenological level in patients with
schizophrenia. In this regard, Martin et al. [(Martin et al. 2014)] have
recently proposed that deficits in what we refer to as timing of
perception could be associated with minimal self-disturbances in
schizophrenic individuals. They argued that difficulties in integrating
sensory information in time may affect the self because of their impact
upon our ability to create single and stable representations, which
would cause an uninterrupted flow of sensory inputs. In addition, Martin
et al. [(Martin et al. 2014)] added that the impairment in timing of
perception may also be responsible for the altered sense of time
continuity also described at the phenomenological level in
schizophrenia. Indeed, the representation of ourselves is stabilized
within temporal windows and is experienced as being continuous in time.
Instead, they demonstrated that, despite their enlarged temporal binding
window, patients implicitly distinguish stimuli in time as controls do;
however, differently from controls, they process stimuli individually
rather than in sequence [(Lalanne et al. 2012), (Lalanne, van Assche,
and Giersch 2012), (Giersch et al. 2015)]. They interpreted their result
as evidence of disturbed predictive coding in schizophrenia, suggesting
that the ability to anticipate new events, while the focus is still on
current ones, is compromised. This would lead to fragmentation in
information processing, which impacts the sense of time continuity. This
theory clearly supports a link between deficits in timing of perception,
the temporal deficit reported at phenomenological level, and some main
symptoms characterizing schizophrenia [(n.d.g)]. It is as if the sense
of self required that sensory information were experienced as continuous
in time, and in turn the sense of temporal continuity relied on the
possibility to retain the latest past information and predict the
imminent future events.

Therefore, research on both perception of time and timing of perception
suggests that an impairment in the temporal aspects of early perceptual
processing may be a pivotal substrate of psychotic functioning
[(Andreasen 1999)]. Starting from this perspective, major symptoms of
schizophrenia, as those observed at phenomenological level, may be
regarded as displays of globally disturbed time processing [(n.d.e)]. A
recent study explored the relationship between perception of time and
timing of perception and suggested that a higher precision in timing of
perception implies a more fine-grained sense of the passage of time.
Thus, there may be a common mechanism underlying these two perceptual
dimensions [(Fenner et al. 2020)] and its alteration may contribute to
the pathophysiology of patients with schizophrenia. However, findings on
the relationship between these dimensions of timing processing are
inconsistent and do not allow any specific conclusion. The link between
perception of time and timing of perception still needs further
investigation, as well as the understanding of the interconnections
between different aspects of the time deficit and psychosis. Yet,
results presented in this paragraph are encouraging and, in our opinion,
call clinicians and rehabilitators to consider the impairment in
temporal representations at sensory level within the clinical
rehabilitative framework.

.. _Sec8:

New insight for rehabilitation of schizophrenia based on sensory processing of time representations
===================================================================================================

Despite the introduction of novel pharmacological agents and
psychosocial interventions, schizophrenia remains one of the most severe
and debilitating mental disorders [(Owen and Sawa 2016)], affecting 1%
of the population [(Bitanihirwe, Mauney, and Woo 2016), (Birnbaum and
Weinberger 2017)]. Although we have seen that a perceptual impairment in
time processing has been frequently described, it is still neglected at
both clinical and rehabilitative level. Indeed, existing treatments
address neither the overall temporal deficit nor the related sensory
alterations in perception. Beyond pharmacological treatments,
interventions for schizophrenic patients are mostly focused on
rehabilitation of cognitive and psychosocial skills. Some examples are
the Cognitive Remediation Therapy (CRT) [(Bowie et al. 2020)],
cognitive-behavioural informed psychological interventions [(Wood et al.
2020)], or psychosocial lifestyle interventions [(Barber and Thornicroft
2018)]. However, if alterations in time representation at the perceptual
level are at the core of psychosis, as hypothesized in previous
sections, then they should be considered during both the assessment and
rehabilitation phases of schizophrenia. In addition, since there is some
evidence that they characterize the prodromal phase of the disease e.g.
refs. [(Coy and Hutton 2013)–(Penney et al. 2005)], they could become a
useful tool for screening or early intervention.

Notwithstanding that further research is necessary to clarify the role
of the time deficit, all kinds of task presented above could potentially
complement standard screening procedures to discriminate between healthy
people and patients, to assess the level of severity of the disease, or,
for example, to plan targeted interventions. For rehabilitation, sensory
training addressing the specific impaired temporal skills could be
planned. For example, previous research demonstrated that the most
reliable sense to represent time is hearing [(Burr, Banks, and Morrone
2009)], and hearing calibrates, regarding the perception of time, the
other sensory modalities during development [(Gori, Sandini, and Burr
2012)]. Hence, intervention strategies to improve the overall impairment
in perception of time in schizophrenia could target hearing. Previous
research demonstrated the potential of training auditory temporal skills
and showed that the learned improvements on the temporal task
transferred from the auditory modality to the visual one [(McGovern et
al. 2016)]. Similarly, other studies showed the benefits of perceptual
learning to improve temporal judgements (e.g. refs. [(Bratzke, Seifried,
and Ulrich 2012), (Nagarajan et al. 1998)]). Concerning the timing of
perception, previous studies demonstrated high plasticity of
multisensory integration in time, suggesting it is sensitive to
experience and it can be successfully modified through perceptual
training [(Bidelman 2016), (Powers, Hillock, and Wallace 2009)] and
temporal recalibration [(Van der Burg and Goodbourn 2015)]. Perceptual
training consists of, for instance, training procedures that aim to
narrow the temporal binding window width through sensory exposure
[(Stevenson et al. 2013), (Powers, Hevey, and Wallace 2012)]. Instead,
temporal recalibration involves the exposure to temporally asynchronous
pairs of stimuli to modify the temporal weight ascribed to each sense.
For example, healthy individuals immersed in a visual-leading-auditory
environment for several minutes develop a higher tolerance for
visual-leading-auditory asynchrony [(Vroomen et al. 2004), (Roseboom,
Linares, and Nishida 2014)] and this aftereffect of asynchrony exposure
is maintained until new discrepant sensory information is presented
[(Machulla et al. 2012)]. In addition, musical training could be
considered since musicians show a much smaller temporal binding window
compared to non-musicians [(n.d.h)].

The above trainings are only few examples of how the temporal deficit of
schizophrenia could be addressed. Sensory and perceptual trainings,
temporal recalibration and musical training could be exploited as
clinical treatments for temporal distortions. Clearly, further research
is needed to investigate the generalizability of the benefits of sensory
training on time. Specifically, we might expect that other aspects of
the disease associated with impaired temporal processing [(Zhou, Cheung,
and Chan 2020)], such as incoherent perception, language and
communication dysfunctions, impaired social cognition and
self-disturbance, could improve following temporal trainings at
perceptual level. The next section briefly illustrates the technology
developed to assess and treat schizophrenia, discussing the digital
revolution’s potential for delivering perceptual training on time.

.. _Sec9:

Technology as tool for sensory intervention on time representations in schizophrenia
====================================================================================

Nowadays, the world of e-mental Health is defined as “mental health
services and information delivered or enhanced through the Internet and
related technologies” [(n.d.i)]. This new category of technology-based
assessment and intervention techniques can improve accessibility, reduce
costs, ensures flexibility in terms of standardization and
personalization, interactivity, and consumer engagement [(Lal and Adair
2014)]. The potential benefits are such that various digital tools for
both assessment and therapy of schizophrenia have been developed already
(for reviews, see refs. [(Lal and Adair 2014)–(Bell and Alvarez-Jimenez
2019)]). Indeed, the disease itself does not set any specific limit to
the development and use of e-mental Health-based solutions. People with
schizophrenia who own digital devices do not differ from the typical
population, and they have shown interest in using digital technologies
for their mental health [(Bell and Alvarez-Jimenez 2019)]. On the
therapeutic side, the most popular digital interventions for
schizophrenic patients include chatbots, which are software applications
for monitoring signs of relapse in on-line chats, and computer-based
cognitive training programs targeting different cognitive domains (e.g.
CogPack) [(Moritz et al. 2018)] or social cognition (e.g. the “Mind
Reading: Interactive Guide to Emotions” [(Lindenmayer et al. 2013)]).
These are only a few examples of technology-based interventions for
psychosis; while some of them are at the very beginning, others are
ready and available for clinical trials.

As the reader may have noticed, most of the efforts have been directed
towards the creation of new technological ways to deliver classical
therapies. However, the constant improvement of computational power and
speed of digital devices [(n.d.j)] makes the new technologies valid
tools to flexibly investigate earlier stages of sensory information
processing. The study of perception requires stimuli presentation to be
accurate in terms of intensity, onset, duration, and reproducibility
across participants’ sessions. These characteristics are nowadays
available even in smartphones, which are widely used, cheaper than
standard experimental setups, and highly portable. Moreover, smartphones
can deliver multimodal stimuli (i.e. visual, auditory and tactile)
easily, as they can display images, animations or videos, reproduce
sounds and vibrate. Thus, sensory processing underlying time
representations, which requires multimodal stimulations at the
millisecond scale, has become a research domain that today’s consumer
electronics can probe. For instance, as described above, the deficit in
the timing of perception of schizophrenic patients results in a temporal
binding window around 10 to 500 ms larger than that of the typical
population, depending on the task [(Zhou et al. 2018)]. Consequently,
typical paradigms on unisensory stimulation and multisensory integration
require auditory, visual and/or haptic stimulations with a temporal
delay among each other sometimes <20 ms e.g. ref. [(Stevenson and
Wallace 2013)]. A few years ago, only computers with a strong GPU and a
dedicated monitor with a refresh rate >100 Hz could reach such a degree
of timing precision. Nowadays, as Inuggi et al. have demonstrated,
consumer-level Android smartphones can deliver stimuli with the
requested temporal accuracy [(n.d.k), (n.d.l)]. Based on their findings,
Inuggi et al. developed Psysuite [(n.d.k), (n.d.l)], an Android app
aimed to perform various psychophysics tasks that can probe, amongst
others, the temporal correlates of perception. Specifically, two tasks
have been validated with Psysuite: the double-flash illusion [(n.d.k)]
and the temporal interval discrimination task [(n.d.l)]. The
double-flash illusion task, mentioned above to illustrate the implicit
investigation of timing of perception, requires inter-stimuli interval
to be sometimes below few tens of milliseconds [(Shams, Kamitani, and
Shimojo 2002)]. Users tested with Psysuite were subjected to this
illusion. Albeit resistant to feedback training [(Rosenthal, Shimojo,
and Shams 2009)], the smartphone-based double-flash illusion could be
used for remote assessment of temporal processing. The temporal interval
discrimination task, instead, is one of the most common paradigms for
explicit perception of time [(Matthews and Meck 2014)]. Participants
trained in performing this task with Psysuite improved their performance
after 4 days of unsupervised home training. These were just two
practical examples of temporal tasks performed on smartphones, but all
the above-mentioned sensory trainings on perception of time and timing
of perception could be potentially delivered through new dedicated
technologies. A remarkable body of literature is investigating the
boundaries within which perceptual learning is obtained and generalizes
to untrained stimuli [(n.d.k), (n.d.l)]. If temporal trainings at the
perceptual level really work, they could be easily administrated during
hospitalization or in the comfort of the patient’s house.

Another strength of modern digital devices yet to be fully exploited in
regard to schizophrenia is immersive virtual reality. That is, the
possibility to “immerse” users in virtual environments by fulfilling
their senses with computer-generated visual, acoustic and haptic stimuli
that mimic the perceptual features of physical stimuli and adapt in
real-time to the users’ movements [(n.d.m)]. The power of immersive
virtual reality resides in its ability to manipulate the users’ sense of
embodiment [(Kilteni, Groten, and Slater 2012)], defined as the result
of the sense of presence (i.e. self-location [(Servotte et al. 2020)]),
the sense of agency [(Haggard 2017)], and the sense of body-ownership
[(Slater et al. 2009)]. In other words, immersive virtual reality offers
a tool to investigate in a controlled and safe context the users’ sense
of self, which is at the core of schizophrenia and, as hypothesized
here, is likely interconnected with temporal processing. The
implementation of real-time interactions with users allows to manipulate
the temporal relationships between human predictions, actions, and
sensory feedbacks, thus changing the sensorimotor contingencies and
investigating the link between time and sense of self. Using virtual
reality, it becomes possible, for instance, to control temporal delays
of sensory feedback (e.g. delaying the incoming visual information), to
create new sensory consequences for specific motor actions (e.g.
bouncing a virtual ball by pressing a button), or to manipulate the
temporal delay of sensory consequences (e.g. delaying the bounce of a
virtual ball after pressing a button) within an ecological environment.
All these possible experimental manipulations would allow to investigate
sensory-motor temporal predictions and recalibration [(Stetson et al.
2006)]. A link between the sense of agency in schizophrenia and
imprecise motor predictions has already been identified thanks to
virtual reality’s ability to on-line change the relationship between
movements and corresponding sensory consequences [(Synofzik et al.
2009)–(Landgraf et al. 2010)]. Furthermore, since the human
sensory-motor system seems able to adapt to temporal manipulations of
the sensory-motor contingencies (see ref. [(Rohde and Ernst 2016)] for a
review), immersive virtual reality may offer a way to train the
perception of time or the timing of perception and simultaneously assess
the training effect on the sense of self [(Lallart, Lallart, and Jouvent
2009), (Davidson 2020)]. That said, despite the potential of such
technology, to date virtual reality has been employed mainly to enhance
and extend psychosocial and cognitive-behavioural treatments [(n.d.n)].

To sum up, the emergence of the e-mental Health has extensively expanded
clinical possibilities by providing digital tools to modernise standard
techniques. Digital technologies represent the most promising field of
application for perceptual trainings. Considering results about sensory
processing underlying time representations in schizophrenia, the
scientific community should exploit the potentials of technology to
create new science-based assessment and rehabilitation procedures
working at sensory and sensory-motor levels. It is not about reinventing
wheels; it is about using wings.

.. _Sec10:

Conclusion
==========

In this perspective review we provided a brief overview of the existing
literature showing impaired ability to process temporal proprieties of
the environment in people affected by schizophrenia. By distinguishing
the phenomenological from the perceptual level and, within the latter,
perception of time from timing of perception, we highlighted that the
temporal deficit is multifaceted and encompasses low-level sensory
alterations. However, these are not considered when thinking of
rehabilitation strategies and technological devices. Although various
reviews have stressed out the potential of digital tools on both
assessment and therapy of schizophrenia, we think that the growth of the
e-mental Health services must be expanded to the range of the possible
assessment, early intervention and rehabilitation techniques based on
scientific evidence. Digital technologies offer powerful resources for
evaluating the soft signs of the disease, giving clinicians the
possibility to dig into the lower levels of sensory processing with
unprecedented ease. These potentials should be considered to develop new
solutions that emerge from an interdisciplinary approach, involving
experts on psychopathology, psychophysics and technology.

This work was developed within the framework of the DINOGMI Department
of Excellence of MIUR 2018–2022 (law 232; 2016), and the joint-lab
ANTARES based on the collaboration between the Unit for Visually
Impaired People of the Italian Institute of Technology and the DINOGMI.

All authors contributed to conception of the manuscript. MBA, DE and AE
wrote the first draft of the manuscript. MBA, DE, AE, CC, and AI
contributed to manuscript revision. All authors read and approved the
final version.

The authors declare no competing interests.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR10

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR17

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR33

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR45

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR46

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR70

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR75

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR97

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR99

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR106

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR108

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR109

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR112

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR125

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR1

      Allman, MJ, KA Pelphrey, and WH Meck. 2012. “Developmental
      Neuroscience of Time and Number: Implications for Autism and Other
      Neurodevelopmental Disabilities.” *Front Integr Neurosci* 6.
      https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2012.00007.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR76

      Andreasen, NC. 1999. “A Unitary Model of Schizophrenia: Bleuler’s
      “Fragmented Phrene” as Schizencephaly.” *Arch Gen Psychiatry* 56:
      781–87. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.56.9.781.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR8

      Andreasen, NC, P Nopoulos, DS O'Leary, DD Miller, T Wassink, and M
      Flaum. 1999. “Defining the Phenotype of Schizophrenia: Cognitive
      Dysmetria and Its Neural Mechanisms.” *Biol Psychiatry* 46:
      908–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3223(99)00152-3.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR83

      Barber, S, and G Thornicroft. 2018. “Reducing the Mortality Gap in
      People with Severe Mental Disorders: The Role of Lifestyle
      Psychosocial Interventions.” *Front Psychiatry* 9.
      https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00463.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR103

      Bell, IH, and M Alvarez-Jimenez. 2019. “Digital Technology to
      Enhance Clinical Care of Early Psychosis.” *Curr Treat Options
      Psychiatry* 6: 256–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40501-019-00182-y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR89

      Bidelman, GM. 2016. “Musicians Have Enhanced Audiovisual
      Multisensory Binding: Experience-Dependent Effects in the
      Double-Flash Illusion.” *Exp Brain Res* 234: 3037–47.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-016-4705-6.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR80

      Birnbaum, R, and DR Weinberger. 2017. “Genetic Insights into the
      Neurodevelopmental Origins of Schizophrenia.” *Nat Rev Neurosci*
      18: 727–40. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2017.125.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR79

      Bitanihirwe, BK, SA Mauney, and TU Woo. 2016. “Weaving a Net of
      Neurobiological Mechanisms in Schizophrenia and Unraveling the
      Underlying Pathophysiology.” *Biol Psychiatry* 80: 589–98.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.03.1047.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR72

      Borda, JP, and LA Sass. 2015. “Phenomenology and Neurobiology of
      Self Disorder in Schizophrenia: Primary Factors.” *Schizophr Res*
      169: 464–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2015.09.024.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR81

      Bowie, CR, MD Bell, JM Fiszdon, JK Johannesen, JP Lindenmayer, and
      SR McGurk. 2020. “Cognitive Remediation for Schizophrenia: An
      Expert Working Group White Paper on Core Techniques.” *Schizophr
      Res* 215: 49–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2019.10.047.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR5

      Brannon, EM, LW Roussel, WH Meck, and M Woldorff. 2004. “Timing in
      the Baby Brain.” *Brain Res Cogn Brain Res* 21: 227–33.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.04.007.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR87

      Bratzke, D, T Seifried, and R Ulrich. 2012. “Perceptual Learning
      in Temporal Discrimination: Asymmetric Cross-Modal Transfer from
      Audition to Vision.” *Exp Brain Res* 221: 205–10.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3162-0.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR14

      Buonomano, DV, and MD Mauk. 1994. “Neural Network Model of the
      Cerebellum: Temporal Discrimination and the Timing of Motor
      Responses.” *Neural Comput* 6: 38–55.
      https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1994.6.1.38.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR84

      Burr, D, MS Banks, and MC Morrone. 2009. “Auditory Dominance over
      Vision in the Perception of Interval Duration.” *Exp Brain Res*
      198: 49–57. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-009-1933-z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR29

      Carlson, VR, and I Feinberg. 1968. “Individual Variations in Time
      Judgment and the Concept of an Internal Clock.” *J Exp Psychol*
      77: 631–40. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0026048.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR48

      Ciullo, V, F Piras, D Vecchio, N Banaj, JT Coull, and G Spalletta.
      2018. “Predictive Timing Disturbance Is a Precise Marker of
      Schizophrenia.” *Schizophrenia Res: Cognition* 12: 42–49.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR6

      Ciullo, V, G Spalletta, C Caltagirone, RE Jorge, and F Piras.
      2016. “Explicit Time Deficit in Schizophrenia: Systematic Review
      and Meta-Analysis Indicate It Is Primary and Not Domain Specific.”
      *Schizophr Bull* 42: 505–18.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbv104.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR30

      Clausen, J. 1950. “An Evaluation of Experimental Methods of Time
      Judgment.” *J Exp Psychol* 40: 756–61.
      https://doi.org/10.1037/h0056354.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR27

      Coull, J, and A Nobre. 2008. “Dissociating Explicit Timing from
      Temporal Expectation with fMRI.” *Curr Opin Neurobiol* 18: 137–44.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2008.07.011.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR62

      Coy, AL, and SB Hutton. 2013. “The Influence of Hallucination
      Proneness and Social Threat on Time Perception.” *Cogn
      Neuropsychiatry* 18: 463–76.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/13546805.2012.730994.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR11

      Creelman, CD. 1962. “Human Discrimination of Auditory Duration.”
      *J Acoustical Soc Am* 34: 582–93.
      https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1918172.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR124

      Davidson, L. 2020. “Recovering a Sense of Self in Schizophrenia.”
      *J Pers* 88: 122–32. https://doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12471.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR54

      Di Cosmo, G, M Costantini, E Ambrosini, A Salone, G Martinotti,
      and M Corbo. 2020. “Body-Environment Integration: Temporal
      Processing of Tactile and Auditory Inputs Along the Schizophrenia
      Continuum.” *J Psychiatr Res* 134: 208–14.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2020.12.034.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR51

      ———. 2021. “Body-Environment Integration: Temporal Processing of
      Tactile and Auditory Inputs Along the Schizophrenia Continuum.” *J
      Psychiatr Res* 134: 208–14.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2020.12.034.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR50

      Dixon, NF, and L Spitz. 1980. “The Detection of Auditory Visual
      Desynchrony.” *Perception* 9: 719–21.
      https://doi.org/10.1068/p090719.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR31

      Eijk, RL van, A Kohlrausch, JF Juola, and S van de Par. 2008.
      “Audiovisual Synchrony and Temporal Order Judgments: Effects of
      Experimental Method and Stimulus Type.” *Percept Psychophys* 70:
      955–68. https://doi.org/10.3758/PP.70.6.955.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR36

      Elvevag, B, GD Brown, T McCormack, JI Vousden, and TE Goldberg.
      2004. “Identification of Tone Duration, Line Length, and Letter
      Position: An Experimental Approach to Timing and Working Memory
      Deficits in Schizophrenia.” *J Abnorm Psychol* 113: 509–21.
      https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-843X.113.4.509.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR34

      Escelsior, A, M Belvederi Murri, P Calcagno, A Cervetti, R Caruso,
      and E Croce. 2019. “\ `Effectiveness of Cerebellar Circuitry
      Modulation in Schizophrenia: A Systematic
      Review <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31503187>`__.” *J Nerv
      Ment Dis* 207: 977–86.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR77

      Fenner, B, N Cooper, V Romei, and G Hughes. 2020. “Individual
      Differences in Sensory Integration Predict Differences in Time
      Perception and Individual Levels of Schizotypy.” *Conscious Cogn*
      84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2020.102979.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR66

      Ferri, F, YS Nikolova, MG Perrucci, M Costantini, A Ferretti, and
      V Gatta. 2017. “A Neural “Tuning Curve” for Multisensory
      Experience and Cognitive-Perceptual Schizotypy.” *Schizophr Bull*
      43: 801–13. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbw174.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR65

      Ferri, F, A Venskus, F Fotia, J Cooke, and V Romei. 2018. “Higher
      Proneness to Multisensory Illusions Is Driven by Reduced Temporal
      Sensitivity in People with High Schizotypal Traits.” *Conscious
      Cogn* 65: 263–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2018.09.006.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR52

      Foucher, JR, M Lacambre, BT Pham, A Giersch, and MA Elliott. 2007.
      “Low Time Resolution in Schizophrenia Lengthened Windows of
      Simultaneity for Visual, Auditory and Bimodal Stimuli.” *Schizophr
      Res* 97: 118–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2007.08.013.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR41

      Freedman, BJ. 1974. “The Subjective Experience of Perceptual and
      Cognitive Disturbances in Schizophrenia. A Review of
      Autobiographical Accounts.” *Arch Gen Psychiatry* 30: 333–40.
      https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1974.01760090047008.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR39

      Fuchs, T. 2007. “The Temporal Structure of Intentionality and Its
      Disturbance in Schizophrenia.” *Psychopathology* 40: 229–35.
      https://doi.org/10.1159/000101365.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR13

      Gibbon, J, RM Church, and WH Meck. 1984. “Scalar Timing in
      Memory.” *Ann N. Y Acad Sci* 423: 52–77.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1984.tb23417.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR28

      Giersch, A, L Lalanne, and P Isope. 2016. “Implicit Timing as the
      Missing Link Between Neurobiological and Self Disorders in
      Schizophrenia.” *Front Hum Neurosci* 10.
      https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00303.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR74

      Giersch, A, PE Poncelet, RL Capa, B Martin, CZ Duval, and M
      Curzietti. 2015. “Disruption of Information Processing in
      Schizophrenia: The Time Perspective.” *Schizophr Res Cogn* 2:
      78–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scog.2015.04.002.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR85

      Gori, M, G Sandini, and D Burr. 2012. “Development of
      Visuo-Auditory Integration in Space and Time.” *Front Integr
      Neurosci* 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2012.00077.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR115

      Haggard, P. 2017. “Sense of Agency in the Human Brain.” *Nat Rev
      Neurosci* 18: 196–207. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2017.14.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR56

      Haß, K, C Sinke, T Reese, M Roy, D Wiswede, and W Dillo. 2017.
      “Enlarged Temporal Integration Window in Schizophrenia Indicated
      by the Double-Flash Illusion.” *Cogn Neuropsychiatry* 22: 145–58.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/13546805.2017.1287693.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR21

      Ivry, RB. 1996. “The Representation of Temporal Information in
      Perception and Motor Control.” *Curr Opin Neurobiol* 6: 851–57.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(96)80037-7.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR18

      Ivry, RB, and JE Schlerf. 2008. “Dedicated and Intrinsic Models of
      Time Perception.” *Trends Cogn Sci* 12: 273–80.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2008.04.002.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR25

      Jones, CR, K Rosenkranz, JC Rothwell, and M Jahanshahi. 2004. “The
      Right Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex Is Essential in Time
      Reproduction: An Investigation with Repetitive Transcranial
      Magnetic Stimulation.” *Exp Brain Res* 158: 366–72.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-004-1912-3.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR113

      Kilteni, K, R Groten, and M Slater. 2012. “The Sense of Embodiment
      in Virtual Reality.” *Presence: Teleoperators Virtual Environ* 21:
      373–87. https://doi.org/10.1162/PRES_a_00124.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR100

      Lal, S, and CE Adair. 2014. “E-Mental Health: A Rapid Review of
      the Literature.” *Psychiatr Serv* 65: 24–32.
      https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.201300009.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR73

      Lalanne, L, M van Assche, and A Giersch. 2012. “When Predictive
      Mechanisms Go Wrong: Disordered Visual Synchrony Thresholds in
      Schizophrenia.” *Schizophr Bull* 38: 506–13.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbq107.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR57

      Lalanne, L, M Van Assche, W Wang, and A Giersch. 2012. “Looking
      Forward: An Impaired Ability in Patients with Schizophrenia.”
      *Neuropsychologia* 50: 2736–44.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.07.023.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR123

      Lallart, E, X Lallart, and R Jouvent. 2009. “Agency, the Sense of
      Presence, and Schizophrenia.” *Cyberpsychol Behav* 12: 139–45.
      https://doi.org/10.1089/cpb.2008.0070.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR121

      Landgraf, S, MO Krebs, JP Olié, G Committeri, E van der Meer, and
      A Berthoz. 2010. “Real World Referencing and Schizophrenia: Are We
      Experiencing the Same Reality?” *Neuropsychologia* 48: 2922–30.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.05.034.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR63

      Lee, K-H, JK Dixon, SA Spence, and PW Woodruff. 2006. “Time
      Perception Dysfunction in Psychometric Schizotypy.” *Personal
      Individ Differ* 40: 1363–73.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2005.10.021.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR22

      Lee, KH, PN Egleston, WH Brown, AN Gregory, AT Barker, and PW
      Woodruff. 2007. “The Role of the Cerebellum in Subsecond Time
      Perception: Evidence from Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic
      Stimulation.” *J Cogn Neurosci* 19: 147–57.
      https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2007.19.1.147.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR40

      Lewis, A. 1932. “\ `The Experience of Time in Mental
      Disorder <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19988601>`__.” *Proc
      R Soc Med* 25: 611–20.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR23

      Lewis, PA, and RC Miall. 2003a. “Brain Activation Patterns During
      Measurement of Sub- and Supra-Second Intervals.”
      *Neuropsychologia* 41: 1583–92.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0028-3932(03)00118-0.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR20

      ———. 2003b. “Distinct Systems for Automatic and Cognitively
      Controlled Time Measurement: Evidence from Neuroimaging.” *Curr
      Opin Neurobiol* 13: 250–55.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(03)00036-9.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR105

      Lindenmayer, JP, SR McGurk, A Khan, S Kaushik, A Thanju, and L
      Hoffman. 2013. “Improving Social Cognition in Schizophrenia: A
      Pilot Intervention Combining Computerized Social Cognition
      Training with Cognitive Remediation.” *Schizophr Bull* 39: 507–17.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbs120.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR96

      Machulla, TK, M Di Luca, E Froehlich, and MO Ernst. 2012.
      “Multisensory Simultaneity Recalibration: Storage of the
      Aftereffect in the Absence of Counterevidence.” *Exp Brain Res*
      217: 89–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-011-2976-5.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR55

      Martin, B, A Giersch, C Huron, and V van Wassenhove. 2013.
      “Temporal Event Structure and Timing in Schizophrenia: Preserved
      Binding in a Longer “Now”.” *Neuropsychologia* 51: 358–71.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.07.002.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR44

      Martin, B, M Wittmann, N Franck, M Cermolacce, F Berna, and A
      Giersch. 2014. “\ `Temporal Structure of Consciousness and Minimal
      Self in
      Schizophrenia <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25400597>`__.”
      *Front Psychol* 5.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR111

      Matthews, WJ, and WH Meck. 2014. “Time Perception: The Bad News
      and the Good.” *Wiley Interdiscip Rev Cogn Sci* 5: 429–46.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1298.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR16

      Mauk, MD, and DV Buonomano. 2004. “The Neural Basis of Temporal
      Processing.” *Annu Rev Neurosci* 27: 307–40.
      https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144247.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR86

      McGovern, DP, AT Astle, SL Clavin, and FN Newell. 2016.
      “Task-Specific Transfer of Perceptual Learning Across Sensory
      Modalities.” *Curr Biol* 26: R20–21.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.11.048.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR68

      Meredith, MA, JW Nemitz, and BE Stein. 1987. “Determinants of
      Multisensory Integration in Superior Colliculus Neurons. I.
      Temporal Factors.” *J Neurosci* 7: 3215–29.
      https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.07-10-03215.1987.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR67

      Meredith, MA, and BE Stein. 1986. “Spatial Factors Determine the
      Activity of Multisensory Neurons in Cat Superior Colliculus.”
      *Brain Res* 365: 350–54.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-8993(86)91648-3.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR104

      Moritz, S, CI Mahlke, S Westermann, F Ruppelt, PH Lysaker, and T
      Bock. 2018. “Embracing Psychosis: A Cognitive Insight Intervention
      Improves Personal Narratives and Meaning-Making in Patients with
      Schizophrenia.” *Schizophr Bull* 44: 307–16.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbx072.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR88

      Nagarajan, SS, DT Blake, BA Wright, N Byl, and MM Merzenich. 1998.
      “Practice-Related Improvements in Somatosensory Interval
      Discrimination Are Temporally Specific but Generalize Across Skin
      Location, Hemisphere, and Modality.” *J Neurosci* 18: 1559–70.
      https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-04-01559.1998.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR78

      Owen, M, and A Sawa. 2016. “Mortensen Pb.” *Schizophrenia Lancet*
      388: 86–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01121-6.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR42

      Parnas, J, and MG Henriksen. 2014. “Disordered Self in the
      Schizophrenia Spectrum: A Clinical and Research Perspective.”
      *Harv Rev Psychiatry* 22: 251–65.
      https://doi.org/10.1097/HRP.0000000000000040.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR19

      Paton, JJ, and DV Buonomano. 2018. “The Neural Basis of Timing:
      Distributed Mechanisms for Diverse Functions.” *Neuron* 98:
      687–705. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.03.045.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR64

      Penney, TB, WH Meck, SA Roberts, J Gibbon, and L
      Erlenmeyer-Kimling. 2005. “Interval-Timing Deficits in Individuals
      at High Risk for Schizophrenia.” *Brain Cogn* 58: 109–18.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2004.09.012.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR26

      Piras, F, and JT Coull. 2011. “Implicit, Predictive Timing Draws
      Upon the Same Scalar Representation of Time as Explicit Timing.”
      *PLoS One* 6. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0018203.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR59

      Posada, A, and N Franck. 2002. “Use and Automation of a Rule in
      Schizophrenia.” *Psychiatry Res* 109: 289–96.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-1781(02)00027-6.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR71

      Postmes, L, HN Sno, S Goedhart, J van der Stel, HD Heering, and L
      de Haan. 2014. “Schizophrenia as a Self-Disorder Due to Perceptual
      Incoherence.” *Schizophr Res* 152: 41–50.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2013.07.027.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR93

      Powers, AR, MA Hevey, and MT Wallace. 2012. “Neural Correlates of
      Multisensory Perceptual Learning.” *J Neurosci* 32: 6263–74.
      https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6138-11.2012.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR90

      Powers, AR, AR Hillock, and MT Wallace. 2009. “Perceptual Training
      Narrows the Temporal Window of Multisensory Binding.” *J Neurosci*
      29: 12265–74. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3501-09.2009.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR69

      Rochat, P. 2011. “The Self as Phenotype.” *Conscious Cogn* 20:
      109–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2010.09.012.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR122

      Rohde, M, and MO Ernst. 2016. “Time, Agency, and Sensory Feedback
      Delays During Action.” *Curr Opin Behav Sci* 8: 193–99.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2016.02.029.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR95

      Roseboom, W, D Linares, and S Nishida. 2014. “Adaptation Reveals
      Mechanisms for Enhanced Representation of Common and Novel
      Temporal Relationships.” *Procedia Soc Behav Sci* 126.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.02.320.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR110

      Rosenthal, O, S Shimojo, and L Shams. 2009. “Sound-Induced Flash
      Illusion Is Resistant to Feedback Training.” *Brain Topogr* 21:
      185–92. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10548-009-0090-9.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR114

      Servotte, J-C, M Goosse, SH Campbell, N Dardenne, B Pilote, and IL
      Simoneau. 2020. “Virtual Reality Experience: Immersion, Sense of
      Presence, and Cybersickness.” *Clin Simul Nurs* 38: 35–43.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecns.2019.09.006.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR32

      Shams, L, Y Kamitani, and S Shimojo. 2002. “Visual Illusion
      Induced by Sound.” *Brain Res Cogn Brain Res* 14: 147–52.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-6410(02)00069-1.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR60

      Simon, JR. 1969. “Reactions Toward the Source of Stimulation.” *J
      Exp Psychol* 81: 174–76. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0027448.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR116

      Slater, M, D Perez-Marcos, HH Ehrsson, and MV Sanchez-Vives. 2009.
      “Inducing Illusory Ownership of a Virtual Body.” *Front Neurosci*
      3: 214–20. https://doi.org/10.3389/neuro.01.029.2009.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR37

      Stanghellini, G, M Ballerini, S Presenza, M Mancini, A Raballo,
      and S Blasi. 2016. “\ `Psychopathology of Lived Time: Abnormal
      Time Experience in Persons with
      Schizophrenia <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25943123>`__.”
      *Schizophr Bull* 42: 45–55.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR117

      Stetson, C, X Cui, PR Montague, and DM Eagleman. 2006.
      “Motor-Sensory Recalibration Leads to an Illusory Reversal of
      Action and Sensation.” *Neuron* 51: 651–59.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2006.08.006.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR53

      Stevenson, RA, S Park, C Cochran, LG McIntosh, JP Noel, and MD
      Barense. 2017. “The Associations Between Multisensory Temporal
      Processing and Symptoms of Schizophrenia.” *Schizophr Res* 179:
      97–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2016.09.035.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR107

      Stevenson, RA, and MT Wallace. 2013. “Multisensory Temporal
      Integration: Task and Stimulus Dependencies.” *Exp Brain Res* 227:
      249–61. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-013-3507-3.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR92

      Stevenson, RA, MM Wilson, AR Powers, and MT Wallace. 2013. “The
      Effects of Visual Training on Multisensory Temporal Processing.”
      *Exp Brain Res* 225: 479–89.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3387-y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR118

      Synofzik, M, P Thier, DT Leube, P Schlotterbeck, and A Lindner.
      2009. “Misattributions of Agency in Schizophrenia Are Based on
      Imprecise Predictions about the Sensory Consequences of One’s
      Actions.” *Brain* 133: 262–71.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awp291.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR47

      Thoenes, S, and D Oberfeld. 2017. “Meta-Analysis of Time
      Perception and Temporal Processing in Schizophrenia: Differential
      Effects on Precision and Accuracy.” *Clin Psychol Rev* 54: 44–64.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2017.03.007.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR24

      Tregellas, JR, DB Davalos, and DC Rojas. 2006. “Effect of Task
      Difficulty on the Functional Anatomy of Temporal Processing.”
      *Neuroimage* 32: 307–15.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.02.036.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR61

      Ueda, N, K Maruo, and T Sumiyoshi. 2018. “Positive Symptoms and
      Time Perception in Schizophrenia: A Meta-Analysis.” *Schizophr Res
      Cogn* 13: 3–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scog.2018.07.002.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR91

      Van der Burg, E, and PT Goodbourn. 2015. “\ `Rapid, Generalized
      Adaptation to Asynchronous Audiovisual
      Speech <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25716790>`__.” *Proc
      Biol Sci* 282.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR94

      Vroomen, J, M Keetels, B de Gelder, and P Bertelson. 2004.
      “Recalibration of Temporal Order Perception by Exposure to
      Audio-Visual Asynchrony.” *Brain Res Cogn Brain Res* 22: 32–35.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.07.003.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR9

      Wittmann, M. 2013. “The Inner Sense of Time: How the Brain Creates
      a Representation of Duration.” *Nat Rev Neurosci* 14: 217–23.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3452.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR82

      Wood, L, C Williams, J Billings, and S Johnson. 2020. “A
      Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Cognitive Behavioural
      Informed Psychological Interventions for Psychiatric Inpatients
      with Psychosis.” *Schizophr Res* 222: 133–44.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2020.03.041.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR49

      Zhou, HY, XL Cai, M Weigl, P Bang, E Cheung, and R Chan. 2018.
      “Multisensory Temporal Binding Window in Autism Spectrum Disorders
      and Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders: A Systematic Review and
      Meta-Analysis.” *Neurosci Biobehav Rev* 86: 66–76.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.12.013.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR98

      Zhou, HY, EFC Cheung, and RCK Chan. 2020. “Audiovisual Temporal
      Integration: Cognitive Processing, Neural Mechanisms,
      Developmental Trajectory and Potential Interventions.”
      *Neuropsychologia* 140.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2020.107396.
