============================================================================================================
Cognitive and perceptual impairments in schizophrenia extend to other psychotic disorders but not schizotypy
============================================================================================================

Natalie Frattaroli
Mia Geljic
Dominika Runkowska
Hayley Darke
Caitlin Reddyhough
Taylor Mills
Matthew Mitchell
Rachel Hill
Olivia Carter
Suresh Sundram⁎Corresponding author at: Department of Psychiatry, School
of Clinical Sciences, Monash University, Level 3 P-Block, Monash Medical
Centre, 246 Clayton Road, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
Suresh.sundram@monash.edu\  [1]_
:Date: 2022-8-05

:Abstract:
   Well characterised cognitive and perceptual impairments in
   schizophrenia may not be diagnostically specific with some studies
   suggesting no significant differences between psychotic disorders.
   This transdiagnostic ambiguity is paralleled in the boundary
   distinctions between psychotic disorders and the sub-threshold
   symptomatology of schizotypy. The current study used the CNTRACS test
   battery to explore if performance deficits in visual integration,
   relational memory and goal maintenance were specific to schizophrenia
   or extend to other psychotic disorders; and if task performance
   varied between individuals with schizophrenia and schizotypy in
   healthy adults. The sample consisted of healthy controls, and
   patients who met DSM-IV criteria for schizophrenia, other psychotic
   disorders and non-psychotic disorders who were tested in person; and
   an online sample of self-assessed healthy adults. No significant
   differences were found in performance between patients with
   schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders in contrast to
   non-psychotic disorders and healthy controls. The high schizotypy
   group performed better on the tasks compared to the other psychoses
   and schizophrenia groups. There were no differences in the healthy
   control group between individuals with high versus low schizotypy or
   between in-person and online task performance. These findings support
   the notion that cognitive and perceptual impairments in schizophrenia
   extend to other psychotic disorders but are discontinuous with
   schizotypy. This study provides insights into similarities between
   schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders with regards to the
   potential neural substrates underpinning these functions and supports
   the use of online tools for assessing domains of cognition and
   perception.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _s0005:

1. Introduction
===============

Schizophrenia is a disorder characterised by extensive cognitive and
perceptual impairments ((McCleery and Nuechterlein 2019); (Sheffield,
Karcher, and Barch 2018)) including visual integration, relational
encoding and retrieval, and goal maintenance domains. These are relevant
to functional outcomes in schizophrenia ((Barch et al. 2009); (Green
2009); (J. Ragland et al. 2009); (Wells et al. 2015)) and have all been
demonstrably linked to neural systems ((Mukherjee et al. 2016); (Poppe
et al. 2016); (Silverstein et al. 2015); (Tripathi, Kar, and Shukla
2018)) providing opportunity for translational research ((Barch et al.
2009)).

However, the diagnostic specificity of these findings is not well
resolved and the limited literature comparing visual integration,
relational memory and goal maintenance performance across different
psychiatric illnesses, suggests that individuals with psychotic
disorders do not significantly differ in task performance. For example,
(Owoso et al. 2013) found no major quantitative differences between
schizophrenia and schizoaffective patient groups in these three domains
with both uniformly performing worse than healthy controls. Likewise,
(Smucny et al. 2020) concluded that impaired visual integration
performance was not specific to schizophrenia but also present in
bipolar I and schizoaffective disorders. This is consistent with
transdiagnostic ambiguity in cognitive and perceptual domains between
psychotic disorders ((East-Richard et al. 2020)).

To assist in the disambiguation of cognition and perception between
schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders relatively specific tasks
for cognitive and perceptual domains were identified by the Cognitive
Neuroscience Treatment Research to Improve Cognition in Schizophrenia
project (CNTRICS; (Carter and Barch 2007)) and more recently, the
CNTRACS (Cognitive Neuroscience Test Reliability and Clinical
Applications for Schizophrenia; (J. Gold 2012)) consortium. With regards
to visual integration, relational encoding and retrieval, and goal
maintenance, the Jittered Orientation Visual Integration (JOVI),
Relational and item-Specific Encoding (RiSE) and the Dot Pattern
Expectancy (DPX) tasks were respectively designated as useful measures
for these domains. The JOVI, RiSE and DPX lack significant
inter-correlation ((J. M. Gold et al. 2012); (Smucny et al. 2020))
indicating three distinctive domains of cognition and perception. These
tasks have proven psychometric characteristics as well as good construct
validity ((Jones, Sponheim, and MacDonald 2010); (J. D. Ragland et al.
2012); (Silverstein et al. 2012)) and are well tolerated by patients.

Using the JOVI, RiSE and DPX tasks, previous studies have repeatedly
demonstrated significant impairments in schizophrenia spectrum
participants compared to healthy controls ((Jones, Sponheim, and
MacDonald 2010); (Keane et al. 2014); (Poppe et al. 2016); (J. D.
Ragland et al. 2015); (Silverstein et al. 2012); (Williams et al. 2010);
(Barch et al. 2003); (Cohen et al. 1999)). These findings add support to
claims that these tasks provide valid and sensitive measures of impaired
cognitive and perceptual function specific to schizophrenia
((Lopez-Garcia et al. 2016); (J. D. Ragland et al. 2012); (Silverstein
et al. 2012)).

Therefore, the diagnostic specificity remains unresolved with existing
data conflicted about deficits overlapping with other disorders
consistent with both dimensional and categorical views of psychosis.
However, no study to date has compared performance on these tasks across
a mixed psychiatric inpatient population.

This categorical-dimensional psychosis controversy is paralleled in the
distinction between psychotic disorders and sub-threshold or
non-clinical psychotic symptomatology conceptualised as schizotypy.
Substantial evidence suggests that schizotypy and clinical schizophrenia
have significant overlap in terms of genetic, biological and
psychosocial factors ((Ripke et al. 2013)). However, whether this is as
an “endophenotype” in the general population for schizophrenia or if it
is a distributed dimension throughout the entire population is contested
((Grant, Green, and Mason 2018)). Moreover, there is limited conflicting
data as to whether the impaired cognitive and perceptual domains
observed in people with psychotic disorders also extend into schizotypy
((Ettinger et al. 2015); (Sahakyan et al. 2019)). The psychosis
continuum theory would predict, similar to psychotic symptoms, cognitive
and perceptual function would be diminished in participants with high
schizotypy compared to participants with low schizotypy ((Xavier et al.
2015)).

The current study aimed to expand the current understanding by testing
whether cognitive and perceptual dysfunction is specific to
schizophrenia compared to other psychotic and non-psychotic disorders
using the JOVI, RiSE and DPX, and if there is cognitive and perceptual
function discontinuity between schizophrenia and schizotypy in these
domains. Additionally, given the increasing use of online assessments, a
sub aim was to assess the validity of the JOVI, RiSE and DPX in an
online context.

It was hypothesised that: (1) patients with schizophrenia and other
psychotic disorders will show significantly worse performance on the
three tasks than patients with non-psychotic disorders and healthy
controls; and (2a) healthy controls with high schizotypy scores will
show similar but milder patterns of cognitive impairment compared to
patients with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, and (2b) that
there will be a negative association between schizotypy and performance
on the tasks.

.. _s0010:

2. Methods
==========

.. _s0015:

2.1. Participants
-----------------

The in-person sample was recruited from patients admitted to adult
psychiatric inpatient units at two metropolitan hospitals (the Northern
Hospital and the Monash Medical Centre) in Melbourne, Australia and
opportunistically from staff, students and colleagues. Participants were
patients who met DSM-IV (4th ed, Text Revision; DSM-IV-TR; (2000))
criteria for schizophrenia and a range of other psychotic and
non-psychotic disorders as assessed by an independent consultant
psychiatrist, and healthy controls who did not meet criteria for any
disorder.

The online sample initially consisted of 153 participants. Three
participants did not meet the age criterion, three used psychotropic
medication and 36 had very poor task performance (i.e., accuracy below
chance level). The final online sample consisted of 111 self-assessed
healthy adults from Australia and the UK.

Participation was voluntary, consent was informed (in-person study),
participants could withdraw from the study at any time and participants
were reimbursed for their time. Ethical approvals were obtained from the
Melbourne Health and Monash University Human Research Ethics Committees.

.. _s0020:

2.2. Materials
--------------

.. _s0025:

2.2.1. Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The PANSS measures positive symptoms, negative symptoms and general
psychopathology through an assessment of behavioural manifestations via
interview and reports from family members and hospital staff ((Kay,
Fiszbein, and Opler 1987)). It comprises 30 items and each item is
scored from one to seven, ascending in severity.

.. _s0030:

2.2.2. Community Assessment of Psychic Experiences (CAPE)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The CAPE is a 42 item self-report psychological inventory which measures
the level of schizotypy in an individual ((Stefanis et al. 2002)). The
measure is not used to diagnose people but to assess the severity of
schizotypy characteristics in the general population.

.. _s0035:

2.2.3. Jittered Orientation Visual Integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The JOVI task is composed of a background of Gabor elements, which
correspond to the primary visual cortex receptive field organization,
placed at various orientations ((Silverstein et al. 2012)). Participants
are required to identify fragmented egg shapes amongst this array and
judge whether the shapes point towards the left or right by tapping the
left and right arrow keys on their keyboard ((Silverstein et al. 2012)).

.. _s0040:

2.2.4. Computerised item Specific and Relational Memory Cognitive Task
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The RiSE is a psychometrically valid and reliable measure of relational
and item-specific memory for healthy adults and individuals with
schizophrenia ((J. D. Ragland et al. 2012)). It involves four subtasks
which measure item specific encoding, relational encoding, item specific
retrieval and relational retrieval.

.. _s0045:

2.2.5. The Dot Pattern Expectancy Task
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The DPX task was used to measure goal maintenance. Participants were
required to respond after a cue and probe stimuli and received auditory
feedback after each stimulus. The DPX has shown to be a reliable measure
of goal maintenance with a high internal consistency ((Jones, Sponheim,
and MacDonald 2010)). To minimise response bias, response patterns were
used to compute d'Context scores of overall sensitivity. Correct hits on
the target “AX” trials were calculated as: (Correct
hits + 0.05) / (Total target trials + 1); and the false alarms on the
rule-based “BX” trials as (False alarms + 0.05) / (Total rule-based
trials + 1). d'Context scores were then computed using a formula
recommended by (Macmillan and Creelman 1996): d'Context = z(Hit
rate) − z(False alarms).

.. _s0050:

2.3. Procedure
--------------

.. _s0055:

2.3.1. In-person study
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All in-person participants first completed a demographics questionnaire
that screened for eligibility, and assessed age, gender, education
level, diagnosis, illness duration, substance use and psychiatric
history. Participants then commenced the tasks: JOVI, RiSE and DPX,
where instructions were read aloud to every participant and participants
completed practice trials for that task. Practice trials were
administered as per the CNTRACS protocols ((Silverstein et al. 2012);
(J. D. Ragland et al. 2012); (Jones, Sponheim, and MacDonald 2010)) and
when criteria were met participants proceeded to the task questions.
Note that in-person participation varied between tasks (specific
participant numbers and demographic details for each task are in `Table
6 <#t0030>`__). The in-person participants also completed the NART
(National Adult Reading Test; (Nelson and Wilson 1991)) and patients
were administered the PANSS. Participants were permitted to take a short
break between task blocks if required. The overall duration of the
in-person study was approximately 4 h.

.. _s0060:

2.3.2. Online schizotypy study
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The study was advertised online via the Amazon MTurk recruitment
website. Participants were asked to read the eligibility criteria and
the study information sheet before providing their consent. Participant
task submissions were de-identified through MTurk's process of assigning
anonymous Worker Number IDs. Participants first completed a demographics
form providing their computer screen dimensions and resolution, age,
country of birth, education level, employment status, gender, medical
conditions and medications and primary language. Participants were then
redirected to `Pavlovia.org <http://Pavlovia.org>`__, where they
commenced the three cognitive tasks. The order of the JOVI, RiSE and DPX
tasks varied between participants to account for differences in
performance due to task order. Practice trials were embedded at the
beginning of each of the tasks. After this, participants completed the
CAPE. The duration of the study was approximately 1 h, however
participants had 3 h available to complete the tasks.

.. _s0065:

2.4. Statistical analyses
-------------------------

Spearman's correlational analyses were performed to assess any
confounding effects of age, on d'Context, RiSE, JOVI, CAPE-42, and PANSS
scores. Age was identified as a confounding variable in JOVI and RiSE
in-person and online samples. No moderating variables were found in the
DPX in-person sample, but age and education level were identified in the
DPX online sample.

To assess the size and direction of the linear association between
performance on the cognitive and perceptual tasks and scores on the
PANSS and its component subscales for the patient group, a Spearman's
rank correlation coefficient (*r*\ :sub:`s`) was calculated with a
Bonferroni adjusted α level of 0.016 (0.05/3) per test. To assess the
size and direction of the linear association between performance on the
cognitive tasks and scores on the CAPE and its component subscales for
the online healthy control group, a Spearman's rank correlation
coefficient (*r*\ :sub:`s`) was calculated with a Bonferroni adjusted α
level of 0.016 (0.05/3) per test. Unless otherwise stated, an alpha
level (α) of 0.05 was used in the analyses.

.. _s0070:

3. Results
==========

.. _s0075:

3.1. Demographic and clinical data
----------------------------------

Demographic information including sample size, sex, age and location for
all participant groups and in each of the tasks is shown in `Table
1 <#t0005>`__.Table 1Demographic data for both online and in-person
participant groups.Table 1DPXRiSEJOVIOnline HCIn-person
HCSZPSNon-PSOnline HCIn-person HCSZPSNon-PSOnline HCIn-person
HCSZPSNon-PSN10520161281112017991022013118Sex Female401064441107563910484 Male64101084691010436310934M\ :sub:`age`
(SD)30.60 (8.81)28.00 (12.1)37.10 (8.1)33.80 (8.5)31.00 (7.5)30.20
(8.78)25.70 (8.34)38.35 (5.93)38.33 (10.05)45.33 (12.69)31.01
(8.93)28.00 (12.09)38.60 (9.30)34.50 (8.49)31.00
(7.54)Location UK495147 Australia566055 [2]_

.. _s0080:

3.2. Symptom and schizotypy ratings
-----------------------------------

The descriptive statistics for the PANSS scores associated with the
psychiatric inpatient sample are provided in `Table 2 <#t0010>`__. As
the online samples were not fully overlapping, descriptive statistics
for the CAPE measures relating to the participants included in the JOVI,
RiSE and DPX task analyses are provided in `Table 3 <#t0015>`__.Table
2Descriptive statistics (mean (standard deviation)) for Positive and
Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) total and subscale scores for all
participants in the in-person psychiatric inpatient study.Table 2PANSS
totalPANSS positivePANSS negativePANSS disorganisedPANSS general
psychopathologyJOVI dataset73.31 (13.92)18.09 (5.89)16.88 (6.83)20.56
(7.55)38.34 (7.06)RiSE dataset52.43 (9.44)15.11 (6.30)10.77 (3.62)15.63
(4.89)26.54 (4.87)DPX dataset74.17 (14.55)18.53 (5.97)16.92 (6.91)21.33
(7.70)38.72 (7.47) [3]_Table 3Descriptive statistics (mean (standard
deviation)) for Community Assessment of Psychic Experiences (CAPE) total
and subscale scores for all participants in the online schizotypy
study.Table 3CAPE totalCAPE positiveCAPE negativeCAPE depressiveJOVI
dataset70.96 (15.50)1.46 (0.34)1.89 (0.53)1.90 (0.52)RiSE dataset70.60
(15.22)1.46 (0.34)1.88 (0.52)1.88 (0.51)DPX dataset71.09 (15.40)1.47
(0.34)1.90 (0.52)1.90 (0.52) [4]_

.. _s0085:

3.3. Between group differences in task performance
--------------------------------------------------

.. _s0090:

3.3.1. JOVI
~~~~~~~~~~~

An ANCOVA, covarying for age, between the online healthy control,
in-person healthy control, non-psychosis, other psychoses, and
schizophrenia patient groups revealed statistically significant
differences in JOVI scores (F(4, 98) = 4.762, p = .001,
η\ :sup:`2`\ :sub:`g` = 0.163). As shown in `Fig. 1 <#f0005>`__\ A,
controlling for age, Tukey post hoc analyses revealed the in-person
healthy controls (*M* = 0.77, *SD* = 0.06) performed significantly
better on the JOVI than the non-psychosis (*M* = 0.68, *SD* = 0.07), the
other psychoses (*M* = 0.67, *SD* = 0.08) and the schizophrenia groups
(*M* = 0.67, *SD* = 0.09). There were no significant differences between
the online healthy controls (*M* = 0.73, *SD* = 0.07) and the in-person
healthy controls.Fig. 1Group comparisons of performance on the A.
Jittered Orientation Visual Integration (JOVI); B. Computerised item
Specific and Relational Memory Cognitive Task (RiSE); and C. Dot
Expectancy Task expressed as d'Context (see `Methods <#s0010>`__). Lines
over plots represent groups which were significantly different.
\*p < .05; \**p < .01; HC = healthy control.Fig. 1

.. _s0095:

3.3.2. RiSE
~~~~~~~~~~~

An ANCOVA, covarying for age, revealed a significant main effect between
groups (F(4,160) = 17.93, p < .001, η\ :sup:`2`\ :sub:`g` = 0.310) on
RiSE task performance (`Fig. 1 <#f0005>`__\ B). Tukey post hoc analyses
revealed RiSE scores were significantly higher for online (*M* = 11.20,
*SD* = 4.32) and in-person (*M* = 9.25, *SD* = 4.20) healthy control
groups compared to the schizophrenia group (*M* = 1.82, *SD* = 4.92).
There were also significant differences between the online healthy
control group and the other psychoses (*M* = 3.89, *SD* = 5.73) and the
non-psychosis (*M* = 5.89, *SD* = 4.73) groups. No other significant
differences were found.

.. _s0100:

3.3.3. DPX
~~~~~~~~~~

A Kruskal-Wallis test demonstrated statistically significant differences
in performance on the DPX task between groups (Chi square = 37.07,
p < .001, df = 5, η\ :sup:`2`\ :sub:`H` = 0.305) (`Fig.
1 <#f0005>`__\ C). Multiple comparison post-hoc analyses with Dunn's
test revealed that schizophrenia patients had significantly lower
d'Context scores (*M* = 0.11, *SD* = 0.57) than online (*M* = 0.70,
*SD* = 0.23) and in-person (*M* = 0.82, *SD* = 0.15) healthy controls.
There were no significant differences in performance on the task between
patients with schizophrenia, non-psychosis (*M* = 0.92, *SD* = 0.05) and
other psychoses groups (*M* = 0.72, *SD* = 0.22).

.. _s0105:

3.4. Association between symptom profiles and schizotypy scores and task performance
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _s0110:

3.4.1. In-person study
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For both, RiSE overall accuracy and DPX ranked d'Context scores, there
were significant negative correlations with PANSS total scores, and the
positive and disorganised subscales (`Table 4 <#t0020>`__).Table
4Spearman's correlations between overall task accuracy for the Jittered
Orientation Visual Integration (JOVI) (n = 32), Computerised item
Specific and Relational Memory Cognitive Task (RiSE) (n = 35) and Dot
Expectancy Task (n = 36) and Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale
(PANSS) total and sub-scale scores for all participants in the in-person
psychiatric inpatient study.Table 4TaskPANSS totalPANSS positivePANSS
negativePANSS disorganisedPANSS generalJOVI0.048 (0.799)−0.176
(0.336)0.089 (0.630)−0.226 (0.214)0.108 (0.556)RiSE−0.419
(0.012)\ `⁎ <#tf0005>`__\ −0.473 (0.004)\ `⁎ <#tf0005>`__\ −0.230
(0.184)−0.456 (0.006)\ `⁎ <#tf0005>`__\ −0.030 (0.866)DPX−0.41
(0.012)\ `⁎ <#tf0005>`__\ −0.63 (<0.001)\ `⁎ <#tf0005>`__\ −0.05
(0.780)−0.60 (<0.001)\ `⁎ <#tf0005>`__\ −0.15 (0.387) [5]_

.. _s0115:

3.4.1.1. Psychotropic medication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Antipsychotic drug doses (expressed as chlorpromazine equivalents) and
benzodiazepine drug doses (expressed as diazepam equivalents) (`Table
6 <#t0030>`__) showed no significant differences between patient groups
for those completing the RiSE and DPX tasks. For those completing the
JOVI task, Kruskal-Wallis analysis demonstrated statistically
significant differences in antipsychotic doses between clinical groups
(F(2,32) = 8.07, p < .018) with a pairwise Wilcoxon analysis showing
significantly higher doses in the Other Psychoses (M\ :sub:`D` = 254.56,
p = .042) and the Schizophrenia (M\ :sub:`D` = 321.07, p = .036) groups
compared to the Non-Psychosis group. However, there were no differences
in benzodiazepine doses for this group. Antipsychotic drug dose did not
significantly correlate with task performance on the JOVI (r = −0.099,
p = .589), RiSE (r = 0.217, p = .345) or DPX (r = −0.941, p = .354); nor
did benzodiazepine drug dose and task performance on the JOVI
(r = −0.24, p = .184), RiSE (r = 0.087, p = .777) or DPX (r = 0.695,
p = .492).

.. _s0120:

3.4.2. Online study
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As shown in `Table 5 <#t0025>`__, there were no statistically
significant associations between performance on the cognitive tasks and
scores on the CAPE and its component subscales.Table 5Spearman's
correlations between overall task accuracy for the Jittered Orientation
Visual Integration (JOVI), Computerised item Specific and Relational
Memory Cognitive Task (RiSE) and Dot Expectancy Task and Community
Assessment of Psychic Experiences (CAPE) total and subscale scores for
all participants in the online schizotypy study.Table 5CAPE totalCAPE
positiveCAPE negativeCAPE depressiveJOVI dataset0.067 (0.506)0.038
(0.711)0.056 (0.575)0.053 (0.598)RiSE dataset−0.146 (0.131)−0.192
(0.045)−0.100 (0.301)−0.063 (0.514)DPX dataset−0.12 (0.223)−0.01
(0.912)−0.12 (0.218)−0.20 (0.039) [6]_Table 6Diagnostic and treatment
data for the in-person psychiatric participant groups.Table 6RiSE
patient groupDPX patient groupJOVI patient groupSchizophrenia
group First episode psychosis001 Schizoaffective
disorder1086 Schizophrenia786Other Psychoses group Post-partum
psychosis011 Bipolar affective disorder198 Depression with psychotic
features011 Complex PTSD111Non-Psychosis group Depression455 Depression
with comorbid anxiety111 Substance abuse122 Borderline personality
disorder100Medication Antipsychotics293028 Benzodiazepines17108  Chlorpromazine
equivalent (mg)RiSE patient groupDPX patient groupJOVI patient groupMean
(SD\ `a <#tf0010>`__)Mean (SD)Mean (SD)Antipsychotics daily
dose Schizophrenia group621.82 (529.16)487.86 (390.88)437.78
(383.59) Other Psychoses group298.00 (118.83)369.00 (224.04)371.27
(234.77) Non-Psychosis group154.00 (169.72)233.25 (151.71)116.71
(159.44)Benzodiazepine daily dose (mg) Schizophrenia group23.00
(32.52)12.50 (5.00)10.00 (0.00) Other Psychoses group17.50 (13.92)8.33
(2.89)10.00 (0.00) Non-Psychosis group21.00 (19.17)13.33 (5.77)13.33
(5.77) [7]_ [8]_ [9]_

.. _s0125:

3.4.2.1. Online schizotypy sample versus in-person healthy controls cognitive function
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As shown in `Fig. 2 <#f0010>`__, there were no significant differences
in task performance between the online low and high schizotypy groups
and in-person healthy controls. Low and high schizotypy groups were
formed by splitting the online group into quartiles based on total CAPE
score and selecting the lowest and highest quartiles.Fig. 2Group
comparisons between the online low and high schizotypy and in-person
healthy control (HC; *n* = 20) groups of performance on the A. Jittered
Orientation Visual Integration (JOVI; *n*\ :sub:`low` = 27,
*n*\ :sub:`high` = 25); B. Computerised item Specific and Relational
Memory Cognitive Task (RiSE; *n*\ :sub:`low` = 29,
*n*\ :sub:`high` = 28); and C. Dot Expectancy Task expressed as
d'Context (see `Methods <#s0010>`__; *n*\ :sub:`low` = 27,
*n*\ :sub:`high` = 28).Fig. 2

.. _s0130:

4. Discussion
=============

Visual integration, relational memory and goal maintenance are processes
that are commonly impaired in individuals with schizophrenia, though
substantially less is known about how these cognitive impairments relate
to other psychotic disorders and schizotypy.

This study first explored if impairments in these tasks were specific to
schizophrenia or if they generalised to other psychotic and
non-psychotic disorders. While clear differences were seen between
individuals with a diagnosis of schizophrenia and healthy controls, no
differences were found between patients with schizophrenia or other
psychoses. These findings contrast with claims regarding the diagnostic
specificity of impaired performance on the JOVI, RiSE and DPX tasks but
are consistent with other work similarly demonstrating that cognitive
and perceptual impairments observed in schizophrenia extend to other
psychotic disorders ((Barch et al. 2003); (Owoso et al. 2013); (Smucny
et al. 2020)). These findings align with a dimensional perspective of
cognitive and perceptual dysfunction in psychotic disorders
differentiating them from non-psychotic disorders and potential
confounds such as medication. Moreover, the diagnostic heterogeneity
within the other psychoses group and the correlational relationships
with psychotic symptoms is suggestive of some possible common mechanisms
underlying both these symptoms and cognitive and perceptual domains
independent of diagnosis.

The current study further aimed to investigate whether there is
continuity in function between schizotypy in healthy controls and
patients diagnosed with schizophrenia, across the domains of goal
maintenance, relational memory, and contour integration. The hypothesis
that healthy controls with high schizotypy scores will show similar but
milder patterns of cognitive impairment compared to patients with
schizophrenia was not supported. Results for the RiSE and DPX tasks
showed no significant difference between the high and low schizotypy
groups and both were superior to the schizophrenia group. In the case of
the JOVI measure of contour integration, the difference between the
performance of the online healthy control group was not significantly
different from the schizophrenia group however there was again no
significant difference between high and low schizotypy group. These
findings demonstrate some discontinuity in cognitive and perceptual
performance between schizophrenia and people with high schizotypy. This
could be consistent with the transition to schizophrenia requiring
additional factors to those for psychosis-like symptoms including
different neural substrates for sub-threshold symptoms and cognitive and
perceptual functioning. These data could also be consistent with a sharp
demarcation between schizophrenia and schizotypy in the general
population. Until now there have been no studies comparing the
performance of healthy controls with high schizotypy against
schizophrenia patients on the JOVI, RiSE and DPX. Therefore, this study
is the first to demonstrate that cognitive and perceptual performance in
these three domains is not dimensional along a sub-threshold
non-clinical to clinical psychosis continuum.

Moreover, we found no statistically significant correlation between task
performance and schizotypy scores and no difference in task performance
when the healthy control group was dichotomised into high versus low
schizotypy. This argues against cognitive and perceptual impairments in
psychosis sharing a transitional profile into a non-clinical
psychosis-like dimension. The current findings are consistent with a
recent study ((Sahakyan et al. 2019)), which found no correlation
between relational memory and overall schizotypy levels. However, it
contrasts with earlier work showing a gradation of increasing cognitive
task impairments from low to high schizotypy that was accompanied by
brain activity changes consistent with those seen in individuals with
schizophrenia ((Ettinger et al. 2015); (Xavier et al. 2015)).

The study also sought to determine whether the online and in-person
versions of the JOVI, RiSE and DPX tasks produced similar performance
levels across two different non-clinical samples. Our results showed no
statistically significant differences between the online and the
in-person healthy control group task scores. This demonstrates for the
first time the validity of using the JOVI, RiSE and DPX tasks in an
online setting, at least in the general population.

While the online format did not allow for a fully controlled study
environment, which may have influenced the outcome, it had other
advantages over in-person assessment. Implementing computerized
cognitive tasks and collecting data in a novel online format allowed
efficient sample recruitment. Additionally, despite the participants in
patient groups receiving different medication types and doses, there
were no statistically significant differences in task performance and
there were no significant correlations between task performance and drug
dose. Thus, it is unlikely that medication significantly influenced the
results of the current study. As is reflected in the PANSS scores
presented in `Table 4 <#t0020>`__, illness severity in the in-patient
participant groups is mild-moderate which was considered sufficiently
stable to manage participation in the tasks, and unlikely to have
influenced task performance. Finally, it is possible that the lack of
significant group differences between psychiatric groups on the CNTRACS
measures may be due to low statistical power as a result of small sample
sizes for the in-person patient groups.

The current study's findings support the notion that cognitive and
perceptual impairments in schizophrenia extend to other psychotic
disorders but are discontinuous with schizotypy. Our findings suggest
that cognitive deficits that are present in schizophrenia are not
present in individuals with high schizotypy and it therefore does not
support schizotypy as a useful construct to study cognitive and
perceptual deficits in schizophrenia. This study provides insights into
similarities between schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders with
regards to the potential neural substrates underpinning these cognitive
and perceptual functions.

.. _s0135:

Ethical approval
================

Ethical approval for the study was given by the Melbourne Health (for
the Northern Hospital site and in-person healthy control arms) and
Monash University (for the Monash Medical Centre site and online arms)
Human Research Ethics Committees and all participants gave informed
consent.

.. _s0140:

Funding sources
===============

Funding was provided by internal departmental research funds.

.. _s0145:

CRediT authorship contribution statement
========================================

NF, MG and DR: investigation, formal analysis, writing – original
draftHD: methodology, software, formal analysis, project administration,
supervision, resources, writing – review and editingCR, TM and MM:
investigation, formal analysisRH: supervision, resources, writing –
review and editingOC: conceptualisation, methodology, supervision,
resources, funding acquisition, writing – review and editingSS:
conceptualisation, supervision, resources, funding acquisition, writing
– review and editing.

Declaration of competing interest
=================================

Authors report no potential conflicts of interest relevant to the
current paper.

We thank Ms Sumathy Sathiyamoorthy at the Northern Hospital and all
staff of the adult psychiatric inpatients units at both the Northern
Hospital and Monash Medical Centre for assistance with recruitment of
participants.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0005

      2000.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0015

      Barch, D.M., M.G. Berman, R. Engle, J.H. Jones, J. Jonides, A.
      MacDonald, D.E. Nee, T.S. Redick, and S.R. Sponheim. 2009.
      “\ `CNTRICS Final Task Selection: Working
      Memory <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18990711>`__.”
      *Schizophr. Bull.* 35 (1): 136–52.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0010

      Barch, D.M., C.S. Carter, A.W. MacDonald, T.S. Braver, and J.D.
      Cohen. 2003. “Context-Processing Deficits in Schizophrenia:
      Diagnostic Specificity, 4-Week Course, and Relationships to
      Clinical Symptoms.” *J. Abnorm. Psychol.* 112 (1): 132–43.
      https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-843X.112.1.132.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0020

      Carter, C.S., and D.M. Barch. 2007. “\ `Cognitive
      Neuroscience-Based Approaches to Measuring and Improving Treatment
      Effects on Cognition in Schizophrenia: The CNTRICS
      Initiative <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17630405>`__.”
      *Schizophr. Bull.* 33 (5): 1131–37.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0030

      Cohen, J.D., D.M. Barch, C. Carter, and D. Servan-Schreiber. 1999.
      “Context-Processing Deficits in Schizophrenia: Converging Evidence
      from Three Theoretically Motivated Cognitive Tasks.” *J. Abnorm.
      Psychol.* 108 (1): 120–33.
      https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-843X.108.1.120.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0035

      East-Richard, C., R.-A. Mercier, D. Nadeau, and C. Cellard. 2020.
      “Transdiagnostic Neurocognitive Deficits in Psychiatry: A Review
      of Meta-Analyses.” *Can. Psychol.* 61 (3): 190–214.
      https://doi.org/10.1037/cap0000196.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0040

      Ettinger, U., C. Mohr, D. Gooding, A. Cohen, A. Rapp, C.
      Haenschel, and S. Park. 2015. “Cognition and Brain Function in
      Schizotypy: A Selective Review.” *Schizophr. Bull.* 41 (Suppl. 2):
      S417–26. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbu190.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0045

      Gold, J. 2012. “Cognitive Neuroscience Test Reliability and
      Clinical Applications for Schizophrenia.” *Schizophr. Bull.* 38
      (1). https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbr173.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0050

      Gold, J.M., D.M. Barch, C.S. Carter, S. Dakin, S.J. Luck, A.W.
      MacDonald, D. Ragland, et al. 2012. “\ `Clinical, Functional, and
      Intertask Correlations of Measures Developed by the Cognitive
      Neuroscience Test Reliability and Clinical Applications for
      Schizophrenia
      Consortium <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22101961>`__.”
      *Schizophr. Bull.* 38 (1): 144–52.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0055

      Grant, P., M.J. Green, and O.J. Mason. 2018. “Models of
      Schizotypy: The Importance of Conceptual Clarity.” *Schizophr.
      Bull.* 44 (suppl_2): S556–63.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sby012.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0060

      Green, M.F. 2009. “New Possibilities in Cognition Enhancement for
      Schizophrenia.” *Am. J. Psychiatry* 166 (7): 749–52.
      https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2009.09050610.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0065

      Jones, J.A., S.R. Sponheim, and A.W. MacDonald. 2010. “\ `The Dot
      Pattern Expectancy Task: Reliability and Replication of Deficits
      in
      Schizophrenia <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20230159>`__.”
      *Psychol. Assess.* 22 (1): 131–41.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0070

      Kay, S.R., A. Fiszbein, and L.A. Opler. 1987. “\ `The Positive and
      Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) for
      Schizophrenia <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3616518>`__.”
      *Schizophr. Bull.* 13 (2): 261–76.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0075

      Keane, B.P., G. Erlikhman, S. Kastner, D. Paterno, and S.M.
      Silverstein. 2014. “Multiple Forms of Contour Grouping Deficits in
      Schizophrenia: What Is the Role of Spatial Frequency.”
      *Neuropsychologia* 65: 221–33.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.10.031.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0080

      Lopez-Garcia, P., T.A. Lesh, T. Salo, D.M. Barch, A.W. MacDonald,
      J.M. Gold, J.D. Ragland, M. Strauss, S.M. Silverstein, and C.S.
      Carter. 2016. “\ `The Neural Circuitry Supporting Goal Maintenance
      During Cognitive Control: A Comparison of Expectancy AX-CPT and
      Dot Probe Expectancy
      Paradigms <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26494483>`__.”
      *Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci.* 16 (1): 164–75.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0085

      Macmillan, N.A., and C.D. Creelman. 1996. “\ `Triangles in ROC
      Space: History and Theory of “Nonparametric” Measures of
      Sensitivity and Response
      Bias <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24213864>`__.” *Psychon.
      Bull. Rev.* 3 (2): 164–70.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0090

      McCleery, A., and K.H. Nuechterlein. 2019. “\ `Cognitive
      Impairment in Psychotic Illness: Prevalence, Profile of
      Impairment, Developmental Course, and Treatment
      Considerations <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31749648>`__.”
      *Dialogues Clin. Neurosci.* 21 (3): 239–48.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0095

      Mukherjee, P., A. Sabharwal, R. Kotov, A. Szekely, R. Parsey, D.M.
      Barch, and A. Mohanty. 2016. “Disconnection Between Amygdala and
      Medial Prefrontal Cortex in Psychotic Disorders.” *Schizophr.
      Bull.* 42 (4): 1056–67. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbw012.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0100

      Nelson, H.E., and J. Wilson. 1991. Windsor, UK: NFER-Nelson.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0105

      Owoso, A., C. Carter, J. Gold, A. MacDonald, J. Ragland, S.M.
      Silverstein, M.E. Strauss, and D.M. Barch. 2013. “Cognition in
      Schizophrenia and Schizo-Affective Disorder: Impairments That Are
      More Similar Than Different.” *Psychol. Med.* 43 (12): 2535–45.
      https://doi.org/10.1017/s0033291713000536.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0110

      Poppe, A.B., D.M. Barch, C.S. Carter, J.M. Gold, J.D. Ragland,
      S.M. Silverstein, and A.W. MacDonald. 2016. “Reduced
      Frontoparietal Activity in Schizophrenia Is Linked to a Specific
      Deficit in Goal Maintenance: A Multisite Functional Imaging
      Study.” *Schizophr. Bull.* 42 (5): 1149–57.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbw036.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0120

      Ragland, J.D., C. Ranganath, D.M. Barch, J.M. Gold, B. Haley, A.W.
      MacDonald, S.M. Silverstein, M.E. Strauss, A.P. Yonelinas, and
      C.S. Carter. 2012. “Relational and Item-Specific Encoding (RISE):
      Task Development and Psychometric Characteristics.” *Schizophr.
      Bull.* 38 (1): 114–24. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbr146.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0125

      Ragland, J.D., C. Ranganath, M.P. Harms, D.M. Barch, J.M. Gold, E.
      Layher, T.A. Lesh, et al. 2015. “Functional and Neuroanatomic
      Specificity of Episodic Memory Dysfunction in Schizophrenia: A
      Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study of the Relational and
      Item-Specific Encoding Task.” *JAMA Psychiatry* 72 (9): 909–16.
      https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.0276.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0115

      Ragland, J., A. Laird, C. Ranganath, R. Blumenfeld, S. Gonzales,
      and D. Glahn. 2009. “Prefrontal Activation Deficits During
      Episodic Memory in Schizophrenia.” *Am. J. Psychiatry* 166 (8):
      863–74. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2009.08091307.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0130

      Ripke, S., C. O'Dushlaine, K. Chambert, J.L. Moran, A.K. Kahler,
      S. Akterin, S.E. Bergen, et al. 2013. “Genome-Wide Association
      Analysis Identifies 13 New Risk Loci for Schizophrenia.” *Nat.
      Genet.* 45 (10): 1150–59. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2742.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0135

      Sahakyan, L., T.R. Kwapil, Y. Lo, and L. Jiang. 2019. “Examination
      of Relational Memory in Multidimensional Schizotypy.” *Schizophr.
      Res.* 211: 36–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2019.07.031.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0140

      Sheffield, J., N. Karcher, and D. Barch. 2018. “Cognitive Deficits
      in Psychotic Disorders: A Lifespan Perspective.” *Neuropsychol.
      Rev.* 28 (4): 509–33. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11065-018-9388-2.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0150

      Silverstein, S.M., M.P. Harms, C.S. Carter, J.M. Gold, B.P. Keane,
      A. MacDonald, J.D. Ragland, and D.M. Barch. 2015. “Cortical
      Contributions to Impaired Contour Integration in Schizophrenia.”
      *Neuropsychologia* 75: 469–80.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.07.003.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0145

      Silverstein, S.M., B.P. Keane, D.M. Barch, C.S. Carter, J.M. Gold,
      I. Kovacs, A. MacDonald, J.D. Ragland, and M.E. Strauss. 2012.
      “Optimization and Validation of a Visual Integration Test for
      Schizophrenia Research.” *Schizophr. Bull.* 38 (1): 125–34.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbr141.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0155

      Smucny, J., A. Iosif, N. Eaton, T. Lesh, J. Ragland, D.M. Barch,
      J.M. Gold, et al. 2020. “Latent Profiles of Cognitive Control,
      Episodic Memory, and Visual Perception Across Psychiatric
      Disorders Reveal a Dimensional Structure.” *Schizophr. Bull.* 46
      (1): 154–62. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbz025.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0160

      Stefanis, N.C., M. Hanssen, N.K. Smirnis, D.A. Avramopoulos, I.K.
      Evdokimidis, C.N. Stefanis, H. Verdoux, and J. Van Os. 2002.
      “Evidence That Three Dimensions of Psychosis Have a Distribution
      in the General Population.” *Psychol. Med.* 32 (2): 347–58.
      https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291701005141.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0165

      Tripathi, A., S.K. Kar, and R. Shukla. 2018. “Cognitive Deficits
      in Schizophrenia: Understanding the Biological Correlates and
      Remediation Strategies.” *Clin. Psychopharmacol. Neurosci.* 16
      (1): 7–17. https://doi.org/10.9758/cpn.2018.16.1.7.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0175

      Wells, R., V. Swaminathan, S. Sundram, D. Weinberg, J. Bruggemann,
      I. Jacomb, V. Cropley, et al. 2015. “The Impact of Premorbid and
      Current Intellect in Schizophrenia: Cognitive, Symptom, and
      Functional Outcomes.” *NPJ Schizophr.* 1 (1): 1–8.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/npjschz.2015.43.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0180

      Williams, L.E., A. Must, S. Avery, A. Woolard, N.D. Woodward, N.J.
      Cohen, and S. Heckers. 2010. “Eye-Movement Behavior Reveals
      Relational Memory Impairment in Schizophrenia.” *Biol. Psychiatry*
      68 (7): 617–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.05.035.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bb0185

      Xavier, S., M.W. Best, S. Schorr, and C.R. Bowie. 2015.
      “Neurocognition, Functional Competence and Self-Reported
      Functional Impairment in Psychometrically Defined Schizotypy.”
      *Cogn. Neuropsychiatry* 20 (1): 53–63.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/13546805.2014.969419.

.. [1]
   These authors contributed equally to this work.

.. [2]
   DPX = Dot Expectancy Task, RiSE = Computerised item Specific and
   Relational Memory Cognitive Task, JOVI = Jittered Orientation Visual
   Integration, HC = healthy control, SZ = schizophrenia, PS = other
   psychoses, Non-PS = non-psychosis.

.. [3]
   JOVI = Jittered Orientation Visual Integration, RiSE = Computerised
   item Specific and Relational Memory Cognitive Task, DPX = Dot
   Expectancy Task.

.. [4]
   JOVI = Jittered Orientation Visual Integration, RiSE = Computerised
   item Specific and Relational Memory Cognitive Task, DPX = Dot
   Expectancy Task.

.. [5]
   p < .016.

.. [6]
   Values in parentheses are p-values.

.. [7]
   Numbers reported are *n* unless otherwise stated.

.. [8]
   JOVI = Jittered Orientation Visual Integration, RiSE = Computerised
   item Specific and Relational Memory Cognitive Task, DPX = Dot
   Expectancy Task; PTSD = post-traumatic stress disorder.

.. [9]
   SD = standard deviation.
