==================================================================================================================
Cost analysis of lurasidone for the treatment of schizophrenia in adolescents and adults within the United Kingdom
==================================================================================================================

Amy Dymond
Daniela Afonso
Will Green
:Date: 2022-8-25

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background

   Schizophrenia is a serious mental health condition characterised by
   distortions in thought processes, perception, mood, sense of self,
   and behaviour. Lurasidone, a second-generation atypical
   antipsychotic, represents an additional treatment option alongside
   existing antipsychotics for adolescents and adults with
   schizophrenia. An economic model was developed to evaluate the
   incremental costs of lurasidone as a first-line treatment option
   compared to existing antipsychotics.

   .. rubric:: Methods

   A Markov model was developed to estimate the cost impact of
   lurasidone as a first-line treatment option for both adolescents and
   adults. The sequence-based model incorporated the following health
   states: stable (no relapse or discontinuation), discontinuation (due
   to adverse events or other reasons), and relapse. Data used to
   determine the movement of patients between health states were
   obtained from network meta-analyses (NMAs). The time horizon ranged
   from three to five years (depending on the patient population) and a
   six-weekly cycle length was used. Unit costs and resource use were
   reflective of the UK NHS and Personal Social Services and consisted
   of the following categories: outpatient, adverse events, primary and
   residential care. Extensive deterministic sensitivity analysis was
   undertaken to assess the level of uncertainty associated with the
   base case results.

   .. rubric:: Results

   Lurasidone is demonstrated to be cost-saving as a first-line
   treatment within the adolescent and adult populations when compared
   to second-line and third-line respectively. Lurasidone is more
   expensive in terms of treatment costs, resource use (in the stable
   health state) and the treatment of adverse events. However, these
   costs are outweighed by the savings associated with the relapse
   health state. Lurasidone remains cost-saving when inputs are varied
   in sensitivity analysis and scenario analysis.

   .. rubric:: Conclusions

   Lurasidone is a cost-saving first-line treatment for schizophrenia
   for both adolescents and adults.

   .. rubric:: Supplementary Information

   The online version contains supplementary material available at
   10.1186/s12913-022-08436-x.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _Sec1:

Background
==========

Schizophrenia is a serious mental health characterised by distortions in
thought processes, perception, mood, sense of self, and behaviour
[(Mental Disorders: Schizophrenia 2019)]. The symptoms of schizophrenia
are typically characterised as positive (such as hallucinations,
delusions, and movement disorders), negative (such as emotional apathy,
lack of motivation and social withdrawal) and cognitive (such as
impairment in cognitive functioning reduced attention span and memory
problems) [(Schizophrenia - Topic 2019)]. Schizophrenia can have a
detrimental effect on personal, social, educational, and occupational
functioning and place a heavy burden on parents and carers [(Psychosis
and Schizophrenia in Children and Young People: Recognition and
Management (Cg155). London 2013)]. Whilst there is no cure for
schizophrenia, evidence shows that it can be treated effectively using
pharmacological and psychosocial therapies [(n.d.a)]. Most
pharmacological interventions target dopamine pathways in the brain and
can broadly be classified into typical and atypical antipsychotics
[(Miyamoto et al. 2012)].

Lurasidone is a second-generation atypical antipsychotic with a license
for the treatment of schizophrenia in both adolescents and adults
[(n.d.b)]. Lurasidone represents an additional treatment option
alongside existing antipsychotics for adolescents and adults with
schizophrenia. There are currently no restrictions on treatment lines of
schizophrenia therapy within the UK, and the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) advise that “the choice of
antipsychotic medication should be made by the service user and
healthcare professional together” [(n.d.c)–(Barnes et al. 2020)].

An economic model was developed to demonstrate the cost impact of
lurasidone as a first-line treatment option when compared to alternative
antipsychotics for the treatment of schizophrenia in both adolescents
and adults from the perspective of the NHS and Personal Social Services.
It is anticipated that this analysis will be beneficial to physicians
when determining the order in which antipsychotics should be prescribed
to adolescents and adults with schizophrenia in the United Kingdom.

.. _Sec2:

Methods
=======

.. _Sec3:

Patient populations
-------------------

The economic model generated results for three distinct populations of
people with schizophrenia, adolescents aged 13–17 years, adolescents
aged 15–17 years, and adults (aged 18 years and over) [(n.d.b)]. It was
necessary to model three distinct populations because lurasidone and
haloperidol are currently the only second-generation atypical
antipsychotics licensed for patients with schizophrenia between the age
of 13–15 [(n.d.b), (Haloperidol Oral Solution BP 10 Mg/5 Ml 2018)]. The
treatment options were extended to aripiprazole or paliperidone once
patients reached the age of 15 [(Aripiprazole 5mg Tablets 2020), (Invega
3 Mg Prolonged-Release Tablets 2018)]. Alternative antipsychotics are
licensed for patients aged 18 and over (brexpiprazole and cariprazine).
Therefore, patients within the adult population were able to receive
either lurasidone, brexpiprazole or cariprazine upon entry to the model.

.. _Sec4:

Model overview
--------------

A Markov sequenced-based model was developed in Microsoft Excel to
assess the cost impact of lurasidone as a first-line treatment when
compared to second-line and third-line within the adolescent and adult
populations respectively (Fig. `1 <#Fig1>`__). The model structure, and
corresponding assumptions, was designed in alignment with an economic
model developed by NICE to inform the clinical guideline of
schizophrenia in adults and a model submitted to NICE for the appraisal
of aripiprazole for the treatment of schizophrenia in adolescents aged
15–17 years [(Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Adults: The NICE Guideline
on Treatment and Management. 2014), (Aripiprazole for the Treatment of
Schizophrenia in People Aged 15 to 17 Years (Ta213) 2011)].Fig.
1Schematic of base case model structure

A hypothetical cohort with diagnosed schizophrenia entered the model and
received first-line treatment with either lurasidone, or an alternative
antipsychotic, and their condition was classified as stable (the patient
was continuing to receive treatment with no relapse). Following the
first six-weekly cycle, patients either:Remained in the stable health
state;Experienced a relapse;Discontinued treatment due to intolerable
side effects/adverse events;Discontinued treatment for any other reasons
except relapse or the presence of intolerable side effects;Died.

In alignment with the aforementioned NICE models, patients discontinuing
first-line treatment due to intolerable side effects/adverse events were
assumed to switch to second-line antipsychotic therapy [(Psychosis and
Schizophrenia in Adults: The NICE Guideline on Treatment and Management.
2014), (Aripiprazole for the Treatment of Schizophrenia in People Aged
15 to 17 Years (Ta213) 2011)]. Patients discontinuing first-line
treatment due to other reasons were assumed to stop treatment abruptly
and move onto no treatment where they remained until they experienced a
relapse. All patients experiencing a relapse were assumed to stop any
antipsychotic drug that they had been receiving whilst in the stable
health state and, instead, were treated for the acute relapse episode.
Following relapse, patients either returned to their previous
antipsychotic medication (if they had previously discontinued treatment
for other reasons) or switched to second-line treatment. Patients
discontinuing treatment because of intolerable side effects, or other
reasons, were assumed not to experience a relapse for the remaining
duration of the cycle within which discontinuation occurred.

It was assumed that the discontinuation of an antipsychotic because of
intolerable side effects only occurred during the first six weeks of
use. However, discontinuation due to other reasons was possible across
the remainder of cycles within the model. Patients may have also
experienced side effects that did not lead to discontinuation (tolerable
side effects). In these cases, it was assumed that patients continued to
take the antipsychotic until they discontinued it for any other reason.
It was also possible for patients to die within any health state.

A six-weekly cycle was chosen to align with the follow-up period
included within the network meta-analyses (NMA) that were used to inform
treatment discontinuation within the model [(Watkins et al. 2021),
(Sanderson et al. 2020)]. All transitions in the model, for purposes of
estimations of costs, were assumed to occur in the middle of each cycle.
The number of weeks and/or years that a patient spent in each health
state was estimated over the time horizon of the model. Time horizons of
five and three years were used within the adolescent populations
(13–17 years and 15–17 years respectively) to replicate the maximum
duration an individual would remain within their initial patient group
before being considered an adult. A time horizon of five years was used
within the adult population.

The model structure for the adult population was very similar across the
adolescent and adult populations. However, the treatment sequences (and
subsequent efficacy and safety data), differed across the populations
(as presented below). The choice of treatment sequence was determined
followed consultation with clinicians. The specific sequences were
chosen because they reflected current and expected clinical practice at
the time of publication.Adolescent (aged 13–17 years and
15–17 years):Intervention: Lurasidone, haloperidol, aripiprazole,
paliperidone and clozapine vs;Comparator: Haloperidol, lurasidone,
aripiprazole, paliperidone and clozapine.Please note that patients could
not receive aripiprazole or paliperidone until they reached the age of
15.Adult (aged 18 and over):Intervention: Lurasidone, cariprazine,
brexpiprazole and clozapine vs;Comparator: Cariprazine, brexpiprazole,
lurasidone and clozapine.

.. _Sec5:

Data sources and model parameters
---------------------------------

All clinical and safety inputs used to inform the transition of patients
throughout the model are presented in Table `1 <#Tab1>`__.Table
1Clinical input data used in
modelAntipsychoticSix-weekly\ **DiscontinuationRelapse ≥ 7% weight
gainEPSAdverse eventsOther reasons**\ Lurasidone: adolescents
(80 mg)1.3% [(Watkins et al. 2021)]8.8% [(Watkins et al. 2021)]2.1%
[(Kearns et al. 2021)]5.9% [(Huhn et al. 2019)]28.7% [(Huhn et al.
2019)]Haloperidol (3 mg)8.0% [(Srisurapanont et al. 2021)]7.5% [(Huhn et
al. 2019)]4.9% [(n.d.d)]9.7% [(Huhn et al. 2019)]46.2% [(Huhn et al.
2019)]Paliperidone (6 mg)3.4% [(Watkins et al. 2021)]3.8% [(Watkins et
al. 2021)]1.9% [(Kearns et al. 2021)]14.7% [(Huhn et al. 2019)]23.8%
[(Huhn et al. 2019)]Aripiprazole (10 mg)15.3% [(Watkins et al.
2021)]25.7% [(Watkins et al. 2021)]4.6% [(Kearns et al. 2021)]9.0%
[(Huhn et al. 2019)]19.5% [(Huhn et al. 2019)]Lurasidone: adults
(148 mg)7.6% [(Sanderson et al. 2020)]18.2% [(Sanderson et al.
2020)]2.1% [(Kearns et al. 2021)]5.9% [(Huhn et al. 2019)]28.7% [(Huhn
et al. 2019)]Brexpiprazole (4 mg)5.6% [(Sanderson et al. 2020)]25.6%
[(Sanderson et al. 2020)]2.5% [(Kearns et al. 2021)]13.5% [(Huhn et al.
2019)]23.7% [(Huhn et al. 2019)]Cariprazine (6 mg)8.5% [(Sanderson et
al. 2020)]28.8% [(Sanderson et al. 2020)]3.7% [(Kearns et al. 2021)]5.6%
[(Huhn et al. 2019)]32.7% [(Huhn et al. 2019)]ClozapineNA5.4% [(Huhn et
al. 2019)]4.9% [(Kishimoto et al. 2013)]33.3% [(Why Does Clozapine Cause
Weight Gain? 2013)]6.8% [(Huhn et al. 2019)]No treatmentNANA7.1%
[(Kearns et al. 2021)]NANA

.. _Sec6:

Clinical efficacy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Treatment efficacy was determined by the length of time patients spent
within the stable health state throughout the model time horizon.

.. _FPar1:

Discontinuation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The six-weekly probabilities of discontinuation due to intolerable
adverse events and other reasons associated with the adolescent and
adult populations were informed by two separate NMAs [(Watkins et al.
2021), (Sanderson et al. 2020)]. The first NMA was designed to estimate
the efficacy and safety of lurasidone, brexpiprazole and cariprazine as
treatments for schizophrenia. The systematic review used to inform the
feasibility assessment of this NMA only identified one trial within the
adolescent population and, therefore, this NMA was limited to the adult
population. The second NMA focused on treatments specifically licensed
for adolescents (lurasidone, aripiprazole, paliperidone and
haloperidol).

The outputs of both NMAs were used to inform the odds ratios of
discontinuation, compared to placebo, associated with each of the
interventions. Based on these odds ratios, the odds of discontinuation
with each intervention could then be estimated when compared with
placebo. All odds were then converted to a probability to facilitate
inclusion in the economic model. Discontinuation due to a lack of
efficacy, as reported in the NMA, was assumed to be a suitable proxy for
discontinuation due to other reasons. No studies assessing either the
efficacy or the safety of haloperidol were identified from the
systematic literature review informing the second NMA. Furthermore,
clozapine was not included within either NMA. Therefore, the
probabilities of discontinuation associated with haloperidol and
clozapine were obtained from alternative sources [(Huhn et al. 2019),
(Srisurapanont et al. 2021)]. Further information regarding the
derivation of the six-weekly discontinuation probabilities is presented
within the supplementary material (Sect. `1.2 <#MOESM1>`__).

.. _FPar2:

Relapse
^^^^^^^

The probability of relapse was dependent on the latest antipsychotic
treatment received and identified from a targeted literature search. As
relapse rates were not considered within the NMAs used to inform the
discontinuation parameters described above, the relative risks of
relapse associated with the majority of interventions (except
haloperidol and clozapine), compared to placebo, were obtained from an
alternative NMA that was identified from a targeted literature search
[(Kearns et al. 2021)]. The definition of relapse used within this NMA
was dependent on that used in each of the clinical trials. The most
common definitions of relapse were a rating scale-based criteria,
hospital admission or a combination of the two. The annual relapse rate
associated with placebo was converted to a six-weekly probability to
account for the cycle length within the model [(Gidwani 2014)]. The
relative risk of each antipsychotic, taken from the NMA, was then used
to estimate the six-weekly probability of relapse associated with each
active intervention.

The relative risks of relapse associated with haloperidol and clozapine
were obtained from alternative sources because they were not included
within the NMA previously described [(Kearns et al. 2021), (n.d.d)]. The
relapse rate associated with no treatment was assumed to be equal to
placebo. Further information regarding the estimation of relapse rates
used within the model is provided within the supplementary material
(Sect. `1.3 <#MOESM1>`__).

.. _FPar3:

Adverse Events
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The model incorporated one-off treatment costs for two adverse events
that are not necessarily intolerable nor lead patients to discontinue
treatment: weight gain of ≥ 7% and extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS). These
adverse events were assumed to occur within the first six weeks of
treatment and, therefore, one-off treatment costs were applied within
the base case analysis.

An NMA of randomised controlled trials of 32 antipsychotics was used to
determine the relative risk of a patient experiencing a ≥ 7% increase in
weight compared to placebo, except for clozapine which was not reported
[(Huhn et al. 2019)]. The probability of a ≥ 7% weight gain associated
with clozapine was obtained from an NHS research study which reported
that a third of patients’ experienced ≥ 7% weight gain over three years
[(Why Does Clozapine Cause Weight Gain? 2013)]. This NMA was also used
to determine the relative risk of a patient requiring antiparkinsonian
medication when taking each antipsychotic compared to placebo (the use
of antiparkinsonian medication was used as a proxy for the requirement
of treatment for EPS symptoms) [(Huhn et al. 2019)]. Further information
regarding the adverse event inputs used within the model is provided
within the supplementary material (Sect. `1.4 <#MOESM1>`__).

.. _FPar4:

Mortality
^^^^^^^^^

An all-cause mortality risk, sourced from UK age-related population
norms, was applied to all patients when alive within the model
[(National Life Tables: UK (2017 to 2019) 2021)]. However, there is
evidence that the risk of death associated with schizophrenia is greater
than the general population. In particular, the authors of a systematic
review concluded that the mean standardised mortality ratio (SMR)
associated with schizophrenia was 2.6 for all populations [(McGrath et
al. 2008)]. Therefore, this SMR was applied to the age-related
population norm mortality data to generate schizophrenia-specific values
suitable for the model. It was assumed that the risk of death was
independent of specific antipsychotic drug use, or health state, owing
to a lack of sufficient data to support an alternative hypothesis.

.. _Sec7:

Costs
~~~~~

Four types of costs were captured in the model: treatment acquisition,
medication switching, health state-specific and adverse event management
(Table `2 <#Tab2>`__).Table 2Cost inputs used in model\ **DrugPrice per
packPackagingDaily cost**\ Lurasidone (adolescents) (80 mg)£90.72
[(n.d.e)]28 × 74 mg tablets£3.50Lurasidone (adults) (148 mg)£90.72
[(n.d.e)]28 × 74 mg tablets£6.48Haloperidol (3 mg)£4.48 [(Drugs and
Pharmaceutical Electronic Market Information Tool (eMIT) 2021)]5 mg/5 ml
100 ml solution£0.13Paliperidone (6 mg)£97.28 [(n.d.f)]28 × 6 mg
tablets£3.47Aripiprazole (10 mg)£0.59 [(Drugs and Pharmaceutical
Electronic Market Information Tool (eMIT) 2021)]28 × 5 mg
tablets£0.04Brexpiprazole (4 mg)\ :sup:`a`\ £104.4728 × 6 mg
tablets£2.49Cariprazine (6 mg)£80.36 [(n.d.g)]28 × 6 mg
tablets£2.87Clozapine (325 mg)£6.32 [(Drugs and Pharmaceutical
Electronic Market Information Tool (eMIT) 2021)]84 × 25 mg
tablets£0.98\ **ItemTotal six-weekly costs (per
patient)StableRelapse**\ Outpatient, primary, community care and
residential care (adults)£2,000 [(Psychosis and Schizophrenia in
Children and Young People: Recognition and Management (Cg155). London
2013), (Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Adults: The NICE Guideline on
Treatment and Management. 2014), (Drugs and Pharmaceutical Electronic
Market Information Tool (eMIT) 2021), (n.d.h)–(Curtis and Burns
2007)]£27,906 [(Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Children and Young
People: Recognition and Management (Cg155). London 2013), (Psychosis and
Schizophrenia in Adults: The NICE Guideline on Treatment and Management.
2014), (Drugs and Pharmaceutical Electronic Market Information Tool
(eMIT) 2021), (n.d.h)–(Curtis and Burns 2007)]Outpatient, primary,
community care and residential care (adolescents)£701 [(Psychosis and
Schizophrenia in Children and Young People: Recognition and Management
(Cg155). London 2013), (Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Adults: The NICE
Guideline on Treatment and Management. 2014), (Drugs and Pharmaceutical
Electronic Market Information Tool (eMIT) 2021), (n.d.h)–(Curtis and
Burns 2007)]£28,692 [(Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Children and Young
People: Recognition and Management (Cg155). London 2013), (Psychosis and
Schizophrenia in Adults: The NICE Guideline on Treatment and Management.
2014), (Drugs and Pharmaceutical Electronic Market Information Tool
(eMIT) 2021), (n.d.h)–(Curtis and Burns 2007)]\ **ItemWeight GainAcute
EPS**\ Total cost per adverse event£92 [(Psychosis and Schizophrenia in
Children and Young People: Recognition and Management (Cg155). London
2013), (Aripiprazole for the Treatment of Schizophrenia in People Aged
15 to 17 Years (Ta213) 2011), (Drugs and Pharmaceutical Electronic
Market Information Tool (eMIT) 2021), (n.d.h)–(Curtis and Burns
2007)]£220 [(Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Adults: The NICE Guideline
on Treatment and Management. 2014), (Drugs and Pharmaceutical Electronic
Market Information Tool (eMIT) 2021), (n.d.h)–(Curtis and Burns
2007)]\ :sup:`a` Assumed to be 30% more expensive than cariprazine
(assumption based on current pricing data provided by Angelini on Czech
Republic, Denmark, Finland, Italy, Norway, and Slovenia)

.. _FPar5:

Treatment acquisition
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The unit costs for haloperidol, aripiprazole and clozapine were obtained
from NHS EMIT, which provides prices for generic drugs in England
[(Drugs and Pharmaceutical Electronic Market Information Tool (eMIT)
2021)]. Unit costs for all other treatments were sourced from the BNF
except for brexpiprazole. The unit cost of brexpiprazole is not yet
publicly available and was assumed to be 30% greater than cariprazine.
Patient monitoring costs were also applied to patients receiving
clozapine because the prescribing physician must register themselves, a
nominated pharmacist, and the patient with the Clozaril Patient
Monitoring Service, as outlined in the Summary of Product
Characteristics [(Clozaril 25mg and 100mg Tablets 2020)]. These
requirements equate to monitoring costs associated with approximately
three blood tests per six-weekly cycle.

.. _FPar6:

Medication switching
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Patients moving to the next line of treatment (due to relapse or
discontinuation) or returning to the same treatment, following at least
one cycle receiving no treatment, incurred costs associated with three
visits to a consultant psychiatrist [(National Schedule of NHS Costs
2018/19 2021)].

.. _FPar7:

Health state
^^^^^^^^^^^^

It was assumed that adult patients within the stable health state either
resided within a private household, residential care (sheltered or
group), or long-term hospital care (77, 18, 2 and 3% respectively)
[(Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Adults: The NICE Guideline on Treatment
and Management. 2014)]. Adolescent patients within the stable health
state were assumed to reside in a private household only and, therefore,
did not incur any residential costs.

Patients experiencing relapse were assumed to receive inpatient
treatment within an acute hospital or remain at home whilst receiving
support through mental health services (a distribution of 77.30 and
22.70% respectively) [(Haloperidol Oral Solution BP 10 Mg/5 Ml 2018)].
It was assumed that adolescents and adults receiving treatment at home
received support from the crisis resolution team for adults with mental
health problems and child & adolescent mental health services (CAMHS)
respectively. It was also assumed that patients stopped taking their
previous antipsychotic medication while in the relapse health state, and
instead, receive olanzapine at a dose of 10 mg/day [(n.d.h)]. Six-weekly
outpatient, primary and community care costs were also applied to
patients within the stable and relapse health states (supplementary
tables `7 <#MOESM1>`__, `8 <#MOESM1>`__ and `9 <#MOESM1>`__).

.. _FPar8:

Adverse event
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All adverse events were assumed to present within the first six weeks
and, therefore, these costs were applied upfront within the model
(within the first cycle that a patient received each antipsychotic). All
patients experiencing ≥ 7% weight gain were assumed to require two
visits to their GP for general advice. In addition, 20% of patients
received special advice from a dietician (two visits required). It was
assumed that all patients requiring treatment for EPS would attend an
additional psychiatrist outpatient appointment and receive procyclidine
for three months [(Drugs and Pharmaceutical Electronic Market
Information Tool (eMIT) 2021), (National Schedule of NHS Costs 2018/19
2021)]. It was assumed that the resource use associated with each
adverse event did not differ by patient age (i.e., it was the same for
both adolescents and adults).

All unit costs in the model were inflated to the 2019/20 price year
using the most recent Pay and Prices Index within the Personal Social
Services Research Unit [(n.d.i)] and are presented in Table
`2 <#Tab2>`__. Further details associated with the elicitation of these
costs is presented with the supplementary material (supplementary table
`10 <#MOESM1>`__).

.. _Sec8:

Sensitivity analysis
--------------------

Deterministic sensitivity analysis (DSA) was conducted to account for
first-order uncertainty around all clinical effectiveness, cost, and
adverse event parameters. Parameters were varied using associated 95%
credible intervals where available. All other parameters were varied
by ± 20%.

Probabilistic sensitivity analysis (PSA) was undertaken with 1,000 model
simulations. Log-normal distributions were fitted to the relative risks
and/or odds ratios used to inform the probability of discontinuation and
adverse events. Gamma distributions were fitted to the disutility and
resource use parameters. In the absence of data on the variability
around the sampling distribution of mean values, the standard error was
assumed to be equal to 25% of the mean.

.. _Sec9:

Results
=======

The results presented in Table `3 <#Tab3>`__ and `4 <#Tab4>`__ are based
upon the following treatment sequences:Table 3Base case results (per
patient)\ **Total cost (five-years)Intervention sequenceComparator
sequenceDifference**\ Adolescent
(13–17 years)£100,288£103,375-£3,088\ **Total cost
(three-years)Intervention sequenceComparator
sequenceDifference**\ Adolescent
(15–17 years)£52,274£54,214-£1,939\ **Total cost
(five-years)Intervention sequenceComparator sequenceDifference**\ Adults
(18 years and over)£141,558£142,355-£797Table 4Number of relapses (per
patient)\ **Total number of relapses (five-years)Intervention
sequenceComparator sequenceDifference**\ Adolescent
(13–17 years)2.6692.781-0.112\ **Total number of relapses
(three-years)Intervention sequenceComparator
sequenceDifference**\ Adolescent (15–17 years)1.2141.297-0.082\ **Total
number of relapses (five-years)Intervention sequenceComparator
sequenceDifference**\ Adults (18 years and over)2.4072.456-0.049

Adolescent (aged 13–17 years and 15–17 years):Intervention: Lurasidone,
haloperidol, aripiprazole, paliperidone and clozapine vs;Comparator:
Haloperidol, lurasidone, aripiprazole, paliperidone and clozapine.Please
note that patients could not receive aripiprazole or paliperidone until
they reached the age of 15.Adult (aged 18 and over):Intervention:
Lurasidone, cariprazine, brexpiprazole and clozapine vs;Comparator:
Cariprazine, brexpiprazole, lurasidone and clozapine.

The three-year and five-year base case results demonstrate that
lurasidone is cost-saving when used as a first-line treatment, compared
to second-line and third-line, within the adult and adolescent
populations respectively. Lurasidone as a first-line treatment is more
expensive in terms of treatment costs and resource use in the stable
health state in all populations. However, lurasidone is associated with
a lower number of relapses in all populations. Therefore, these
increased costs are outweighed by the savings associated with the
relapse health state meaning lurasidone is cost-saving as a first-line
treatment when compared to lurasidone as a third-line treatment. A
further cost breakdown by resource category is presented within the
supplementary appendix (supplementary Sect. `1.5.6 <#MOESM1>`__).

.. _Sec10:

Sensitivity analysis
--------------------

The results of the DSA (as presented within the `supplementary
appendix <#MOESM1>`__) show that the discontinuation rate (due to other
reasons) associated with lurasidone is the primary driver of the cost
model results when all other inputs remain constant at base case
settings. Discontinuation rates (due to intolerable adverse events and
other reasons), relapse and residential costs associated with relapse
are also key drivers of the model results. Only the discontinuation rate
due to other reasons associated with lurasidone caused lurasidone to
become cost-incurring as a first-line treatment when compared to
second-line, in the adolescent (aged 13–17 population). No other inputs
cause lurasidone to become cost-incurring when varied across the three
populations. Tornado plots for each of the populations are presented
within the supplementary material (see supplementary
Figs. `1 <#MOESM1>`__, `2 <#MOESM1>`__ and `3 <#MOESM1>`__).

The results of the PSA are similar to the base case analysis in all
populations, with lurasidone as a first-line treatment being cost-saving
in all populations (see supplementary Figs. `4 <#MOESM1>`__,
`5 <#MOESM1>`__ and `6 <#MOESM1>`__). Lurasidone as a starting treatment
was cost-saving in 86.5%, 76.8% and 70.4% of iterations within the
13–17, 13–15 and 18 years and above populations respectively.

.. _Sec11:

Discussion
==========

The results of the cost model indicate that lurasidone is cost-saving as
a first-line treatment for schizophrenia versus second-line, and
third-line, within both the adolescent (aged 13–17 and 15–17 years) and
adult populations respectively. Lurasidone is associated with greater
treatment, stable health state and adverse event costs when used as a
first-line treatment within all populations. However, these additional
costs are outweighed by the cost-savings incurred through patients
spending less time within the relapse health state. Therefore, there
could be savings to the NHS for the optimisation of schizophrenia
treatment sequences, namely through the use of lurasidone earlier in the
sequence.

The model only considers the cost implications of the use of lurasidone
as first-line treatment compared to second and third-line (within the
adolescent and adult populations respectively), with no consideration of
the patient health-related quality of life (which considers the impact
that a disease has on a patient’s functioning and well-being). However,
it is expected that patients would experience a reduction in quality of
life whilst receiving treatment for a relapse episode. Lurasidone is
associated with a lower relapse rate and, therefore, it is expected that
lurasidone may also lead to a greater quality of life when taken as
first-line rather than second and third-line within the adolescent and
adult populations, respectively. The increased quality of life
associated with lurasidone as a first-line treatment should be
demonstrated through further research.

The authors are aware of one previous economic evaluation estimating the
cost-utility of lurasidone compared to aripiprazole (both followed by
amisulpride and clozapine) in adults with schizophrenia [(Rajagopalan et
al. 2016)]. The results of this economic evaluation are not directly
comparable to this study, because it was conducted from a Scottish
perspective, and compared different treatment options. However, although
the treatment sequence containing lurasidone was associated with higher
drug, outpatient and residential costs across both the present and
Scottish models, these additional costs were outweighed by savings
associated with relapse (which contributed to the greatest proportion of
costs).

.. _Sec12:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

The incremental cost of several different treatment sequences could be
assessed using the model and several assumptions were made regarding the
treatment sequences modelled. The NICE guidelines do not outline any
specific treatment sequences and, as such, the sequences modelled may
not reflect the order of antipsychotics received by all patients with
schizophrenia within the UK. Furthermore, whilst there are similar modes
of action between comparators, it is unclear whether the efficacy of
subsequent lines of treatment is independent of treatments received
previously. Limited evidence was available regarding the potential
degradation in treatment effects if a patient had taken an alternative
treatment previously. Due to a lack of alternative information to
suggest otherwise, the model currently assumes the efficacy of each
intervention is not dependent upon the treatment line.

One strength of this model is that the implementation of a Markov model
allows the long-term costs of schizophrenia to be estimated and allows
sufficient time for patients to receive all treatments within the
sequence. The model structure within the adolescent (aged 13–17 years)
population also takes into consideration the fact that treatment options
change once patients reach the age of 15, due to licencing differences.
The structure of the model, and its inputs, also align with an economic
model developed by NICE to inform the clinical guideline of
schizophrenia in adults and a model submitted to NICE for the appraisal
of aripiprazole (TA213) for the treatment of schizophrenia in
adolescents aged 15–17 years [(Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Adults:
The NICE Guideline on Treatment and Management. 2014), (Aripiprazole for
the Treatment of Schizophrenia in People Aged 15 to 17 Years (Ta213)
2011)].

The probability of discontinuation due to intolerable adverse events and
other reasons, relapse rates and probability of intolerable adverse
events were informed by NMAs [(Watkins et al. 2021), (Sanderson et al.
2020), (Huhn et al. 2019), (Zhao et al. 2016)–(Leucht et al. 2009)].
NMAs are robust sources of efficacy data, since they use both direct and
indirect evidence to estimate the comparative efficacy of several
interventions to each other and reduce bias caused by differences in
trial designs and populations [(n.d.j)]. Therefore, the efficacy data
used to inform the model is likely to be particularly robust. However,
it was not possible to identify one NMA that reported all the outcomes
required to populate the model.

It should be noted that the NMAs used to inform the discontinuation
parameters produced results for individual dosages of each
antipsychotic, rather than as a combination. However, a wide range of
dosages for each intervention are used throughout the UK (the rates for
each dose are uncertain). Whilst efficacy data were applied in the model
for the doses that are expected to be the most commonly used (according
to the BNF and summary of product characteristics), the discontinuation
efficacy parameters are unlikely to be reflective of the whole patient
population within the UK receiving each antipsychotic given the
variation in the doses administered.

The six-weekly probability discontinuation of haloperidol due to
intolerable adverse events was also taken from an NMA analysis of the
dose–response effects of lurasidone on acute schizophrenia
[(Srisurapanont et al. 2021)]. This NMA reported results of the opposite
direction for all dosages of lurasidone, which may positively bias the
adolescent results in favour of lurasidone. It must also be noted that
the confidence intervals were extremely wide across all NMA results and,
therefore, these inputs are associated with uncertainty.

.. _Sec13:

Conclusions
===========

Lurasidone is demonstrated to be cost-saving when used earlier in the
schizophrenia treatment sequence, within all populations, because
patients receiving this treatment spend less time within the relapse
health state (which is the most-costly health state).

Supplementary Information
=========================

.. _Sec14:

**Additional file 1.** Supplementary materials.

BNF
   British National Formulary

CAMHS
   Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services

DSA
   Deterministic Sensitivity Analysis

EMIT
   Electronic Market Information Tool

EPS
   Extrapyramidal Symptoms

GP
   General Practitioner

NHS
   National Health Service

NICE
   National Institute for Health and Care Excellence

NMA
   Network Meta-Analysis

PSA
   Probabilistic Sensitivity Analysis

SMR
   Standardised Mortality Ratio

UK
   United Kingdom

YHEC
   York Health Economics Consortium

The authors are grateful to Katy Wilson at YHEC for leading the
development of the NMAs. The authors are grateful to Fiorenza Puricelli
and Simona Boccaletti at Angelini for providing feedback throughout the
development of the model.

Conceptualisation—AD, DA and WG; methodology—AD, DA and WG; writing
(original draft preparation) – AD and DA; writing (review and editing) –
AD and WG; project administration—AD. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.

The research study was funded by Angelini.

All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this
published article [and its supplementary information file].

This article is based on previously conducted studies and does not
contain any new studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors. Therefore, ethical approval and consent to
participate was not required along with the statement for guidelines.

Not applicable.

All authors are employees of York Health Economics Consortium who were
commissioned by Angelini to provide consultancy, develop the economic
model, and write the manuscript.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR4

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR6

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR7

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR20

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR26

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR28

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR29

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR30

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR31

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR40

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR11

      *Aripiprazole 5mg Tablets*. 2020.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR14

      *Aripiprazole for the Treatment of Schizophrenia in People Aged 15
      to 17 Years (Ta213)*. 2011.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR9

      Barnes, TR, R Drake, C Paton, SJ Cooper, B Deakin, and IN Ferrier.
      2020. “Evidence-Based Guidelines for the Pharmacological Treatment
      of Schizophrenia: Updated Recommendations from the British
      Association for Psychopharmacology.” *J Psychopharmacol* 34 (1):
      3–78. https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881119889296.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR34

      *Clozaril 25mg and 100mg Tablets*. 2020.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR33

      Curtis, L, and A Burns. 2007. *Unit Costs of Health and Social
      Care*.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR27

      *Drugs and Pharmaceutical Electronic Market Information Tool
      (eMIT)*. 2021.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR23

      Gidwani, R. 2014. *Deriving Transition Probabilities for Decision
      Models*.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR10

      *Haloperidol Oral Solution BP 10 Mg/5 Ml*. 2018.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR18

      Huhn, M, A Nikolakopoulou, J Schneider-Thoma, M Krause, M Samara,
      and N Peter. 2019. “Comparative Efficacy and Tolerability of 32
      Oral Antipsychotics for the Acute Treatment of Adults with
      Multi-Episode Schizophrenia: A Systematic Review and Network
      Meta-Analysis.” *The Lancet* 394 (10202): 939–51.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(19)31135-3.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR12

      *Invega 3 Mg Prolonged-Release Tablets*. 2018.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR17

      Kearns, B, K Cooper, A Cantrell, and C Thomas. 2021.
      “Schizophrenia Treatment with Second-Generation Antipsychotics: A
      Multi-Country Comparison of the Costs of Cardiovascular and
      Metabolic Adverse Events and Weight Gain.” *Neuropsychiatr Dis
      Treat* 17: 125–37. https://doi.org/10.2147/NDT.S282856.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR21

      Kishimoto, T, V Agarwal, T Kishi, S Leucht, JM Kane, and CU
      Correll. 2013. “Relapse Prevention in Schizophrenia: A Systematic
      Review and Meta-Analysis of Second-Generation Antipsychotics
      Versus First-Generation Antipsychotics.” *Mol Psychiatry* 18 (1):
      53–66. https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2011.143.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR39

      Leucht, S, D Arbter, RR Engel, W Kissling, and JM Davis. 2009.
      “How Effective Are Second-Generation Antipsychotic Drugs? A
      Meta-Analysis of Placebo-Controlled Trials.” *Mol Psychiatry* 14
      (4): 429–47. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4002136.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR25

      McGrath, J, S Saha, D Chant, and J Welham. 2008. “Schizophrenia: A
      Concise Overview of Incidence, Prevalence, and Mortality.”
      *Epidemiol Rev* 30 (1): 67–76.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/epirev/mxn001.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR1

      *Mental Disorders: Schizophrenia*. 2019.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR5

      Miyamoto, S, N Miyake, LF Jarskog, WW Fleischhacker, and JA
      Lieberman. 2012. “Pharmacological Treatment of Schizophrenia: A
      Critical Review of the Pharmacology and Clinical Effects of
      Current and Future Therapeutic Agents.” *Mol Psychiatry* 17 (12):
      1206–27. https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2012.47.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR24

      *National Life Tables: UK (2017 to 2019)*. 2021.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR35

      *National Schedule of NHS Costs 2018/19*. 2021.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR13

      *Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Adults: The NICE Guideline on
      Treatment and Management.* 2014.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR3

      *Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Children and Young People:
      Recognition and Management (Cg155). London*. 2013.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR36

      Rajagopalan, K, D Trueman, L Crowe, D Squirrell, and A Loebel.
      2016. “Cost-Utility Analysis of Lurasidone Versus Aripiprazole in
      Adults with Schizophrenia.” *Pharmacoeconomics* 34 (7): 709–21.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s40273-016-0405-0.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR16

      Sanderson, A, R McCool, H Wood, M Bunney, and A Phalguni. 2020.
      *Systematic Review and Feasibility Assessment for a Network
      Meta-Analysis of Treatments for Schizophrenia [Crd42020167883]*.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR2

      *Schizophrenia - Topic*. 2019.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR19

      Srisurapanont, M, S Suttajit, S Likhitsathian, B Maneeton, and N
      Maneeton. 2021. “A Network Meta-Analysis of the Dose–Response
      Effects of Lurasidone on Acute Schizophrenia.” *Sci Rep* 11 (1):
      1–3. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-79139-8.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR15

      Watkins, D, K Wilson, H Wood, S Beale, J Patterson, and B Mclean.
      2021. *Systematic Review, Feasibility Assessment and Network
      Meta-Analysis of Treatments for Adolescents with Schizophrenia
      [Crd42021244609]*.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR22

      *Why Does Clozapine Cause Weight Gain?* 2013.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR37

      Zhao, YJ, L Lin, M Teng, AL Khoo, LB Soh, and TA Furukawa. 2016.
      “Long-Term Antipsychotic Treatment in Schizophrenia: Systematic
      Review and Network Meta-Analysis of Randomised Controlled Trials.”
      *BJPsych Open* 2 (1): 59–66.
      https://doi.org/10.1192/bjpo.bp.115.002576.
