===============================================================================================================================
The Cumulative Effect of Antipsychotic Usage on Mortality in Schizophrenia: A Nationwide Population-based Cohort Study in Korea
===============================================================================================================================

Gyurin Kim
Soo Jung Rim
Minkyung Jo
Min Geu Lee
Se Jin Park
Subin Park\ **Address for correspondence:** Subin Park Mental Health
Research Institute, National Center for Mental Health, 127 Yongmasan-ro,
Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 04933, Korea, E-mail: subin-21@hanmail.net, ORCID:
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4623-9899
:Date: 2022-8-31

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Objective

   To investigate the cumulative effect of antipsychotics at different
   dosages on mortality in patients with schizo-phrenia.

   .. rubric:: Methods

   We analyzed data from the Korean National Health Insurance
   System−National Sample Cohort covering the 2002−2013 period. We used
   Cox regression analysis to calculate hazard ratios for mortality
   risks according to cumulative antipsychotic exposure levels (low,
   moderate, and high).

   .. rubric:: Results

   Our analyses revealed no significant association between
   antipsychotic exposure and mortality (either all-cause or
   cause-specific) in patients with schizophrenia.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion

   Our results imply that the excess mortality of patients with
   schizophrenia is attributable to factors other than antipsychotic
   usage.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
INTRODUCTION
============

Schizophrenia is a mental disorder that features symptoms such as
delusions, hallucinations, and disorganized speech and behavior, and it
causes multifaceted dysfunction in life [(Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5 2013)]. The median lifetime prevalence
rate of schizophrenia is reported as 0.48% (interquartile range,
0.34−0.85%) [(Simeone et al. 2015)]. In spite of the low prevalence
rate, the burden that schizophrenia places on patients, family members,
and society is tremendous [(Chong et al. 2016)]. According to the Global
Burden of Disease Study 2017, there were 1.13 million incident cases of
schizophrenia and 12.66 million (95% uncertainty interval, 9.48−15.56
million) disability- adjusted life years due to schizophrenia in 2017
[(He et al. 2017)].

One of the major burdens of schizophrenia is premature mortality [(De
Hert et al. 2009)]. Patients with schizophrenia have a higher risk of
all-cause mortality and mortality due to specific causes (e.g.,
cardiovascular disease, neoplasm, and suicide) when compared with the
general population [(Olfson et al. 2015),(Ko et al. 2018)]. This
premature mortality has generally been attributed to factors such as
unhealthy lifestyles, alcohol and substance abuse, and comorbid somatic
diseases [(Olfson et al. 2015),(Galletly 2017)]. Another factor
potentially related to mortality in patients with schizophrenia is their
antipsychotic usage, but the literature contains mixed results. A
systematic review suggested that long-term usage of antipsychotics may
increase mortality [(Weinmann, Read, and Aderhold 2009)], but other
studies have found that exposure (any, current, or cumulative) to
antipsychotics reduces mortality risks [(Crump et al. 2013)(Cullen et
al. 2013)(Baandrup et al. 2010)(Tiihonen et al. 2011)(Tiihonen et al.
2009)-(Tiihonen et al. 2016)]. Moreover, a recent study from Sweden
[(Torniainen et al. 2015)] found that exposure to antipsychotics
exhibited a U-shaped association with all-cause mortality, with the
no-usage group having the highest overall mortality rate followed by the
high-exposure group. The authors suggested that adequate antipsychotic
dosages (low or moderate) lower mortality risks for patients with
schizophrenia and that excess mortality of patients with schizophrenia
is due to other factors, not antipsychotic usage [(Torniainen et al.
2015)].

However, studies on the effect of antipsychotics on mortality in
patients with schizophrenia are scarce, and studies on the cumulative
dose-specific effects of antipsychotics on mortality are rare. It is
thus difficult to draw firm conclusions on the cumulative dose-specific
effects of antipsychotics on mortality. We therefore conducted a
nationwide population-based cohort study to investigate the cumulative
dose-specific effects of antipsychotics on all-cause and cause-specific
mortality in patients with schizophrenia in the Republic of Korea.

METHODS
=======

We conducted this study with data from the Korean National Health
Insurance System-National Sample Cohort (NHIS-NSC) provided by the
Korean National Health Insurance Corporation. The Korean NHIS system,
which was established for claims reimbursement purposes, includes the
entire national population (approximately 50 million people). For
representative sampling of the NHIS data, 756 strata based on 18 groups
for age, 21 groups for income level by insurance type, and two groups
for sex were set up with data from 2002. The NHIS-NSC data sample
includes 1,025,340 individuals, which is equivalent to 2.2% of all NHIS
members in 2002.

For the present study, we selected individuals from the NHIS-NSC dataset
who had at least one primary diagnosis (outpatient or inpatient) for the
International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision (ICD-10) codes
of F20 to F25, which correspond to schizophrenia and related diagnoses.
In total, 9,978 individuals were included in the present study. We
followed these individuals from their initial diagnosis dates until
death or December 31, 2013, whichever came first. Whether the patients
were still alive on December 31, 2013, was determined by linkage to the
database of the Statistics Korea and the specific cause of mortality was
recorded based on the ICD-10 codes. The outcomes of interest were
all-cause mortality (ICD-10 codes A00 to Z99) and three specific causes
of mortality: suicide (ICD-10 codes X60 to X84), cardiovascular disease
(ICD-10 codes I00 to I99), and neoplasms (ICD-10 codes C00 to D49).

Antipsychotic usage levels were determined based on prescription records
from the observation period. Pre-scription drugs were classified
according to the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical coding system, under
which antipsychotics are coded as N05A; antidepressants are coded as
N06AA, N06AB, N06AG, or N06AX; and benzodiazepines are coded as N03AE,
N05BA, or N05CD. The antipsychotic drugs investigated in this study
included amisulpride, aripiprazole, chlorpromazine, clozapine,
haloperidol, levomepromazine, olanzapine, paliperidone, perphenazine,
pimozide, quetiapine, risperidone, sulpiride, ziprasidone, and zotepine.
The prescribed medication doses were estimated based on defined daily
doses (DDDs), and cumulative antipsychotic doses were calculated by
multiplying the prescribed medication dose by the number of prescription
days and dividing by the DDD. If a participant was prescribed with more
than one antipsychotic medication, all antipsychotic medication that the
participants were prescribed with was considered when calculating the
cumulative DDD. For instance, if a participant has been prescribed with
100 mg of Olanzapine (DDD\ :sub:`Olanzapine` = 10 mg, cumulative
DDD\ :sub:`olanzapine` = 100 mg/10 mg = 10DDD) and 6,000 mg of Clozapine
(DDD\ :sub:`clozapine` = 300 mg, cumulative DDD\ :sub:`clozapine` =
6,000 mg/300 mg = 20DDD) during the follow up period, this participants’
cumulative DDD (cDDD) would be 30 DDD. The selected individuals were
categorized into four cDDD groups: 1) non-use, defined as no
antipsychotic usage during the observation period; 2) low-dose, defined
as having a nonzero daily cDDD under 0.5; 3) moderate- dose, defined as
having a daily cDDD of 0.5 to 1.5; and 4) high-dose, defined as having a
daily cDDD greater than 1.5. This categorization scheme was used in a
previous study [(Tiihonen et al. 2016)].

The selected individuals were also categorized into 5-year age groups
(age of diagnosis), and the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI)
[(Sundararajan et al. 2004)] was calculated for each individual. Under
the CCI system, certain physical diseases (e.g., diabetes, tumor, etc.)
have their own weight based on their severity. A score of 0 indicates
that an individual does not have a comorbid disease, and higher CCI
scores indicate that the patient has multiple comorbid diseases or a
severe disease.

This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the
National Center for Mental Health (116271-2021-09).

Statistical Analysis
--------------------

To quantify the associations between antipsychotic cDDD groups and
mortality rates, we used Cox regression analysis to calculate hazard
ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The no-use condition
consistently served as the reference group in HR calculations. Our Cox
regression analysis included adjustments for sex, age, use of other
medications (antidepressants and benzodiazepines), and CCI scores
[(Tiihonen et al. 2016)]. All analyses were performed with SAS version
9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA), and *p*\ values less than or equal
to 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

RESULTS
=======

The descriptive characteristics of the included indivi-duals are
presented in `Table 1 <#T1>`__. The adjusted hazard ratios for all-cause
and cause-specific mortality according to different antipsychotic
exposure levels are listed in `Table 2 <#T2>`__.

Before controlling for sex, age, use of other medications, and CCI
scores, high-dose antipsychotic usage was associated with a reduced risk
of all-cause mortality (crude HR [CHR] = 0.56, 95% CI = 0.42−0.75) and
mortality due to cardio-vascular disease (CHR = 0.35, 95% CI =
0.16−0.74), and moderate-dose usage was associated with a lower risk of
all-cause mortality (CHR = 0.71, 95% CI = 0.55−0.91). However, these
associations disappeared after controlling for the covariates.

DISCUSSION
==========

In this population-based cohort study, we investigated the effect of
cumulative antipsychotic usage on all-cause and cause-specific mortality
in patients with schizophrenia. After controlling for covariates, there
was no significant association between antipsychotic usage at any dosage
level and all-cause or cause-specific mortality in patients with
schizophrenia.

Previous studies suggest that the use of clozapine [(Taipale et al.
2020),(Vermeulen et al. 2019)] or long-acting injection antipsychotic
drugs [(Taipale et al. 2018),(Huang, Fang, and Shao 2021)] lowers the
mortality of those with schizophrenia. However, to date, only a few
studies have examined the effect of cumulative antipsychotic usage on
mortality in patients with schizophrenia and more research needs to be
done to achieve consensus on the cumulative effect of antipsychotic use
in schizophrenia mortality. These studies generally reported that
antipsychotic usage lowered mortality risks in patients with
schizophrenia, although dose-specific effects varied between studies.
Two studies from Sweden [(Tiihonen et al. 2016)] and Finland [(Taipale
et al. 2020)] found that moderate and high doses of antipsychotics were
associated with reduced overall mortality for patients with
schizophrenia. Another study from Sweden [(Torniainen et al. 2015)]
found that low and moderate antipsychotic doses were associated with
reduced mortality risks for patients with schizophrenia. Taipale *et
al*. [(Taipale et al. 2020)] suggested that antipsychotic usage reduces
mortality by alleviating the symptoms of schizophrenia. Moreover,
antipsychotic usage lowers cardiovascular mortality by reducing
unhealthy behaviors (e.g., smoking and alcohol abuse) and stress [(Lahti
et al. 2012)(Laursen, Nordentoft, and Mortensen 2014)-(Oh et al. 2021)].
Our findings also imply that excess mortality in schizophrenia may be
attributable to factors other than antipsychotic treatment, which is in
line with a previous study’s findings [(Torniainen et al. 2015)]. It is
generally believed that excess mortality in patients with schizophrenia
is largely attributable to unhealthy lifestyle factors, such as smoking,
alcohol abuse, poor diet, and lack of exercise [(Brown, Inskip, and
Barraclough 2000)]. However, the factors associated with mortality in
patients with schizophrenia remain unclear. Future studies are needed to
identify these various factors.

This study had several limitations. First, we conducted a retrospective
cohort study utilizing a national registry data. Therefore, there were
limited information that was retrievable (e.g., the severity of
schizophrenia could not be measured), and the presence or absence of
each disease was classified based solely on ICD-10 codes. Second,
because we only had access to data concerning physician- issued
prescriptions, we could not determine the degree of adherence to
antipsychotic therapy. Last but not least, the NHIS-NSC is comprised of
2% of the entire popula-tion in Korea and schizophrenia is a mental
disorder with a relatively low prevalence rate. Therefore, future
studies need to be conducted while utilizing the entire population in
Korea to confirm the results found in this study. The main strength of
our study is that it used a nationally representative sample.

In conclusion, our results indicate that there is no significant
association between antipsychotic usage at any dosage level and
all-cause or cause-specific mortality in patients with schizophrenia.
This implies that the excess mortality of patients with schizophrenia is
attributable to factors other than antipsychotic use.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Characteristics of the patient sample

   ========================== =============
   Characteristics            Number (%)
   ========================== =============
   Age (yr)                   
   0−19                       432 (5.60)
   20−29                      1,313 (17.03)
   30−39                      1,711 (22.19)
   40−49                      1,806 (23.42)
   50−59                      1,080 (14.00)
   60−69                      699 (9.06)
   ≥ 70                       671 (8.70)
   Sex                        
   Male                       3,807 (49.36)
   Female                     3,905 (50.64)
   Charlson Comorbidity Index 
   0                          2,057 (26.67)
   1                          2,050 (26.58)
   2                          1,435 (18.61)
   ≥ 3                        2,170 (28.14)
   Antipsychotic exposure     
   No use                     657 (8.52)
   Low use                    2,316 (30.03)
   Moderate use               3,201 (41.51)
   High use                   1,538 (19.94)
   Cause of mortality         
   All-cause                  842 (10.92)
   Cause-specific             
   Cardiovascular disease     162 (19.24)
   Suicide                    166 (19.71)
   Neoplasms                  105 (12.47)
   ========================== =============

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Causes of mortality and association with cumulative antipsychotic
      doses

   +--------+--------+---+--------+--------+--------+---+--------+--------+--------+---+-----+--------+--------+---+-----+--------+--------+
   | Cause  | No use |   | Low    |        | Mo     |   | High   |        | Use    |   |     |        |        |   |     |        |        |
   | of     | (n =   |   | dose   |        | derate |   | dose   |        | (com   |   |     |        |        |   |     |        |        |
   | mor    | 657)   |   | (n =   |        | dose   |   | (n =   |        | bined) |   |     |        |        |   |     |        |        |
   | tality |        |   | 2,316) |        | (n =   |   | 1,538) |        | (n =   |   |     |        |        |   |     |        |        |
   |        |        |   |        |        | 3,201) |   |        |        | 7,055) |   |     |        |        |   |     |        |        |
   +========+========+===+========+========+========+===+========+========+========+===+=====+========+========+===+=====+========+========+
   | All    | 76     |   | 345    | 1.23   | 1.05   |   | 306    | 0.71   | 1.14   |   | 115 | 0.56   | 1.22   |   | 766 | 0.84   | 1.11   |
   | -cause |        |   |        | (0.96  | (0.82  |   |        | (0.55  | (0.88  |   |     | (0.42  | (0.91  |   |     | (0.66  | (0.87  |
   |        |        |   |        | −1.57) | −1.35) |   |        | −0.91) | −1.47) |   |     | −0.75) | −1.65) |   |     | −1.06) | −1.40) |
   +--------+--------+---+--------+--------+--------+---+--------+--------+--------+---+-----+--------+--------+---+-----+--------+--------+
   | Ca     | 14     |   | 88     | 1.72   | 1.34   |   | 47     | 0.60   | 1.23   |   | 13  | 0.35   | 1.26   |   | 148 | 0.89   | 1.30   |
   | rdiova |        |   |        | (0.98  | (0.76  |   |        | (0.33  | (0.67  |   |     | (0.16  | (0.58  |   |     | (0.51  | (0.75  |
   | scular |        |   |        | −3.02) | −2.38) |   |        | −1.09) | −2.24) |   |     | −0.74) | −2.75) |   |     | −1.54) | −2.25) |
   | d      |        |   |        |        |        |   |        |        |        |   |     |        |        |   |     |        |        |
   | isease |        |   |        |        |        |   |        |        |        |   |     |        |        |   |     |        |        |
   +--------+--------+---+--------+--------+--------+---+--------+--------+--------+---+-----+--------+--------+---+-----+--------+--------+
   | S      | 12     |   | 38     | 0.86   | 0.90   |   | 76     | 1.13   | 1.02   |   | 40  | 1.25   | 1.09   |   | 154 | 1.07   | 1.00   |
   | uicide |        |   |        | (0.45  | (0.46  |   |        | (0.61  | (0.55  |   |     | (0.66  | (0.56  |   |     | (0.60  | (0.55  |
   |        |        |   |        | −1.65) | −1.73) |   |        | −2.07) | −1.91) |   |     | −2.39) | −2.11) |   |     | −1.93) | −1.82) |
   +--------+--------+---+--------+--------+--------+---+--------+--------+--------+---+-----+--------+--------+---+-----+--------+--------+
   | Neo    | 6      |   | 48     | 2.12   | 1.54   |   | 40     | 1.13   | 1.93   |   | 11  | 0.66   | 2.07   |   | 99  | 1.32   | 1.72   |
   | plasms |        |   |        | (0.91  | (0.66  |   |        | (0.48  | (0.81  |   |     | (0.24  | (0.75  |   |     | (0.58  | (0.76  |
   |        |        |   |        | −4.94) | −3.61) |   |        | −2.66) | −4.57) |   |     | −1.78) | −5.71) |   |     | −3.02) | −3.93) |
   +--------+--------+---+--------+--------+--------+---+--------+--------+--------+---+-----+--------+--------+---+-----+--------+--------+

   The antipsychotic no-use group was used as a reference group for all
   HR calculations.

   HR, hazard ratio; aHR, HR adjusted for sex, age group, use of
   medications (i.e., antidepressants, benzodiazepines), and CCI; CCI,
   Charlson Comorbidity Index; CI, confidence interval.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      Baandrup, L, C Gasse, VD Jensen, BY Glenthoj, M Nordentoft, and H
      Lublin. 2010. “Antipsychotic Polypharmacy and Risk of Death from
      Natural Causes in Patients with Schizophrenia: A Population-Based
      Nested Case-Control Study.” *J Clin Psychiatry* 71: 103–8.
      https://doi.org/10.4088/JCP.08m04818yel.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      Brown, S, H Inskip, and B Barraclough. 2000. “Causes of the Excess
      Mortality of Schizophrenia.” *Br J Psychiatry* 177: 212–17.
      https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.177.3.212.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      Chong, HY, SL Teoh, DB Wu, S Kotirum, CF Chiou, and N
      Chaiyakunapruk. 2016. “Global Economic Burden of Schizophrenia: A
      Systematic Review.” *Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat* 12: 357–73.
      https://doi.org/10.2147/NDT.S96649.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      Crump, C, MA Winkleby, K Sundquist, and J Sundquist. 2013.
      “Comorbidities and Mortality in Persons with Schizophrenia: A
      Swedish National Cohort Study.” *Am J Psychiatry* 170: 324–33.
      https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.12050599.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      Cullen, BA, EE McGinty, Y Zhang, SC Dosreis, DM Steinwachs, and E
      Guallar. 2013. “Guideline-Concordant Antipsychotic Use and
      Mortality in Schizophrenia.” *Schizophr Bull* 39: 1159–68.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbs097.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      De Hert, M, JM Dekker, D Wood, KG Kahl, RI Holt, and HJ Möller.
      2009. “Cardiovascular Disease and Diabetes in People with Severe
      Mental Illness Position Statement from the European Psychiatric
      Association (EPA), Supported by the European Association for the
      Study of Diabetes (EASD) and the European Society of Cardiology
      (ESC).” *Eur Psychiatry* 24: 412–24.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpsy.2009.01.005.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      *Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5*.
      2013. Arlington: American Psychiatric Association.
      https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425596.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      Galletly, CA. 2017. “Premature Death in Schizophrenia: Bridging
      the Gap.” *Lancet Psychiatry* 4: 263–65.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30079-2.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      He, H, Q Liu, N Li, L Guo, F Gao, and L Bai. 2017. “Trends in the
      Incidence and DALYs of Schizophrenia at the Global, Regional and
      National Levels: Results from the Global Burden of Disease Study
      2017.” *Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci* 29.
      https://doi.org/10.1017/S2045796019000891.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      Huang, CY, SC Fang, and YJ Shao. 2021. “Comparison of Long-Acting
      Injectable Antipsychotics with Oral Antipsychotics and Suicide and
      All-Cause Mortality in Patients with Newly Diagnosed
      Schizophrenia.” *JAMA Netw Open* 4.
      https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.8810.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      Ko, YS, HC Tsai, MH Chi, CC Su, IH Lee, and PS Chen. 2018. “Higher
      Mortality and Years of Potential Life Lost of Suicide in Patients
      with Schizophrenia.” *Psychiatry Res* 270: 531–37.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2018.09.038.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      Lahti, M, J Tiihonen, H Wildgust, M Beary, R Hodgson, and E
      Kajantie. 2012. “Cardiovascular Morbidity, Mortality and
      Pharmacotherapy in Patients with Schizophrenia.” *Psychol Med* 42:
      2275–85. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291712000396.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      Laursen, TM, M Nordentoft, and PB Mortensen. 2014. “Excess Early
      Mortality in Schizophrenia.” *Annu Rev Clin Psychol* 10: 425–48.
      https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-032813-153657.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      Oh, J, H Nam, S Park, JH Chae, and TS Kim. 2021. “Decreased
      Cardio-Vascular Death in Schizophrenia Patients Treated with
      Antipsychotics: A Korean National Cohort Study.” *Schizophr Res*
      228: 417–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2021.01.006.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      Olfson, M, T Gerhard, C Huang, S Crystal, and TS Stroup. 2015.
      “Premature Mortality Among Adults with Schizophrenia in the United
      States.” *JAMA Psychiatry* 72: 1172–81.
      https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.1737.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      Simeone, JC, AJ Ward, P Rotella, J Collins, and R Windisch. 2015.
      “An Evaluation of Variation in Published Estimates of
      Schizophrenia Prevalence from 1990−2013: A Systematic Literature
      Review.” *BMC Psychiatry* 15.
      https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-015-0578-7.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      Sundararajan, V, T Henderson, C Perry, A Muggivan, H Quan, and WA
      Ghali. 2004. “New ICD-10 Version of the Charlson Comorbidity Index
      Predicted in-Hospital Mortality.” *J Clin Epidemiol* 57: 1288–94.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2004.03.012.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      Taipale, H, E Mittendorfer-Rutz, K Alexanderson, M Majak, J
      Mehtälä, and F Hoti. 2018. “Antipsychotics and Mortality in a
      Nationwide Cohort of 29,823 Patients with Schizophrenia.”
      *Schizophr Res* 197: 274–80.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2017.12.010.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      Taipale, H, A Tanskanen, J Mehtälä, P Vattulainen, CU Correll, and
      J Tiihonen. 2020. “20-Year Follow-up Study of Physical Morbidity
      and Mortality in Relationship to Antipsychotic Treatment in a
      Nationwide Cohort of 62,250 Patients with Schizophrenia (Fin20).”
      *World Psychiatry* 19: 61–68. https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.20699.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      Tiihonen, J, J Haukka, M Taylor, PM Haddad, MX Patel, and P
      Korhonen. 2011. “A Nationwide Cohort Study of Oral and Depot
      Antipsychotics After First Hospitalization for Schizophrenia.” *Am
      J Psychiatry* 168: 603–9.
      https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10081224.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      Tiihonen, J, J Lönnqvist, K Wahlbeck, T Klaukka, L Niskanen, and A
      Tanskanen. 2009. “11-Year Follow-up of Mortality in Patients with
      Schizophrenia: A Population-Based Cohort Study (Fin11 Study).”
      *Lancet* 374: 620–27.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60742-X.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      Tiihonen, J, E Mittendorfer-Rutz, M Torniainen, K Alexanderson,
      and A Tanskanen. 2016. “Mortality and Cumulative Exposure to
      Antipsychotics, Antidepressants, and Benzodiazepines in Patients
      with Schizophrenia: An Observational Follow-up Study.” *Am J
      Psychiatry* 173: 600–606.
      https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.15050618.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      Torniainen, M, E Mittendorfer-Rutz, A Tanskanen, C Björkenstam, J
      Suvisaari, and K Alexanderson. 2015. “Antipsychotic Treatment and
      Mortality in Schizophrenia.” *Schizophr Bull* 41: 656–63.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbu164.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      Vermeulen, JM, G van Rooijen, MPJ van de Kerkhof, AL Sutterland,
      CU Correll, and L de Haan. 2019. “Clozapine and Long-Term
      Mortality Risk in Patients with Schizophrenia: A Systematic Review
      and Meta-Analysis of Studies Lasting 1.1-12.5 Years.” *Schizophr
      Bull* 45: 315–29. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sby052.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      Weinmann, S, J Read, and V Aderhold. 2009. “Influence of
      Antipsychotics on Mortality in Schizophrenia: Systematic Review.”
      *Schizophr Res* 113: 1–11.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2009.05.018.
