==============================================================================================================================================
One-Year Clinical Outcomes Following Electroconvulsive Therapy for Patients with Schizophrenia: A Nationwide Health Insurance Data-Based Study
==============================================================================================================================================

Sung Woo Joo
Harin Kim
Young Tak Jo
Soojin Ahn
Young Jae Choi
Woohyeok Choi
Soyeon Park
Jungsun LeeCorrespondence: Jungsun Lee, Department of Psychiatry, Asan
Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-Ro
43-Gil, Songpa-Gu, Seoul, 05505, Republic of Korea, Tel +82-2-3010-3422,
Fax +82-2-485-8381, Email js_lee@amc.seoul.kr
:Date: 2022-8-08

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background
      :name: s2001

   Although the use of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) in the treatment
   of schizophrenia has decreased since the advent of antipsychotic
   drugs, ECT is still implemented in several clinical indications.
   However, a few population-based studies have examined its real-world
   effectiveness in schizophrenia.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: s2002

   We used data from 2010 to 2019 from the Health Insurance Review and
   Assessment Service database in the Republic of Korea. We selected 380
   schizophrenia patients having more than six ECT sessions and 1140
   patient controls matched for age, sex, calendar year at entry, and
   the number of psychiatric hospitalizations before the time point of
   start of psychiatric hospitalization for ECT. Antipsychotic treatment
   discontinuation, psychiatric hospitalization, and direct medical
   costs were used as measures of clinical outcomes. Multiple regression
   analysis was used for any group-by-time interaction effect, and
   1-year pre- and post-ECT periods were compared within and between the
   groups.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: s2003

   We found a significantly lower number of antipsychotic treatment
   discontinuations in the ECT group during the 1-year post-ECT period
   (t=2.195, p=0.028). A larger decrease was found in the number of
   psychiatric hospitalizations in the ECT group, with a group-by-time
   interaction effect (p=0.043). The direct medical costs in the 1-year
   pre- (t=−8.782, p<0.001) and post-ECT periods (t=−9.107, p<0.001)
   were higher in the ECT group than in the control group, with no
   significant change across both periods.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion
      :name: s2004

   We found that the ECT group had a larger decrease in the number of
   psychiatric hospitalizations in the 1-year post-ECT period than the
   control group.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _s0001:

Introduction
============

Despite the declining use of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) after the
development and acceptance of pharmacological treatment of
schizophrenia, ECT is still an important treatment option in managing
patients with schizophrenia along with antipsychotic medications.
Several studies have reported the additive effectiveness of ECT
augmentation to antipsychotic treatment in terms of the improvement of
positive symptoms and amelioration of negative symptoms in
treatment-resistant schizophrenia.(n.d.a),(n.d.b) The clinical
indications for ECT in patients with schizophrenia include catatonia,
suicidal risk, severe agitation/violence, and poor oral intake,(n.d.c)
which suggests that ECT still plays an indispensable role in the
treatment of schizophrenia in real-world clinical practice.(n.d.d)
Despite enormous efforts to reduce the stigma surrounding ECT, its
utilization rate is still low worldwide,(n.d.e),(n.d.f) including the
Republic of Korea. According to a previous study, the utilization rate
of ECT for the treatment of schizophrenia during psychiatric
hospitalization was estimated to be approximately 0.3% in the Republic
of Korea, which is notably lower than that in other Asian
countries.(n.d.g)

Although ECT is not associated with the risk of incidental dementia and
a detrimental effect on cognitive functions,(n.d.h),(n.d.i) it is
usually considered the last treatment option.(n.d.j) Clinicians opt to
initiate ECT when several trials of pharmacotherapy and
non-pharmacotherapy fail. Therefore, patients indicated for ECT are
likely to be treatment-refractory or have a severe suicidal or violence
risk, which could limit the enrollment of patients in randomized
controlled trials (RCTs), probably owing to a lack of their ability to
provide informed consent.(n.d.k) Most previous studies regarding the
effectiveness and safety of ECT in schizophrenia are retrospective
observational studies with a relatively small number of participants,
which cannot provide good-quality evidence.(n.d.c) With regard to the
generalization of results from RCTs, it should be considered that
participants in RCTs are more likely to be selective and compliant than
patients in real-world clinical practice. Therefore, it is important to
evaluate the real-world effectiveness of ECT in schizophrenia with a
large amount of real-world data.

All South Koreans are obligated to register in a nationwide health
insurance service, except for those in special circumstances, resulting
in an insurance coverage rate of 98%. The Health Insurance Review and
Assessment Service (HIRA) is responsible for reviewing claims generated
from medical institutions and maintaining a claim database. Information
on the use of medical services by all South Koreans, such as diagnoses,
prescriptions of medications, and direct medical costs, is encoded in
the claim database.(n.d.l) Our research team has conducted several
studies using this nationwide claim database;(n.d.m),(n.d.n) these
studies have a notable strength of utilizing a large sample size and
being able to observe patients without follow-up loss because of
nationwide coverage and the compulsory nature of the national health
insurance service. Given the low utilization rate of ECT for the
treatment of schizophrenia in the Republic of Korea,(n.d.g) the
availability of data for a large number of patients with schizophrenia
who had received ECT may be a remarkable strength of the HIRA database.

In this study, we aimed to investigate the real-world effectiveness of
ECT in patients with schizophrenia using the HIRA database. The number
of antipsychotic treatment discontinuations and psychiatric
hospitalizations, as well as direct medical costs, were used as measures
of the clinical outcomes. Abundant evidence has emphasized the
importance of the continuation of antipsychotic treatments for the
prevention of relapses and improvement in social and occupational
functions of patients.(n.d.o),(n.d.p) Psychiatric hospitalization has
been considered a marker for relapse in previous studies using claim
databases.(n.d.q),(n.d.r) Direct medical costs are reflective of the
economic burden to patients, families, and society and may be associated
with the severity and clinical course of the disease.(n.d.s),(n.d.t) We
compared the 1-year pre- and post-ECT periods within and between two
groups of patients who had received ECT and of matched controls who had
not received ECT. We examined whether schizophrenia patients who had
received ECT had better clinical outcomes than the matched controls in
terms of the number of antipsychotic treatment discontinuations and
psychiatric hospitalizations, as well as the direct medical costs.

.. _s0002:

Materials and Methods
=====================

.. _s0002-s2001:

Study Population
----------------

We utilized data from January 2010 to December 2019 from the HIRA
database to include patients with schizophrenia who had received ECT.
Initially, we identified patients with schizophrenia using the following
criteria: 1) The main diagnostic code for schizophrenia (F20) was
recorded at least twice for outpatients or once for inpatients during
the total observation period; 2) the observation period started from the
first antipsychotic prescription, and the patient’s age at the start of
the observation period was between 18 and 65 years; and 3) medications
for dementia, including acetylcholine esterase inhibitors (eg,
donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine) and memantine, were not
prescribed before and within 1 year after the start of the observation
period. Among them, we initially included patients who had received at
least one ECT session during the total observation period. An ECT course
was defined as at least more than two ECT sessions per week during
psychiatric hospitalization. We only included the patients who had
received only one ECT course during the total observation period,
resulting in the exclusion of patients who had received ECT courses
several times or received maintenance/continuation ECT during the total
observation period. The main diagnostic code for psychiatric
hospitalization during which ECT had been performed was to be F20–29
(schizophrenia, schizotypal, and delusional disorders), and the number
of ECT sessions during the psychiatric hospitalization was to be more
than six. With the abovementioned criteria, we included 380 patients
with schizophrenia in the ECT group. We selected patient controls
matched for age at entry, sex, calendar year at entry, and the number of
psychiatric hospitalizations before the time point of start of
psychiatric hospitalization for ECT at a ratio of 1:3.

This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Asan
Medical Center (IRB No. 2021–0556). The need for informed consent was
waived owing to the use of anonymous and de-identified data.

.. _s0002-s2002:

Definitions of the Clinical Outcomes
------------------------------------

Antipsychotic treatment discontinuation was defined as a lapse of more
than 30 days from the expected date of the next antipsychotic
prescription. `Supplementary Table
1 <https://www.dovepress.com/get_supplementary_file.php?f=373222.docx>`__
shows a list of antipsychotic drugs included in the analyses. When more
than two antipsychotic drugs were prescribed in the same treatment
period, we used the highest prescription duration among the drugs. The
hospitalization episodes were reconstructed by adopting the methods
described in a previous study.(n.d.u) When the type of hospitalization
was general medical or psychiatric, and the main diagnostic code for
hospitalization was F00–99 (mental and behavioral disorders), we labeled
it as a psychiatric hospitalization. When rehospitalization occurred
within 30 days after the end of the prior hospitalization, we
disregarded it when calculating the number of psychiatric
hospitalizations. Direct medical costs were calculated using information
indicating the total medical costs for visits (RVD_RPE_TAMT_AMT) in the
claim database. The total medical costs include inpatient and outpatient
care costs, as well as pharmacy costs, but not non-covered costs by the
insurance provider. To extract the costs associated with psychiatric
illness, we applied the condition that the main diagnostic code for
visits should be F00-99.

.. _s0002-s2003:

Statistical Analysis
--------------------

All statistical analyses were performed using the R software, version
3.5.1 (R Development Core Team, Vienna, Austria). A two-tailed p-value
of <0.05 was used to determine statistical significance.

Continuous and categorical variables (demographic and clinical
characteristics of the study population) were presented as means and
standard deviations (SD) or numbers (%). Group comparisons were
performed using an unpaired *t*-test or the chi-square test. We examined
the number of antipsychotic treatment discontinuations and psychiatric
hospitalizations and the direct medical costs in the 1-year pre- and
post-ECT periods. Group-by-time interaction effects were evaluated using
multiple regression analysis. An unpaired *t*-test was used to compare
the outcome variables between the two groups in the 1-year pre- and
post-ECT periods. Within each group, a paired *t*-test was used to
compare the outcome variables in the 1-year pre- and post-ECT periods.

.. _s0003:

Results
=======

.. _s0003-s2001:

Demographic and Clinical Characteristics of the Study Population
----------------------------------------------------------------

A total of 380 patients with schizophrenia who had received ECT and 1140
matched controls were included in the analysis. In the ECT group, the
mean (SD) age at entry was 33.2 (11.2) years, and 44.5% were men. The
mean (SD) number of psychiatric hospitalizations from entry to the start
of psychiatric hospitalization for ECT was 1.9 (1.9). There were no
significant group differences in age at entry, sex, and the number of
psychiatric hospitalizations between the ECT and the control groups. The
patients in the ECT group had received a mean (SD) number of 12.2 (4.2)
ECT sessions during psychiatric hospitalization. During the 3 months
before psychiatric hospitalization for ECT, the patients in the ECT
group had been prescribed a mean (SD) number of 2.6 (1.5)
antipsychotics, and the proportions of patients with monotherapy and
polypharmacy were 22.6% and 77.4%, respectively. Further details on the
demographic and clinical characteristics of the study population are
presented in `Table 1 <#t0001>`__.Table 1Demographic and Clinical
Characteristics of the Study PopulationVariableECT Group (n=380)Control
Group (n=1140)P-valueAge at entry, mean (SD), years33.2 (11.2)33.4
(11.2)0.76Age group at entry, n (%), years1.00 18–1932 (8.4)96
(8.4) 20–29136 (35.8)411 (35.8) 30–3995 (25.0)288 (25.0) 40–4980
(21.1)243 (21.1) 50–5930 (7.9)90 (7.9) 60–657 (1.8)21 (1.8)Male, n
(%)169 (44.5)507 (44.5)1.00Duration from entry to the time point of
start of psychiatric hospitalization for ECT, mean (SD), years4.4
(2.3)4.4 (2.3)1.00Number of psychiatric hospitalizations from entry to
the time point of start of psychiatric hospitalization for ECT, mean
(SD)1.9 (1.9)1.8 (1.8)0.36Length of psychiatric hospitalization for ECT,
mean (SD), days56.2 (26.6)Number of ECT sessions, mean (SD)12.2
(4.2)Antipsychotic treatment during the 3 months before psychiatric
hospitalization for ECT Number of prescribed antipsychotics, mean
(SD)2.6 (1.5) Monotherapy, n (%)86 (22.6) Polypharmacy, n (%)294
(77.4)  With clozapine125 (32.9) [1]_

.. _s0003-s2002:

Within- and Between-Group Comparisons of the Clinical Outcomes in the 1-Year Pre- and Post-ECT Periods (`Table 2 <#t0002>`__ and `Figure 1 <#f0001>`__)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _s0003-s2002-s3001:

Within-Group Comparisons
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The number of antipsychotic treatment discontinuations significantly
decreased in the 1-year post-ECT period in both groups (ECT group:
t=−3.628, p<0.001; control group: t=−2.271, p=0.023). The number of
psychiatric hospitalizations in the 1-year post-ECT period also
decreased in the ECT (t=−5.302, p<0.001) and control groups (t=−6.952,
p<0.001). There was no significant change in the direct medical costs in
the 1-year post-ECT period in both groups.Table 2Group Comparisons of
the Clinical Outcomes in the 1-Year Pre- and Post-ECT
PeriodsGroupBetween-Group, t-value (P-value)Within-Group, t-value
(P-value)Group × Time P-valueECTControlECTControlNumber of antipsychotic
treatment discontinuations, mean (SD) Before0.31 (0.61)0.29 (0.61)−0.317
(0.752)−3.628 (<0.001)***−2.271 (0.023)*0.083 After0.17 (0.48)0.25
(0.60)2.195 (0.028)*Number of psychiatric hospitalizations, mean
(SD) Before0.84 (0.79)0.45 (0.64)−9.766 (<0.001)***−5.302
(<0.001)***−6.952 (<0.001)***0.043* After0.58 (0.79)0.30 (0.57)−7.493
(<0.001)***Direct medical costs, KRW, mean (SD) Before8,850,888
(7,799,587)5,340,390 (6,360,241)−8.782 (<0.001)***0.475 (0.635)−1.854
(0.064)0.433 After9,052,569 (8,888,967)5,078,276 (6,785,412)−9.107
(<0.001)**\* [2]_ [3]_ Figure 1Comparisons of (**A**) the number of
antipsychotic treatment discontinuations, (**B**) psychiatric
hospitalizations, and (**C**) the direct medical costs between the ECT
and control groups in the 1-year pre- and post-ECT periods. The Orange
and blue bars indicate mean and standard deviations of the values in the
ECT and control groups, respectively. \* p<0.05, \**\* p<0.001. KRW,
Korean won.

.. _s0003-s2002-s3002:

Between-Group Comparisons
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

While there was no significant difference in the number of antipsychotic
treatment discontinuations in the 1-year pre-ECT period, the ECT group
had a significantly lower number of antipsychotic treatment
discontinuations than the control group in the 1-year post-ECT period
(t=2.195, p=0.028). The group-by-time interaction effect for the number
of antipsychotic treatment discontinuations was not significant
(p=0.083). The ECT group had a significantly increased number of
psychiatric hospitalizations in the 1-year pre- (t=−9.766, p<0.001) and
post-ECT periods (t=−7.493, p<0.001) compared with the control group. A
significantly larger decrease in the number of psychiatric
hospitalizations was found in the ECT group than in the control group,
with a significant group-by-time interaction effect (p=0.043). There was
a consistent pattern of significantly increased direct medical costs in
the ECT group compared with that in the control group in the 1-year pre-
(t=−8.782, p<0.001) and post-ECT periods (t=−9.107, p<0.001).

.. _s0004:

Discussion
==========

In this study, we used the HIRA database to investigate the real-world
effectiveness of ECT in patients with schizophrenia. We compared the
number of antipsychotic treatment discontinuations and psychiatric
hospitalizations and the direct medical costs in the 1-year pre- and
post-ECT periods within and between the groups. We found that there was
a significantly lower number of antipsychotic treatment discontinuations
in the 1-year post-ECT period in the ECT group than in the control
group. Although the number of psychiatric hospitalizations in both
periods was higher in the ECT group than in the control group, there was
a significantly larger decrease in the number of psychiatric
hospitalizations across both periods in the ECT group than in the
control group. No significant difference in the direct medical costs
between the 1-year pre- and post-ECT periods was found in either group;
the direct medical costs in the ECT group were consistently higher in
both periods than those in the control group.

Most practice guidelines for the treatment of schizophrenia recommend
1–2 years of antipsychotic treatment for first-episode schizophrenia and
long-term antipsychotic treatment for multiple-episode
schizophrenia.(n.d.v) The continuation of antipsychotic treatment has
been considered an essential part of the treatment of schizophrenia to
prevent relapses and improve the long-term outcomes and functioning of
patients. Several previous studies have reported the low continuation
rate of antipsychotic treatment in patients with schizophrenia.(n.d.w) A
systematic review showed that familial support and the level of insight
are highly predictive of treatment adherence.(n.d.x) It was reported
that poor insight exists even at the onset of psychosis among patients
with schizophrenia.(n.d.y) Several treatment strategies, such as
long-acting injectable antipsychotic drugs and cognitive behavioral
therapy for psychosis, have been developed to enhance treatment
adherence; however, their effectiveness is limited.(n.d.y) In this
study, the ECT group showed a lower number of antipsychotic treatment
discontinuations in the 1-year post-ECT period than the control group.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing evidence related to
this observation. The promising effects of ECT on antipsychotic
treatment continuation in this study should be validated in future
studies with a larger sample and longer observation period.

Although we used matched controls in the group comparisons, an increased
number of psychiatric hospitalizations in the l-year pre-ECT period was
found in the ECT group compared with the control group. This might be
related to the severe psychiatric symptoms or treatment resistance among
the patients in the ECT group, considering that 32.9% of these patients
had received polypharmacy with clozapine during the 3 months before
psychiatric hospitalization for ECT. We observed a larger decrease in
the number of psychiatric hospitalizations in the 1-year post-ECT period
in the ECT group than in the control group. Given that the severity of
psychiatric symptoms dictates whether schizophrenia patients should be
managed in inpatient or outpatient settings, the initiation of
psychiatric hospitalization suggests that the psychiatric symptoms of
the patients are severe enough to require intensive care or management.
Based on that psychiatric hospitalization has been used as a surrogate
for relapse in previous studies,(n.d.q),(n.d.r) our results may also
indicate the usefulness of ECT in reducing relapses. In line with the
current findings, a previous study by Lin et al demonstrated that their
ECT group had a decreased rate of rehospitalization in the 1-year
post-ECT period compared with their control group.(n.d.z)

Despite the low incidence of schizophrenia, it is a tremendous economic
burden for patients, their families, and society across the
world.(n.d.t) Previous studies have reported that a substantial
proportion of the total costs is associated with indirect costs, which
include caregiving, premature mortality, and
unemployment.(n.d.t),(n.d.aa) Direct medical costs usually include
expenditure for inpatient care, outpatient care, diagnostic tests, and
prescription drugs. In our study, there was no significant change in the
direct medical costs between the 1-year pre- and post-ECT periods in
both groups. However, the direct medical costs were consistently higher
in the ECT group than in the control group across both periods. Given
that a substantial proportion of direct medical costs related to
schizophrenia is related to inpatient care,(n.d.ab),(n.d.ac) the
increased direct medical costs in the ECT group might be related to the
higher number of psychiatric hospitalizations in the 1-year pre- and
post-ECT periods. In the within-group comparison, the direct medical
costs in the ECT group did not decrease in the 1-year post-ECT period,
while the number of psychiatric hospitalizations decreased in the 1-year
post-ECT period. A possible explanation for the lack of any significant
change in the direct medical costs is a more regular follow-up in the
1-year post-ECT period supported by the lower number of antipsychotic
treatment discontinuations. Contrary to our study, Lin et al reported
that the total medical expenses increased significantly in their control
group in the 1-year post-ECT period but not in their ECT group.(n.d.z)
This could be attributed to a few methodological differences. While we
aimed to focus on the effects of ECT on psychiatric symptoms specific to
schizophrenia by restricting the main diagnostic code to F20-29, the
previous study did not consider schizophrenia specific symptoms to be
the main indication for ECT. In the previous study, the authors had
selected control patients who had at least one psychiatric
hospitalization during the observation period and used the duration of
hospitalization in the matching procedure. In contrast, we utilized the
number of psychiatric hospitalizations during the period from entry to
the start of psychiatric hospitalization for ECT in selecting matched
controls.

One notable strength of our study is the utilization of information from
a relatively large number of patients with schizophrenia who had
received ECT, despite the low utilization rate of ECT in the Republic of
Korea. However, some limitations should be considered. First, because
this study was based on a claim database, we could not assess the
severity of the psychiatric symptoms of the patients. Although
antipsychotic treatment discontinuation and psychiatric hospitalization
are important indicators of clinical course, they only have an indirect
association with the clinical symptoms. Second, our results suggest that
ECT may have a beneficial effect in reducing psychiatric
hospitalization. However, it is still uncertain how ECT exerts its
positive effects and which clinical and therapeutic factors are
associated with them. Third, we included patients who received more than
six ECT sessions during psychiatric hospitalization for ECT to ascertain
an adequate administration of ECT. However, the minimum criterion of at
least six ECT sessions was still arbitrary, given that more than six ECT
sessions are recommended in general, and a higher number of ECT sessions
may be needed for patients with schizophrenia than for those with mood
disorders.(n.d.ad) Fourth, the current study has a retrospective
observational study design, which is an inherent limitation in
evaluating the effectiveness of ECT on clinical outcomes in
schizophrenia. Our results indicate the associations of ECT with
clinical outcomes but not the causal relationship between them. A
prospective RCT with a large sample size is needed to validate the
current results.

.. _s0005:

Conclusions
===========

We investigated the real-world effectiveness of ECT in patients with
schizophrenia in terms of the number of antipsychotic treatment
discontinuations and psychiatric hospitalizations, as well as direct
medical costs. A lower number of antipsychotic treatment
discontinuations was observed in the ECT group than in the control group
in the 1-year post-ECT period. Further, there was a larger decrease in
the number of psychiatric hospitalizations in the ECT group than in the
control group. The direct medical costs in the 1-year pre- and post-ECT
periods were significantly higher in the ECT group than in the control
group, but there was no significant change in the direct medical costs
across both periods in both groups. Based on these nationwide health
insurance data, we suggest that ECT may be beneficial in reducing
psychiatric hospitalizations in patients with schizophrenia. However,
further investigations are needed to collect more evidence.

.. _s0006:

Data Sharing Statement
======================

The datasets used in this study are available from the Health Insurance
Review and Assessment service on reasonable request.

.. _s0007:

Author Contributions
====================

All authors made a significant contribution to the work reported,
whether that is in the conception, study design, execution, acquisition
of data, analysis and interpretation, or in all these areas; took part
in drafting, revising or critically reviewing the article; gave final
approval of the version to be published; have agreed on the journal to
which the article has been submitted; and agree to be accountable for
all aspects of the work.

.. _s0008:

Disclosure
==========

The authors have declared that there are no conflicts of interest in
relation to the subject of this study.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0001

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0002

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0003

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0004

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0005

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0006

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0007

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0008

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0009

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0010

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0011

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0012

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0013

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0014

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0015

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0016

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0017

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0018

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0019

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0020

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0021

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0022

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0023

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0024

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0025

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0026

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0027

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0028

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0029

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0030

      n.d.ad.

.. [1]
   **Abbreviations**: ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; SD, standard
   deviation.

.. [2]
   **Note**: \*p<0.05, \***p<0.001.

.. [3]
   **Abbreviations**: ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; KRW, Korean won;
   SD, standard deviation.
