================================================================================================================
Sexual dimorphism in the relationship between *Forkhead-Box P2* and BMI with cognitive deficits in schizophrenia
================================================================================================================

Mi Yang
Ying Cui
Mei Xue
Mattew T. Forster
Xiaoe Lang
Meihong Xiu
Zezhi Li
Xiangyang Zhang [1]_ [2]_\*Correspondence: Zezhi Li
biolpsychiatry@126.com Meihong Xiu xiumeihong97@163.com Xiangyang Zhang
zhangxy@psych.ac.cn\  [3]_
:Date: 2022-8-03

:Abstract:
   *FOXP2*, cognitive deficits, and schizophrenia are associated with
   neurodegenerative pathophyisiology. Mounting evidence suggests that
   body mass index (BMI) and *FOXP2* may contribute to cognitive
   deficits in schizophrenia. However, the sex difference in the
   contribution of *FOXP2* and BMI, as well as their potential
   interaction with cognitive deficits in schizophrenia, have not been
   investigated. A total of 867 schizophrenia patients and 402 controls
   were recruited. Cognitive function was assessed using the Repeatable
   Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS). The
   polymorphism rs10447760 of the *FOXP2* gene was genotyped. Male
   schizophrenia patients had superior language performance compared to
   female patients (*F* = 17.83; *p*\ :sub:`Bonferroni` < 0.0001). BMI
   was positively associated with language scores in male patients with
   schizophrenia (*ß* = 0.60, *t* = 3.30, *p* = 0.001), as well as in
   patients with schizophrenia who carried the *FOXP2* rs10447760 CC
   genotype (*ß* = 0.53, *t* = 3.16, *p* = 0.002). Interestingly, this
   association was only found in male patients with schizophrenia who
   also carried the *FOXP2* rs10447760 CC genotype (*ß* = 0.63, *t* =
   3.44, *p* = 0.001). Our study reveals a sex difference in the
   language deficits of schizophrenia patients and shows sexual
   dimorphism in the contribution of *FOXP2*, BMI, and their interaction
   to cognitive deficits in patients with schizophrenia.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _s1:

Introduction
============

Cognitive deficits, including in aspects of attention, memory, learning,
language, and executive function, are an essential feature of
schizophrenia—being displayed in 98% of patients (Keefe et al., (n.d.a);
Tripathi et al., (n.d.b)). These cognitive deficits can impinge on
patient prognosis and quality of life (Harvey et al., (n.d.c)). Previous
evidence has shown that cognitive deficits in schizophrenia may be an
innate trait, as they can occur in the initial episode as well as in
patients with chronic schizophrenia (Gerretsen et al., (n.d.d)).
Cognitive deficits can also occur in the prodromal stages and throughout
the illness course, despite the alleviation of symptoms with
pharmacological therapy (Hughes et al., (n.d.e); Kahn and Keefe,
(n.d.f)).

Although it is recognized that certain patients are predisposed to
cognitive deficits, the underlying multi-faceted cause of cognitive
deficits in schizophrenia remains largely obscure (Toulopoulou et al.,
(n.d.g)). However, accumulating evidence suggests a genetic contribution
to cognitive deficits in schizophrenia patients (Harvey et al.,
(n.d.h)). For instance, cognitive deficits have even been observed in
the unaffected relatives of schizophrenia patients (Snitz et al.,
(n.d.i)). Currently, a primary hypothesis is that neurodevelopmental and
neurodegenerative dysfunction underlies the etiology of both cognitive
deficits and schizophrenia (Li et al., (n.d.j)). The forkhead-box P2
(*FOXP2*) gene, located on chromosome 7q31, which contributes to brain
development and neuronal processes, was first identified as being
involved in language and speech (Lai et al., (n.d.k)). It is well
established that disturbances of speech and language processes are
central components of both schizophrenia and cognitive deficits (Li et
al., (n.d.l)). Furthermore, *FOXP2* has been associated with
schizophrenia in genome-wide association studies (Hagenaars et al.,
(n.d.m)). Our previous studies have reported that one of the *FOXP2*
polymorphisms, rs10447760 within the 5’ regulatory region, is associated
with clinical outcomes and cognitive deficits in chronic schizophrenia
(Rao et al., (n.d.n); Lang et al., (n.d.o)). Additionally, *FOXP2* has
been associated with obesity in a genome-wide association study
(Glessner et al., (n.d.p); Clifton et al., (n.d.q)). Collectively, this
evidence suggests that *FOXP2* contributes to both cognitive deficits
and obesity in patients with schizophrenia.

In addition, it is now well established that critical, non-genetic
aspects, such as metabolic syndrome and obesity, also contribute to
cognitive deficits in schizophrenia patients (Rashid et al., (n.d.r);
Bora et al., (n.d.s)). Prior studies have also suggested a relationship
between body mass index (BMI) and cognitive deficits (Smith et al.,
(n.d.t)). The frequency of higher BMI and obesity are greater in
schizophrenic patients overall (Li et al., (n.d.u)), and the association
of BMI with cognitive deficits in schizophrenia has also been
established (Bora et al., (n.d.s)). However, other studies have reported
inconsistent findings (Friedman et al., (n.d.v); Takayanagi et al.,
(n.d.w)).

The above-mentioned inconsistent results may be due to the possible
confounding interactions of sex, BMI, and genetic background. Increasing
evidence has indicated that there are sex differences in clinical
characteristics and outcomes, especially cognitive deficits, among
schizophrenia patients across (Leger and Neill, (n.d.x)). Sex
differences in brain structure and function, as well as sexually
dimorphic steroid hormones, may contribute to the sex-specific effects
on cognitive deficits in schizophrenic patients (Mendrek and
Mancini-Marie, (n.d.y)). Previous studies have demonstrated different
cognitive deficits between male and female patients with schizophrenia
during their first and/or chronic episodes that were not observed in
healthy controls (Leger and Neill, (n.d.x); Mendrek and Mancini-Marie,
(n.d.y)). However, the results are still equivocal. For example, several
studies did not find an association between sex and cognitive deficits
in patients with schizophrenia (Mendrek and Mancini-Marie, (n.d.y)).

Although our previous study has shown that *FOXP2* polymorphisms
(rs10447760) is associated with cognitive deficits in chronic
schizophrenia (Lang et al., (n.d.o)), it remains unclear whether there
are sex differences in the degree of contribution of genetic factors to
cognitive deficits in schizophrenia; whether there are sex differences
in the influences of BMI on cognitive deficits in schizophrenia; and/or
whether there are sex differences in the effects of genetic
contributions and BMI on cognitive deficits in schizophrenia. These
interesting questions prompt a need for further investigation.

Some previous evidence has demonstrated that sex differences in
cognitive performance are associated with certain genetic backgrounds
(Zhang et al., (n.d.z); Jancke, (n.d.aa)). Additionally, recent studies
have shown that cognitive function and BMI may share a common genetic
pathway (Davies et al., (n.d.ab); Marioni et al., (n.d.ac)). Prior
research has also suggested the existence of a shared genetic mutation
that is associated with both BMI and cognitive performance (Marioni et
al., (n.d.ac)). Frazier-Wood et al. ((n.d.ad)) found that shared genetic
factors contributed to cognitive function and BMI in a study of 1,312
twins. Additionally, Laitala et al. ((n.d.ae)) performed a study with a
large sample of 2,606 twins which also showed a significant shared
genetic influence on the correlation between cognitive decline and
midlife BMI. The above evidence suggests that interactions between sex,
genetic contribution, and BMI are involved in the pathophysiology of
cognitive deficits.

Therefore, to the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to
investigate: (1) whether the *FOXP2* polymorphism rs10447760 affects
cognition differently as a function of sex; (2) whether BMI was
associated with cognitive deficits in schizophrenia patients; (3) and
whether any relationship between BMI and cognitive deficits in
schizophrenia was further altered by sex.

.. _s2:

Materials and Methods
=====================

.. _s2-1:

Subjects
--------

The protocol was approved by the ethics committee of the Beijing
Huilongguan Hospital (No. BJ-7072035; Date: July 10th, 2016). Each
subject or guardian signed a written informed consent prior to being
enrolled in the study. The inclusion criteria have been described in
previous studies (Lang et al., (n.d.o)), but, briefly, include: (1)
patients must be between 18 and 75 years old; (2) patients must be of
Han Chinese descent; (3) patients met diagnostic criteria for
schizophrenia, as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV); (4) patients experienced
disease courses of at least 5 years; (5) patients had been treated
mainly with monotherapy of an antipsychotic drug for at least 12 months.

Healthy controls without a family history of psychotic disorders were
recruited through local advertisements. Individuals were excluded if
they had any other major Axis I disorders.

Any patients who were pregnant or experiencing severe physical diseases,
such as cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, cancer,
infection, or unstable diabetes, were excluded. Any patient who had
alcohol or drug abuse/dependence, as determined by laboratory urine
tests, was excluded.

A total of 867 patients and 402 healthy controls were recruited. The
demographic information of patients has been described in our previous
studies. Briefly, there were differences in sex, BMI, and education
between patients and healthy controls (Lang et al., (n.d.o)).

The antipsychotics that patients received have been described in our
previous study but included clozapine, risperidone, quetiapine,
chlorpromazine, sulpiride, aripiprazole, perphenazine, olanzapine,
haloperidol, and other antipsychotics. The antipsychotic doses were
calculated by being equivalent to chlorpromazine (Lang et al., (n.d.o)).

.. _s2-2:

Clinical interview assessments
------------------------------

All participants were interviewed independently by two psychiatrists
using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID-I/P). We also
used the Positive and Negative Symptoms Scale (PANSS) to assess clinical
symptoms. Cognitive performance was evaluated using the Chinese version
of the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS, Form A).

.. _s2-3:

DNA isolation and SNP genotyping
--------------------------------

Peripheral venous blood was sampled, and DNA was extracted using a
salting-out method followed by preservation at −80\ :sup:`°`\ C (Rao et
al., (n.d.n)).

The polymorphism rs10447760 of *FOXP2* was genotyped using the methods
described before (Rao et al., (n.d.n)). 5% of the samples were randomly
selected for repeated genotyping as a quality control measure.

.. _s2-4:

Statistical analyses
--------------------

The normality of variable distribution was assessed using the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Chi-square tests and student’s *t*-tests were
used, for categorical variables and continuous variables, respectively.
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium was detected using a goodness of fit of
χ\ :sup:`2` test.

To investigate the effects of differing antipsychotics on cognitive
scores in patients, we conducted a multiple analysis of covariance
(MANCOVA). We chose this approach to address the overall *p*-value
because we thought it would reduce type I error, while also adjusting
for age, BMI, smoking, education, onset age, illness duration,
hospitalization times, antipsychotic duration, and daily dose. Then, an
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was performed to examine the effects of
different antipsychotics on the cognitive score, while adjusting for the
same parameters as in the primary MANCOVA.

To identify the effects of sex on cognitive scores in patients and
healthy controls, a 2 × 2 MANCOVA (sex × diagnosis) was conducted. All
of the RBANS subscores were dependent variables, and diagnosis and sex
were fixed factors. We also adjusted for age, BMI, smoking, and
education level. Then, an ANCOVA was performed with individual RBANS
scores as the dependent variable. In this model, sex and diagnosis were
the fixed factors, and we adjusted for age, BMI, smoking, and education
in the control group, and for onset age, hospitalization time,
antipsychotic types (atypical or typical antipsychotics), duration of
treatment with antipsychotics and antipsychotics dose in the patient
group. Stepwise multivariate regression analyses were conducted with
each RBANS score as a dependent variable, where sex was an independent
variable, and the same confounding covariates were controlled for
patients.

To identify the effects of the *FOXP2* genotype on the relationship
between sex and cognitive scores in patients and healthy controls, we
used 2 × 2 MANCOVAs (genotype × sex) separately in patient and control
groups. All RBANS scores were set as dependent variables, with the
genotype and sex as the independent variables, and adjustment for
confounding covariates. We then used an ANCOVA with each RBANS score as
a dependent variable, genotype, and sex as independent variables, and
with separate adjustments for confounding covariates in the patient and
control groups.

To explore the association between BMI and cognitive scores in the
patients and controls separately, as well as in the different sex and
genotypic groupings, we used partial correlations which adjusted for
demographic and clinical covariates. We also carried out multivariate
regression analyses, with each cognitive domain as a dependent variable,
BMI as an independent variable, and controlling for confounding
variables.

Bonferroni corrections were performed for multiple tests. The power of
the sample in the present study was calculated using Quanto Software
under dominant, log additive, and recessive models, and setting the
prevalence of schizophrenia as 1% in the population. The statistical
analyses were applied using SPSS version 25.0, and statistical
significance was identified as a 2-tailed p-value that was less than
0.05.

.. _s3:

Results
=======

.. _s3-1:

The effect of different antipsychotics on cognitive performance in patients
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The MANCOVA demonstrated that there were no significant effects of
differing antipsychotics on cognitive function (Wilks’ Lambda, *F* =
0.94, *p* = 0.61). Furthermore, the ANCOVA demonstrated that differing
antipsychotics did not have different effects on immediate memory (*F* =
1.46, *p* = 0.16), visual space/structure (*F* = 0.85, *p* = 0.56),
language (*F* = 0.51, *p* = 0.89), attention (*F* = 1.03, *p* = 0.42),
delayed memory (*F* = 1.18, *p* = 0.31), or total RBANS scores (*F* =
1.13, *p* = 0.34).

.. _s3-2:

Sex difference in cognitive scores of patients and controls
-----------------------------------------------------------

The 2 × 2 MANCOVA analysis (sex × diagnosis), which adjusted for age,
BMI, and educational years, showed a main effect of sex on cognitive
performance (Wilks’ lambda *F* = 8.01; *p* < 0.0001). Then, as shown in
`Table 1 <#T1>`__, after adjustments for age, BMI, and educational
years, ANCOVA showed a main effect of sex on language performance (*F* =
25.13; corrected *p* < 0.0001). There was a significant effect of
diagnosis × sex on language scores (*F* = 16.71, *p* < 0.001) which also
survived Bonferroni correction. Further ANCOVA analysis of the patient
group showed male patients with schizophrenia had better language
performance than female patients (*F* = 17.83; *p* < 0.0001), after
adjusting for confounding variables. This result also persisted after
Bonferroni correction (*p* < 0.0001). Further multivariate regression
analysis demonstrated that sex was correlated with language performance
in patients (*ß* = −7.69, *t* = 4.22, *p* < 0.0001); that is, female
patients performed worse than males did. In the control group, there
were no significant differences in any of the RBANS subscale scores, or
the total RBANS scores, between males and females (*p* > 0.05).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Comparisons among the RBANS total and five subscale scores by
      diagnostic and sex groupings (Mean ± SD).

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Pat   | Con   | Diag  | Sex   | Diag  |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ients | trols | nosis |       | nosis |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       | × Sex |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
   | Imme  | 56.88 | 60.02 | 75.56 | 75.77 | 2     | <     | 3.69  | 0.06  | 0.17  | 0.68  |
   | diate | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     | 56.95 | 0.001 |       |       |       |       |
   | m     | 15.58 | 18.38 | 15.79 | 18.27 |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | emory |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Atte  | 64.19 | 64.21 | 89.28 | 86.24 | 4     | <     | 1.78  | 0.18  | 0.36  | 0.55  |
   | ntion | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     | 20.86 | 0.001 |       |       |       |       |
   |       | 17.87 | 20.45 | 18.34 | 21.52 |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Lan   | 76.11 | 69.25 | 95.07 | 93.12 | 4     | <     | 25.13 | <     | 16.71 | <     |
   | guage | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     | 44.23 | 0.001 |       | 0.001 |       | 0.001 |
   |       | 17.31 | 19.96 | 11.41 | 14.04 |       |       |       | \ :su |       | \ :su |
   |       | \ :su | \ :su |       |       |       |       |       | p:`b` |       | p:`a` |
   |       | p:`a` | p:`a` |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Visuo | 76.56 | 76.86 | 81.26 | 78.55 | 13.19 | <     | 1.93  | 0.17  | 0.04  | 0.85  |
   | spati | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     |       | 0.001 |       |       |       |       |
   | al/co | 18.23 | 17.95 | 15.61 | 15.52 |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | nstru |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ction |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | De    | 63.48 | 66.72 | 86.72 | 85.94 | 3     | <     | 0.24  | 0.62  | 0.04  | 0.85  |
   | layed | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     | 23.84 | 0.001 |       |       |       |       |
   | m     | 19.09 | 20.91 | 14.24 | 15.91 |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | emory |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Total | 60.88 | 61.58 | 80.64 | 79.31 | 43    | <     | 0.48  | 0.49  | 0.92  | 0.34  |
   | score | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     | 6.776 | 0.001 |       |       |       |       |
   |       | 13.79 | 16.66 | 14.90 | 16.12 |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

   *a\ There was a significant effect of diagnosis X Gender on language
   score after a Bonferroni correction (F = 16.71, p < 0.001). Male
   patients had higher language performance than female patients.
   b\ Furthermore, there was a significant effect of gender on language
   score after a Bonferroni correction (F = 25.13, p < 0.001). The
   language score was higher in male than in female patients with
   schizophrenia (F = 17.83; p < 0.0001), while no difference was found
   in language score between males and females in controls (p > 0.05)*.

.. _s3-3:

Sex differences in the effects of *FOXP2* rs10447760 on cognitive scores in patients and controls
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The 2 × 2 MANCOVA demonstrated no effects of genotype (Wilks’ lambda *F*
= 1.41; *p* = 0.21), sex (Wilks’ lambda *F* = 1.71; *p* = 0.12), or
genotype × sex (Wilks’ lambda *F* = 0.56; *p* = 0.77) on cognitive
performance. ANCOVA analysis showed that there were genotype effects on
immediate memory scores (*F* = 4.14, *p* = 0.04) and language scores
(*F* = 4.89, *p* = 0.03; `Table 2 <#T2>`__) in the patient group.
However, the results did not persist after Bonferroni correction (*p* =
0.24, *p* = 0.18). No sex differences in the genotypic effects on BMI
was found.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Comparisons among the RBANS total and five subscale scores by
      gender and genotypic groupings in patient group (Mean ± SD).

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
   | Male  | F     | Sex   | Gen   | Sex × |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   |       | emale |       | otype | Gen   |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   |       |       |       |       | otype |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+======+
   | Imme  | 57.05 | 52.54 | 60.45 | 44.80 | 0.003 | 0.96  | 4.14  | 0.04  | 0.17  | 0.69 |
   | diate | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     |       |       |       | \ :su |       |      |
   | m     | 15.63 | 14.00 | 18.42 | 8.04  |       |       |       | p:`a` |       |      |
   | emory |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
   | Atte  | 64.32 | 60.96 | 64.29 | 61.40 | 0.07  | 0.80  | 0.09  | 0.76  | 0.03  | 0.86 |
   | ntion | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   |       | 18.00 | 13.83 | 20.58 | 16.42 |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
   | Lan   | 76.19 | 74.19 | 69.50 | 60.20 | 4.89  | 0.03  | 0.86  | 0.36  | 0.19  | 0.67 |
   | guage | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     |       | \ :su |       |       |       |      |
   |       | 17.31 | 17.53 | 19.99 | 18.21 |       | p:`a` |       |       |       |      |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
   | Visuo | 76.58 | 75.92 | 77.02 | 71.20 | 0.06  | 0.81  | 0.003 | 0.96  | 0.18  | 0.67 |
   | spati | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   | al/co | 18.27 | 17.35 | 17.93 | 19.73 |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   | nstru |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   | ction |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
   | De    | 63.50 | 62.88 | 66.95 | 58.60 | 0.02  | 0.88  | 0.09  | 0.77  | <0    | 0.99 |
   | layed | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     |       |       |       |       | .0001 |      |
   | m     | 19.09 | 19.33 | 20.95 | 19.41 |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   | emory |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
   | Total | 60.97 | 58.65 | 61.79 | 54.20 | 0.23  | 0.63  | 0.86  | 0.36  | 0.02  | 0.90 |
   | score | ±     | ±     | ±     | ±     |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   |       | 13.90 | 10.76 | 16.77 | 10.92 |       |       |       |       |       |      |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+

   *a\ The p-value did not survive after a Bonferroni correction*.

In the control group, there were no effects of sex, genotype, or sex ×
genotype on any of the RBANS scores (all *p* > 0.05).

.. _s3-4:

Sex difference in BMI of patients and healthy controls
------------------------------------------------------

There were no significant effects of sex or diagnosis × sex effects on
BMI (*F* = 0.96, *p* = 0.33; *F* = 0.16, *p* = 0.69). Furthermore, there
were no significant sex differences in BMI in any of the subjects,
whether they were patients or healthy controls (all *p*\ ’s > 0.05),
which suggested that sex had no effects on BMI in patients or controls.

.. _s3-5:

Sex difference in the association between BMI and cognitive scores in patients and controls
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To further investigate whether BMI was associated with cognitive scores
in different sexes, we further divided the patients into a male patient
group and a female patient group. Additional multivariate regression
analysis demonstrated a positive association of BMI with language
performance in the male patient group (*ß* = 0.60, *t* = 3.30, *p* =
0.001), while other cognitive subscale scores and total scores showed no
significant differences after adjusting for confounding variables and
performing Bonferroni corrections (all *p*\ ’s > 0.05).

In the healthy control group, BMI was negatively correlated with
attention performance in the male control group (*r* = −0.26, *p* =
0.001), including after controlling confounding covariables (partial *r*
= -0.21, partial *p* = 0.009). However, this did not persist after
Bonferroni correction. Other cognitive subscale scores and total scores
showed no significant associations with BMI after adjusting for
confounding variables (all *p*\ ’s > 0.05).

.. _s3-6:

Sex differences in the association of BMI with cognitive performance: adjusted by *FOXP2* rs10447760
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To further explore the association between BMI and cognitive performance
in different *FOXP2* rs10447760 genotypes, we divided the patients into
two genotypic groups: patients carrying CC and patients carrying CT.
Multivariate regression analysis demonstrated a positive association
between BMI and language scores in the patient group carrying the CC
genotype (*ß* = 0.53, *t* = 3.16, *p* = 0.002). Interestingly, this
positive association was found only in male patients (*ß* = 0.63, *t* =
3.44, *p* = 0.001), not in female patients (*p* > 0.05).

In the healthy control group, no association was found between BMI and
any of the five RBANS subscale scores or total scores in either *FOXP2*
genotypic subgroup, after adjusting for confounding variables and
performing Bonferroni corrections (all *p*\ ’s > 0.05).

.. _s4:

Discussion
==========

The main findings of this study were: (1) male schizophrenia patients
had better language performance than female patients; (2) the *FOXP2*
rs10447760 genotype did not show an interaction with sex on cognitive
performance in schizophrenia patients; (3) there was a positive
correlation between BMI and language performance only in male
schizophrenia patients; (4) after stratification by *FOXP2* rs10447760
genotype, there was a positive correlation between BMI and language
performance only in schizophrenia patients carrying the CC genotype.

Considering differences in hormonal status, psychosocial stress, and
brain structure and function between male and female patients with
schizophrenia, previous evidence has documented sex-specific effects on
cognitive deficits in schizophrenia (Han et al., (n.d.af)). However,
these results are still controversial. Most prior studies have shown
that male schizophrenia patients have relatively worse performances on
various cognitive dimensions (Han et al., (n.d.af); Leger and Neill,
(n.d.x)), but some studies have shown opposite results (Gogos et al.,
(n.d.ag); Leger and Neill, (n.d.x)). Additionally, other studies have
shown that sex has no effect on cognitive changes in schizophrenia
(Karilampi et al., (n.d.ah); Kao et al., (n.d.ai)). Our results
demonstrated better language cognitive performance in males compared to
female patients with chronic schizophrenia. Previously, Lewine et al.
((n.d.aj)) found greater deficits in verbal and spatial memory in female
patients with schizophrenia. They also found the worse performance of
the right hemisphere than that of the left hemisphere, consistent with
previous evidence showing right-hemispheric brain activation contributes
to language function (van Ettinger-Veenstra et al., (n.d.ak)).

We have previously reported that *FOXP2* rs10447760 affects immediate
memory in chronic schizophrenia (Lang et al., (n.d.o)). However, we did
not find any effects of *FOXP2* rs10447760 on any cognitive scores
across sexes, indicating that there were no interactive effects of
*FOXP2* rs10447760 and sex on cognitive scores in schizophrenia. Few
prior studies have explored the interplay of sex and gene polymorphism
on cognitive deficits in schizophrenia. One previous study found
significant sex interactions when assessing the relationship between
BDNF AL66Met polymorphism, another neurotrophic factor, and cognitive
performance (Kim et al., (n.d.al)). This evidence suggests that
different genes, or even different polymorphisms in the same gene, can
lead to different sex-specific interactions on cognitive functioning.

Higher BMI and obesity are common in schizophrenia patients. However,
any effects of BMI on cognitive performance within schizophrenia
patients are unknown (Bora et al., (n.d.s)). Previous findings have
suggested that the influence of BMI on cognitive deficits in
schizophrenia is complex (Friedman et al., (n.d.v); Takayanagi et al.,
(n.d.w); Rashid et al., (n.d.r); Hidese et al., (n.d.am)). Other
aspects, including sex and genetic background, may be involved in the
association between BMI and cognitive deficits in schizophrenia patients
(Rashid et al., (n.d.r)). A previous study by our group also showed that
NRG3 polymorphism altered the effect of BMI on cognitive deficits of
patients with schizophrenia (Zhou et al., (n.d.an)). Here, we showed
that there was a positive association between BMI and language
performance in schizophrenia patients, even after adjusting for
demographic and clinical covariables. Interestingly, this positive
association was found in male patients, but not in female patients. It
seems likely that BMI affects cognitive deficits as a function of sex in
schizophrenia. Previously, one study demonstrated that increased BMI
correlated with worse executive function and attention in male patients
with heart failure, but not in female patients, which also indicated an
interacting sex effect on the relationship between BMI and cognitive
function (Hawkins et al., (n.d.ao)).

FOXP\ *2* plays a critical role in the neuronal processes that
contribute to language and speech performance (Liegeois et al.,
(n.d.ap); Vernes et al., (n.d.aq)), and its polymorphisms have been
reported to be involved in the pathophysiology of cognitive function and
language phenotypes in schizophrenia (Tolosa et al., (n.d.ar); Mozzi et
al., (n.d.as)). However, we did not find any associations between the
*FOXP2* rs10447760 genotype and language scores in our previous study
(Lang et al., (n.d.o)), and a recent meta-analysis also showed no
association between *FOXP2* variations and language deficits in
schizophrenia (McCarthy et al., (n.d.at)). These inconsistent findings
might be the result of foregoing consideration of other crucial
demographic or clinical characteristics, including BMI and sex. In this
study, although we did not observe an interactive effect between sex and
*FOXP2* rs10447760 on cognitive deficits, we did find that *FOXP2*
rs10447760 interplayed with BMI to affect cognitive changes in
schizophrenia patients: There was a positive correlation of BMI with
language function only in schizophrenia patients with the *FOXP2*
rs10447760 CC genotype. This suggests that BMI might affect cognitive
deficits in schizophrenia as a condition of specific *FOXP2* genotypes.
*FOXP2* has also been associated with obesity in previous studies
(Glessner et al., (n.d.p); Xia and Grant, (n.d.au); Clifton et al.,
(n.d.q)). Accumulating evidence indicates there is a shared genetic
pathway or system for cognitive performance and BMI (Marioni et al.,
(n.d.ac)). Marioni et al. ((n.d.ac)) demonstrated that individual
genetic mutations correlating with BMI account for a critical component
of the variance in cognitive performance, and *vice versa*. They also
showed that genetic variants leading to higher cognitive performance
correlated with lower BMI (Marioni et al., (n.d.ac)). In addition, some
studies have also suggested that genetic factors contribute highly to
cognitive function and BMI phenotypes. For example, Frazier-Wood et al.
((n.d.ad)) reported between 20% and 30% shared genetic variance of
cognitive function and BMI of 20%–30% (Laitala et al., (n.d.ae)).
Additionally, these shared genetic pathways or systems appear to display
overlapping gene expression profiles in specific areas of the brain
(Locke et al., (n.d.av)). Our present results provide further evidence
of the shared genetic influences underlying BMI and cognitive function.

The present study has some limitations. First, we recruited patients
with chronic schizophrenia and with different antipsychotic treatment
regimens. However, several lines of evidence indicate that the style and
severity of cognitive deficits are fundamentally stable. In addition,
cognitive deficits were independent of illness duration and remained
relatively stable without changes over time (Harvey et al., (n.d.aw);
Bowie and Harvey, (n.d.ax)). Furthermore, the different antipsychotics
used all converted to chlorpromazine. Second, although we recruited
relatively larger samples, unequal sample sizes between the patient and
control groups, as we had here, may cause type II error. Furthermore,
there were unequal sample sizes between males and females within patient
or healthy controls, and unequal sample sizes between *FOXP2* CC and
*FOXP2* CT genotypes within the patient group. Further studies in first
episode drug naïve schizophrenia patients, and studies with equal sample
sizes between patients and controls, should be conducted to validate our
results. With regard to the unequal sample sizes between *FOXP2* C and T
alleles within subjects, *FOXP2* rs10447760 has the rare variant allele
T in the Asian population. Thus, a small number of subjects with CT
genotype may dramatically change the significance of p-value. Last but
not least, the differences in sex, BMI, and education between patients
and healthy controls might influence the results, although these factors
have been adjusted for.

In conclusion, the present study showed sex differences in language
deficits in schizophrenia patients. Furthermore, sexual dimorphism and
*FOXP2* rs10447760 may impact the influence of BMI on language-based
cognitive deficits in schizophrenia patients.

.. _s5:

Data Availability Statement
===========================

The datasets presented in this study can be found in online
repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession
number(s) can be found below:
https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/gsub/submit/bioproject/list,subSAM098688.

.. _s6:

Ethics Statement
================

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved and
the protocol was approved by the ethics committee of the Beijing
Huilongguan Hospital (No. BJ-7072035). The patients/participants
provided their written informed consent to participate in this study.

.. _s7:

Authors Contributions
=====================

ZL, MXi, and XZ designed the study. ZL, MF, MXu, and YC wrote the
article. MY and XL did the statistical analysis. All authors contributed
to the article and approved the submitted version.

.. _s8:

Funding
=======

This research was funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(81401127, 62073058), Chengdu Municipal Health Commission (2021057),
Open Project Program of State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality
Technology and Systems, Beihang University (No. VRLAB2022 B02), and
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders Open Grant (21-K03).
Funding had no role in study design, data analysis, or the decision to
submit the article for publication.

We thank all of the patients and healthy volunteers who participated in
this research. We also thank Dr. Dachun Chen, Song Chen, and Gui Gang
Yang for all of their hard work and significant contributions to this
study.

.. _s9:

Conflict of Interest
====================

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

.. _s10:

Publisher’s Note
================

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or
those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that
may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B1

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B2

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B3

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B4

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B5

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B6

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B7

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B8

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B9

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B11

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B12

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B13

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B14

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B15

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B16

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B17

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B18

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B19

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B20

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B21

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B22

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B23

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B24

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B25

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B26

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B27

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B28

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B29

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B30

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B31

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B32

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B33

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B34

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B35

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B36

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B37

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B38

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B39

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B40

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B41

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B42

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B43

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B44

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B45

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B46

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B10

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B47

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B48

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B49

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B50

      n.d.an.

.. [1]
   Edited by: Yuzhen Xu, Shandong First Medical University, China

.. [2]
   Reviewed by: Qin Xu, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
   Diseases (NIH), United States; Yu Wang, Tianjin Medical University
   General Hospital, China

.. [3]
   **Specialty section**: This article was submitted to Cellular and
   Molecular Mechanisms of Brain-aging, a section of the journal
   Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience
