===========================================================================================
Perspectives of Nursing Students towards Schizophrenia Stigma: A Qualitative Study Protocol
===========================================================================================

Xi Chen
Jingjing Su
Daniel Thomas Bressington
Yan Li
Sau Fong Leung*Correspondence: sau.fong.leung@polyu.edu.hk
:Date: 2022-8-04

:Abstract:
   Aim: This study aims to explore fourth-year nursing students’
   knowledge of schizophrenia and their attitudes, empathy, and
   intentional behaviours towards people with schizophrenia. Design:
   This will be a descriptive qualitative study using focus-group
   interviews. Methods: Fourth-year nursing students on clinical
   placement in a hospital in Hunan province will be invited for
   focus-group interviews. Snowball and purposive sampling will be used
   to recruit nursing students for this study. Five focus-group
   interviews, each including six participants, will be conducted to
   explore participants’ knowledge, attitudes, intentional behaviours,
   and empathy towards schizophrenia. The interview will be conducted
   through the online Tencent video conference platform and the
   interview data will be collected through the same platform. All
   interviews will be recorded and transcribed verbatim and analysed
   with the approach of the content analysis supported by NVivo 12.
   Simultaneous data collection and analysis will be performed, and the
   interviews will be continued until data saturation is met. The
   findings of this study will be helpful in developing effective
   interventions to decrease the stigma toward schizophrenia among
   nursing students and those who study healthcare disciplines.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _sec1-ijerph-19-09574:

1. Introduction
===============

Mental illness is a highly frequent disorder in which an individual’s
cognition, emotion regulation, or behaviour is clinically significantly
disturbed [(“Mental Disorders” 2022)]. Mental illness stigma is defined
as social stereotyping of, or discrimination against, people with mental
illness [(Corrigan, Kerr, and Knudsen 2005)]. A study involving 16
countries showed that the public had a high level of stigma towards
people with mental illness [(Pescosolido et al. 2013)]. Mental
illness-related stigma is extremely damaging to people with mental
illness, their families, and the health care system [(Brouwers
2020),(Wittchen et al. 2011)], and those with severe mental illness
often face severe stigma [(Whitley and Campbell 2014)]. Typical severe
mental illnesses include schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major
depression [(“Helping People with Severe Mental Disorders Live Longer
and Healthier Lives” 2017)], of which schizophrenia is the most
stigmatized mental illness [(Angermeyer and Dietrich 2006),(Jorm,
Reavley, and Ross 2012),(Valery and Prouteau 2020)].

Schizophrenia results in individuals’ significant impairments in
perceiving reality and changes all aspects of their lives; it affects
approximately 24 million people globally [(“Schizophrenia” 2022)]. In
China, an epidemiological study reported that the lifetime prevalence of
schizophrenia among Chinese people was 0.6% between 2013 and 2015
[(Huang, Wang, and Wang 2019)]. A recent study reported that the
age-standardized incidence rate of schizophrenia in China was
18.47/100,000 in 2019 [(Dong et al. 2022)]. The incidence rate implies
that almost 8.46 million people in China had schizophrenia [(Zhai,
n.d.)]. However, a huge number of people with schizophrenia were
undetected by the healthcare system, as only 0.29 million (95% UI = 0.26
to 0.33 million) newly diagnosed schizophrenia cases were reported in
2017 in China [(He et al. 2021)]. Stigma is the main barrier to
health-seeking behaviours, and the exploration of schizophrenia stigma
is urgent.

People with schizophrenia face stigma in different aspects of their
daily lives, such as in employment [(Koschorke et al. 2014),(Sharac et
al. 2010)], friendships [(Lee et al. 2005)], romantic relationships
[(Koschorke et al. 2014),(Lee et al. 2005)], rehabilitation [(Leamy et
al. 2011),(Vass et al. 2017)], social integration [(Vass et al. 2017)],
and receiving medical treatment [(Caqueo-Urízar et al. 2019)], which
affects their life quality [(Valery and Prouteau 2020),(Cai and Yu
2017),(Wang, Petrini, and Morisky 2016)] and reduces their willingness
to confide in others or ask for help [(Koschorke et al. 2014),(Maharjan
and Panthee 2019),(Corrigan, Druss, and Perlick 2014),(Gerlinger et al.
2013),(Kleintjes, Lund, and Flisher 2010)]. Such stigmatisation can make
them lose their self-esteem and ignore their own symptoms [(Maharjan and
Panthee 2019),(Lysaker et al. 2008),(Lysaker, Vohs, and Tsai 2009)]. The
loss of social status and familial respect caused by stigma [(Koschorke
et al. 2014)] can even lead to suicide [(Sharaf, Ossman, and Lachine
2012)]. Meanwhile, stigmatising views held by health professionals can
decrease their willingness to work in psychiatric departments [(Halter
2008),(Henderson et al. 2014)], leading to a shortage of doctors and
nurses [(Samari et al. 2019)].

Nurses constitute the largest occupational group in the healthcare
sector globally [(“Helping People with Severe Mental Disorders Live
Longer and Healthier Lives” 2017)]. Some nursing students in Mainland
China also hold negative attitudes towards people with mental illness
[(Geng 2015),(Pan et al. 2013),(Fei, Li, and Geng 2016)]. Compared with
their USA peers, they were found to have poor knowledge of schizophrenia
[(Liu 2019)]. Nurses play a major role in the rehabilitation and
treatment of people with schizophrenia [(Sánchez-Martínez and Sales-Orts
2020)]. Thus, exploring the perspectives towards people with
schizophrenia among nursing students, as future nurses, will be
invaluable in designing anti-stigma interventions for these students and
ultimately improving the conditions of people with schizophrenia. Many
quantitative studies have investigated nursing students’ knowledge of
mental illness and/or their stigmatised attitudes and/or intentional
behaviours towards people with mental illness [(Fekih-Romdhane et al.
2022),(Chang et al. 2017),(Palou et al. 2022),(Fernandes et al.
2022),(Hawthorne et al. 2020)]. Mental illness stigma is influenced by
multiple factors [(Shrivastava, Johnston, and Bureau 2012)], especially
cultural factors [(Ran et al. 2021)]. But little quantitative research
considers the cultural factors of stigma. Previous quantitative research
often used some form of scale to assess the attitudes and intentional
behaviours of nursing students’ stigma towards schizophrenia [(Sideras
et al. 2015)]. To develop specific and targeted interventions in
decreasing nursing students’ stigma towards schizophrenia, it is
necessary to understand their real perspectives. However, our knowledge
of this area is lacking. Hence, a qualitative study will be more
suitable for such an investigation. A qualitative descriptive research
study generates data of three dimensions—who, what, and where—of events
or experiences from a subjective perspective [(Kim, Sefcik, and Bradway
2017)]. Philosophically, reality exists within a certain context, which
is continuously changing and is perceived differently by different
subjects. Thus, reality is characteristic of diversity and subjectivity,
and it is highly recommended that the approach of constructionism and
critical theories that use interpretative and naturalistic methods
should be adopted in this research [(Lincoln, Lynham, and Guba 2017)].
This study aims to obtain straightforward descriptions of nursing
students’ experiences and perceptions towards schizophrenia. The
qualitative descriptive approach is frequently used to provide
straightforward descriptions of experiences and perceptions within a
unique context [(Sandelowski 2010)]. In this type of research, the
research process is inductive and dynamic, and the data collected from
this phenomenon will not be over-transformed [(Sandelowski
2010),(Ormston et al. 2014)]. The advantages of the qualitative
descriptive approach are both the questions’ subjective nature and
participants’ diverse experiences, which can be recognized. Moreover,
the outcomes will be reported straightforwardly, or in a way using
similar terminology to the initial research question [(Bradshaw,
Atkinson, and Doody 2017)].

Some qualitative studies have explored the knowledge, attitudes, and
behaviours of health professional students [(Riffel and Chen
2020),(Pederson et al. 2022)], nursing students [(Samari et al.
2018),(Fokuo et al. 2017)], and medical students [(Rodríguez-Rivas
2021)] towards mental illness. There is a lack of qualitative research
focusing on schizophrenia stigma, even though schizophrenia is the most
stigmatized mental illness [(Angermeyer and Dietrich 2006),(Jorm,
Reavley, and Ross 2012),(Valery and Prouteau 2020)], and the
relationship between culture and stigma is given little attention in
qualitative studies. Thus, further studies could be centred around
nursing students’ perceptions of schizophrenia stigma. Unlike Western
countries, China is a developing country with a culture of face-saving
that is deeply influenced by Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism [(Yang
et al. 2014),(Yang and Kleinman 2008)].

In view of the relationship between culture and the stigma, the
development of anti-stigma interventions should be tailored to the
Chinese culture. The findings of such a qualitative study may help to
develop Chinese culture-specific interventions to decrease
schizophrenia-related stigma among nursing students, as well as students
of other healthcare disciplines and health professionals in China.

.. _sec2-ijerph-19-09574:

2. Theoretical Framework
========================

In 2006, Thornicroft put forward the idea that three domains have
constructed the problem of stigma: “knowledge, leading to ignorance;
attitudes, leading to prejudice; and behaviour, leading to
discrimination” [(Thornicroft 2006)]. Although stigma has been
conceptualized differently, attitudes and behaviours are two core
elements in most conceptualizations [(Thornicroft et al. 2007)]. Stigma
can be recognized as a negative attitude towards people with mental
illness, and public stigma consists of three base components:
stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination [(Corrigan and Penn
1999),(Corrigan and Kleinlein 2005)]. Empathy is recognized as how an
individual perceives other people’s thinking and feeling, and figures
out what makes someone give a response to other people’s suffering with
sensitivity and care [(Batson 2009)]. According to a meta-analysis
report, empathy is a mediator of the relationship between intergroup
contact and reduced prejudice [(Pettigrew and Tropp 2008)]. A study
reported that empathy is inversely related to stigma and can be used to
predict stigma [(Webb et al. 2016)]. Some studies also reported that
improving empathy could decrease negative attitudes towards people with
mental illness or other specific populations, and function as a
potential protective factor that can reduce stigma [(Webb et al.
2016),(Batson et al. 1997),(Naylor et al. 2009)]. In different cultures,
people have different understandings of stigma, treat it in different
ways, and yield different results [(Yang 2007)]. Culture and beliefs
will affect people’s views towards mental illness [(Yang et al. 2007)].
“Notions of stigma are bound by culture” ([(Ainlay, Becker, and Coleman
2012)] p. 1). Studies have shown that sociocultural and religious
factors strongly influence stigmatising attitudes [(S. N. Chen, Zhong,
and Zhang 2009),(Haddad et al. 2016),(Haddad et al. 2017),(Waqas et al.
2020),(Waqas et al. 2014)]. It is difficult to measure peoples’ real
behaviours towards schizophrenia [(Maunder and White 2019)]. Thus,
intentional behaviours will be measured instead. It is envisaged that
understanding how nursing students’ knowledge, attitudes, intentional
behaviours, empathy, and the cultural influence on them affect their
perspectives of schizophrenia and support the future development of
interventions to decrease schizophrenia-related stigma among nursing
students.

.. _sec3-ijerph-19-09574:

3. Aims
=======

This study will explore fourth-year nursing students’ knowledge of
schizophrenia and their attitudes, empathy, and intentional behaviours
towards people with schizophrenia.

.. _sec4-ijerph-19-09574:

4. Methods and Analysis
=======================

.. _sec4dot1-ijerph-19-09574:

4.1. Study Design and Setting
-----------------------------

This qualitative study will adopt a descriptive design focusing on
fourth-year nursing students’ knowledge of schizophrenia and their
attitudes, empathy, and intentional behaviours towards people with
schizophrenia. The study will be conducted at a tertiary first-class
hospital in mainland China that provides clinical training for more than
250 fourth-year nursing students from across the country each year. Data
collection will be conducted through focus-group interviews based on an
online interview platform (Tencent meeting, a very popular online
interview platform in China).

It is recognized that focus-group interviews can help generate deeper
and richer data in many scenarios, as they involve group interactions
[(Rabiee 2004)]. These data can help to construct the key components of
the intervention [(Campbell et al. 2000)]. Through focus-group
interviews, data from the researcher and each participant can be
collected, and new questions and answers can be generated through
interactive verbal communication among the group members. Researchers
can thus know their participants’ needs and feelings and explore the
influence of cultural values and beliefs on them [(Holloway and Galvin
2016)]. The consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research
[(Tong, Sainsbury, and Craig 2007)] will be used to guide the reporting
of the focus-group interviews and the writing of the qualitative
protocol.

As mentioned above, it is widely recognized that cultural values
influence the stigma surrounding mental illness. Focus groups involving
in-depth interviews of a particular population group on a certain topic
can be used to develop or modify relevant intervention protocols
[(Rabiee 2004)]. Thus, we chose focus-group interviews to collect the
data from 25 July 2022 to 30 September 2022. Apart from the focus-group
interviews, individual interviews will also be offered to any
participant who does not feel comfortable discussing the sensitive topic
of stigma in a group setting.

.. _sec4dot2-ijerph-19-09574:

4.2. Participants, and Recruitment
----------------------------------

All the participants of this study will be fourth-year nursing students.
WeChat or emails will be used for recruitment purposes. The principal
investigator will be responsible for recruiting eligible participants
and collecting their written informed consent. The inclusion and
exclusion criteria are as follows:

Inclusion Criteria:

Nursing students who (1) are on clinical placement at the hospital
involved in this study; (2) are 18 years old or above; (3) can
communicate in Mandarin; and (4) agree to participate in this study.

Exclusion Criteria:

Nursing students who (1) have no access to a computer, a smartphone, or
any electronic device for joining the online interview.

.. _sec4dot3-ijerph-19-09574:

4.3. Sampling
-------------

“In focus-group research, the strategy is to use purposeful sampling
whereby the researcher selects participants based on the purpose of the
study [(Holloway and Galvin 2016)] p. 452.” To gain rich information and
to achieve maximum variation sampling from the participant, we will
enrol fourth-year nursing students who satisfy the criteria and, if
possible: (1) have contact experience with people with schizophrenia or
mental illness, (2) are of male gender (most nursing students are
female; thus, we want to enrol some male nursing students), (3) come
from different provinces (it would be best to include some from ethnic
minority groups), and (4) are very interested in studying mental health
and willing to discuss their perspectives on our research topic.
However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and without contact information
for the potential participants, it will be challenging and difficult to
recruit a purposeful sample. Thus, the initial participant recruitment
will adopt the snowball sampling method. Interested nursing students
will be recruited through the affiliation of the principal investigator
with a nursing college which can promote the study.

If possible, we will also ask the participants to help us recruit their
peers who can meet the inclusion criteria of the aforementioned
purposeful sampling.

.. _sec4dot4-ijerph-19-09574:

4.4. Sample Size
----------------

A sample size of 4–12 participants is recommended for focus-group
interviews. However, as it will be challenging to manage more than 12
participants in online focus-group interviews, we will divide the
participants into two or three independent focus groups [(Nyumba et al.
2018)], with six participants per group [(Holloway and Galvin 2016)]. It
is suggested that data collection should be controlled as data
collection after data saturation leads to a waste of time and resources
[(Marshall et al. 2013)]; therefore, concurrent data analysis will be
adopted. Data saturation determines the sample size; thus, an exact
sample size cannot be determined before the focus-group interviews
[(Lincoln and Guba 1985)]. It is reported that the first 5–6
participants produce the majority of new information in the dataset,
while little information is gained from the later participants, and
80–92% of early information is identified within the dataset from the
first 10 participants [(Guest, Namey, and Chen 2020)]. Little new
information will be collected when the sample size is close to 20
interviews [(Baker and Edwards 2012)]. Thus, we expect around 5 groups
of focus-group interviews (about 30 participants) will achieve data
saturation, (i.e., when no new codes or themes emerge). The focus-group
interviews will be stopped upon reaching data saturation.

.. _sec4dot5-ijerph-19-09574:

4.5. Data Collection
--------------------

An interview guide will be prepared for focus-group interviews based on
a literature review and a research-group discussion. To make the
interview questions clearer and easier to understand for nursing
students, pilot interviews were used to collect suggestions about the
interview questions, and then the interview guide was adjusted. The
details of the questions included in the interview guide are provided in
`Table 1 <#ijerph-19-09574-t001>`__.

Tencent Video Conference will be used to conduct and record the online
focus-group interviews. A sociodemographic questionnaire will be used to
collect participants’ demographic information. The principal researcher,
who has received postgraduate research training, will conduct the
focus-group interviews. Meanwhile, one research assistant will use field
notes to record the non-verbal expressions and emotional states of all
of the participants. Since this will be an online focus-group interview,
all participants are free to choose a comfortable place for themselves
during the interview. When the interview starts, some warm-up questions
will be raised first to build rapport between all participants. Each
focus group interview will last approximately 1–1.5 h. All of the
interviews will be recorded and transcribed. A research assistant and
the principal researcher will check the transcripts’ accuracy by
comparing the transcripts word-by-word with the recorded videos
independently. They will compare the difference between the two versions
and check the video recording together before agreeing on a final
version. The final version of the transcripts will be shared with the
participants to correct any discrepancies and provide additional
clarification that might improve data accuracy. Non-verbal responses
will also be recorded in the transcripts [(Creswell 2013)].

.. _sec4dot6-ijerph-19-09574:

4.6. Data Analysis
------------------

Data analysis will be conducted after completing the data transcripts
and the coding will be done as early as possible. The principal
researcher will read the transcription many times to ensure his
familiarity with the data, which will be helpful for the subsequent data
analysis. The dimensions of analysis will rely on the interview data and
focus on the specific objectives to explore participants’ knowledge,
attitudes, empathy, and intentional behaviours towards people with
schizophrenia.

.. _sec4dot6dot1-ijerph-19-09574:

4.6.1. Descriptive Statistics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The demographic characteristics of the participants will be presented
with descriptive statistics, including means, standard deviations, and
percentages, where appropriate.

.. _sec4dot6dot2-ijerph-19-09574:

4.6.2. Qualitative Content Analysis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Content analysis is widely used in qualitative research to discover the
underlying meaning of words by quantification [(Renz, Carrington, and
Badger 2018)]. An inductive approach will be used for content analysis
in this study, as it involves detailed readings of the raw data to
derive concepts and themes, which allows findings to emerge directly
from the analysis of the raw data, rather than from a priori
expectations or models [(Thomas 2006)]. Furthermore, in qualitative
content analysis, systematic coding is used to describe the meaning of
the qualitative data [(Assarroudi et al. 2018)]; the two most common
approaches are manifest content and latent content analyses
[(Kleinheksel et al. 2020)]. Manifest content analysis involves
examining the surface structure of the text, while latent content
analysis involves exploring hidden meanings of the text [(Bengtsson
2016)]. Both manifest content and latent content analyses have
advantages in text interpretation, and a combination of both may ensure
more consistent and accurate findings than either approach alone
[(Bengtsson 2016),(Vaismoradi, Turunen, and Bondas 2013)]. Thus, both
types of content analysis will be adopted in this study to understand
participants’ true views about schizophrenia. Simultaneous qualitative
data collection and analysis have been reported to enhance the depth and
quality of data analysis [(Gibbs 2018)]. Thus, concurrent data analysis
will be used in the interviews, and the interviews will be stopped upon
reaching data saturation.

The five steps of qualitative content analysis are described below: data
preparing and organising, reading and memoing, data coding, generating
categories, and presenting the description and themes [(Creswell 2013)].

NVivo 12, a qualitative data analysis software, will be used to manage
the data. An experienced qualitative researcher will also be invited to
code the transcripts independently, and the coding outcomes of the
principal researcher and the qualitative researcher will be compared. If
some disagreement occurs, the research team will discuss the themes and
findings, and make modifications until a consensus is reached. An
outline of this focus-group interview study is shown in `Figure
1 <#ijerph-19-09574-f001>`__.

.. _sec4dot7-ijerph-19-09574:

4.7. Issues of Data Trustworthiness
-----------------------------------

Qualitative validity refers to the extent to which the study findings
are accurate at every step of the analysis, while qualitative
reliability refers to the extent to which the study findings are
consistent between different researchers and projects [(Gibbs 2018)].
Credibility, dependability, transferability, and confirmability are the
four criteria that determine the trustworthiness of a rigorous
qualitative study [(Lincoln and Guba 1986)]. Peer-debriefing,
member-checking, and all interview data will be transcribed into Chinese
by a research assistant independently. Different categories and
subcategories will be established after all data are analysed, and the
research findings will be translated into English. This process will
help to decrease the loss of meaning during translation and thus improve
the credibility of the findings [(H.-Y. Chen and Boore 2010)]. A sound
audit trail and analytical memos will be maintained, and details of each
step of the study will be recorded to ensure the dependability of this
study. The information on the demographic and clinical characteristics
and study context will be provided in detail, and the transferability of
the findings will be increased in this study [(Anney 2014)]. The
researcher will reflect upon his actions to determine whether he has
provided any misleading cues to the participants. Meanwhile, a research
assistant will examine the video recordings of the interviews to
identify any instances where the researcher might have manipulated the
participants’ responses. Peer-debriefing will be used to examine the
data-analysis process. Two trained research assistants will examine the
processes of discussion and analysis to improve the confirmability of
the data [(Elo et al. 2014)].

.. _sec4dot8-ijerph-19-09574:

4.8. Ethical Issues and Data Safety
-----------------------------------

Ethical approval has been obtained from the Research Ethics Committee of
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (HSEARS20220127002 on 22 February
2022) and the Research Ethics Committee of the Hospital (KE202203129 on
18 March 2022) to conduct this study. Written informed consent will be
obtained from eligible participants before data collection. Before
filling in the information sheet, the participants will be reminded of
the voluntary nature of their participation in the study, and their
right to withdraw from the study at any time without any consequences
for their clinical rotation. All information of the participants will be
kept confidential and destroyed three years after completing the study.

.. _sec5-ijerph-19-09574:

5. Discussion
=============

Exploring nursing students’ perspectives of schizophrenia stigma is a
significant research topic, due to the lack of relevant knowledge. The
findings of this qualitative study can inform the development of a
Chinese culture-specific intervention to decrease schizophrenia-related
stigma in China. Focus-group dynamic interaction is one of the methods
to deal with sensitive, potential, and unpredictable questions within a
group interview setting [(Sim and Waterfield 2019)], whereas individual
interviews may gain profound and accurate information of sensitive
issues from participants. Most of our participants will be interviewed
in focus groups as Chinese students might feel shy to express their
opinions over a sensitive topic and would feel more at ease when
accompanied by peers [(Lo 2019)]. However, given the face-saving
tendencies of some Chinese people [(Yang and Kleinman 2008)], we will
also consider offering individual interviews for students who feel
uncomfortable with a focus-group interview. To ensure the data
trustworthiness of this study, particular attention will be paid to data
coding and data analysis, as highlighted in the earlier sessions. All
interviews will be strictly transcribed by the principal researcher and
a research assistant into written form to avoid the loss of information.
Agreement on the codes and themes will be ensured among the research
team members. More importantly, we will invite our participants to
examine the findings of this data analysis and determine whether these
findings reflect their real perspectives or opinions.

.. _sec6-ijerph-19-09574:

6. Limitations and Strengths
============================

Nursing students with strong stigmatised views towards people with
schizophrenia may be unwilling to participate in this study due to
perceptions related to social desirability. This could lead to bias in
participant recruitment. In addition, only fourth-year nursing students
(from different universities) will be included in the focus-group
interviews in view of the students’ theoretical knowledge of mental
health. Thus, our sample may not be representative of the whole nursing
student population spanning all degree years. However, the fourth year
is the final year of the nursing degree, when nursing students’ stigma
towards people with schizophrenia may affect their choice of nursing
specialisation and their care for such patients in the years to come.
Thus, we believe that exclusively including fourth-year nursing students
is a potential strength of this study, as its results may guide the
development of specific interventions to decrease these students’ stigma
towards schizophrenia and encourage more graduating nurses to work in
mental health departments.

.. _sec7-ijerph-19-09574:

7. Conclusions
==============

To the best of our knowledge, this study will be the first to explore
the perceived effect of Chinese culture on the stigma towards
schizophrenia among nursing students. The study findings will inform the
development of culture-specific interventions to decrease this stigma in
Chinese nursing students and the nursing workforce. The findings may
also stimulate the development of such interventions for decreasing the
stigma towards other mental illnesses among nursing students, as well as
students of other healthcare disciplines and health professionals in
China.

All the authors contributed to the design and methodology of this study.
X.C. drafted the initial version of this manuscript and all the other
authors were involved in the writing, reviewing, and editing. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki,
and approved by the Ethics Committee of the Hong Kong Polytechnic
University (protocol code HSEARS20220127002) and Xiang Ya Hospital
(protocol code KE202203129) for studies involving humans.

Informed consent will be obtained from all participants involved in the
study.

This statement can be excluded as the study did not report any data.

The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.

.. figure:: ijerph-19-09574-g001
   :alt: Outline of the focus-group interview study.
   :name: ijerph-19-09574-f001

   Outline of the focus-group interview study.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: ijerph-19-09574-t001

   ijerph-19-09574-t001_Table 1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Interview guide of the focus groups.

   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 1.  | What is your understanding of schizophrenia (SZ)? (Probe:     |
   |     | causal factors, manifestation, prognosis; where did you       |
   |     | obtain such information?)                                     |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 2.  | What do you think about the life of people with SZ? (Probe:   |
   |     | social support > intimate relationship > education > working) |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 3.  | What are your experiences of interacting with people with SZ  |
   |     | or mental illness? (If no personal encounter, any story you   |
   |     | have heard?) [When > what happened > who > what did you say > |
   |     | How do you feel]?.                                            |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 4.  | How do you think Chinese people view schizophrenia compared   |
   |     | to people from Western countries?                             |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 5.  | What do you think of the views of traditional Chinese culture |
   |     | and religion on schizophrenia? [How do Confucianism, Taoism,  |
   |     | and Buddhism view and deal with schizophrenia > According to  |
   |     | the idea of traditional Chinese culture and religion, what    |
   |     | are the causes of schizophrenia and how to deal with it?]     |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 6.  | How do you perceive the stigma often encountered by people    |
   |     | with schizophrenia?                                           |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 7.  | What do you think are the main factors causing the stigma of  |
   |     | schizophrenia?                                                |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 8.  | What do you think of caring for people with schizophrenia?    |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 9.  | From your view, how could an intervention program be used to  |
   |     | decrease the stigma of schizophrenia?                         |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 10. | If you need to take part in a contact activity with people    |
   |     | recovering from schizophrenia, what kind of activity will you |
   |     | recommend?                                                    |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 11. | What do you think of becoming a mental health nurse? (What    |
   |     | are the motivations and barriers?)                            |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
   | 12. | What are your suggestions to attract nursing students to work |
   |     | in the psychiatric department?                                |
   +-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B70-ijerph-19-09574

      Ainlay, S.C., G. Becker, and L.M. Coleman. 2012. *The Dilemma of
      Difference: A Multidisciplinary View of Stigma (Perspectives in
      Social Psychology)*. Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B8-ijerph-19-09574

      Angermeyer, M.C., and S. Dietrich. 2006. “Public Beliefs about and
      Attitudes Towards People with Mental Illness: A Review of
      Population Studies.” *Acta Psychiatr. Scand.* 113: 163–79.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.2005.00699.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B96-ijerph-19-09574

      Anney, V.N. 2014. “Ensuring the Quality of the Findings of
      Qualitative Research: Looking at Trustworthiness Criteria.” *J.
      Emerg. Trends Educ. Res. Policy Stud.* 5: 272–81.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B89-ijerph-19-09574

      Assarroudi, A., F. Heshmati Nabavi, M.R. Armat, A. Ebadi, and M.
      Vaismoradi. 2018. “Directed Qualitative Content Analysis: The
      Description and Elaboration of Its Underpinning Methods and Data
      Analysis Process.” *J. Res. Nurs.* 23: 42–55.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/1744987117741667.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B85-ijerph-19-09574

      Baker, S.E., and R. Edwards. 2012. “National Centre for Research
      Methods Review Paper.” 2012.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B63-ijerph-19-09574

      Batson, C.D. 2009. *These Things Called Empathy: Eight Related but
      Distinct Phenomena*. Edited by J. Decety and W. Ickes. *The Social
      Neuroscience of Empathy*. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B66-ijerph-19-09574

      Batson, C.D., M.P. Polycarpou, E. Harmon-Jones, H.J. Imhoff, E.C.
      Mitchener, L.L. Bednar, T.R. Klein, and L. Highberger. 1997.
      “Empathy and Attitudes: Can Feeling for a Member of a Stigmatized
      Group Improve Feelings Toward the Group?” *J. Personal. Soc.
      Psychol.* 72: 105–18. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.72.1.105.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B91-ijerph-19-09574

      Bengtsson, M. 2016. “How to Plan and Perform a Qualitative Study
      Using Content Analysis.” *NursingPlus Open* 2: 8–14.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.npls.2016.01.001.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B51-ijerph-19-09574

      Bradshaw, C., S. Atkinson, and O. Doody. 2017. “Employing a
      Qualitative Description Approach in Health Care Research.” *Glob.
      Qual. Nurs. Res.* 4: 1–8.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/2333393617742282.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B4-ijerph-19-09574

      Brouwers, E.P.M. 2020. “Social Stigma Is an Underestimated
      Contributing Factor to Unemployment in People with Mental Illness
      or Mental Health Issues: Position Paper and Future Directions.”
      *BMC Psychol.* 8. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40359-020-00399-0.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B22-ijerph-19-09574

      Cai, C.F., and L.P. Yu. 2017. “Quality of Life in Patients With
      Schizophrenia in China Relationships Among Demographic
      Characteristics, Psychosocial Variables, and Symptom Severity.”
      *J. Psychosoc. Nurs. Ment. Health Serv.* 55: 48–54.
      https://doi.org/10.3928/02793695-20170627-03.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B78-ijerph-19-09574

      Campbell, M., R. Fitzpatrick, A. Haines, A.L. Kinmonth, P.
      Sandercock, D. Spiegelhalter, and P. Tyrer. 2000. “Framework for
      Design and Evaluation of Complex Interventions to Improve Health.”
      *BMJ* 321: 694–96. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.321.7262.694.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B21-ijerph-19-09574

      Caqueo-Urízar, A., L. Boyer, A. Urzúa, and D.R. Williams. 2019.
      “Self-Stigma in Patients with Schizophrenia: A Multicentric Study
      from Three Latin-America Countries.” *Soc. Psychiatry* 54: 905–9.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s00127-019-01671-4.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B40-ijerph-19-09574

      Chang, S., H.L. Ong, E. Seow, B.Y. Chua, E. Abdin, E. Samari, W.L.
      Teh, S.A. Chong, and M. Subramaniam. 2017. “Stigma Towards Mental
      Illness Among Medical and Nursing Students in Singapore: A
      Cross-Sectional Study.” *BMJ Open* 7.
      https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018099.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B95-ijerph-19-09574

      Chen, H.-Y., and J.R. Boore. 2010. “Translation and
      Back-Translation in Qualitative Nursing Research: Methodological
      Review.” *J. Clin. Nurs.* 19: 234–39.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2702.2009.02896.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B71-ijerph-19-09574

      Chen, S.N., W. Zhong, and J. Zhang. 2009. “Stigma and
      Schizophrenia.” *Lancet* 373.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60764-9.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B25-ijerph-19-09574

      Corrigan, P.W., B.G. Druss, and D.A. Perlick. 2014. “The Impact of
      Mental Illness Stigma on Seeking and Participating in Mental
      Health Care.” *Psychol. Sci. Public Interes* 15: 37–70.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100614531398.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B2-ijerph-19-09574

      Corrigan, P.W., A. Kerr, and L. Knudsen. 2005. “The Stigma of
      Mental Illness: Explanatory Models and Methods for Change.” *Appl.
      Prev. Psychol.* 11: 179–90.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appsy.2005.07.001.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B62-ijerph-19-09574

      Corrigan, P.W., and P. Kleinlein. 2005. *The Impact of Mental
      Illness Stigma*. *On the Stigma of Mental Illness: Practical
      Strategies for Research and Social Change*. Washington, DC, USA:
      American Psychological Association.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B61-ijerph-19-09574

      Corrigan, P.W., and D.L. Penn. 1999. “Lessons from Social
      Psychology on Discrediting Psychiatric Stigma.” *Am. Psychol.* 54:
      765–76. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.54.9.765.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B86-ijerph-19-09574

      Creswell, J.W. 2013. *Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design:
      Choosing Among Five Approaches*. London, UK: SAGE Publications,
      Inc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B13-ijerph-19-09574

      Dong, W., Y. Liu, J. Sun, Y. Liu, Z. Sun, and R. Bai. 2022.
      “Temporal Trends in the Incidence and Disability Adjusted Life
      Years of Schizophrenia in China Over 30 Years.” *Front.
      Psychiatry* 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2022.831188.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B97-ijerph-19-09574

      Elo, S., M. Kääriäinen, O. Kanste, T. Pölkki, K. Utriainen, and H.
      Kyngäs. 2014. “Qualitative Content Analysis: A Focus on
      Trustworthiness.” *Sage Open* 4.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244014522633.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B36-ijerph-19-09574

      Fei, Y., F.F. Li, and L. Geng. 2016. “A Comparative Study on
      Mental Illness Attitudes Between Psychiatric Clinical Nurses and
      Health School Nurse Students.” *Chin. J. Mod. Nurs.* 22: 3201–4.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B39-ijerph-19-09574

      Fekih-Romdhane, F., M. Saidi, M.A. Chaabane, and M. Cheour. 2022.
      “Knowledge, Attitude and Behaviours Toward People with Mental
      Illness Among Tunisian Nursing Students and Nonhealth Care
      Students: A Cross-Sectional Study.” *Collegian* 29: 500–509.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colegn.2021.11.006.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B42-ijerph-19-09574

      Fernandes, J.B., C. Família, C. Castro, and A. Simões. 2022.
      “Stigma Towards People with Mental Illness Among Portuguese
      Nursing Students.” *J. Pers. Med.* 12.
      https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm12030326.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B55-ijerph-19-09574

      Fokuo, J.K., V. Goldrick, J. Rossetti, C. Wahlstrom, C. Kocurek,
      J. Larson, and P. Corrigan. 2017. “Decreasing the Stigma of Mental
      Illness Through a Student-Nurse Mentoring Program: A Qualitative
      Study.” *Community Ment. Health J.* 53: 257–65.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s10597-016-0016-4.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B34-ijerph-19-09574

      Geng, X. 2015. “Investigation of Mental Health Related Attitude
      Among Nursing Students: Description and Influential Factors.”
      *Chin. J. Nurs.* 50: 1217–21.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B26-ijerph-19-09574

      Gerlinger, G., M. Hauser, M. De Hert, K. Lacluyse, M. Wampers, and
      C.U. Correll. 2013. “Personal Stigma in Schizophrenia Spectrum
      Disorders: A Systematic Review of Prevalence Rates, Correlates,
      Impact and Interventions.” *World Psychiatry* 12: 155–64.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.20040.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B93-ijerph-19-09574

      Gibbs, G.R. 2018. *Analyzing Qualitative Data (Qualitative
      Research Kit)*. London, UK: SAGE Publications Ltd.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B84-ijerph-19-09574

      Guest, G., E. Namey, and M. Chen. 2020. “A Simple Method to Assess
      and Report Thematic Saturation in Qualitative Research.” *PLoS
      ONE* 15. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0232076.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B72-ijerph-19-09574

      Haddad, M., A. Waqas, W. Qayyum, M. Shams, and S. Malik. 2016.
      “The Attitudes and Beliefs of Pakistani Medical Practitioners
      about Depression: A Cross-Sectional Study in Lahore Using the
      Revised Depression Attitude Questionnaire (R-DAQ).” *BMC
      Psychiatry* 16. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-016-1069-1.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B73-ijerph-19-09574

      Haddad, M., A. Waqas, A.B. Sukhera, and A.Z. Tarar. 2017. “The
      Psychometric Characteristics of the Revised Depression Attitude
      Questionnaire (R-DAQ) in Pakistani Medical Practitioners: A
      Cross-Sectional Study of Doctors in Lahore.” *BMC Res. Notes* 10.
      https://doi.org/10.1186/s13104-017-2652-3.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B31-ijerph-19-09574

      Halter, M.J. 2008. “Perceived Characteristics of Psychiatric
      Nurses: Stigma by Association.” *Arch. Psychiatr. Nurs.* 22:
      20–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apnu.2007.03.003.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B43-ijerph-19-09574

      Hawthorne, A., R. Fagan, E. Leaver, J. Baxter, P. Logan, and A.
      Snowden. 2020. “Undergraduate Nursing and Midwifery Student’s
      Attitudes to Mental Illness.” *Nurs. Open* 7: 1118–28.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/nop2.494.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B15-ijerph-19-09574

      He, H.R., Q.Q. Liu, N. Li, L.Y. Guo, F.J. Gao, L. Bai, F. Gao, and
      J. Lyu. 2021. “Trends in the Incidence and DALYs of Schizophrenia
      at the Global, Regional and National Levels: Results from the
      Global Burden of Disease Study 2017.” *Epidemiol. Psychiatr. Sci.*
      30. https://doi.org/10.1017/S2045796021000184.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B7-ijerph-19-09574

      “Helping People with Severe Mental Disorders Live Longer and
      Healthier Lives.” 2017. 2017.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B32-ijerph-19-09574

      Henderson, C., J. Noblett, H. Parke, S. Clement, A. Caffrey, O.
      Gale-Grant, B. Schulze, B. Druss, and G. Thornicroft. 2014.
      “Mental Health-Related Stigma in Health Care and Mental
      Health-Care Settings.” *Lancet Psychiatry* 1: 467–82.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(14)00023-6.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B79-ijerph-19-09574

      Holloway, I., and K. Galvin. 2016. *Qualitative Research in
      Nursing and Healthcare*. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley-Blackwell.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B12-ijerph-19-09574

      Huang, Y., Y. Wang, and H. Wang. 2019. “Prevalence of Mental
      Disorders in China: A Cross-Sectional Epidemiological Study.”
      *Lancet Psychiatry* 6: 211–24.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(18)30511-X.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B9-ijerph-19-09574

      Jorm, A.F., N. Reavley, and A.M. Ross. 2012. “Belief in the
      Dangerousness of People with Mental Disorders: A Review.” *Aust.
      N. Z. J. Psychiatry* 46: 1029–45.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/0004867412442406.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B47-ijerph-19-09574

      Kim, H., J. Sefcik, and C. Bradway. 2017. “Characteristics of
      Qualitative Descriptive Studies: A Systematic Review.” *Res. Nurs.
      Health* 40: 23–42. https://doi.org/10.1002/nur.21768.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B90-ijerph-19-09574

      Kleinheksel, A.J., N. Rockich-Winston, H. Tawfik, and T.R. Wyatt.
      2020. “Demystifying Content Analysis.” *Am. J. Pharm. Educ.* 84:
      127–37. https://doi.org/10.5688/ajpe7113.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B27-ijerph-19-09574

      Kleintjes, S., C. Lund, and A. Flisher. 2010. “A Situational
      Analysis of Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services in Ghana,
      Uganda, South Africa and Zambia.” *Afr. J. Psychiatry* 13: 132–39.
      https://doi.org/10.4314/ajpsy.v13i2.54360.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B16-ijerph-19-09574

      Koschorke, M., R. Padmavati, S. Kumar, A. Cohen, H.A. Weiss, S.
      Chatterjee, J. Pereira, S. Naik, S. John, and H. Dabholkar. 2014.
      “Experiences of Stigma and Discrimination of People with
      Schizophrenia in India.” *Soc. Sci. Med.* 123: 149–59.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.10.035.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B19-ijerph-19-09574

      Leamy, M., V. Bird, C. Le Boutillier, J. Williams, and M. Slade.
      2011. “Conceptual Framework for Personal Recovery in Mental
      Health: Systematic Review and Narrative Synthesis.” *Br. J.
      Psychiatry* 199: 445–52.
      https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.110.083733.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B18-ijerph-19-09574

      Lee, S., M.T.Y. Lee, M.Y.L. Chiu, and A. Kleinman. 2005.
      “Experience of Social Stigma by People with Schizophrenia in Hong
      Kong.” *Br. J. Psychiatry* 186: 153–57.
      https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.186.2.153.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B83-ijerph-19-09574

      Lincoln, Y.S., and E. Guba. 1985. *Naturalistic Inquiry*. London,
      UK: SAGE Publications.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B94-ijerph-19-09574

      Lincoln, Y.S., and E.G. Guba. 1986. “But Is It Rigorous?
      Trustworthiness and Authenticity in Naturalistic Evaluation.” *New
      Dir. Program Eval.* 1986: 73–84. https://doi.org/10.1002/ev.1427.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B48-ijerph-19-09574

      Lincoln, Y.S., S.A. Lynham, and E.G. Guba. 2017. *Paradigmatic
      Controversies, Contradictions and Emerging Confluences*. Edited by
      N.K. Denzin and Y.S. Guba. *The Sage Handbook of Qualitative
      Research*. Thousand Oaks, CA, USA: Sage.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B37-ijerph-19-09574

      Liu, W. 2019. “Recognition of, and Beliefs about, Causes of Mental
      Disorders: A Cross-Sectional Study of US and Chinese Undergraduate
      Nursing Students.” *Nurs. Health Sci.* 21: 28–36.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/nhs.12428.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B99-ijerph-19-09574

      Lo, L.N. 2019. “Teachers and Teaching in China: A Critical
      Reflection.” *Teach. Teach.* 25: 553–73.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/13540602.2019.1632823.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B28-ijerph-19-09574

      Lysaker, P.H., J. Tsai, P. Yanos, and D. Roe. 2008. “Associations
      of Multiple Domains of Self-Esteem with Four Dimensions of Stigma
      in Schizophrenia.” *Schizophr. Res.* 98: 194–200.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2007.09.035.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B29-ijerph-19-09574

      Lysaker, P.H., J.L. Vohs, and J. Tsai. 2009. “Negative Symptoms
      and Concordant Impairments in Attention in Schizophrenia:
      Associations with Social Functioning, Hope, Self-Esteem and
      Internalized Stigma.” *Schizophr. Res.* 110: 165–72.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2009.01.015.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B24-ijerph-19-09574

      Maharjan, S., and B. Panthee. 2019. “Prevalence of Self-Stigma and
      Its Association with Self-Esteem Among Psychiatric Patients in a
      Nepalese Teaching Hospital: A Cross-Sectional Study.” *BMC
      Psychiatry* 19. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-019-2344-8.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B82-ijerph-19-09574

      Marshall, B., P. Cardon, A. Poddar, and R. Fontenot. 2013. “Does
      Sample Size Matter in Qualitative Research?: A Review of
      Qualitative Interviews in Is Research.” *J. Comput. Inf. Syst.*
      54: 11–22. https://doi.org/10.1080/08874417.2013.11645667.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B76-ijerph-19-09574

      Maunder, R.D., and F. White. 2019. “Intergroup Contact and Mental
      Health Stigma: A Comparative Effectiveness Meta-Analysis.” *Clin.
      Psychol. Rev.* 72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2019.101749.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B1-ijerph-19-09574

      “Mental Disorders.” 2022. 2022.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B67-ijerph-19-09574

      Naylor, P.B., H. Cowie, S. Walters, L. Talamelli, and J. Dawkins.
      2009. “Impact of a Mental Health Teaching Programme on
      Adolescents.” *Br. J. Psychiatry* 194: 365–70.
      https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.108.053058.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B81-ijerph-19-09574

      Nyumba, T.O., K. Wilson, C.J. Derrick, and N. Mukherjee. 2018.
      “The Use of Focus Group Discussion Methodology: Insights from Two
      Decades of Application in Conservation.” *Methods Ecol. Evol.* 9:
      20–32. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12860.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B50-ijerph-19-09574

      Ormston, R., L. Spencer, M. Barnard, and D. Snape. 2014. *The
      Foundations of Qualitative Research*. Edited by J. Ritchie, J.
      Lewis, C. McNaughton Nicholls, and R. Ormston. *Qualitative
      Research Practice. A Guide for Social Science Students and
      Researchers*. London, UK: Sage.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B41-ijerph-19-09574

      Palou, R.G., G.P. Vigué, M. Romeu-Labayen, and G. Tort-Nasarre.
      2022. “Analysis of Stigma in Relation to Behaviour and Attitudes
      Towards Mental Health as Influenced by Social Desirability in
      Nursing Students.” *Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health* 19.
      https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19063213.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B35-ijerph-19-09574

      Pan, S.M., Y. Zhou, X.J. Luo, W.S. Feng, C.J. Lu, W.Q. Lin, X.S.
      Yan, H. Zhang, and Y.X. Zhang. 2013. “Reliability and Validity of
      Chinese Version of Mental Illness: Clinician’s Attitudes Scale.”
      *Chin. J. Pract. Nurs.* 29: 4–8.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B53-ijerph-19-09574

      Pederson, A.B., J.K. Fokuo, G. Thornicroft, O. Bamgbose, O.P.
      Ogunnubi, K. Ogunsola, and Y.O. Oshodi. 2022. “Perspectives of
      University Health Care Students on Mental Health Stigma in
      Nigeria: Qualitative Analysis.” *Transcult. Psychiatry*, 1–14.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/13634615211055007.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B3-ijerph-19-09574

      Pescosolido, B.A., T.R. Medina, J.K. Martin, and J.S. Long. 2013.
      “The “Backbone” of Stigma: Identifying the Global Core of Public
      Prejudice Associated With Mental Illness.” *Am. J. Public Health*
      103: 853–60. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2012.301147.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B64-ijerph-19-09574

      Pettigrew, T.F., and L.R. Tropp. 2008. “How Does Intergroup
      Contact Reduce Prejudice? Meta-Analytic Tests of Three Mediators.”
      *Eur. J. Soc. Psychol.* 38: 922–34.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.504.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B77-ijerph-19-09574

      Rabiee, F. 2004. “Focus-Group Interview and Data Analysis.” *Proc.
      Nutr. Soc.* 63: 655–60. https://doi.org/10.1079/PNS2004399.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B45-ijerph-19-09574

      Ran, M.-S., B.J. Hall, T.T. Su, B. Prawira, M. Breth-Petersen,
      X.-H. Li, and T.-M. Zhang. 2021. “Stigma of Mental Illness and
      Cultural Factors in Pacific Rim Region: A Systematic Review.” *BMC
      Psychiatry* 21. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-020-02991-5.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B87-ijerph-19-09574

      Renz, S.M., J.M. Carrington, and T.A. Badger. 2018. “Two
      Strategies for Qualitative Content Analysis: An Intramethod
      Approach to Triangulation.” *Qual. Health Res.* 28: 824–31.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732317753586.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B52-ijerph-19-09574

      Riffel, T., and S.P. Chen. 2020. “Exploring the Knowledge,
      Attitudes, and Behavioural Responses of Healthcare Students
      Towards Mental Illnesses-A Qualitative Study.” *Int. J. Environ.
      Res. Public Health* 17. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17010025.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B56-ijerph-19-09574

      Rodríguez-Rivas, M.E. 2021. “Attitudes Towards People with Mental
      Illness Among Medical Students: A Qualitative Research.” *Psychol.
      Soc. Educ.* 13: 21–33. https://doi.org/10.25115/psye.v13i2.3663.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B54-ijerph-19-09574

      Samari, E., E. Seow, B.Y. Chua, H.L. Ong, E. Abdin, S.A. Chong,
      and M. Subramaniam. 2018. “Stigma Towards People with Mental
      Disorders: Perspectives of Nursing Students.” *Arch. Psychiatr.
      Nurs.* 32: 802–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apnu.2018.06.003.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B33-ijerph-19-09574

      Samari, E., E. Seow, B.Y. Chua, H.L. Ong, Y.W. Lau, R. Mahendran,
      S.K. Verma, H. Xie, J. Wang, and S.A. Chong. 2019. “Attitudes
      Towards Psychiatry Amongst Medical and Nursing Students in
      Singapore.” *BMC Med. Educ.* 19.
      https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-019-1518-x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B38-ijerph-19-09574

      Sánchez-Martínez, V., and R. Sales-Orts. 2020. “Design and
      Validation of a Brief Scale for Cognitive Evaluation in People
      with a Diagnosis of Schizophrenia (BCog-S).” *J. Psychiatr. Ment.
      Health Nurs.* 27: 543–52. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpm.12602.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B49-ijerph-19-09574

      Sandelowski, M. 2010. “What’s in a Name? Qualitative Description
      Revisited.” *Res. Nurs. Health* 33: 77–84.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/nur.20362.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B11-ijerph-19-09574

      “Schizophrenia.” 2022. 2022.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B17-ijerph-19-09574

      Sharac, J., P. Mccrone, S. Clement, and G. Thornicroft. 2010. “The
      Economic Impact of Mental Health Stigma and Discrimination: A
      Systematic Review.” *Epidemiol. E Psichiatr. Soc.-Int. J.
      Epidemiol. Psychiatr. Sci.* 19: 223–32.
      https://doi.org/10.1017/S1121189X00001159.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B30-ijerph-19-09574

      Sharaf, A.Y., L.H. Ossman, and O.A. Lachine. 2012. “A
      Cross-Sectional Study of the Relationships Between Illness
      Insight, Internalized Stigma, and Suicide Risk in Individuals with
      Schizophrenia.” *Int. J. Nurs. Stud.* 49: 1512–20.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2012.08.006.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B44-ijerph-19-09574

      Shrivastava, A., M. Johnston, and Y. Bureau. 2012. “Stigma of
      Mental Illness-1: Clinical Reflections.” *Mens Sana Monogr.* 10:
      70–84. https://doi.org/10.4103/0973-1229.90181.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B46-ijerph-19-09574

      Sideras, S., G. McKenzie, J. Noone, N. Dieckmann, and T.L. Allen.
      2015. “Impact of a Simulation on Nursing Students’ Attitudes
      Toward Schizophrenia.” *Clin. Simul. Nurs.* 11: 134–41.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecns.2014.11.005.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B98-ijerph-19-09574

      Sim, J., and J. Waterfield. 2019. “Focus Group Methodology: Some
      Ethical Challenges.” *Qual. Quant.* 53: 3003–22.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-019-00914-5.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B88-ijerph-19-09574

      Thomas, D.R. 2006. “A General Inductive Approach for Analyzing
      Qualitative Evaluation Data.” *Am. J. Eval.* 27: 237–46.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/1098214005283748.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B59-ijerph-19-09574

      Thornicroft, G. 2006. “Tackling Discrimination.” *Ment. Health
      Today*, 26–29.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B60-ijerph-19-09574

      Thornicroft, G., D. Rose, A. Kassam, and N. Sartorius. 2007.
      “Stigma: Ignorance, Prejudice or Discrimination?” *Br. J.
      Psychiatry* 190: 192–93.
      https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.106.025791.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B80-ijerph-19-09574

      Tong, A., P. Sainsbury, and J. Craig. 2007. “Consolidated Criteria
      for Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ): A 32-Item Checklist
      for Interviews and Focus Groups.” *Int. J. Qual. Health Care* 19:
      349–57. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzm042.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B92-ijerph-19-09574

      Vaismoradi, M., H. Turunen, and T. Bondas. 2013. “Content Analysis
      and Thematic Analysis: Implications for Conducting a Qualitative
      Descriptive Study.” *Nurs. Health Sci.* 15: 398–405.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/nhs.12048.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B10-ijerph-19-09574

      Valery, K.-M., and A. Prouteau. 2020. “Schizophrenia Stigma in
      Mental Health Professionals and Associated Factors: A Systematic
      Review.” *Psychiatry Res.* 290.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113068.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B20-ijerph-19-09574

      Vass, V., K. Sitko, S. West, and R.P. Bentall. 2017. “How Stigma
      Gets Under the Skin: The Role of Stigma, Self-Stigma and
      Self-Esteem in Subjective Recovery from Psychosis.” *Psychosis* 9:
      235–44. https://doi.org/10.1080/17522439.2017.1300184.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B23-ijerph-19-09574

      Wang, X.Q., M.A. Petrini, and N.E. Morisky. 2016. “Predictors of
      Quality of Life Among Chinese People with Schizophrenia.” *Nurs.
      Health Sci.* 19: 142–48. https://doi.org/10.1111/nhs.12286.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B74-ijerph-19-09574

      Waqas, A., S. Naveed, A. Makhmoor, A. Malik, H. Hassan, and K.K.
      Aedma. 2020. “Empathy, Experience and Cultural Beliefs Determine
      the Attitudes Towards Depression Among Pakistani Medical
      Students.” *Community Ment. Health J.* 56: 65–74.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s10597-019-00459-9.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B75-ijerph-19-09574

      Waqas, A., M. Zubair, H. Ghulam, M.W. Ullah, and M.Z. Tariq. 2014.
      “Public Stigma Associated with Mental Illnesses in Pakistani
      University Students: A Cross Sectional Survey.” *PeerJ* 2.
      https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.698.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B65-ijerph-19-09574

      Webb, M., J. Peterson, S.C. Willis, H. Rodney, E. Siebert, J.A.
      Carlile, and L. Stinar. 2016. “The Role of Empathy and Adult
      Attachment in Predicting Stigma Toward Severe and Persistent
      Mental Illness and Other Psychosocial or Health Conditions.” *J.
      Ment. Health Couns.* 38: 62–78.
      https://doi.org/10.17744/mehc.38.1.05.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B6-ijerph-19-09574

      Whitley, R., and R.D. Campbell. 2014. “Stigma, Agency and Recovery
      Amongst People with Severe Mental Illness.” *Soc. Sci. Med.* 107:
      1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.02.010.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B5-ijerph-19-09574

      Wittchen, H., F. Jacobi, J. Rehm, A. Gustavsson, M. Svensson, B.
      Jönsson, J. Olesen, C. Allgulander, J. Alonso, and C. Faravelli.
      2011. “The Size and Burden of Mental Disorders and Other Disorders
      of the Brain in Europe 2010.” *Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol.* 21:
      655–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroneuro.2011.07.018.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B68-ijerph-19-09574

      Yang, L.H. 2007. “Application of Mental Illness Stigma Theory to
      Chinese Societies: Synthesis and New Directions.” *Singap. Med.
      J.* 48: 977–85.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B57-ijerph-19-09574

      Yang, L.H., F.-P. Chen, K.J. Sia, J. Lam, K. Lam, H. Ngo, S. Lee,
      A. Kleinman, and B. Good. 2014. ““What Matters Most”: A Cultural
      Mechanism Moderating Structural Vulnerability and Moral Experience
      of Mental Illness Stigma.” *Soc. Sci. Med.* 103: 84–93.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2013.09.009.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B58-ijerph-19-09574

      Yang, L.H., and A. Kleinman. 2008. “‘Face’ and the Embodiment of
      Stigma in China: The Cases of Schizophrenia and AIDS.” *Soc. Sci.
      Med.* 67: 398–408.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2008.03.011.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B69-ijerph-19-09574

      Yang, L.H., A. Kleinman, B.G. Link, J.C. Phelan, S. Lee, and B.
      Good. 2007. “Culture and Stigma: Adding Moral Experience to Stigma
      Theory.” *Soc. Sci. Med.* 64: 1524–35.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2006.11.013.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B14-ijerph-19-09574

      Zhai, Z. n.d. “Population Opportunities and Challenges for
      High-Quality Development in the New Era|Interpretation of the
      Seventh National Census Communique.”
