=====================================================================================
Understanding MMPI-2 response structure between schizophrenia and healthy individuals
=====================================================================================

Yu Cheng Hsu
Zhiyu Ye
Lisha Dai
Yaqin Jing
Kwok-Leung Tsui
Paul S. F. Yip
Wentian Li
Qingpeng Zhang [1]_ [2]_\*Correspondence: Wentian Li
liwentian2018@163.com\ Qingpeng Zhang
qingpeng.zhang@cityu.edu.hk\  [3]_ [4]_
:Date: 2022-7-28

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background

   Using Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2 (MMPI-2) clinical
   scales to evaluate clinical symptoms in schizophrenia is a
   well-studied topic. Nonetheless, research focuses less on how these
   clinical scales interact with each other.

   .. rubric:: Aims

   Investigates the network structure and interaction of the MMPI-2
   clinical scales between healthy individuals and patients with
   schizophrenia through the Bayesian network.

   .. rubric:: Method

   Data was collected from Wuhan Psychiatric Hospital from March 2008 to
   May 2018. A total of 714 patients with schizophrenia and 714 healthy
   subjects were identified through propensity score matching according
   to the criteria of the International Classification of Diseases
   (ICD-11). Separated MMPI-2 clinical scales Bayesian networks were
   built for healthy subjects and patients with schizophrenia,
   respectively.

   .. rubric:: Results

   The Bayesian network showed that the lower 7 scale was a consequence
   of the correlation between the lower 2 scale and the greater 8 scale.
   A solely lower 7 scale does yield neither a lower 2 scale nor a
   higher 8 scale. The proposed method showed 72% of accuracy with 78%
   area under the ROC curve (AUC), similar to the previous studies.

   .. rubric:: Limitations

   The proposed method simplified the continuous Bayesian network to
   predict binary outcomes, including other categorical data is not
   explored. Besides, the participants might only represent an endemic
   as they come from a single hospital.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion

   This study identified MMPI-2 clinical scales correlation and built
   separated Bayesian networks to investigate the difference between
   patients with schizophrenia and healthy people. These differences may
   contribute to a better understanding of the clinical symptoms of
   schizophrenia and provide medical professionals with new perspectives
   for diagnosis.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _s1:

Introduction
============

Schizophrenia is a major psychiatric disorder diagnosed by observing a
combination of symptoms ((n.d.a)). Schizophrenia is the most common
group of psychiatric disorders characterized by basic personality
changes, splitting of thinking, emotions, and behavior, and
incompatibility of mental activities with the environment, and the
MMPI-2 is a recognized measurement tool to assist in screening patients
with schizophrenia. The lifetime prevalence in urban China areas is
0.83%, and it was estimated that there were 7.16 million people in China
suffering from schizophrenia in 2010 ((n.d.b)). Diagnosing schizophrenia
is the first step for professionals to take intervention and provide
them suitable support. Early detection and diagnosis of schizophrenia
are of research interest because they can benefit both clinical
professionals and patients. Early detection and filtering without
clinical professional effort can relieve the burden in the clinics and
facilitate the early intervention, which alleviates the severity and
chronicity ((n.d.c)).

Diagnosis of schizophrenia in clinical fields is difficult, and current
practices have received several challenges. The major reason is that
diagnosing schizophrenia in clinics relies on clinical observations of
specific symptoms over a month using the Fifth Edition of the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) ((n.d.a)) and the
International Classification of Disease (ICD) ((n.d.d)) guidelines.
Though these guidelines are widely adopted in clinics, they have been
criticized in several aspects. 1. A high diagnostic threshold is needed
for schizophrenia ((n.d.e)). 2. Various symptom profiles occur in the
exiting guideline ((n.d.f), (n.d.g)). These difficulties make the
diagnosis of schizophrenia time-consuming and heavily rely on
professional clinical experience. It is hard for professionals to
diagnose accurately and effectively. An innovative exploration of
clinical symptoms of schizophrenia is conducive to helping medical
professionals better understand schizophrenia, and facilitate the
realization of early detection and diagnosis.

Existing research studies on detecting schizophrenia in the early stage
can be categorized into using magnetic resonance image (MRI)
((n.d.h)–(n.d.i)) and the psychometric test ((n.d.j)–(n.d.k)), such as
the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI). The psychometric
test is a self-completed questionnaire that is not limited by the
availability of MRI scanners and radiologists. The psychometric test
provides an off-the-shelf and less expensive option than MRI for early
scanning and detection of schizophrenia.

Many studies have examined the feasibility of differentiating
schizophrenia patients from other psychiatric disorders or healthy
adults using MMPI. Using the available clinical scales as indicators of
schizophrenia is a common approach ((n.d.j)–(n.d.k)), and the other
approach ((n.d.l)) is constructing a new scale by selecting relevant
questions from the MMPI questions. Building a new scale can effectively
screen schizophrenia patients by selecting relevant questions in MMPI
tests. The shortcoming is that these specific scales were not widely
adopted in other circumstances and, therefore, adoption in different
demographics might require additional validation before use. In
contrast, using existing scales might not be as discriminative as
specific scales, but it is convenient and widely used in most
demographics.

Early research studies in the MMPI have studied the discriminative power
of MMPI Clinical scales and the difference between schizophrenia
patients and other populations. Many research studies ((n.d.j)–(n.d.k),
(n.d.m)) indicated a statistical significance of a higher Scale 8 in
schizophrenia patients. Research study ((n.d.n)) pointed out that
patients with schizophrenia usually exhibit lower scores on Scale 2
(Depression). Evidence ((n.d.o)) also supported the aforementioned
finding in the MMPI-2, a revised version of MMPI. In summary, different
from the 278 codetype in the MMPI-2 manual, most of the research has a
major consensus ((n.d.j), (n.d.p), (n.d.m), (n.d.q)) is that a lower
score in Scale 2 (Depression), and 7 (Psychasthenia) and a higher score
in Scale 8 (Schizophrenia) are a sign of schizophrenia.

Nonetheless, research teams less addressed the correlations between MMPI
clinical scales in different populations explicitly. A previous study
((n.d.r)) pointed out a high correlation between clinical Scale 8 and
validity Scale F. The existence of correlation among MMPI-2 scales
affects the interpretation of classification results because such
correlation within MMPI-2 clinical scales violates the assumption of the
regression that these independent variables are independent. This
research investigates these correlations between MMPI-2 clinical scales
and examines whether there is any difference in MMPI-2 clinical scales
correlation between schizophrenia patients and healthy individuals,
which has an important reference value for the interpretation of the
scale results and the clinical work of diagnosis of schizophrenia.

This study used a data-driven approach and investigated the correlation
and its difference in the MMPI-2 clinical scales between schizophrenia
patients and healthy individuals through the separated Bayesian network.
This study examined the interaction between Scale 278 in patients with
schizophrenia, providing a more comprehensive understanding and
sketching of schizophrenia MMPI-2 clinical scales. Overall, the finding
could benefit medical professionals in better understanding the symptoms
of schizophrenia and providing guidance for clinical diagnosis.

.. _s2:

Materials and methods
=====================

Participants
------------

A total of 9,216 participants completed MMPI-2 during their visit to
Wuhan Psychiatric Hospital from March 2008 to May 2018. Their
admission-related ICD diagnosis and demographics were also collected at
the time of conducting MMPI-2. Diagnoses for all patients with
schizophrenia were based on the Structured Clinical Interview for the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (SCID-I/P)
((n.d.s)). A panel of research psychiatrists and psychologists
re-evaluated clinical data using ICD-9 criteria and made a final
consensus diagnosis. Their diagnosis is healthy (ICD-9:0.0, *n* =
3,135), other unspecified complications of medical care not elsewhere
specified (ICD-9: 999.9, *n* = 5,168), schizophrenia (ICD-9: 295.9, *n*
= 714), and other psychiatric disorders (*n* = 199). The diagnosis was
made according to ICD guidelines by psychiatric doctors.

A huge portion of healthy participants in the psychiatric hospital come
from the fact that some enterprises or community organizations might
entrust psychiatric hospitals with the mental health examination before
employment. These healthy people are helpful for us in comparing the
MMPI-2 clinical scale difference between them and those with
schizophrenia.

Ethics
~~~~~~

The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki
(as revised in 2013). Before the survey, the Institutional Review Board
of Wuhan Mental Health Center approved the survey protocol and the
above-mentioned procedures of informed consent (No.: KY2021.08.05).
Participants' written informed consent was obtained as well.

Measure instruments and procedure
---------------------------------

The final sample used in this study consists of 714 patients with
schizophrenia, and the other 714 healthy participants were included
through propensity score matching using MatchIt ((n.d.t)) package using
the optimal full matching method ((n.d.u)) in R. Among 3,849
participants included for the propensity score matching, 3,553 of them
used 200 items MMPI-2, 257 of them used 399 items MMPI-2 and the rest of
39 participants used 566 items MMPI-2. Propensity score matching based
on age, gender, educational level, and marital status was applied to
minimize the demographic difference in these aspects and reduce the bias
and confounding factors from demographics. The detailed decomposition of
the participants is tabularized in `Table 1 <#T1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Demographics of participants included in this study.

   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   |                 | **Overall**   | **Healthy**   | **              |
   |                 |               |               | Schizophrenia** |
   +=================+===============+===============+=================+
   | n               | 1,428         | 714           | 714             |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Age (year)      | 27.82 (12.11) | 28.18 (12.75) | 27.47 (11.42)   |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Gender (1:Male, | 0.75 (0.43)   | 0.74 (0.44)   | 0.76 (0.43)     |
   | 0:Female)       |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Education level | 11.39 (3.41)  | 11.33 (3.61)  | 11.45 (3.20)    |
   | (Year of        |               |               |                 |
   | receiving       |               |               |                 |
   | education)      |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Marital status  | 0.30 (0.66)   | 0.31 (0.59)   | 0.30 (0.73)     |
   | (1:married,     |               |               |                 |
   | 0:others)       |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | MMPI-2 L, F, K  |               |               |                 |
   | and clinical    |               |               |                 |
   | scales          |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | L scale         | 53.96 (14.91) | 50.19 (13.43) | 57.74 (15.37)   |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | F scale         | 59.18 (14.88) | 55.65 (14.38) | 62.70 (14.55)   |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | K scale         | 53.92 (14.04) | 50.96 (13.01) | 56.89 (14.41)   |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Scale 1         | 58.72 (12.80) | 58.17 (14.10) | 59.26 (11.13)   |
   | Hypochondriasis |               |               |                 |
   | (Hs)            |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Scale 2         | 55.03 (13.39) | 56.11 (15.62) | 53.95 (10.61)   |
   | Depression (D)  |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Scale 3         | 61.68 (14.39) | 60.38 (14.42) | 62.99 (14.25)   |
   | Hysteria (Hy)   |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Scale 4         | 56.99 (12.99) | 57.11 (14.53) | 56.87 (11.24)   |
   | Psychopathic    |               |               |                 |
   | Deviate (Pd)    |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Scale 5         | 51.99 (12.05) | 51.19 (13.51) | 52.78 (10.34)   |
   | Masculi         |               |               |                 |
   | nity/Femininity |               |               |                 |
   | (MF)            |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Scale 6         | 54.38 (10.36) | 52.54 (10.55) | 56.23 (9.85)    |
   | Paranoia (Pa)   |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Scale 7         | 55.91 (12.14) | 57.81 (13.58) | 54.00 (10.16)   |
   | Psychasthenia   |               |               |                 |
   | (Pt)            |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Scale 8         | 56.99 (12.63) | 56.19 (13.31) | 57.79 (11.88)   |
   | Schizophrenia   |               |               |                 |
   | (Sc)            |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Scale 9         | 55.55 (10.54) | 54.66 (11.01) | 56.44 (9.98)    |
   | Hypomania (Ma)  |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
   | Scale 0 Social  | 45.08 (11.06) | 47.06 (12.54) | 43.10 (8.93)    |
   | Introversion    |               |               |                 |
   | (Si)            |               |               |                 |
   +-----------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+

Data analysis
-------------

Bayesian network model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Bayesian network method is an adequate method to model the MMPI-2
scales and their relation to schizophrenia, as researchers are concerned
about how the combination of different scales affects the prediction
outcome. The Bayesian network provides the fruitful interpretation of
the dependency structure in the MMPI-2 clinical scales and, thus,
provides both the prediction outcome and insightful interpretations.

Bayesian networks were used to analyze the MMPI-2 clinical scales and
three validity scales, L, F, and K, in this study. Bayesian network is a
directed acyclic graphical (DAG) model. Bayesian networks denote the
variables (i.e., the MMPI clinical scales in this study) as the node.
While a node pair shows a dependence structure, then the arc is
connected between them. If a node is connected by several nodes, that
means this node is jointly dependent on these nodes. The arc strength is
to quantify the magnitude of the dependence structure. The measurement
criterium is Bayesian information criteria that measure the model's
goodness.

If a normal distributed variable node *Y* is pointed by a normally
distributed nodes set *X* then there is a linear probabilistic
relationship. In other words, it can be expressed as *Y* =
β\ *x*\ +\ *c*, where β is the coefficient and *c* is the constant. The
Bayesian network quantifies the linear correlation between each MMPI-2
and delineates the interaction of these variables. Furthermore, it
examines the difference in correlation between schizophrenia patients
and healthy people. The correlation test was made the method proposed by
Wang et al. ((n.d.v)), which performs the hypothesis test in a
non-parametric manner.

Dependency structures in Bayesian networks usually rely on domain
knowledge to determine its existence and direction. Since domain
knowledge might not always be available and comprehensive, this study
used structure learning algorithms to provide a statistical solution to
construct the Bayesian network without domain knowledge. The presented
research first learned separated Bayesian network structures for healthy
individuals and patients with schizophrenia on MMPI-2 scales (10
clinical scales, L, F, and K scale) through H2PC ((n.d.w)) method. After
the structures were learned, the parameters of each arc were fitted by
maximizing the likelihood. Bayesian network structure learning and
fitting were implemented using the bnlearn ((n.d.x)) package in R.

The classification assumes that the new observation would exhibit a
higher probability in the corresponding Bayesian networks if they are in
the same diagnosis group. This assumption is valid when each group's
portion is a fixed constant using the Bayes rule shown in Equation 1.

p
(
X
=
x
\|
Y
=
N
o
r
m
a
l
)
p
(
X
=
x
\|
Y
=
S
c
h
i
z
o
p
h
r
e
n
i
a
)
∝
p
(
Y
=
N
o
r
m
a
l
\|
X
=
x
)
p
(
Y
=
S
c
h
i
z
o
p
h
r
e
n
i
a
\|
X
=
x
)
The portion of the patients with schizophrenia and healthy people
population is controlled by the propensity matching in this study. In
other words, the odd of the new observation in the healthy participants
and schizophrenia patients' MMPI-2 response is proportional to the
probability that the new observation occurs in the corresponding
Consequently, the portion can be a helpful indicator in differentiating
healthy participants and patients with schizophrenia.

Evaluation metrics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Accuracy, area under the curve (AUC), and F1 score are used as an
indicator of the classification performance. AUC is the area under the
receiver operating curve (ROC), which is the plot of true positive (TP)
and false positive (FP) at different thresholds. F1 score is the
harmonic mean of precision and recall, which measure the accuracy with
consideration of both positive cases and negative cases.

.. _s3:

Results
=======

Compared with the logistic regression, the Bayesian network performed
slightly better in terms of accuracy, AUC, and F1 score. 100-iteration
random-shuffle-split cross-validation (100-RSSCV) was used to test the
proposed method. In each iteration, 80% of the samples were randomly
selected to construct the model, and the rest of the 20% were for
testing the model. The proposed method was compared with logistic
regression using only clinical scales 2, 7, and 8, which were frequently
reported in the previous studies. `Table 2 <#T2>`__ displays the
prediction performance of each method. The proposed method performed the
best among the rest of the two baselines in terms of all evaluation
metrics, including accuracy, F1 score, and area under the curve (AUC).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Results of the proposed method and other indicators used in the
      previous studies.

   ================== ============ =========== ===========
   \                  **Accuracy** **F1**      **AUC**
   ================== ============ =========== ===========
   Proposed method    0.72 (0.02)  0.75 (0.02) 0.78 (0.03)
   Clinical Scale 278 0.71 (0.02)  0.71 (0.02) 0.71 (0.03)
   ================== ============ =========== ===========

   *The bold effect used to indicate the best highest among the column*.

Common features among patients with schizophrenia and healthy participants
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

`Figure 1 <#F1>`__ displayed the developed Bayesian network for healthy
participants and patients with schizophrenia using H2PC structure
learning using the whole datasets. The thickness of the arcs in `Figure
1 <#F1>`__ was scaled according to the arc strength measured by Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC).

.. figure:: fpsyt-13-918999-g0001
   :alt: Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)-2 scales
   Bayesian network for healthy participants (left) and patients with
   schizophrenia (right). The thickness of the arcs is proportional to
   the BIC value, D, Depression; F Infrequency; Hs, Hypochondriasis; Hy,
   Hysteria; K, Defensiveness; L, Lie; Ma, Hypomania; Mf, Masculine
   feminine; Pa, Paranoia; Pd, Psychopathic deviate; Pt, Psychasthenia;
   Sc, Schizophrenia; Si, Social Introversion.
   :name: F1

   Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)-2 scales Bayesian
   network for healthy participants (left) and patients with
   schizophrenia (right). The thickness of the arcs is proportional to
   the BIC value, D, Depression; F Infrequency; Hs, Hypochondriasis; Hy,
   Hysteria; K, Defensiveness; L, Lie; Ma, Hypomania; Mf, Masculine
   feminine; Pa, Paranoia; Pd, Psychopathic deviate; Pt, Psychasthenia;
   Sc, Schizophrenia; Si, Social Introversion.

The Bayesian network in the MMPI-2 response has revealed that healthy
participants tended to have simpler network structures than patients
with schizophrenia. Healthy participants' Bayesian network on MMPI-2
response had 16 arcs. In contrast, the Bayesian network of patients with
schizophrenia on MMPI-2 response had 21 arcs. Those extra edges slightly
overall goodness of fit of the Bayesian network model (slight change in
BIC).

There were some common arcs that existed in both schizophrenia patients'
networks and healthy participants' networks. L- K, K-Hy, Hs- Hy, Sc-Pt,
F-Sc, Si-D, and Pd-Pt arcs existed in both networks with high arc
strengths. This phenomenon implied that these scales were dependent on
each other, neglecting the effect of schizophrenia.

Difference of Bayesian network between patients with schizophrenia and healthy participants
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

`Figure 2 <#F2>`__ has shown the correlation between MMPI response in
healthy participants and patients with schizophrenia. The Bayesian
network could quantify the linear relationships among the MMPI-2
clinical scales and make the decision. Healthy people exhibited a strong
correlation between Pt and D scales (Pearson correlation = 0.74) and Pd
and Ma scales (Pearson correlation = 0.61). In contrast, patients with
schizophrenia have revealed a lower correlation for Pt and D scales
(Pearson correlation = 0.29) and Pd and Ma scales (Pearson correlation =
0.41). Besides, both patients with schizophrenia and healthy
participants had a moderate correlation coefficient between the F and Hs
scales (Pearson correlation = 0.55, 0.63, respectively).

.. figure:: fpsyt-13-918999-g0002
   :alt: MMPI-2 correlation matrix of healthy adults (top) and patients
   with schizophrenia (bottom). The correlation coefficient is
   calculated by Pearson correlation coefficients.
   :name: F2

   MMPI-2 correlation matrix of healthy adults (top) and patients with
   schizophrenia (bottom). The correlation coefficient is calculated by
   Pearson correlation coefficients.

`Figure 3 <#F3>`__ illustrates their correlation difference using the
Pearson correlation coefficient. The correlation difference of MMPI
response majorly occurred at the Hs, D, Pd, and Mf scale interaction
with the rest of the MMPI-2 score. This difference was especially
obvious in the D and Hy Scale. A statistical test ((n.d.v)) was used to
test the correlation matrix between healthy participants and patients
with schizophrenia. The result indicated that the MMPI-2 score
cor-relations differed between healthy participants and patients with
schizophrenia (*p* < 0.001). We have listed all pairs of MMPI-2 clinical
scales which the correlation difference between normal and
schizophrenia. Pt-D and Pt-Hy have 0.5 correlation differences, and
Sc-D, Sc-Hy, and Pa-Hy have 0.4 correlation differences. Healthy
individuals have high positive correlations with these pairs but
patients with schizophrenia do not. These correlation differences
facilitated the Bayesian network to capture the difference between
patients with schizophrenia and healthy individuals.

.. figure:: fpsyt-13-918999-g0003
   :alt: MMPI-2 scales correlation matrix difference between healthy
   people and patients with schizophrenia.
   :name: F3

   MMPI-2 scales correlation matrix difference between healthy people
   and patients with schizophrenia.

Scale 278 in the Bayesian network
---------------------------------

The Bayesian network facilitates researchers to generate the samples
from the probabilistic distribution. The Bayesian network could generate
new samples by controlling part of the MMPI-2 clinical scales, so we
could conduct a What-if analysis of the MMPI-2 clinical scales and
observe the patterns for the rest of the clinical scales. Each time
1,000 random samples of Scale 2, Scale 7, or Scale 8 was generated using
schizophrenia patients' demography. Afterward, these random samples were
used to generate the rest of the two scales in Scale 2, Scale 7, and
Scale 8 with healthy people's network and schizophrenia patients'
networks. `Table 3 <#T3>`__ showed the imputed result. All the imputed
cells showed statistical differences using a paired-student *t*-test
with *p*-values less than 0.001.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Difference (normal-schizophrenia) in the imputed MMPI-2 scale in
      schizophrenia patients and healthy people (Diagonal line shows the
      mean and standard deviation of randomly generated samples).

   +--------------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+
   | **Randomly         |               |              |               |
   | generated sample   |               |              |               |
   | difference between |               |              |               |
   | imputed MMPI-2     |               |              |               |
   | scales**           |               |              |               |
   +====================+===============+==============+===============+
   |                    | Scale 2       | Scale 7      | Scale 8       |
   +--------------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+
   | Scale 2            | 53.54 (10.47) | 2.65 (0.11)  | −2.69 (0.04)  |
   +--------------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+
   | Scale 7            | −0.38 (0.12)  | 53.82 (9.93) | −4.72 (0.05)  |
   +--------------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+
   | Scale 8            | 3.15 (0.10)   | 5.25 (0.11)  | 57.97 (11.81) |
   +--------------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+

.. _s4:

Discussion
==========

The results of this investigation were generally consistent with the
results from previous studies, and some innovative discoveries have been
explored. F-Sc arc found in this study has been identified in previous
studies ((n.d.r)). Si-D and Sc-Pt are the arcs related to the Scale 278
used in differentiating schizophrenia patients. L and K scales were the
validity score that quantified a person's behavior on under-reporting
their psychological symptoms ((n.d.q)). This evidence showed that the
Bayesian network was able to align with the previous findings. In
addition, some new findings were obtained through the Bayesian network.
We constructed separated Bayesian networks of healthy participants and
schizophrenia patients in the MMPI clinical scale and identified all of
the arcs, and these arcs represent the correlations between nodes. This
method is a generative model which can predict not only schizophrenia
but also the range of scores from one scale to another scale.

Network structure
-----------------

The main findings of this study were obtained through the network
structure on the MMPI clinical scales of healthy participants and
patients with schizophrenia. We could observe the correlation and
differences between the scales in the arcs of two network structures. We
found some arcs in both networks, suggesting that healthy participants
and patients with schizophrenia had some common responses on the MMPI
clinical scales. Besides, study found differences in scale correlation
between the two network structures. The method has identified that the
correlation differences between healthy participants and patients with
schizophrenia are majorly in Hs, D, Pd, and Mf scales. In the MMPI,
these subscales mainly measure abnormal concern for bodily functions
(Hs), content related to depression, apathy, pessimism, and slowness of
thought and action (D), personality (Pd), and degree of masculinity or
femininity (Mf). In addition to these sub-scales related to
schizophrenia symptoms, disorganized thinking, emotional indifference,
and bizarre behavior as measured by the Sc scale are also important
considerations in distinguishing schizophrenia. Furthermore, some arcs
existed only in the network structure of healthy participants or
patients with schizophrenia. Eight arcs were found only in the network
of patients with schizophrenia, but the correlations these arcs were
weak. Therefore, it is more worthy of our attention that the Bayesian
network method finds that D-Pt, Pd-Ma, and Hs-F arcs only exist in the
network structure of healthy participants, and there was a high
correlation between these scales.

This study further explored the reasons behind this result and its
clinical significance. The difference in the MMPI-2 correlation matrix
in network structure could be viewed as the correlation difference
between schizophrenia patients' MMPI response and normal people's MMPI
response. These differences can be two folds. 1. The structural
difference between the two networks indicated that there was a linear
correlation in one type of people, and the other did not exhibit such
correlation. 2. Even if a link exists in both networks, the linear
relationship might behave differently; thus, we can observe such a
difference. Bearing the above concepts, we could observe the following
findings. The D-Pt arc and Pd-Ma arc were correlated only in the healthy
participant network and presented as arcs. This suggests that there are
common patterns in these two pairs of responses that patients with
schizophrenia do not exhibit. The presence or absence of these two arcs
can be observed to assist clinicians in diagnosing schizophrenia.
Although the Hs-F arc was moderately correlated in the network structure
of both healthy participants and patients with schizophrenia, the Hs-F
arc disappeared due to the presence of the Sc-Hs arc in the network
structure of patients with schizophrenia. The reason for this phenomenon
is that the subject is schizophrenia, so the subject will inevitably
have significant clinical manifestations on the two scales of
schizophrenia (Sc) and psychopathy (Hs). Thus, Sc-Hs arcs appear in the
network structure of patients with schizophrenia but not in the network
structure of healthy participants. Therefore, for patients with
schizophrenia, the Sc scale is directly related to the Hs scale, which
is expressed in the Sc-Hs arc. For healthy participants without Sc-Hs
arcs, the association between the Sc scale and Hs scale was indirectly
linked through the F scale. Based on the above findings, in clinical
practice, when clinical workers try to explain the corresponding
clinical symptoms through the correlation between the two scales, the
results of the F scale can better explain the results of the Hs scale
for healthy individuals, while for patients with schizophrenia, the
results of Sc scale can better explain the results of Hs scale.

The interaction between Scale 278
---------------------------------

The other finding of this study was an interaction between Scale 278.
Based on previous studies that lower 2, lower 7, and higher 8 are a sign
of schizophrenia, we observed that the lower Scale 7 is the consequence
of the higher Scale 8 and lower Scale 2. We could observe that setting
either Scale 2 at a lower level or Scale 8 at a higher level will result
in the conclusion that schizophrenia has a higher Scale 8 and lower
Scale 2 and 7. Nonetheless, setting scale 7 at the lower level does not
result. Given the above observation, we concluded that the interaction
on Scale 278 for schizophrenia was mainly from the higher Scale 8 and
lower Scale 2. This result helped us further validate the typical sign
of schizophrenia in MPPI-2 and more vividly delineate the relationship
between 278 scales. The proposed method provides a novel perspective of
interpretation of the interaction between Depression, Psychasthenia, and
Schizophrenia scales. This perspective facilitates clinical workers to
interpret the meaning behind the scores of the three scales and helps
them better understand schizophrenia.

The Bayesian network
--------------------

This study also found the unique application value of the Bayesian
network in MMPI. The Bayesian network method constructed a network
structure for the response patterns of healthy participants and patients
with schizophrenia on the MPPI-2 clinical scale, respectively. The
Bayesian network structure presented the different degrees of
correlation and interactions between each clinical scale. In addition to
classifying schizophrenia patients from healthy, researchers can use the
Bayesian network to predict the score range of one scale through the
score of another scale and infer the overall data from part of the
observed data. Therefore, this Bayesian network method can estimate the
overall score only by the scores of several scales, which can help
clinical workers perform preliminary filtering of schizophrenia more
efficiently, lighten the burden of work and improve efficiency.

Limitations
-----------

There are two limitations of this study. One limitation is that the
proposed method relied on the nature that the predictors are continuous
(MMPI-2 scales), and the target outcome is a binary variable
(Diagnosis). Instead of solving a Bayesian network with hybrid
variables, separated continuous Bayesian networks for healthy
participants and patients with schizophrenia were built. The
classification decision was made according to the posterior probability
of all MMPI-2 clinical scales. Advance algorithms might be developed to
diagnose through the Bayesian networks in the future directly in the
mixed variable situation. This is especially valuable for the reason
that binary or nominal demographic variables (such as gender) could be
included in the model. The other limitation is that the participants of
this study came from a single hospital. The demographics might not
reflect other cultural and endemic differences in other countries.We
would like to expand the population to include more participants from
various backgrounds and mental diseases to study the endemic and
cultural differences and differential diagnoses between different mental
diseases.

.. _s5:

Conclusion
==========

In this study, a separated Bayesian network was used to construct the
network structure of the MPPI-2 clinical scale between healthy
individuals and patients with schizophrenia. This study investigated the
correlation and its differences in the network structure of MMPI-2
MMPI-2 clinical scales between healthy individuals and patients with
schizophrenia, Scale 278 of schizophrenia was found to have an
interactive relationship, and the results of were due to the interaction
between Scale 2 and Scale 8. These findings contribute to a more
comprehensive understanding of the clinical symptoms of schizophrenia
and provide a new perspective for the clinical diagnosis of medical
personnel.

.. _s6:

Data availability statement
===========================

The original contributions presented in the study are included in the
article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the
corresponding author.

.. _s7:

Ethics statement
================

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by
Institutional Review Board of Wuhan Mental Health Center. Written
informed consent to participate in this study was provided by the
participants' legal guardian/next of kin.

.. _s8:

Author contributions
====================

YH conducted the analysis and composed the manuscripts. YJ, LD, and WL
were responsible for the data, performed experiments, and contributed to
the discussion. K-LT, QZ, and PY contributed to the review, and
interpretation of study's data. All authors contributed to the article
and approved the submitted version.

.. _s9:

Funding
=======

This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 71972164).

.. _s10:

Conflict of interest
====================

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

.. _s12:

Publisher's note
================

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or
those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that
may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B12

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B13

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B14

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B15

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B16

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B17

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B18

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B20

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B21

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B22

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B23

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B24

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B25

      n.d.x.

.. [1]
   Edited by: Vincenzo De Luca, University of Toronto, Canada

.. [2]
   Reviewed by: Iris Vilares, University of Minnesota Twin Cities,
   United States; Ramon Arce, University of Santiago de Compostela,
   Spain; Lan Xiong, McGill University, Canada

.. [3]
   This article was submitted to Computational Psychiatry, a section of
   the journal Frontiers in Psychiatry

.. [4]
   †These authors have contributed equally to this work
