===================================================
Severe COVID-19 increases the risk of schizophrenia
===================================================

Ancha Baranova
Hongbao Cao
Fuquan Zhang⁎Corresponding author at: Department of Psychiatry, The
Affiliated Brain Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 264 Guangzhou
Road, Nanjing 210029, China. [1]_
:Date: 2022-8-24

:Abstract:
   The coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 invades the central nervous system,
   impacting the mental health of COVID-19 patients. We performed a
   two-sample Mendelian randomization analysis to assess the potential
   causal effects of COVID-19 on schizophrenia. Our analysis indicated
   that genetic liability to hospitalized COVID-19 was associated with
   an increased risk for schizophrenia (OR: 1.11, 95% CI: 1.02−1.20,
   *P* = 0.013). However, genetic liability to SARS-CoV-2 infection was
   not associated with the risk of schizophrenia (1.06, 0.83−1.37,
   *P* = 0.643). Severe COVID-19 was associated with an 11% increased
   risk for schizophrenia, suggesting that schizophrenia should be
   assessed as one of the post-COVID-19 sequelae.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _sec0001:

1. Introduction
===============

Since the inception of the SARS-CoV-2 infection pandemic, a significant
subpopulation of individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 suffers from a
range of post-COVID symptoms or consequences, including various forms of
“long-COVID”. In the course of COVID-19, neuropsychiatric manifestations
are common. The coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 can invade the central nervous
system, impacting the structure, metabolism, function, and activity of
the brain ((Dehghani et al. 2022)). Therefore, the neurotropic
properties of COVID-19 pose a remarkable threat to the mental health of
affected individuals. On the other hand, preexisting brain pathology may
make individuals more vulnerable to the invasion of the coronavirus,
which may predispose infected individuals to severe outcomes.

The prevalence of newly established psychiatric diagnoses is rising
along with pandemics ((Cenat et al. 2021)). Schizophrenia is a severe
mental illness characterized by hallucinations, delusions, disorganized
thinking, and cognitive deficits. In both schizophrenia and SARS-CoV-2
infection, a profound breakdown in neuron-glia homeostasis is notable
((Savelieff, Feldman, and Stino 2022)). It has been reported that
schizophrenia patients are at higher risk for COVID-19 mortality
((Toubasi et al. 2021)).

To date, evidence for associations between COVID-19 and schizophrenia
has largely been derived from correlational studies or clinical
observations. Exploring the causality between COVID-19 and schizophrenia
is hindered by confounding intermediating factors and possible reverse
causation. We sought to test the potential causal effects of two
COVID-19 outcomes, SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 hospitalization, on
schizophrenia by using the Mendelian randomization (MR) framework.

.. _sec0002:

2. Methods
==========

.. _sec0003:

2.1. GWAS summary datasets
--------------------------

In this study, we used publicly available summary results of previously
completed GWAS. Two COVID-19 datasets were obtained from the COVID-19
HGI GWAS round 7 ((Initiative 2020)), including one for SARS-CoV-2
infection (122,616 cases and 2,475,240 controls) and one for
hospitalized COVID-19 (32,519 cases and 2,062,805 controls). The summary
result of schizophrenia-related GWAS contained 53,386 schizophrenia
cases and 77,258 controls, all of which were of European origin
((Trubetskoy et al. 2022)). In SARS-CoV-2 datasets, the data on
infection reflect the overall susceptibility to the virus, whereas the
hospitalized cases of COVID-19 represent the severity of the disease. In
this study, all hospitalized COVID-19 cases were recognized as “severe
COVID-19”.

.. _sec0004:

2.2. MR analysis
----------------

The analyses were performed using three complementary methods
implemented in TwoSampleMR ((Hemani et al. 2018)), including inverse
variance weighted (IVW), weighted median, and MR-Egger. These methods
differ in their assumptions about horizontal pleiotropy ((Bowden, Davey
Smith, and Burgess 2015)). Here, the IVW model was used as the primary
MR technique. The intercept from the MR-Egger regression was utilized to
evaluate the average horizontal pleiotropy ((Bowden, Davey Smith, and
Burgess 2015)). The IVs are not all valid when the MR Egger intercept
significantly differs from zero. The significant associations between
the COVID-19 outcomes and schizophrenia were determined by IVW-based *P*
< 0.025 (0.05/2).

For each exposure phenotype, single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with
genome-wide significance (*P* < 5 × 10\ :sup:`–8`) were selected as IVs.
These IVs were further pruned using a clumping r\ :sup:`2` cutoff of
0.01 within each 10 Mb window, using the 1000 Genomes Project Phase 3
(EUR) as the reference panel. For each MR analysis, we removed SNPs
missing from the outcome dataset as well as palindromic SNPs with
intermediate allele frequencies.

.. _sec0005:

3. Results
==========

.. _sec0006:

3.1. MR analysis
----------------

In the MR analysis aiming to uncover the causal effects of the two
COVID-19 outcomes, SARS-CoV-2 infection and hospitalized COVID-19, on
schizophrenia, a total of 20 and 36 IVs were derived, respectively. We
found that hospitalized COVID-19 (OR: 1.11, 95% CI: 1.02−1.20,
*P* = 0.013) exerts a causal effect on schizophrenia
(`Table 1 <#tbl0001>`__ and Fig. 1). However, SARS-CoV-2 infection does
not have a causal effect on this psychiatric condition (1.06, 0.83−1.37,
*P* = 0.643).Table 1Causal effects of COVID-19 outcomes on
schizophrenia.Table 1Exposure\ **OutcomeMethodb (se)OR
[95%CI]N_IVEgger_interceptP_pleiotropyP**\ SARS-CoV-2
infectionSchizophreniaIVW0.060 (0.128)1.06
[0.83-1.37]20NANA0.643SARS-CoV-2 infectionSchizophreniaWM0.209
(0.111)1.23 [0.99-1.53]20NANA0.060SARS-CoV-2 infectionSchizophreniaMR
Egger-0.357 (0.512)0.70 [0.26-1.91]200.0140.4120.495Hospitalized
COVID-19SchizophreniaIVW0.103 (0.041)1.11
[1.02-1.20]36NANA\ **0.013**\ Hospitalized COVID-19SchizophreniaWM0.089
(0.039)1.09 [1.01-1.18]36NANA0.022Hospitalized COVID-19SchizophreniaMR
Egger0.036 (0.120)1.04 [0.82-1.31]360.0050.5600.765 [2]_

The sensitivity analyses revealed that the directions of causal effect
estimates across the methods were largely the same
(`Table 1 <#tbl0001>`__). Notably, in this MR analysis, tests of
MR-Egger regression did not find evidence of directional pleiotropy
(MR-Egger intercept < 0.02, *P* > 0.05).

.. _sec0007:

4. Discussion
=============

Schizophrenia patients usually have considerable disability and poor
quality of life. Previous studies have documented higher
COVID-19-attributed mortality in schizophrenia patients ((Toubasi et al.
2021)). However, it is largely unknown whether the various COVID-19
outcomes play a causal role in the development of schizophrenia. Here,
we show the causal effect of severe COVID-19 on schizophrenia. We
utilized the MR framework to demonstrate that the association of
COVID-19 with schizophrenia was severity dependent. While the viral
infection may not increase the risk for schizophrenia, COVID-19
hospitalization was associated with an 11% increase in the risk of
schizophrenia.

Our results are consistent with previously observed findings of an
elevated rate of mental disorders during the pandemic ((Cenat et al.
2021)) and suggest that schizophrenia should be assessed as one of the
possible post-COVID-19 sequelae. Our study points out that the protocols
for post-acute COVID-19 care should include the diagnosis and management
of this psychiatric condition.

The main strength of the study is that MR analysis is less affected by
the causality pitfalls of confounding factors and reverse causation than
traditionally designed observational studies. To trace the causative
association between COVID-19 and schizophrenia, we utilized the largest
available GWAS summary datasets. Moreover, all the participants in the
GWAS datasets were of European ancestry, reducing the potential
population heterogeneity.

Our study has several limitations. In particular, we assessed only
genetic liability for both diseases with no regard to the effects of the
environment, which are critical for both schizophrenia and COVID-19.
Some confounding factors may influence the causal associations between
schizophrenia and COVID-19, including smoking ((Rao et al. 2021); (Zhang
and Baranova 2021)). We acknowledge that MR analyses may be biased due
to pleiotropy, especially in nonhomogenous datasets. Therefore, we have
tested the MR assumptions using various models.

.. _sec0008:

5. Conclusions
==============

In summary, our study supports that severe COVID-19 may increase the
risk for schizophrenia. However, our results did not support a causal
effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection on this psychiatric disease.

.. _sec0009:

Funding and disclosure
======================

No funding.

.. _sec0010:

Authors' contributions
======================

FZ conceived the project and supervised the study. FZ analyzed the data.
FZ, HC, and AB wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.

Declaration of Competing interest
=================================

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

The authors thank all investigators and participants from the COVID-19
Host Genetics Initiative and other groups for sharing these data.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bib0001

      Bowden, J., G. Davey Smith, and S. Burgess. 2015. “\ `Mendelian
      Randomization with Invalid Instruments: Effect Estimation and Bias
      Detection Through Egger
      Regression <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26050253>`__.”
      *Int. J. Epidemiol.* 44 (2): 512–25.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bib0002

      Cenat, J.M., C. Blais-Rochette, C.K. Kokou-Kpolou, P.G. Noorishad,
      J.N. Mukunzi, S.E. McIntee, R.D. Dalexis, M.A. Goulet, and P.R.
      Labelle. 2021. “Prevalence of Symptoms of Depression, Anxiety,
      Insomnia, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and Psychological
      Distress Among Populations Affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic: A
      Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” *Psychiatry Res.* 295.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bib0003

      Dehghani, A., E. Zokaei, S.M. Kahani, E. Alavinejad, M. Dehghani,
      G.H. Meftahi, and M.R. Afarinesh. 2022. “The Potential Impact of
      Covid-19 on CNS and Psychiatric Sequels.” *Asian J. Psychiatry*
      72.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bib0004

      Hemani, G., J. Zheng, B. Elsworth, K.H. Wade, V. Haberland, D.
      Baird, C. Laurin, et al. 2018. “\ `The MR-Base Platform Supports
      Systematic Causal Inference Across the Human
      Phenome <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29846171>`__.”
      *Elife* 7.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bib0005

      Initiative, C.-H.G. 2020. “\ `The COVID-19 Host Genetics
      Initiative, a Global Initiative to Elucidate the Role of Host
      Genetic Factors in Susceptibility and Severity of the SARS-CoV-2
      Virus Pandemic <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32404885>`__.”
      *Eur. J. Hum. Genet.* 28 (6): 715–18.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bib0006

      Rao, S., A. Baranova, H. Cao, J. Chen, X. Zhang, and F. Zhang.
      2021. “\ `Genetic Mechanisms of COVID-19 and Its Association with
      Smoking and Alcohol
      Consumption <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34308962>`__.”
      *Brief Bioinform.* 22 (6).

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bib0007

      Savelieff, M.G., E.L. Feldman, and A.M. Stino. 2022. “Neurological
      Sequela and Disruption of Neuron-Glia Homeostasis in SARS-CoV-2
      Infection.” *Neurobiol. Dis.* 168.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bib0008

      Toubasi, A.A., R.B. AbuAnzeh, H.B.A. Tawileh, R.H. Aldebei, and
      S.A.S. Alryalat. 2021. “A Meta-Analysis: The Mortality and
      Severity of COVID-19 Among Patients with Mental Disorders.”
      *Psychiatry Res.* 299.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bib0009

      Trubetskoy, V., A.F. Pardinas, T. Qi, G. Panagiotaropoulou, S.
      Awasthi, T.B. Bigdeli, J. Bryois, et al. 2022. “\ `Mapping Genomic
      Loci Implicates Genes and Synaptic Biology in
      Schizophrenia <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35396580>`__.”
      *Nature* 604 (7906): 502–8.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-bib0010

      Zhang, F., and A. Baranova. 2021. “Smoking Quantitatively
      Increases Risk for COVID-19.” *Eur. Respir. J.*

.. [1]
   These are co-first authors.

.. [2]
   IVW: inverse variance weighted; WM: Weighted median; OR: odds ratio;
   CI: confidence interval; b: effect size; se: standard error; N_IV:
   number of instrumental variables; Q_P: *P*-value of heterogeneity
   analysis.
