=======================================================================================================================================================================
Glutamine and GABA alterations in cingulate cortex may underlie alcohol drinking in a rat model of co-occurring alcohol use disorder and schizophrenia: an 1H-MRS study
=======================================================================================================================================================================

Patrick McCunn
Xi Chen
Barjor Gimi
Alan I. Green
Jibran Y. Khokhar
:Date: 2022-8-23

:Abstract:
   Alcohol use disorder commonly occurs in patients with schizophrenia
   and significantly worsens the clinical course of the disorder. The
   neurobiological underpinnings of alcohol drinking are not well
   understood. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) has been used to
   assess the neurochemical substrates that may be associated with
   alcohol drinking in patients; however, the causal impact of these
   findings remains elusive, highlighting the need for studies in animal
   models. This study performed MRS in the neonatal ventral hippocampal
   lesioned (NVHL) rat model, a model of co-occurring schizophrenia and
   substance use disorders. NVHL lesions (or sham surgeries) were
   performed on post-natal day 7 and animals were given brief exposure
   to alcohol during adolescence (10% v/v in a 2-bottle choice design).
   Animals were re-exposed to alcohol during adulthood (20% v/v) until a
   stable drinking baseline was established, and then forced into
   abstinence to control for the effects of differential alcohol
   drinking. Animals were scanned for MRS after one month of abstinence.
   NVHL rats consumed significantly more alcohol than sham rats and in
   the cingulate cortex showed significantly higher levels of GABA and
   glutamine. Significantly lower GABA levels were observed in the
   nucleus accumbens. No differences between the NVHL and sham animals
   were observed in the hippocampus. Correlation analysis revealed that
   GABA and glutamine concentrations in the cingulate cortex
   significantly correlated with the rats’ alcohol drinking prior to 30
   days of forced abstinence. These findings suggest that a potential
   dysfunction in the glutamate/GABA–glutamine cycle may contribute to
   alcohol drinking in a rat model of schizophrenia, and this
   dysfunction could be targeted in future treatment-focused studies.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _Sec1:

Introduction
============

Alcohol use disorders (AUD) commonly occur in patients with
schizophrenia (43–65%)\ :sup:`(Volkow 2009)`; this use significantly
worsens the course of the disorder contributing to poor treatment
response, treatment non-compliance\ :sup:`(Owen et al. 1996)`,
relapse\ :sup:`(Drake and Mueser 1996),(Gupta et al. 1996)`,
violence\ :sup:`(Bartels et al. 1991),(Swanson et al. 1990)`, and
suicide\ :sup:`(Allebeck et al. 1987),(Harkavy-Friedman and Nelson
1997)`. Unfortunately, both the current understanding of, and treatment
options for, co-occurring alcohol use in patients with schizophrenia are
limited. The most effective current treatment, the atypical
antipsychotic clozapine, is rarely used due to its side-effect
profile\ :sup:`(Khokhar, Henricks, et al. 2018)`, underscoring the need
to new treatment development and investigation of potential therapeutic
targets.

While the self-medication hypothesis is often used to explain alcohol
and other substance use in patients with schizophrenia, we, and others,
have advanced an alternative unifying hypothesis that suggests that
co-occurring substance use may be related to shared genetic
susceptibility or brain reward circuit dysfunction, that makes these
patients especially vulnerable to the effects of
substances\ :sup:`(Chambers, Krystal, and Self 2001)–(Khokhar, Dwiel, et
al. 2018)`. Altered glutamatergic neurotransmission in particular has
been heavily implicated in both schizophrenia and alcohol use disorder
and may provide a potential mechanistic link to the neurobiological
underpinnings of the increased predisposition to alcohol
drinking\ :sup:`(Hartwell, Tolliver, and Brady 2009)`. Previous work has
suggested that alterations in glutamine-glutamate metabolism may in fact
predate alcohol abuse\ :sup:`(Thoma 2011)`, leading to the question of
whether schizophrenia-induced glutamatergic dysfunction may be a
contributor to AUD. However, glutamatergic neurotransmission remains
difficult to measure in-vivo, thereby making it difficult to quantify
dysfunction in the glutamate/GABA–glutamine cycle\ :sup:`(Li, Yang, and
Lin 2019)`.

Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is a useful methodology
that is often used to study the neurochemical correlates of psychiatric
illness. Particularly relevant to this study, MRS allows for the
assessment of glutamatergic function and dysfunction via the measurement
of in-vivo concentrations of amino acid-based neurotransmitters and
their metabolites (i.e., GABA, glutamine, and glutamate) within specific
regions of the brain specified by three-dimensional spectroscopy voxels.
Employing this technique in rodent models can allow for replication into
animal models of metabolite concentration changes reported in MRS
studies of human patients for further validation of the models, to
establish causality, to identify therapeutic targets, and to use MRS
measurements as outcome measures in treatment development.

Compounding the difficulty of detecting subtle neurobiological
alterations, is the difficulty in developing accurate heuristic models
in animals that adequately capture the features of clinical presentation
in humans; this process becomes particularly difficult when modeling
co-occurring disorders such as schizophrenia and AUD\ :sup:`(Menne and
Chesworth 2020)`. To model “dual-diagnosis” in patients, we employed an
established animal model of schizophrenia and co-occurring alcohol use
disorder built upon the neonatal ventral hippocampal lesioned (NVHL)
rat\ :sup:`(Khokhar and Todd 2018)–(Jenkins et al. 2022)`, which is one
of the best-described animal models of SCZ\ :sup:`(Lipska and Weinberger
2002)`. This animal (experimentally created by producing an excitotoxic
lesion in the ventral hippocampus in a 7-day old rat) has strong
construct, face, and predictive validity for
schizophrenia\ :sup:`(Tseng, Chambers, and Lipska 2009)`, and displays
behavioral and neurobiological dysfunctions analogous to those seen in
patients with schizophrenia. Moreover, like patients with
schizophrenia\ :sup:`(Volkow 2009)`, NVHL rats display enhanced
sensitivity to, and increased use of, alcohol\ :sup:`(Jeanblanc
2015),(Conroy, Rodd, and Chambers 2007)`, cocaine\ :sup:`(Chambers and
Self 2002)–(Karlsson et al. 2013)`, nicotine\ :sup:`(Berg et al. 2014)`,
ketamine\ :sup:`(Vohs et al. 2012)`, and methamphetamine\ :sup:`(Brady
et al. 2008)` as well as altered rewarding effects of
cannabinoids\ :sup:`(Gallo, Bouchard, and Rompré 2014),(Gallo et al.
2014)`. It has been shown that this model shows consistent circuit
dysfunctions with those observed in patients with schizophrenia, and
that cannabis vapor exposure can worsen these
dysfunctions\ :sup:`(Jenkins et al. 2022),(Jenkins and Khokhar 2021)`.
We have recently shown that the NVHL rat model of schizophrenia and
alcohol use disorder, initially described by ref. :sup:`(Jeanblanc
2015)`, can be used to understand the behavioral and neurobiological
underpinnings of this disorder, specifically showing that impairments in
switching behaviors (as measured by a latent inhibition of autoshaping
task) contribute to the risk for alcohol drinking in this
model\ :sup:`(Khokhar and Todd 2018)`.

In this study, we utilized MRS in the cingulate cortex, nucleus
accumbens, and hippocampus to assess the relationship between
glutamatergic dysfunction and alcohol drinking in a rat model of
co-occurring AUD and schizophrenia. Glutamine and glutamate levels are
known to normalize to baseline levels by 3-weeks after last alcohol
exposure\ :sup:`(Hermann 2012)`, therefore NVHL rats with established
alcohol drinking were forced into abstinence for a month. We aimed to
replicate and extend previous findings from abstinent patients with a
history of alcohol use disorder\ :sup:`(Thoma 2011)` while ensuring that
the differential levels of drinking between the NVHL and sham rats did
not confound our findings. Further, based on these previous
findings\ :sup:`(Thoma 2011)`, we hypothesized that glutamatergic
dysfunction would correlate with alcohol consumption prior to 30-day
abstinence, supporting a potential contributing effect of this
dysfunction to alcohol drinking in our model, and by extension to AUD in
patients with schizophrenia.

.. _Sec2:

Methods and materials
=====================

.. _Sec3:

Subjects
--------

Timed pregnant Sprague-Dawley dams were ordered from Charles River
(Wilmington, MA) to arrive at gestational day 13 and were singly housed
with ad libitum access to food and water. Male rat pups used in the
study were individually housed in a colony room maintained on a 14:10 h
light-dark cycle. Experimentation took place during the light period of
the cycle. Rats were monitored and cared for in compliance with the
Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Care
guidelines and the IACUC of Dartmouth College.

.. _Sec4:

NVHL preparation and surgery
----------------------------

Male Sprague-Dawley rat pups (*n* = 11) on post-natal day 7 (PND 7,
15–20 g) were anesthetized using hypothermia and placed on a Styrofoam
platform attached to a stereotactic apparatus (Kopf Instruments,
Tujunga). For the NVHL group, pups (*n* = 6) were bilaterally injected
with excitotoxic ibotenic acid (3.0 μg ibotenic acid [Tocris,
Minneapolis] dissolved in 0.3 μl of artificial cerebrospinal fluid
(aCSF; 150 μM Na, 3.0 μM K, 1.4 μM, Ca, 0.8 μM Mg, 1.0 μM P, and 155 μM
Cl; pH 7.4)\ :sup:`(Chambers and Lipska 2011)` into their ventral
hippocampi (AP −3.0 mm, ML ± 3.5 mm, VD ± 5.0 mm relative to bregma).
The remaining pups (*n* = 5) were injected with aCSF at the same
coordinates (Sham, unlesioned). After the surgery, wounds were closed
using tissue glue, and rats were returned to their dams when activity
level had returned to normal. On PND21, rats were weaned and housed
individually for the duration of the study to allow for individual
measurement of alcohol drinking.

.. _Sec5:

Alcohol drinking in adolescence and adulthood
---------------------------------------------

To ensure that the NVHL rats would be susceptible to drinking alcohol
preferentially in adulthood, we followed the protocol of Jeanblanc et
al.\ :sup:`(Jeanblanc 2015)`, in which the rats were given access to
alcohol in a free-access 2-bottle (water and 10% alcohol v/v in
spill-proof bottles) design between PND 28 and 42. At the end of this
period, the alcohol bottle was removed, and the rats only had access to
water until they reached adulthood. Water, alcohol, and food intake as
well as body weight were measured daily during PND 28–42 and then again
in adulthood upon resumption of alcohol drinking. Alcohol was then
reintroduced to the rats in adulthood (PND 90) in a continuous-access
2-bottle choice (water and 20% alcohol v/v) design. The two bottles were
rotated daily to prevent positional preference, consistent with our
previous investigations\ :sup:`(Khokhar and Green 2016)`. Animals were
allowed to drink until their drinking stabilized (4 days with less than
10% variance in drinking) and were allowed to drink at these levels for
30 days, followed by forced abstinence. Since glutamine and glutamate
levels normalize to baseline levels by 3-weeks after last alcohol
exposure\ :sup:`(Hermann 2012)`, we chose to scan the animals 30 days
after the last alcohol drinking day.

.. _Sec6:

MRI methods
-----------

All MRI scans were performed on an Agilent 9.4T animal scanner using
VnmrJ 4.0A software located at the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center,
with a RAPID 2 channel volume coil as a transmitter and a 4-channel
phase-array surface coil as receiver. Rats were anesthetized with an
isoflurane-oxygen mixture (5% for induction and 2.0–2.5% for
maintenance) and the respiration rate was maintained between 40 and 60
respiration per minute. The rectal temperature was kept at 36.5 °C using
a blown hot air system. The sagittal/axial anatomic images were acquired
using a multiple spin-echo sequence (TR/TE = 2000/12 ms, echo
number = 8, average = 4) with the anterior commissure used as a landmark
for axial image positioning. Imaging voxel size was
0.16 × 0.16 × 1 mm\ :sup:`3`.

MRS data were acquired from the cingulate cortex
(1.8 × 1.6 × 3.6 mm\ :sup:`3`), dorsal hippocampus
(1.8 × 0.8 × 2.6 mm\ :sup:`3`) and nucleus accumbens
(1.6 × 1.8 × 2.4 mm\ :sup:`3`) using the spectroscopic voxels listed.
For all acquisitions, an optimized short TE PRESS sequence
(TE/TR = 14/2000 ms) was used. The spectroscopic voxel sizes and precise
locations of placement were chosen according to ref. :sup:`(n.d.)` and
inclusion of CSF and white matter in the voxels was minimized. 3D
shimming was performed before each MRS acquisition such that the
linewidth of the water from each spectroscopic voxel was <14 Hz. The
number of averages used, and acquisition time were 768 (28 min), 1024
(38 min), and 1536 (56 min) for the cingulate cortex, hippocampus, and
nucleus accumbens, respectively. To minimize chemical shift displacement
error for neurotransmitters of interest (Glu, Gln, GABA), the center
frequencies of the localization radiofrequency pulses of the PRESS
sequence were set to 2.3 ppm. Water suppression was performed using the
variable pulse power and optimized relaxation delays water suppression
(VAPOR) scheme\ :sup:`(Tkáč et al. 1999)` using Gaussian-shaped
suppression pulses with a bandwidth of 200 Hz, prior to acquisition of
water-suppressed MRS data. For each region, unsuppressed water signal
was also acquired using the same sequence, except with the RF pulses
turned off during the VAPOR scheme. For acquisition of the water signal,
the RF pulses were centered on the water signal at 4.7 ppm. Data were
acquired in a metabolite-water interleaved fashion, with 16 averages of
unsuppressed water signal acquired between 8-min blocks of
water-suppressed acquisition (256 averages).

Preprocessing of the MRS data was performed in the console software
VnmrJ 4.0 with macros written in-house. Signals from different coil
channels were combined, and phase and frequency corrections of
water-suppressed metabolite spectra were done. Since acquisition was
done in an interleaved fashion, metabolite spectra acquired during each
8-minute block were phase and frequency corrected using the water
spectrum acquired afterward as a reference, for the slow drifts caused
by the magnet and potential animal movements during the long acquisition
time. Processing of acquired metabolite spectra, spectral fitting, and
metabolite quantification was performed with LCModel\ :sup:`(Provencher
1993)` version 3.6-1H. A basis set consisting of simulated metabolite
spectra produced in VeSPA\ :sup:`(Soher et al. 2011)` with the same
acquisition parameters and an experimentally acquired macromolecule
spectrum were provided to LCModel for spectral fitting. The
macromolecule spectrum was acquired from a whole brain spectroscopic
voxel and was included in the basis set to account for the macromolecule
baseline present in the spectra due to the short TE used. The
unsuppressed water signal was provided to LCModel for both the eddy
current correction as well as the reference signal for metabolite
concentration calculation.

.. _Sec7:

Lesion verification and analysis
--------------------------------

After euthanasia, the rat brains were removed and flash frozen. Lesions
were verified via 40 mm sections of the dorsal and ventral hippocampus
using a freezing microtome, that were mounted on glass slides and
thionin stained. The hippocampus was examined for bilateral damage
microscopically (typically includes cell loss, thinning, cellular
disorganization, and ventricular enlargement).

.. _Sec8:

Data analysis
-------------

An unpaired Student’s *t*-test was applied to compare alcohol
consumption between the Sham and NVHL groups and neurometabolite
concentration between the Sham and NVHL groups. When statistically
significant differences were detected in neurometabolite concentrations
a Pearson correlation analysis was used to determine the correlation
between alcohol drinking and neurometabolite concentration. For all
statistical analysis, *p* < 0.05 was taken as statistically significant.
The data that supports the findings of this study is available from OSF
at https://osf.io/d8xrs/.

.. _Sec9:

Results
=======

.. _Sec10:

Histology
---------

All NVHL rats displayed bilateral lesions of the hippocampus, whereas no
lesions were observed in the sham animals. Representative
photomicrographs depicting lesion location and extent are presented in
Fig. `1 <#Fig1>`__.Fig. 1Schematic and representative photomicrographs
depicting lesion extent and location in NVHL rats.Arrows point to a
lesion in a representative NVHL rat’s ventral hippocampus
photomicrographs (right) compared to a sham rat (left).

.. _Sec11:

MRS
---

Figure `2 <#Fig2>`__ shows a representative LCModel fitting of spectra
in the cingulate cortex, hippocampus, and nucleus accumbens of NVHL and
sham rats with the spectroscopic voxel marked on axial/sagittal images.
Quality control data including the linewidth, SNR, and the Cramer-Rao
lower bound are summarized in Table `1 <#Tab1>`__.Fig. 2LCModel fitting
and voxel positions.LCModel fittings (red line) of the experimental
spectra (black line) of the cingulate cortex (top), hippocampus
(middle), and nucleus accumbens (bottom) of representative NVHL and sham
rats, with inset showing the voxel position.Table 1Cramer-Rao lower
bound (CRLB), Linewidth (Hz), and Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) of the
cingulate cortex, hippocampus, and nucleus accumbens of all
spectra.CRLBLinewidth (Hz)SNRGABAGluGlnCingulate
Cortex23 ± 7%4.0 ± 0.3%15 ± 5%9 ± 218 ± 4Hippocampus28 ± 8%7 ± 2%24 ± 9%8 ± 214 ± 2Nucleus
Accumbens26 ± 6%7 ± 1%18 ± 8%10 ± 29 ± 4

.. _Sec12:

Alcohol consumption
-------------------

Alcohol consumption was measured as an average of the last three days
before forced abstinence in both the sham and NVHL groups. Consistent
with our previous findings, results of the t-test revealed NVHL rats
drank significantly more alcohol than the sham group
(NVHL = 4.65 ± 0.77 g/kg, Sham = 2.92 ± 0.78 g/kg, *p* < 0.001, Fig.
`3 <#Fig3>`__). No differences in alcohol drinking were observed between
NVHL and sham rats during adolescence.Fig. 3Higher levels of alcohol
drinking in NVHL rats compared to sham rats.NVHL rats drank
significantly more alcohol than the sham group measured as an average of
the last 3 days before withdrawal (sham = 2.92 ± 0.78 g/kg,
NVHL = 4.65 ± 0.77 g/kg). Statistically significant differences are
denoted by \* (*p* < 0.001; *n* = 6 NVHL, 5 sham). Data are shown as
mean ± SD. Individual data points are denoted with a (+) Sham or (x)
NVHL.

.. _Sec13:

Neurometabolites
----------------

In the cingulate cortex of the NVHL group, a t-test revealed both GABA
and Gln concentrations were statistically significantly higher than the
sham group (GABA: *p* = 0.0061, Cohen’s *d*: 5.0365; Gln: *p* = 0.0412,
Cohen’s *d*: 3.1967), while Glu showed no statistically significant
difference. In the nucleus accumbens of the NVHL group only GABA
concentrations were statistically significantly lower than the sham
group (*p* = 0.0367, Cohen’s *d*: 3.2347), while Gln and Glu showed no
statistically significant difference. There were no statistically
significant differences in concentrations of the three metabolites in
the hippocampus. Table `2 <#Tab2>`__ and Fig. `4 <#Fig4>`__ provide the
complement of results of metabolites in all three brain regions in both
groups.Table 2Average concentrations (mM ± Standard Deviation) of GABA,
glutamine (Gln), and glutamate (Glu) in the cingulate cortex,
hippocampus, and nucleus accumbens of NVHL and sham rats.Averaged
Concentrations (mM ± Standard Deviation) for
NeurometabolitesGABAGlutamineGlutamateCingulate Cortex Sham2.7262 ±
0.20333.6062 ± 0.433714.3130 ± 0.7289 NVHL3.7113 ± 0.18754.7500 ±
0.252015.4058 ± 0.4597 *p* value\ **0.0061\*0.0412\***\ 0.2212Nucleus
Accumbens Sham2.9850 ± 0.43195.5076 ± 0.889211.7468 ± 0.8883 NVHL1.9210
± 0.17285.0982 ± 0.507912.7987 ± 0.4506 *p*
value\ **0.0367\***\ 0.68580.2940Hippocampus Sham3.6268 ± 1.19334.7470 ±
0.645813.0428 ± 1.3991 NVHL3.4128 ± 0.49444.4908 ± 1.732213.5497 ±
1.3989 *p* value0.63850.27220.1184Values showing statistically
significant differences (*p* < 0.05) between groups are bolded and
represented with \*. Data are shown as mean ± SD.Fig. 4Higher cingulate
glutamine and GABA, but lower nucleus accumbens GABA, levels in NVHL
rats.In the cingulate cortex (**A**), GABA and glutamine concentrations
were significantly higher in the NVHL rat compared to the sham rats. In
the nucleus accumbens (**B**) of the NVHL group, GABA concentrations
were significantly lower than the sham group. No differences between
groups were observed in the dorsal hippocampus (**C**). Statistically
significant differences between groups are represented with \*
(*p* < 0.05; *n* = 6 NVHL, 5 sham). Data are shown as mean ± SD.
Individual data points are denoted with a (+) Sham or (x) NVHL.

.. _Sec14:

Correlation analysis
--------------------

Performing a Pearson correlation between alcohol drinking (taken as the
average of the last 3 days of alcohol drinking prior to 30 days of
abstinence) and the neurometabolites as measured by MRS, it was found
that alcohol drinking showed a positive correlation to both GABA and Gln
in the cingulate cortex (GABA: *r*\ (9) = 0.7662, *p* = 0.0060, Cohen’s
*d*: 2.3847; Gln: *r*\ (9) = 0.7497, *p* = 0.0079, Cohen’s *d*: 2.2657).
No other statistically significant correlations were found. Refer to
Table `3 <#Tab3>`__ and Fig. `5 <#Fig5>`__ for full results.Table
3Pearson Correlation analysis of alcohol consumption (g/kg) and
neurometabolites (mM).Alcohol and GABAAlcohol and GlutamineAlcohol and
GlutamateCingulate Cortex Pearson *r*\ 0.76620.74970.3919
*t*\ 3.57693.39871.2779 *p* value\ **0.0060\*0.0079\***\ 0.2332Nucleus
Accumbens Pearson *r*\ −0.3599−0.21210.3206 *t*\ 1.15760.65101.015 *p*
value0.27680.53130.3364Hippocampus Pearson *r*\ −0.0495−0.0956−0.2204
*t*\ 0.14860.28810.6780 *p* value0.88520.77980.5148Alcohol drinking
showed a positive correlation to both GABA (*r*\ (9) = 0.7662,
*p* = 0.0060) and Glutamine concentration (*r*\ (9) = 0.7497,
*p* = 0.0079) as measured by Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS)
(*n* = 6 NVHL, 5 sham).Values showing statistically significant
differences (*p* < 0.05) between groups are bolded and represented with
\*.Fig. 5Glutamine and GABA levels in the cingulate cortex correlate
with alcohol drinking prior to abstinence.Pearson correlation between
(left) alcohol consumption (g/kg) and GABA (mM), and (right) alcohol
consumption (g/kg) and glutamine concentration (mM) in the cingulate
cortex. Alcohol drinking showed a positive correlation between both GABA
(*r*\ (9) = 0.7662, *p* = 0.0060) and glutamine concentration
(*r*\ (9) = 0.7497, *p* = 0.0079) as measured by magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS) (*n* = 6 NVHL, 5 sham). Individual data points are
denoted with a (+) Sham or (x) NVHL.

.. _Sec15:

Discussion
==========

This study utilized MRS to assess the relationship between glutamatergic
dysfunction and alcohol drinking in a neurodevelopmental rat model of
co-occurring AUD and schizophrenia. Consistent with our previous
findings, the NVHL rats showed significantly higher alcohol consumption
(who then underwent 30 days of abstinence prior to being scanned for
neurometabolite levels). Proton MRS in the cingulate cortex revealed
significantly higher levels of GABA and glutamine while significantly
lower GABA levels were also observed in the nucleus accumbens. No
differences in neurometabolite levels in the hippocampus were observed
between the NVHL and sham animals. In the cingulate cortex both GABA and
glutamine showed a positive correlation with the amount of alcohol
consumed prior to 30 days of forced abstinence. No statistically
significant changes were observed in the hippocampus, despite being the
site of the lesions; it should be noted though that MRS was collected in
the dorsal hippocampus. These findings provide support that
glutamatergic dysfunction may be related to alcohol drinking and may
contribute to co-occurring alcohol use disorder in patients with
schizophrenia.

While the neurometabolic correlates of dual-diagnosis schizophrenia and
alcohol have not been studied explicitly, glutamatergic dysfunction is
known to occur in both schizophrenia alone and in AUD alone. The
increased glutamine observed in the cingulate cortex in our study is
consistent with previous reports in pharmacological animal models of
schizophrenia\ :sup:`(Napolitano 2014)` and in patients with
schizophrenia\ :sup:`(Théberge 2002),(Bustillo 2010)`. Our findings of
the elevated GABA in the same region are in line with a recent report on
chronic schizophrenia\ :sup:`(Öngür et al. 2010)`, while the reduced
GABA levels in the nucleus accumbens of decreased GABA are also
consistent with post-mortem findings from patients with
schizophrenia\ :sup:`(Spokes et al. 1980)`, consistent with decreases in
glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 (GAD67, the enzyme that converts
glutamate to GABA) mRNA in the nucleus accumbens in patients with
schizophrenia\ :sup:`(Thompson et al. 2009)`. Further, the increase in
glutamine in the cingulate cortex has also been observed in human
subjects with current AUD and those in remission\ :sup:`(Thoma 2011)`.
Together, these findings indicate that the dysfunction of the
glutamate/GABA–glutamine cycle observed in the NVHL model appears to be
similar to the dysfunctions seen in patients with schizophrenia and/or
AUD alone. Interestingly, no differences in neurometabolite levels in
the dorsal hippocampus were observed. These findings contrast previous
studies which suggest lower GAD67 expression in the dorsal
hippocampus\ :sup:`(Feleder et al. 2009)`; however, these findings were
specific to the CA1 region suggesting that the dorsal hippocampus voxel
may not have captured the sub-region-related changes. Importantly, to
our knowledge, none of the MRS studies of patients with schizophrenia
have focused on the posterior hippocampus (dorsal hippocampus in
primates)\ :sup:`(Duarte and Xin 2019)`. These findings lend some
support for the NVHL model as a potentially useful heuristic studying
schizophrenia and alcohol use disorder, which we can now begin to
manipulate pharmacologically toward treatment development. However, it
is possible that the neurometabolic correlates of the co-occurring
disorder are distinct from those of the two disorders alone, thereby
supporting the need for more studies in dual diagnosis patients to gain
a better understanding of the mechanisms contributing to the development
of AUD in patients with schizophrenia.

Previous work has shown that glutamine and glutamate levels normalize to
baseline levels by 3-weeks after last alcohol exposure in the rat
brain\ :sup:`(Hermann 2012)`. In order to control for the potential
effects of the higher levels of alcohol drinking in the NVHL rats, rats
in this study were forced into abstinence for 30 days prior to MRS
acquisition; therefore, the higher glutamine levels are unlikely to be
due to the effects of higher alcohol consumption or withdrawal from
alcohol drinking. The presence of the higher glutamine levels even after
these 30 days, and the correlation between GABA and glutamine levels and
past drinking, also supports previous hypotheses from studies in
patients with AUD\ :sup:`(Thoma 2011)` that glutamatergic dysfunction
may predate alcohol exposure and could contribute to the vulnerability
for AUD in patients (with or without schizophrenia). Another recent
study in patients with AUD undergoing monitored abstinence found
prospective associations between anterior cingulate glutamine levels
(but not GABA which was found to be significantly increased) and heavy
drinking, craving and withdrawal symptoms\ :sup:`(Prisciandaro 2020)`.
This is further supported by MRS studies in substance-naïve adolescents
with a family history of AUD, where the glutamine to glutamate ratio
correlated with impulsive behaviors, suggesting a role for glutamatergic
dysfunction in the vulnerability toward alcohol
use\ :sup:`(Cohen-Gilbert 2015)`. Moreover, craving during
detoxification in alcohol-dependent individuals is also related to
combined glutamine-glutamate levels in the cingulate
cortex\ :sup:`(Bauer 2013)`. However, it is still possible that the
higher levels of alcohol drinking and withdrawal in the NVHL rats
contributed to increases in the packing density of glutamine synthetase
expressing astrocytes\ :sup:`(Miguel-Hidalgo 2006)`, which might have
contributed to the greater conversion of glutamate to glutamine.
Alternatively, since astrocytic genes are often upregulated in brains
from patients with schizophrenia\ :sup:`(Ramaker 2017)`, it is possible
that the higher levels of glutamine are related to such upregulation in
the NVHL rat, and not due to alcohol drinking. Future studies will
assess neurometabolite levels prior to initiation of alcohol drinking to
assess the potential predictive potential of cingulate cortex glutamine
levels on alcohol drinking, while also uncovering what roles alcohol
drinking and astrocyte expression might contribute to the glutamatergic
dysfunction observed here.

The current study does have some limitations, the most important of
which is the lack of sham and NVHL groups with no alcohol exposure
during adolescence. This limits our ability to assess the differential
effect of adolescent alcohol exposure as it relates to the NVHL model
(aside from its known impact on inducing alcohol drinking in adulthood).
It could be the NVHL surgery, the alcohol drinking during adolescence,
or the interaction between these factors, has led to the glutamatergic
dysfunction observed in the current study. Furthermore, the limited
sample sizes do not permit robust correlations using only the NVHL rats,
which might have been useful in understanding whether the differences in
neurometabolite levels relate just to the differences in alcohol
drinking between NVHL or sham animals (both of which drink different
amounts of alcohol) or are related to other factors that may contribute
to this dysfunction (e.g., NVHL lesion). Therefore, these results must
be interpreted with caution. Follow up studies will attempt to determine
the nature of impact of adolescent alcohol drinking on the
neurometabolic dysfunctions in NVHL rats utilizing a group without
adolescent alcohol exposure.

Abnormal glutamatergic neurotransmission or metabolism has been
previously linked to both schizophrenia and AUD, but also to other
psychiatric disorders such as bipolar disorder and major depressive
disorder, making it a potentially valuable trans-diagnostic target for
treatment development\ :sup:`(Li, Yang, and Lin 2019)`. With growing
evidence of glutamat-/GABA-ergic dysfunction predating AUD in patients
(with or without schizophrenia), more targeted treatment options
tackling this dysfunction may be explored to limit the detrimental
effect alcohol consumption may have on these patients.

.. _Sec16:

Conclusion
==========

Consistent with previous studies in patients with schizophrenia,
glutamatergic dysfunction was observed in the cingulate cortex of NVHL
rats. NVHL rats consumed significantly more alcohol than sham rats and
had significantly higher levels of GABA and glutamine in the cingulate
cortex as well as significantly lower levels of GABA in the nucleus
accumbens. GABA and glutamine showed a positive correlation with alcohol
consumption across all animals (measured as the last 3 days of alcohol
drinking prior to 30 days abstinence). These findings provide additional
support for the hypothesis that glutamat-/GABA-ergic dysfunctions may
contribute to the vulnerability for alcohol drinking, while providing a
potential avenue where schizophrenia-induced neurometabolic dysfunctions
may give rise to a shared susceptibility for both schizophrenia and the
development of AUD.

This work was supported by a Canadian Institute of Health Research
Project Grant PJT-173442 (J.Y.K.) and a pilot grant from the Hitchcock
Foundation (J.Y.K.).

P.M. reports no biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of
interest. X.C. reports no biomedical financial interests or potential
conflicts of interest. B.G. reports no biomedical financial interests or
potential conflicts of interest. A.I.G. reports no biomedical financial
interests or potential conflicts of interest. J.Y.K. reports no
biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR36

      n.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR7

      Allebeck, P, A Varla, E Kristjansson, and B Wistedt. 1987. “Risk
      Factors for Suicide Among Patients with Schizophrenia.” *Acta.
      Psychiatr. Scand.* 76: 414–19.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.1987.tb05626.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR5

      Bartels, SJ, RE Drake, MA Wallach, and DH Freeman. 1991.
      “Characteristic Hostility in Schizophrenic Outpatients.”
      *Schizophr. Bull.* 17: 163–71.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/17.1.163.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR50

      Bauer, J. 2013. “Craving in Alcohol-Dependent Patients After
      Detoxification Is Related to Glutamatergic Dysfunction in the
      Nucleus Accumbens and the Anterior Cingulate Cortex.”
      *Neuropsychopharmacol.* 38: 1401–8.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2013.45.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR27

      Berg, SA, AM Sentir, BS Cooley, EA Engleman, and RA Chambers.
      2014. “Nicotine Is More Addictive, Not More Cognitively
      Therapeutic in a Neurodevelopmental Model of Schizophrenia
      Produced by Neonatal Ventral Hippocampal Lesions.” *Addic. Biol.*
      19: 1020–31. https://doi.org/10.1111/adb.12082.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR29

      Brady, AM, SE McCallum, SD Glick, and P O’Donnell. 2008. “Enhanced
      Methamphetamine Self-Administration in a Neurodevelopmental Rat
      Model of Schizophrenia.” *Psychopharmacology* 200: 205–15.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-008-1195-7.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR42

      Bustillo, JR. 2010. “1h-MRS at 4 Tesla in Minimally Treated Early
      Schizophrenia.” *Mol. Psychiatr.* 15: 629–36.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2009.121.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR10

      Chambers, RA, JH Krystal, and DW Self. 2001. “A Neurobiological
      Basis for Substance Abuse Comorbidity in Schizophrenia.” *Biol.
      Psychiatr.* 50: 71–83.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3223(01)01134-9.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR34

      Chambers, RA, and BK Lipska. 2011. “A Method to the Madness:
      Producing the Neonatal Ventral Hippocampal Lesion Rat Model of
      Schizophrenia.” *Neuromethods* 59: 1–24.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-61779-157-4_1.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR24

      Chambers, RA, and DW Self. 2002. “Motivational Responses to
      Natural and Drug Rewards in Rats with Neonatal Ventral Hippocampal
      Lesions: An Animal Model of Dual Diagnosis Schizophrenia.”
      *Neuropsychopharmacology* 27: 889–905.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/S0893-133X(02)00365-2.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR49

      Cohen-Gilbert, J. 2015. “Impact of Family History of Alcoholism on
      Glutamine/Glutamate Ratio in Anterior Cingulate Cortex in
      Substance-Naïve Adolescents.” *Dev. Cogn. Neurosci.* 16: 147–54.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2015.04.005.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR23

      Conroy, SK, Z Rodd, and RA Chambers. 2007. “Ethanol Sensitization
      in a Neurodevelopmental Lesion Model of Schizophrenia in Rats.”
      *Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav.* 86.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbb.2006.07.017.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR3

      Drake, RE, and KT Mueser. 1996. “Alcohol-Use Disorder and Severe
      Mental Illness.” *Alcohol Res. Health* 20: 87–93.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR47

      Duarte, JMN, and L Xin. 2019. “Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy in
      Schizophrenia: Evidence for Glutamatergic Dysfunction and Impaired
      Energy Metabolism.” *Neurochem. Res.* 44: 102–16.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-018-2521-z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR46

      Feleder, C, KY Tseng, GG Calhoon, and P O’Donnell. 2009. “Neonatal
      Intrahippocampal Immune Challenge Alters Dopamine Modulation of
      Prefrontal Cortical Interneurons in Adult Rats.” *Biol.
      Psychiatr.* 67: 386–92.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.09.028.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR31

      Gallo, A, C Bouchard, E Fortier, C Ducrot, and PP Rompré. 2014.
      “Cannabinoids Reward Sensitivity in a Neurodevelopmental Animal
      Model of Schizophrenia: A Brain Stimulation Reward Study.” *Eur.
      Neuropsychopharmacol.* 24: 1534–45.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroneuro.2014.07.003.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR30

      Gallo, A, C Bouchard, and PP Rompré. 2014. “Animals with a
      Schizophrenia-Like Phenotype Are Differentially Sensitive to the
      Motivational Effects of Cannabinoid Agonists in Conditioned Place
      Preference.” *Behav. Brain Res.* 268: 202–12.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2014.04.020.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR4

      Gupta, S, S Hendricks, AM Kenkel, SC Bhatia, and EA Haffke. 1996.
      “Relapse in Schizophrenia: Is There a Relationship to Substance
      Abuse?” *Schizophr. Res.* 20: 153–56.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/0920-9964(95)00108-5.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR8

      Harkavy-Friedman, JM, and E Nelson. 1997. “Management of the
      Suicidal Patient with Schizophrenia.” *Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am.*
      25: 129–43.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR13

      Hartwell, KJ, BK Tolliver, and KT Brady. 2009. “Biologic
      Commonalities Between Mental Illness and Addiction.” *Prim.
      Psychiatr.* 16: 33–39.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR33

      Hermann, D. 2012. “Translational Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
      Reveals Excessive Central Glutamate Levels During Alcohol
      Withdrawal in Humans and Rats.” *Biol. Psychiatr.* 71: 1015–21.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.07.034.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR22

      Jeanblanc, J. 2015. “Light Alcohol Intake During Adolescence
      Induces Alcohol Addiction in a Neurodevelopmental Model of
      Schizophrenia.” *Addic. Biol.* 20: 490–99.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/adb.12146.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR19

      Jenkins, BW, S Buckhalter, ML Perreault, and JY Khokhar. 2022.
      “Cannabis Vapor Exposure Alters Neural Circuit Oscillatory
      Activity in a Neurodevelopmental Model of Schizophrenia: Exploring
      the Differential Impact of Cannabis Constituents.” *Schizophr.
      Bull. Open* 3: 1–14.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/schizbullopen/sgab052.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR32

      Jenkins, BW, and JY Khokhar. 2021. “Cannabis Use and Mental
      Illness: Understanding Circuit Dysfunction Through Preclinical
      Models.” *Front. Psychiatr.* 12.
      https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2021.597725.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR26

      Karlsson, RM, DM Kircher, Y Shaham, and P O’Donnell. 2013.
      “Exaggerated Cue-Induced Reinstatement of Cocaine Seeking but Not
      Incubation of Cocaine Craving in a Developmental Rat Model of
      Schizophrenia.” *Psychopharmacology* 226: 45–51.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-012-2882-y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR12

      Khokhar, JY, LL Dwiel, AM Henricks, WT Doucette, and AI Green.
      2018. “The Link Between Schizophrenia and Substance Use Disorder:
      A Unifying Hypothesis.” *Schizophr. Res.* 194: 78–85.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2017.04.016.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR35

      Khokhar, JY, and AI Green. 2016. “Effects of Iloperidone, Combined
      with Desipramine, on Alcohol Drinking in the Syrian Golden
      Hamster.” *Neuropharmacology* 105: 25–34.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.01.017.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR9

      Khokhar, JY, AM Henricks, EDK Sullivan, and AI Green. 2018.
      “Unique Effects of Clozapine: A Pharmacological Perspective.”
      *Adv. Pharmacol.* 82: 137–62.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.apha.2017.09.009.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR17

      Khokhar, JY, and TP Todd. 2018. “Behavioral Predictors of Alcohol
      Drinking in a Neurodevelopmental Rat Model of Schizophrenia and
      Co-Occurring Alcohol Use Disorder.” *Schizophr. Res.* 194: 91–97.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2017.02.029.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR15

      Li, CT, KC Yang, and WC Lin. 2019. “Glutamatergic Dysfunction and
      Glutamatergic Compounds for Major Psychiatric Disorders: Evidence
      from Clinical Neuroimaging Studies.” *Front. Psychiatry* 9.
      https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00767.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR20

      Lipska, BK, and DR Weinberger. 2002. “A Neurodevelopmental Model
      of Schizophrenia: Neonatal Disconnection of the Hippocampus.”
      *Neurotoxicity Res.* 4: 469–75.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/1029842021000022089.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR16

      Menne, V, and R Chesworth. 2020. “Schizophrenia and Drug Addiction
      Comorbidity: Recent Advances in Our Understanding of Behavioural
      Susceptibility and Neural Mechanisms.” *Neuroanatom. Behav.* 2.
      https://doi.org/10.35430/nab.2020.e10.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR51

      Miguel-Hidalgo, JJ. 2006. “Withdrawal from Free-Choice Ethanol
      Consumption Results in Increased Packing Density of Glutamine
      Synthetase-Immunoreactive Astrocytes in the Prelimbic Cortex of
      Alcohol-Preferring Rats.” *Alcohol* 41: 379–85.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/alcalc/agl006.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR40

      Napolitano, A. 2014. “In Vivo Neurometabolic Profiling to
      Characterize the Effects of Social Isolation and Ketamine-Induced
      NMDA Antagonism: A Rodent Study at 7.0 T.” *Schizophr. Bull.* 40:
      566–74. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbt067.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR43

      Öngür, D, AP Prescot, J McCarthy, BM Cohen, and PF Renshaw. 2010.
      “Elevated Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid Levels in Chronic
      Schizophrenia.” *Biol. Psychiatr.* 68: 667–70.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.05.016.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR2

      Owen, RR, EP Fischer, BM Booth, and BJ Cuffel. 1996. “Medication
      Noncompliance and Substance Abuse Among Patients with
      Schizophrenia.” *Psychiatr. Serv.* 47: 853–58.
      https://doi.org/10.1176/ps.47.8.853.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR48

      Prisciandaro, JJ. 2020. “Intraindividual Changes in Brain GABA,
      Glutamate, and Glutamine During Monitored Abstinence from Alcohol
      in Treatment-Naive Individuals with Alcohol Use Disorder.” *Addic.
      Biol.* 25. https://doi.org/10.1111/adb.12810.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR38

      Provencher, SW. 1993. “Estimation of Metabolite Concentrations
      from Localized in Vivo Proton NMR Spectra.” *Magnet. Reson. Med.*
      30: 672–79. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.1910300604.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR52

      Ramaker, RC. 2017. “Post-Mortem Molecular Profiling of Three
      Psychiatric Disorders.” *Genome Med.* 9: 1–12.
      https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-017-0458-5.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR39

      Soher, B, P Semanchuk, D Todd, J Steinberg, and K Young. 2011.
      “VeSPA: Integrated Applications for RF Pulse Design, Spectral
      Simulation and MRS Data Analysis.” *Proc. Int. Soc. Magn. Reson.
      Med.* 19.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR44

      Spokes, EG, NJ Garrett, MN Rossor, and LL Iversen. 1980.
      “Distribution of GABA in Post-Mortem Brain Tissue from Control,
      Psychotic and Huntington’s Chorea Subjects.” *J. Neurol. Sci.* 48:
      303–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-510X(80)90103-3.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR6

      Swanson, JW, CE Holzer, VK Ganju, and RT Jono. 1990. “Violence and
      Psychiatric Disorder in the Community: Evidence from the
      Epidemiologic Catchment Area Surveys.” *Hosp. Community
      Psychiatr.* 41: 761–70.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR41

      Théberge, J. 2002. “Glutamate and Glutamine Measured with 4.0 T
      Proton MRS in Never-Treated Patients with Schizophrenia and
      Healthy Volunteers.” *Am. J. Psychiatr.* 159: 1944–46.
      https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.159.11.1944.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR14

      Thoma, R. 2011. “Perturbation of the Glutamate-Glutamine System in
      Alcohol Dependence and Remission.” *Neuropsychopharmacology* 36:
      1359–65. https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2011.20.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR45

      Thompson, M, CS Weickert, E Wyatt, and MJ Webster. 2009.
      “Decreased Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase(67) mRNA Expression in
      Multiple Brain Areas of Patients with Schizophrenia and Mood
      Disorders.” *J Psychiatr. Res.* 43: 970–77.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.02.005.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR37

      Tkáč, I, Z Starčuk, I-Y Choi, and R Gruetter. 1999. “In Vivo 1 H
      NMR Spectroscopy of Rat Brain at 1 Ms Echo Time.” *Magn. Reson.
      Med.* 41: 649–56.
      `https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1522-2594(199904)41:4<649::AID-MRM2>3.0.CO;2-G <https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1522-2594(199904)41:4<649::AID-MRM2>3.0.CO;2-G>`__.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR21

      Tseng, KY, RA Chambers, and BK Lipska. 2009. “The Neonatal Ventral
      Hippocampal Lesion as a Heuristic Neurodevelopmental Model of
      Schizophrenia.” *Behav. Brain Res.* 204: 295–305.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2008.11.039.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR28

      Vohs, JL, RA Chambers, BF O’Donnell, GP Krishnan, and SL
      Morzorati. 2012. “Auditory Steady State Responses in a
      Schizophrenia Rat Model Probed by Excitatory/Inhibitory Receptor
      Manipulation.” *Int. J. Psychophysiol.* 86: 136–42.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2012.04.002.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-CR1

      Volkow, ND. 2009. “Substance Use Disorders in
      Schizophrenia—Clinical Implications of Comorbidity.” *Schizophr.
      Bull.* 35: 469–72. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbp016.
