=================================================================================
Random noise stimulation in the treatment of patients with neurological disorders
=================================================================================

Mateo A. Herrera-Murillo
Mario Treviño
Elias Manjarrez\* **Correspondence to:** Elias Manjarrez,
eliasmanjarrez@gmail.com or elias.manjarrez@correo.buap.mx.  [1]_
:Date: 2022-12

:Abstract:
   Random noise stimulation technique involves applying any form of
   energy (for instance, light, mechanical, electrical, sound) with
   unpredictable intensities through time to the brain or sensory
   receptors to enhance sensory, motor, or cognitive functions. Random
   noise stimulation initially employed mechanical noise in auditory and
   cutaneous stimuli, but electrical energies applied to the brain or
   the skin are becoming more frequent, with a series of clinical
   applications. Indeed, recent evidence shows that transcranial random
   noise stimulation can increase corticospinal excitability, improve
   cognitive/motor performance, and produce beneficial aftereffects at
   the behavioral and psychological levels. Here, we present a narrative
   review about the potential uses of random noise stimulation to treat
   neurological disorders, including attention deficit hyperactivity
   disorder, schizophrenia, amblyopia, myopia, tinnitus, multiple
   sclerosis, post-stroke, vestibular-postural disorders, and
   sensitivity loss. Many of the reviewed studies reveal that the
   optimal way to deliver random noise stimulation-based therapies is
   with the concomitant use of neurological and neuropsychological
   assessments to validate the beneficial aftereffects. In addition, we
   highlight the requirement of more randomized controlled trials and
   more physiological studies of random noise stimulation to discover
   another optimal way to perform the random noise stimulation
   interventions.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Introduction
============

Random noise stimulation (RNS) is becoming a clinical research technique
with potential applications for treating neurological disorders. In this
review, we elaborate the idea that, although the results of these
investigations are promising, the auditory, tactile, and electrical RNS
aftereffects in patients with neurological disorders remain widely
unexplored in the context of controlled clinical trials. Hence, this
work could serve as an initial framework for future clinical research in
this field.

On the other hand, the study of RNS deserves the critical attention of
therapists to carefully examine the side effects for extended periods
(years) of RNS stimulation. In the second place, though there are
several randomized single and double-blinded studies, more systematic
evidence is needed to understand these therapies using auditory,
electrical, or other types of RNS. Likewise, it is necessary to evaluate
the effects of RNS on larger samples, as the ones reported so far are
still relatively small (`Table 1 <#T1>`__). Finally, this review could
help visualize the common beneficial effects of RNS interventions in
different types of neurological diseases.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Summary of the number of participants in the reviewed articles

   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Neurological         | Number of            | Noisy stimulation    |
   | disorder             | participants         | method               |
   +======================+======================+======================+
   | ADHD                 | 171                  | Auditory background  |
   |                      |                      | noise and binaural   |
   |                      |                      | noise                |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Schizophrenia        | 45                   | tRNS and tinnitus    |
   |                      |                      | control apparatus    |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Myopia and amblyopia | 83                   | tRNS                 |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Tinnitus             | 564                  | tRNS                 |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Multiple sclerosis   | 33                   | tRNS                 |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Parkinson’s disease  | 82                   | nGVS and tRNS        |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Balance              | 176                  | Mechanical or        |
   |                      |                      | electrical noise     |
   |                      |                      | over the skin and    |
   |                      |                      | nGVS                 |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Total                | 1154                 |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

   The most used noisy stimulation is tRNS. ADHD: Attention deficit
   hyperactivity disorder; nGVS: noisy galvanic vestibular stimulation;
   tRNS: transcranial random noise stimulation.

Search Strategy
===============

A narrative review was carried out, including articles from Medline and
Web of Science electronic databases updated until November 2021. The
terms used for the database search were “RNS OR noise OR transcranial
random noise stimulation (tRNS) OR tRNS OR nGVS OR stochastic resonance
(SR) AND therapy AND patient AND neuron AND (brain OR peripheral) OR
tinnitus OR ADHD OR schizophrenia, OR amblyopia, OR myopia, OR tinnitus,
OR multiple sclerosis, OR stroke, OR vestibular-postural disorders, OR
sensitivity loss. “ The selected articles focused on auditory, tactile,
or electrical RNS in patients previously diagnosed with conditions
involving nervous system alterations. At least two independent
researchers evaluated the reviewed articles. We filtered the database
search to original articles referred to as experimental evidence,
randomized controlled trials, controlled clinical trials, observational
studies, and case reports published in English. We also explored whether
the reviewed publications found beneficial effects of auditory,
mechanical, or electrical RNS in various neurological disorders.

General Aspects of Random Noise Stimulation
===========================================

For several years, non-invasive stimulation techniques using noise have
been developed, with the idea of activating sensory receptors and brain
regions to improve the quality of life of patients with neuronal
dysfunction. In particular, auditory noise stimulation (which we will
refer to as “auditory RNS”) was examined to improve visual sensations in
the multisensory interaction via a stochastic resonance (SR)-like
phenomenon, also known as cross-modal or multisensory SR (Manjarrez et
al., 2007; Lugo et al., 2008). SR is a mechanism by which noise enhances
the response of a system to an input signal. In 1981, Benzi et al.
introduced for the first time this concept, mentioning that “a dynamical
system subject to both periodic forcing and random perturbation may show
a resonance (peak in the power spectrum) which is absent when either the
forcing or the perturbation is absent.”

Auditory RNS was employed to improve the ability of listeners to
understand spoken words during the observation of another person
performing mouth articulatory movements (Ross et al., 2007; Liu et al.,
2013). Furthermore, “mechanical RNS” applied on the finger skin was
employed to increase visual evoked potentials via multisensory SR in
primary visual cortical areas, but not in regions overlying the
somatosensory cortex (Mendez-Balbuena et al., 2015).

In a similar context, Terney et al. (2008) introduced a technique of
electrical stimulation known as transcranial random noise stimulation
(tRNS), which can increase the amplitude of corticospinal motor evoked
potentials elicited by transcranial magnetic stimulation. This technique
is a form of transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS), where
a low-intensity current varies randomly with a flat probability density
function, similar to white noise. Most studies employed tRNS with a
frequency between 0.1 to 640 Hz or with a higher frequency range from
101 to 640 Hz (Antal and Herrmann, 2016; Ghin et al., 2018).

In another study, Van der Groen and Wenderoth (2016) applied tRNS in
participants who were asked to detect Gabor patches in two trials
visually. These authors found that stimulating the visual cortex with
tRNS at an intensity of approximately 1 to 2 mA improved the performance
in a visual alternative forced-choice task. Furthermore, they suggested
that tRNS improved the detection of a subthreshold signal by increasing
cortical excitability and lowering the response threshold (Potok et al.,
2021). These results were consistent with an SR-like phenomenon and with
other reports showing that high-frequency RNS (hf-tRNS) of 1.5 mA to the
extrastriate MT\ :sup:`+` visual area produced maximal enhancement of
performance (Guin et al., 2018; Pavan et al., 2019). In the study by
Pavan et al. (2019), there was an optimal intensity for hf-tRNS, but it
also confirmed the detrimental effect when using higher noise
intensities.

The utility of tRNS is beneficial for perceptual learning (Fertonani et
al., 2011), memory performance (Penton et al., 2018), auditory gap
discrimination (Rufener et al., 2017), visual motion adaptation (Campana
et al., 2016), and the induction of long-lasting effects on execution
speed (i.e., reduction of reaction times) in Go-Nogo tasks in healthy
subjects (Brevet-Aeby et al., 2019). In the same context, hf-tRNS
reduced the task-related activity in the prefrontal cortex, the
precuneus, and the anterior cingulate cortex during a visuomotor
learning task (Saiote et al., 2013).

Another modality of non-invasive noisy stimulation recently developed is
noise galvanic vestibular stimulation (nGVS), which employs electrodes
bilaterally placed caudal to the ear on the mastoid, close to the tensor
tympani muscle (for instance, Mulavara et al., 2011; Dlugaiczyk et al.,
2019). The nGVS usually uses imperceptible zero-mean Gaussian-white
Galvanic-noise. There is evidence that nGVS improves balance and
locomotor stability in healthy persons (Mulavara et al., 2011, 2015;
Goel et al., 2015; Galvan-Garza et al., 2018; Temple et al., 2018).

Regarding the mechanisms of tRNS, there are only a few physiological
studies in the brain (Chaieb et al., 2015; Remedios et al., 2019) and
dorsal root ganglia (Onorato et al., 2016) evidencing the participation
of sodium (Na\ :sup:`+`) channels in these tRNS amplifying aftereffects.
As a potential mechanism, it was speculated that due to the nonlinearity
of voltage-gated ion channels, the repeated pulses generated by tRNS
could induce multiple ionic influxes, amplifying membrane voltage
fluctuations. In this context, more physiological studies about the
mechanisms of action of tRNS, or other forms of RNS, are required.

The studies mentioned in this section reveal that RNS of different
energies could be a research technique with potential clinical
applications. In the following paragraphs, we will describe the effects
of RNS in the treatment of particular neurological disorders.

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
========================================

The effect of auditory RNS under several experimental paradigms has
demonstrated its alleged role as a therapeutic option for patients with
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (`Figure 1 <#F1>`__). It
has shown its usefulness in improving language, working memory (Pickens
et al., 2019), and reducing impulsivity (Cook et al., 2014). One of the
first studies exploring the effects of auditory RNS on memory tasks
originated partly from the observation that background music could
improve performance on arithmetic tasks, which is interesting
considering it is a task-irrelevant stimulus (Abikoff et al., 1996).
Another relevant study involved a controlled clinical trial in children
performing a memory task (Söderlund et al., 2007). Auditory RNS exerted
beneficial effects on cognitive performance for the ADHD group but a
deteriorated performance for the control group, indicating that ADHD
subjects need more noise than controls for optimal cognitive function.
In other words, auditory RNS was beneficial for the cognitive
performance of ADHD children, while it was detrimental for the healthy
ones.

.. figure:: NRR-17-2557-g001
   :alt: Scheme of noisy stimulation applied to attention deficit
   hyperactivity disorder patients.
   (A) Auditory noise is added to the verbal instructions to be
   remembered by children performing a memory task. (B) Auditory white
   noise is binaurally delivered while children perform cognitive tasks.
   Figure is created with BioRender software based on information from
   the following references: Söderlund et al. (2007, 2016).
   :name: F1

   Scheme of noisy stimulation applied to attention deficit
   hyperactivity disorder patients.
   (A) Auditory noise is added to the verbal instructions to be
   remembered by children performing a memory task. (B) Auditory white
   noise is binaurally delivered while children perform cognitive tasks.
   Figure is created with BioRender software based on information from
   the following references: Söderlund et al. (2007, 2016).

Subsequently, Söderlund et al. (2010) performed an observational study
in which auditory RNS (acoustic background noise in the environment) was
played in a classroom with attentive and inattentive children performing
episodic verbal free recall tests. The authors found statistically
significant proof that auditory RNS only improved the attention of the
inattentive-children (Söderlund et al., 2010). Similarly, binaural
auditory RNS has been shown to improve cognitive performance in ADHD
children, as reported in an experimental study involving 29 diagnosed
children who underwent neuropsychological assessments (Baijot et al.,
2016). These children performed a computerized attentional performance
battery, a counting Stroop task, and a Go-Nogo task. However, the
observed benefit was mainly related to vigilance, as reflected in the
computerized attentional performance, without a generalized improvement
in other functions (Baijot et al., 2016). Also, when performing a
Go-Nogo task, the electroencephalogram P300 amplitude was increased in
the group with auditory RNS. However, this effect was not reflected in
the Go-Nogo task, suggesting that the auditory RNS influences inhibitory
processes not observed at the behavioral level (Baijot et al., 2016).

In a pilot study, Söderlund et al. (2016) also revealed the benefits of
auditory RNS on executive and non-executive memory tasks of ADHD
children and inattentive children who have undergone methylphenidate
medication. In addition, the authors showed that the performance of
verbal episodic memory tasks was better under the auditory RNS
condition, suggesting that auditory RNS could work as a complementary
therapy. In the same context, a recent randomized controlled trial by
Berger et al. (2021) supports this observation, finding that tRNS
yielded a clinical improvement, as indicated by the reduced ADHD
rating-scale score from baseline compared to the changes produced by
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). Finally, Cook et al.
(2014) reported that auditory RNS delivered through headphones reduced
passive off-task behavior in three ADHD children undergoing stimulant
medication. These authors recommended auditory RNS in individuals with
ADHD due to its easy application in classrooms and homes and no side
effects.

In contrast, Metin et al. (2016) examined the impulsive choice in
children with ADHD, finding that auditory RNS in the environment did not
reduce impulsive choice in ADHD. These controversial findings indicate
that the hypothesis that auditory RNS is beneficial in children with
ADHD requires further examination regarding the types of acoustic noise
employed and their biological processes.

We can also speculate regarding the theories behind the observed
behavioral aspects of ADHD improved by the auditory RNS. For instance,
ADHD could be due to abnormally low tonic Dopamine levels, which are
compensated by phasic or stimulus-dependent dopamine release (Sikström
and Söderlund, 2007). In this scenario, the stimulation with moderately
continuous auditory RNS in environments could benefit cognitive
performance and motor learning, possibly due to the facilitation of
information transmission or the constant promoting of phasic dopamine
release. Consequently, this increase in tonic dopamine release could
conduct the brain towards moderate arousal, benefiting cognitive
performance. However, several other theories about the effects of
auditory RNS in the treatments of ADHD could be incorporated, as the
“optimal stimulation theory,” which establishes that every individual
has its optimal level of arousal, an idea which has been supported by
empirical studies (Abikoff et al., 1996; Baijot et al., 2016). Finally,
we could speculate that other theories and methods employing
neurofeedback with an optimal auditory RNS, or tRNS, based on chaotic
resonance (Nobukawa et al., 2021), could also be helpful in the
treatment of ADHD.

Schizophrenia
=============

The effects of electrical noise (i.e., tRNS) and auditory RNS on
schizophrenic patients have been tested based on empirical methods in
some studies. For instance, Palm et al. (2013) reported the case of a
29-year-old patient diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia who received
an experimental treatment with tRNS. The patient was also medicated with
clozapine, haloperidol, pregabalin, and lamotrigine. In this study, tRNS
was delivered on twenty occasions to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
The authors found that the tRNS produced a modest improvement as
reflected by the positive and negative symptom scale (PANSS) and the
scale for assessing negative symptoms. However, the authors recognized
that this effect could be associated with the medication (Palm et al.,
2013).

Later, the effects of tRNS were tested in a female patient with paranoid
schizophrenia, whose auditory verbal hallucinations did not seem to
improve with medication, as severe suicidal conduct eventually
developed. In this case report, tRNS at high frequencies was applied to
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex twice a day for five days, after
which a global clinical improvement was reported. The analysis included
a significant reduction in the PANSS score and the scale for assessing
positive symptoms, producing effects that remained a month after the
sessions (Haesebaert et al., 2014).

More recently, a randomized, double-blind pilot study evaluated patients
with schizophrenia through hf-tRNS and various psychiatric medications
(Chang et al., 2021). Here hf-tRNS was applied on AF3 (`Figure
2 <#F2>`__) twice a day for five weeks to 35 patients with adequate
antipsychotic medication and who exhibited negative symptoms, assessed
through the PANSS factor score for negative symptoms (PANSS-FSNS).
Consistent with prior studies, the negative symptoms of schizophrenia
decreased in the group treated with hf-tRNS, maintaining this effect up
to one month from the first hf-tRNS session. The authors suggested that
the underlying mechanisms could be associated with increased cortical
excitability in the brain, probably involving an SR-like phenomenon.

.. figure:: NRR-17-2557-g002
   :alt: A schizophrenic patient receives white noise through either
   transcranial random noise stimulation or tinnitus control apparatus.
   In transcranial random noise stimulation, the cathode is placed on
   the AF3 position, aiming towards the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
   Figure is created with BioRender.com based on information from the
   following references: Chang et al. (2021) and Kaneko et al. (2013).
   :name: F2

   A schizophrenic patient receives white noise through either
   transcranial random noise stimulation or tinnitus control apparatus.
   In transcranial random noise stimulation, the cathode is placed on
   the AF3 position, aiming towards the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
   Figure is created with BioRender.com based on information from the
   following references: Chang et al. (2021) and Kaneko et al. (2013).

Finally, Kaneko et al. (2013) showed that auditory RNS delivered through
a tinnitus control apparatus improved behavioral and psychological
symptoms of dementia in six elder patients exhibiting dementia with
schizophrenia (`Figure 2 <#F2>`__). Here, the auditory RNS intervention
applied once a day for four weeks significantly reduced the
Neuropsychiatric Inventory scores in these patients compared to patients
diagnosed with dementia. Furthermore, these authors did not find changes
in the mini-mental state and Barthel tests in these patients with
dementia and schizophrenia (Kaneko et al., 2013).

Although the etiology of schizophrenia has not yet been completely
elucidated, there is work suggesting the possible involvement of
neuronal noise as one of the factors in the symptoms observed (Braver et
al., 1999). Therefore, we can speculate that the tRNS intervention could
modulate such neuronal noise in patients with schizophrenia.
Furthermore, this possibility supports the suggestion that dopamine
serves as a gating neuromodulator, regulating access to context
representations into active memory (Braver et al., 1999). Thus, the
combined use of tRNS with the Braver et al. 1999 theory could be helpful
to understand the benefits of tRNS in schizophrenia.

Moreover, increased neuronal noise in prefrontal cortical information
processing in schizophrenia has been described (Winterer and Weinberger,
2004), reinforcing the proposal that tRNS could modulate such neuronal
noise in these patients. Similarly, the increased cortical noise during
cognitive tasks relates to a small local field potential synchronization
in cortical microcircuits, translating into a decreased signal-to-noise
ratio in cortical computations (Winterer and Weinberger, 2004). This is
consistent with studies claiming that increased internal noise is
responsible for facial recognition and speed discrimination (Christensen
et al., 2013). Therefore, it is tempting to speculate that the
application of tRNS could impact the reestablishment of these altered
internal noise levels in schizophrenia disease. A recent review by
Haller et al. (2022) discusses the promising therapeutic options of
using tRNS in the treatment of schizophrenia.

Myopia, Amblyopia, and Visual Learning
======================================

Camilleri et al. (2014b) showed that a combination of behavioral
training and tRNS can be fast and efficacious in improving sight in
individuals with mild myopia. These authors examined whether 2 weeks of
behavioral training with a Gabor patch procedure combined with online
tRNS improved visual functions in participants with mild myopia compared
to a 2-month behavioral training regime without tRNS (`Figure
3 <#F3>`__). Perceptual learning acquired through a forced-choice task
with a Gabor patch of two intervals combined with tRNS improved visual
acuity (VA) and, more subtlety, the contrast sensitivity (CS) in
patients with mild myopia (Camilleri et al., 2014b).

.. figure:: NRR-17-2557-g003
   :alt: An amblyopic/myopic patient undergoes a perceptual learning
   task, consisting of a two-interval forced-choice, where a single
   Gabor patch detection changed the contrast according to the
   performance.
   During perceptual learning, transcranial random noise stimulation
   (tRNS) is delivered through an electrode positioned above the inion.
   After the task, visual acuity (VA) and contrast sensitivity (CS) are
   evaluated. Figure is created with BioRender.com based on information
   from the following reference: Camilleri et al. (2016).
   :name: F3

   An amblyopic/myopic patient undergoes a perceptual learning task,
   consisting of a two-interval forced-choice, where a single Gabor
   patch detection changed the contrast according to the performance.
   During perceptual learning, transcranial random noise stimulation
   (tRNS) is delivered through an electrode positioned above the inion.
   After the task, visual acuity (VA) and contrast sensitivity (CS) are
   evaluated. Figure is created with BioRender.com based on information
   from the following reference: Camilleri et al. (2016).

Another experimental study using behavioral training illustrated in
`Figure 3 <#F3>`__ was conducted in eight sessions for two weeks.
However, eight of the sixteen participants with mild myopia received
hf-tRNS on the occipital cortex during the training. The control group,
which only performed behavioral training, did not change VA and CS after
the test. In contrast, the group that received concurrent hf-tRNS
improved VA and CS as shown in the uncorrected VA and CS tests, with the
progress being more pronounced at intermediate spatial frequencies for
the latter (Camilleriet al., 2014a).

Subsequently, a randomized controlled trial carried out in thirty
patients with mild myopia was developed to show that the improvement
effects previously observed appeared in the following three conditions:
perceptual learning alone, perceptual learning combined with hf-tRNS,
and hf-tRNS alone (Camilleri et al., 2016; Campana et al., 2016).
However, as mentioned above, a combination of behavioral and tRNS can be
fast and efficacious in improving sight in individuals with mild myopia.

Later, a similar sham-controlled study recreated the behavioral training
regime and the VA and CS assessment and hf-tRNS procedure, although it
consisted of a larger sample (*n* = 20) (Moret et al., 2018). In this
experimental design, two groups were formed, one which carried out the
behavioral training with hf-tRNS and another with the same behavioral
training with sham stimulation. In this study, CS did not exhibit a
significant difference between groups, thus suggesting that hf-tRNS is
not crucial for improving CS. However, a considerable improvement was
only observed in the hf-tRNS group for VA. These results prove that the
hf-tRNS is selective, producing differential effects in VA and CS in
adults with amblyopia.

The abovementioned results are supported by recent evidence that tRNS
produces a long-lasting improvement in VA in a 28-day follow-up. Still,
it induces short-term CS improvements in adult amblyopic eyes (Donkor et
al., 2021). However, further experiments will be necessary to understand
the physiological mechanisms of these differential effects produced by
hf-tRNS in these patients.

Tinnitus
========

The effect of electrical tRNS in tinnitus has shown exciting results. In
a preliminary study, Claes et al. (2014) compared the impact of tRNS and
tACS applied on T3 and T4 positions in 226 patients with chronic
non-pulsatile tinnitus. These authors used both stimulation modalities
either in a single session or in 8 sessions distributed in a four-week
interval (Claes et al., 2014). Participants were asked to rank loudness
and annoyance on a scale from 1 to 10, revealing that while tACS had no
impact on reducing these symptoms, tRNS appeared to improve both.

This result of the beneficial effects of tRNS obtained by Claes et al.
(2014) is consistent with previous reports that evaluated tinnitus
loudness, distress, and annoyance after non-invasive brain stimulation
consisting of tDCS, tACS, or tRNS, where all three aspects of the
conditions were improved (Vanneste et al., 2013). However, after
performing univariate analysis, it was shown that tRNS was responsible
for most of the observed results in loudness and distress. These results
open the question of whether tRNS acts through different mechanisms
apart from tDCS and tACS, desynchronizing the over-synchronized network
in the auditory cortex of tinnitus patients.

In a randomized controlled trial, other authors evaluated the effects of
low-frequency tRNS (lf-tRNS), hf-tRNS, and whole spectrum tRNS in 154
chronic non-pulsatile tinnitus patients who underwent a single session
of stimulation (Joos et al., 2015). The results indicated that both
lf-tRNS and hf-tRNS positively impacted tinnitus loudness and distress
reflected on a numerical scale report. However, these authors assumed
that hf-tRNS only influenced pure tone tinnitus, while lf-tRNS affected
pure tone and narrow bandwidth noise tinnitus. They also suggested that
the effects observed after tRNS may be due to a non-focal effect,
pointing towards modulation of areas involved in the distress network,
such as the parahippocampal-subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (`Figure
4 <#F4>`__).

.. figure:: NRR-17-2557-g004
   :alt: Different stimulation protocols are applied to a non-pulsatile
   tinnitus patient.
   (A) Upper panel, tDCS is delivered over F3/F4 targeting the DLPFC and
   over T3/T4, aiming towards the auditory cortex to provide more
   substantial relief. Lower panel, the electrodes are only positioned
   on T3/T4, close to the parahippocampal/subgenual anterior cingulate
   cortex. (B) The effect of noise desynchronizing neural networks is
   shown, which could also influence tinnitus symptoms. Figure is
   created with BioRender.com based on information from the following
   references: Joos et al. (2015) and To et al. (2017). DLPFC:
   Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; tDCS: transcranial direct current
   stimulation; tRNS: transcranial random noise stimulation.
   :name: F4

   Different stimulation protocols are applied to a non-pulsatile
   tinnitus patient.
   (A) Upper panel, tDCS is delivered over F3/F4 targeting the DLPFC and
   over T3/T4, aiming towards the auditory cortex to provide more
   substantial relief. Lower panel, the electrodes are only positioned
   on T3/T4, close to the parahippocampal/subgenual anterior cingulate
   cortex. (B) The effect of noise desynchronizing neural networks is
   shown, which could also influence tinnitus symptoms. Figure is
   created with BioRender.com based on information from the following
   references: Joos et al. (2015) and To et al. (2017). DLPFC:
   Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; tDCS: transcranial direct current
   stimulation; tRNS: transcranial random noise stimulation.

Other authors employed the Tinnitus Questionnaire and numerical rating
for annoyance, unpleasantness, and depression to explore the effects of
tRNS in tinnitus patients who had previously received repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation. This pilot study applied hf-tRNS at
the T7/T8 electroencephalogram position in ten consecutive sessions,
reducing tinnitus loudness after the tRNS even though some patients
reported a temporary increase in tinnitus loudness (Kreuzer et al.,
2019). Nevertheless, the effectiveness of the intervention (31%) was
comparable to that obtained in repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation in the center where the study took place. Furthermore, these
results agree with a previous case report of a woman suffering from red
ear syndrome in combination with tinnitus, in which tRNS given in 2-3
day sessions alleviated pain intensity and prolonged the interval
between the pain episodes (Kreuzer et al., 2017).

Other procedures have shown a positive effect of tRNS on alleviating
negative tinnitus symptoms, such as the paradigm developed by To et al.
(2017). In this randomized controlled trial, patients received tDCS at
F3 and F4, or tRNS delivered at T3 and T4 after tDCS (To et al., 2017).
The added value of this combined tDCS and tRNS showed the most
significant relief, although tDCS alone also reduced the Tinnitus
Questionnaire score and the score of a visual analog scale for tinnitus.
The authors claimed that tRNS inhibits the auditory cortex activity
facilitating the prefrontal cortex output by tDCS, providing more potent
relief (`Figure 4 <#F4>`__).

Multiple Sclerosis and Post-Stroke
==================================

Another neurological disorder where the effect of tRNS has been
addressed is multiple sclerosis (MS) (left panel of `Figure 5 <#F5>`__).
Mainly, two studies have explored this disease in the context of tRNS.
First, a randomized controlled trial was carried out in patients with
relapsing or remitting MS, in which tRNS was administered over the
primary motor cortex (M1) of the most affected limb, at a frequency of
640 Hz, for 2 consecutive weeks (Salemi et al., 2019). The authors
evaluated the patients’ fatigue through the modified fatigue impact
scale. When compared to the sham control group, Salemi et al. (2019)
found that the patients significantly improved after a week of tRNS.
However, in a previous report, tRNS applied towards the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex did not produce significant changes in attention and
mood in MS patients even though tRNS tended to diminish pain, as
reflected in the decreased amplitude of pain-related evoked potentials
(Palm et al., 2016). The lack of effects by tRNS in attention and mood
could be possibly due to the short duration of the intervention, which
consisted of two blocks of three consecutive sessions separated by three
weeks. Consistently, in a recent single-blind, randomized controlled
trial, the intervention with nGVS did not change the dizziness and
imbalance symptoms in MS patients (Lotfi et al., 2021).

.. figure:: NRR-17-2557-g005
   :alt: Multiple sclerosis and post-stroke patients receive
   transcranial random noise stimulation through an electrode positioned
   over the primary motor cortex.
   Note that post-stroke (PS) patients undergo GRASP therapy along with
   noisy stimulation. GRASP means graded repetitive arm supplementary
   program on motor rehabilitation. Figure is created with BioRender.com
   based on information from the following references: Palm et al.
   (2016) and Salemi et al. (2019).
   :name: F5

   Multiple sclerosis and post-stroke patients receive transcranial
   random noise stimulation through an electrode positioned over the
   primary motor cortex.
   Note that post-stroke (PS) patients undergo GRASP therapy along with
   noisy stimulation. GRASP means graded repetitive arm supplementary
   program on motor rehabilitation. Figure is created with BioRender.com
   based on information from the following references: Palm et al.
   (2016) and Salemi et al. (2019).

Regarding limb disability secondary to subacute ischemic stroke, noisy
electrical stimulation (tRNS) has also shown complementary benefits for
rehabilitation in post-stroke patients (right panel of `Figure
5 <#F5>`__). The application of tRNS in the corresponding motor cortex
of the affected limb for five days, combined with a graded repetitive
arm supplementary program, improved patients’ condition, as evaluated
through the Fugl-Meyer assessment-upper extremity (FMA-UE). However,
more work is necessary to know whether these beneficial effects can last
more than one month after tRNS in subacute ischemic stroke patients.

Parkinson’s Disease
===================

The uses of RNS in Parkinsonians revealed that this technique could
change the electrical activity of their central nervous system and
produce improvements in several motor disorders. For example, Stephani
et al. (2011) demonstrated that hf-tRNS could decrease motor cortex
excitability in Parkinson’s disease. Moreover, the stochastic whole-body
vibration (mechanical RNS) improves bradykinesia and postural stability
in Parkinson’s disease patients (Kaut et al., 2011). In the same way,
Kaut et al. (2014) demonstrated that mechanical RNS improves postural
stability in some clinical scores for patients with spinocerebellar
ataxia. Furthermore, more recent studies confirmed that mechanical RNS
applied to idiopathic Parkinson’s disease patients improves postural
stability (Kaut et al., 2016).

Similarly, a crossover, double-blind, randomized study reported
improvements in motor performance after tRNS applied over M1 in patients
with multidimensional Parkinson’s disease with mild cognitive impairment
(Monastero et al., 2020). In addition, this research demonstrated a
reduction in the unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale values.
Moreover, applying 24-hour flickering or pink-noise nGVS during a
clinical trial in patients with multisystem atrophy presenting
parkinsonian symptoms showed decreased response times during a
continuous Go-Nogo task (Yamamoto et al., 2005) (`Figure 6 <#F6>`__).
Consistently, this effect of nGVS reflects the symptom severity in
parkinsonian patients, occurring in akinetic and ataxic patients, in
which the occurrence of an SR-like event produces an anti-akinetic
effect through the vestibulo-cerebellar connections (Pan et al., 2008).

.. figure:: NRR-17-2557-g006
   :alt: Parkinson’s disease patients receive pink noise through
   electrodes placed over the primary motor cortex (M1) or the mastoids
   (noisy galvanic vestibular stimulation, nGVS).
   The latter developed a continuous performance task during the
   stimulation. Figure is created with BioRender.com software based on
   information from the following references: Monastero et al. (2020)
   and Pan et al. (2008).
   :name: F6

   Parkinson’s disease patients receive pink noise through electrodes
   placed over the primary motor cortex (M1) or the mastoids (noisy
   galvanic vestibular stimulation, nGVS).
   The latter developed a continuous performance task during the
   stimulation. Figure is created with BioRender.com software based on
   information from the following references: Monastero et al. (2020)
   and Pan et al. (2008).

Vestibular-Postural Disorders and Sensitivity Loss
==================================================

The effects of auditory or electrical noisy stimulation aiming towards
central structures have been described in previous sections. However,
there is also exciting work on the peripheral nervous system in skin
mechanoreceptors. Many of these results have been reviewed by White et
al. (2019) in the context of SR or SR-like phenomena. Thus suggesting
that sub sensory mechanical-noise approaches are plausible options for
preventing falls, especially in older people (White et al., 2019) and in
treatments to enhance balance control in patients with diabetes and
stroke symptoms (Liu et al., 2002; Priplata et al., 2006).

Among some of the most recent results reviewed by White et al. (2019)
are the positive effects of vibratory and electrical noise stimuli
(tactile RNS) on fingertips or feet for body sway (Magalhães and Kohn,
2011, 2014) in healthy persons, as well as for balance and hand
sensitivity in patients with variable conditions, such as post-stroke
motor impairment and diabetic neuropathy (Bagherzadeh et al., 2016).
Other reviewed reports include the sub-plantar mechanical or
transcutaneous electrical noise stimulation (transcutaneous RNS) that
improves balance sensation and gait in diabetic and older adults
(Bagherzadeh et al., 2016). We consider that future experiments about
the beneficial effects of mechanical or transcutaneous RNS in the
control of balance in these patients will require the simultaneous
activation of skin receptors and spinal reflexes, given that
subthreshold stimulus to the skin or Ia afferents activate feedback
circuits that affect posture.

On the other hand, nGVS has been demonstrated to enhance postural
stability and head rotation rhythm in patients with bilateral vestibular
hypofunction (Ko et al., 2020). In such a study, the patients were asked
to perform seventy trials of five seconds of walking with horizontal
head movements. Then, the patients stopped and stood for another five
seconds, and a computer-assisted system captured the motion (`Figure
7 <#F7>`__). It was suggested that the nGVS exerted these effects by
promoting neural plasticity in the vestibular cortex, as indicated by
electroencephalogram signal changes in the bilateral precentral gyrus
and parietal lobe. This is an example of the overall observation of this
kind of nGVS improving balance control, postural sway, and dynamic gait
stability in patients with bilateral vestibulopathy. In the same
context, the nGVS also is capable of improving vestibular motion
perception in healthy subjects (Wuehr et al., 2016, 2017; Dlugaiczyk et
al., 2019). However, it is essential to note that some degree of neural
activity is needed to produce these beneficial effects. For instance, a
patient with bilateral vestibular loss did not appear to respond to
these interventions (Wuehr et al., 2016, 2017; Dlugaiczyk et al., 2019).

.. figure:: NRR-17-2557-g007
   :alt: Noise improving balance is evaluated through motion capture and
   force plates in older people and patients with bilateral
   vestibulopathy receiving noise through noisy galvanic vestibular
   stimulation (nGVS) or vibrating insoles.
   In addition, sensitivity is enhanced in diabetic patients with
   neuropathy receiving vibratory mechanical noise on the plantar
   surface or in the fingertips. Figure is created with BioRender.com
   based on information from the following references: Cloutier et al.
   (2009), Magalhães and Kohn (2011) and Priplata et al. (2006).
   :name: F7

   Noise improving balance is evaluated through motion capture and force
   plates in older people and patients with bilateral vestibulopathy
   receiving noise through noisy galvanic vestibular stimulation (nGVS)
   or vibrating insoles.
   In addition, sensitivity is enhanced in diabetic patients with
   neuropathy receiving vibratory mechanical noise on the plantar
   surface or in the fingertips. Figure is created with BioRender.com
   based on information from the following references: Cloutier et al.
   (2009), Magalhães and Kohn (2011) and Priplata et al. (2006).

As happens with other noisy stimulation interventions, the mechanisms
underlying the effects of nGVS in balance and locomotor stability are
unknown, or they are attributed to SR-like phenomena (Mulavara et al.,
2011, 2015; Goel et al., 2015; Galvan-Garza et al., 2018; Temple et al.,
2018). Moreover, although nGVS has been proven safe, it still requires
further experimentation in patients with postural disorders and
sensitivity loss to evaluate its impact on the overall quality of those
who receive it.

Conclusions and Future Directions of Random Noise Stimulation
=============================================================

We described several studies where noisy stimulation has benefited
certain aspects of particular neurological and psychiatric disorders. As
may have been noted, tRNS and nGVS are those modalities of stimulation
that have been reported more widely. Nevertheless, perhaps because of
the relatively recent development of such techniques, well-defined
mechanisms of action are missing at the neurobiological level, and more
systematic and controlled studies are required.

There are three common observations derived from this review. The first
is that the optimal way to deliver RNS based therapies is with the
concomitant use of neurological and neuropsychological assessments to
validate the beneficial aftereffects. The second is that the tRNS
produces beneficial aftereffects only in particular aspects of each
neurological disorder. The third is that most authors correlate the
observed effects to an SR-like phenomenon, which is exciting due to the
novel paradigms that this theoretical approach implies and the extensive
evidence of its presence in several neural systems. Therefore, it is
possible that integrating the beneficial effect of RNS and the nonlinear
behavior of the nervous system could offer new possibilities, not only
for explaining the noisy stimulation but also for elucidating the
pathophysiology of the diseases studied.

As proposed for tinnitus, noise in the RNS intervention could be working
by desynchronizing a network whose over-synchronization accounts for the
pathology observed. An over-synchronized network has already been
associated with several psychiatric diseases such as schizophrenia and
Parkinson’s disease (Uhlhaas and Singer, 2006). Therefore, it is
tempting to speculate that the RNS intervention in these pathologies
could also be working by desynchronizing over-synchronized neuronal
networks. In this context, the use of new computational simulations
showing the ability of external noise and the power of population
heterogeneity to promote neural desynchronization (Hunsberger et al.,
2014) could be helpful to understand the impact of tRNS in tinnitus,
schizophrenia, and Parkinson’s disease.

Exploring other energies for noise stimulation beyond tRNS, nGVS, or
acoustic noise could give more information about the differences in the
nervous system’s response to each RNS intervention. Furthermore,
experimental procedures involving no invasive interventions in humans
combined with computational modeling could open more opportunities to
investigate the effects of RNS in neurological disorders. Finally,
previous results utilizing other types of non-invasive stimulation
techniques such as tDCS and tACS (Liu et al., 2018) could help select
appropriate targets in various disorders when different noisy energies
could be employed as a therapeutic tool.

On the other hand, transcranial brain stimulation devices with different
stimulation profiles have been used to treat epilepsy, probably much
earlier than other neurological disorders. For instance, in
drug-resistant epilepsy, tDCS can reduce seizure frequencies, lasting
even up to two months, with a favorable safety profile
(Sudbrack-Oliveira et al., 2021). Similarly, other studies have shown
the efficacy of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation to reduce
seizure frequency as well as epileptiform discharges (Cooper et al.,
2017; Walton et al., 2021). Therefore, given the dynamic nature of
epilepsy, studies of tRNS on epilepsy models or patients may shed more
light on the physiological mechanisms of tRNS.

With the increasing evidence of noise being beneficial for neuronal
function, RNS stimulation in neurological disorders could provide new
information about how this benefit happens and the importance of the RNS
interventions for health. We believe this is an attractive avenue for
investigation, as noise has acquired a new position on our understanding
of neural function. Hence, novel techniques of RNS with diverse energies
offer promising approaches.

**Additional file:** *Open peer review reports 1 and 2*.

.. [1]
   **Author contributions:** *EM conceptualized the content of the
   review article. MAHM wrote the first draft of the manuscript and
   illustrated the figures under the supervision of EM. EM and MT
   improved the writing of the first draft and added information to
   improve the final version of this manuscript. All authors approved
   the final version of the manuscript*.
