====================================================================================================================================
Working memory deficits in children with schizophrenia and its mechanism, susceptibility genes, and improvement: A literature review
====================================================================================================================================

Jintao Zhou
Jingfangzhou Li
Qi Zhao
Peixin Ou
Wan Zhao [1]_ [2]_\*Correspondence: Wan Zhao
zhaowan1108@hotmail.com\  [3]_
:Date: 2022-8-05

:Abstract:
   The negative influence on the cognitive ability of schizophrenia is
   one of the issues widely discussed in recent years. Working memory
   deficits are thought to be a core cognitive symptom of schizophrenia
   and lead to poorer social functions and worse academic performance.
   Previous studies have confirmed that working memory deficits tend to
   appear in the prodromal phase of schizophrenia. Therefore,
   considering that children with schizophrenia have better brain
   plasticity, it is critical to explore the development of their
   working memory. Although the research in this field developed
   gradually in recent years, few researchers have summarized these
   findings. The current study aims to review the recent studies from
   both behavior and neuroimaging aspects to summarize the working
   memory deficits of children with schizophrenia and to discuss the
   pathogenic factors such as genetic susceptibility. In addition, this
   study put forward some practicable interventions to improve cognitive
   symptoms of schizophrenia from psychological and neural perspectives.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _s1:

Introduction
============

Schizophrenia is now one of the most prevalent and serious mental
illnesses in the world with typical symptoms defined ((n.d.a), (n.d.b)):
(a) positive symptoms centered on delusions, hallucinations,
disorganized speech, and grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior; (b)
negative symptoms, i.e., affective flattening, alogia, or avolition; (c)
cognitive symptoms including deficits in attention, working memory, and
executive functions. Multiple psychiatrists proposed that different
aspects of symptoms are not separate. For example, negative symptoms
(loss of function), by definition, incorporate cognitive symptoms.
However, more complex cognitive impairments have been found over the
past years and viewed as one kind of independent symptom by multiple
psychiatrists. As a result, we should treat schizophrenia symptoms from
a unified perspective ((n.d.c), (n.d.d)). In addition, all these
symptoms might be linked to the functions of dopamine, serotonin, and
glutamatergic neurotransmission systems ((n.d.e)–(n.d.f)).

As shown in surveys, the lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia is
estimated to be 0.3% worldwide and 0.83% in China ((n.d.g), (n.d.h)) and
varies depending on the location, economic conditions, and the
diagnostic criteria used. Although the annual cost of schizophrenia for
both patients and society is tremendous ((n.d.i)), the therapeutic
effect of schizophrenia is still not ideal. A previous investigation
showed that only 13.5% of individuals with schizophrenia met the
criteria for recovery ((n.d.j)). Furthermore, Phahladira and Luckhoff
((n.d.k)) have found that 70% of patients treated with antipsychotic
medication achieved symptom remission, while only 9% achieved both
functional remission and good quality of life, implying a large gap
between symptom remission and a return to normal life. In a study by
Nuechterlein, Subotnik ((n.d.l)), it was highlighted that cognitive
functioning is one of the most critical determinants of quality of life
for people with schizophrenia compared to symptoms such as delusions or
hallucinations. More research provides sufficient support for this
statement, for example, the important role of cognitive functioning in
socialization has been demonstrated ((n.d.m)) and a longitudinal study
has also shown that cognitive impairment predicts slower socialization
((n.d.n)). Therefore, cognitive functioning in patients with
schizophrenia has become a key object of research.

People with schizophrenia have deficits in multiple cognitive domains
simultaneously ((n.d.a), (n.d.o)), A meta-analysis has found that adult
patients with schizophrenia perform more poorly than healthy controls in
five cognitive domains including IQ, memory, language, executive
function, and attention ((n.d.p)). Another systematic review has also
indicated worse performance in a broad range of neuropsychological
domains like multiple types of memory, intellectual function, sustained
attention, as well as set-shifting and response inhibition ((n.d.q)).
Specifically, working memory has been considered as one of the most
fundamental cognitive functions and is related to a number of core
symptoms of schizophrenia ((n.d.r)). Early studies demonstrated that
there was a significant correlation between working memory deficits and
several schizophrenia symptoms such as affective disorder and
disorganized behavior ((n.d.s), (n.d.t)).

Working memory is defined as the limited capacity system necessary for
short-term storage and manipulation of information in progress
((n.d.u)). In many studies investigating schizophrenia in all age
groups, childhood and adolescence have been found to be particularly
critical. Cognitive impairments such as working memory deficits tend to
present in childhood (age 7–13) and adolescence (age 14–17) before they
perform signs and symptoms of schizophrenia ((n.d.v)), so working memory
deficits may be one of the predictors of schizophrenia in childhood. In
addition, several empirical studies from schools have found that
children in the early stages (the pre-psychotic prodromal period and the
first 5–10 years after the initial episode) ((n.d.w)) of schizophrenia
have poorer educational achievement and impaired social functioning,
which may be due to working memory deficits ((n.d.x)–(n.d.y)).
Remarkably, schizophrenia, one of the first-episode psychoses (FEP),
often develops in childhood and adolescence ((n.d.z)), and patients with
FEP tend to show a high remission rate owing to early intervention
((n.d.aa), (n.d.ab)), suggesting that the earlier the intervention was
given, the more effective the intervention would be.

Therefore, it is meaningful to study schizophrenia in children from the
perspective of cognitive impairments like working memory deficits,
however, few reviews have been made. To conclude, the current study aims
to summarize studies on working memory deficits in children with
schizophrenia from both behavioral and neuroimaging aspects, try to
explain deficits with possible susceptible genes and recommend some
available interventions.

.. _s2:

Working memory deficits in children with schizophrenia
======================================================

Behavioral studies of working memory deficits in children with schizophrenia
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Childhood and adolescence represent a rapid physical and psychological
development. However, it is also a period when neurodevelopmental
disorders such as schizophrenia begin to appear, accompanied with
cognitive deficits (e.g., working memory deficits), ((n.d.ac)).
Cognitive Neuroscience Treatment Research to Improve Cognition in
Schizophrenia (CNTRICS) has suggested four components of working memory
deficits including goal maintenance, interference control, rehearsal
(active maintenance over time), and updating ((n.d.ad)). Previous
studies have found deficits in goal maintenance among schizophrenia
patients with several working memory tasks such as the anti-saccade task
((n.d.ae)) and Dot Pattern Expectancy task ((n.d.af)). Some other
studies also indicate impaired updating function in schizophrenia with
updating and maintenance paradigm ((n.d.ag)) and auditory target
detection task ((n.d.ah)). Eye-movement studies have also provided some
evidence for abnormal working memory inhibitory processes in
ultra-high-risk subjects and siblings ((n.d.ai), (n.d.aj)). These
findings indicate that schizophrenia affects the working memory function
of patients from multiple dimensions and we suggest that different
mechanisms should be distinguished among these effects. In addition,
some early field studies demonstrated possible working memory deficits
in children with schizophrenia. A meta-analysis also showed that
children with schizophrenia had worse general academic and mathematics
achievements ((n.d.ak)), meanwhile, accompanied by poorer social
functions characterized by inadequate emotional reactions, the disorder
of thinking, and loss of will ((n.d.al), (n.d.am)), which could be
considered main markers of working memory deficits. Then, a
questionnaire study on a large sample of adolescents and young adults
has shown that specific psychotic-like experiences are associated with
low working memory capacity ((n.d.an)). Furthermore, previous behavioral
studies have found that children with schizophrenia tend to present more
slow response time and low accuracy in different types of working memory
tasks including visual, auditory, and verbal tasks ((n.d.ao)–(n.d.ap)).
To conclude, sufficient behavioral evidence has told us that various
working memory deficits exist in (high-risk) schizophrenia subjects and
could be markers of the disease progression.

Neuromechanism of working memory deficits in patients with schizophrenia
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Over the past few years, an increasing number of neuroscientists have
turned to explore the neuromechanism of working memory deficits in
patients with schizophrenia. Many functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) studies have reported altered engagement of the cerebral cortex
during working memory processing in early-onset (EOS; the age of onset
<18 years) schizophrenia, particularly in the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC), ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), and anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) ((n.d.aq)–(n.d.ar)). These regions have been
shown to be closely associated with a wide range of executive
dysfunction, especially memory deficits ((n.d.as)). For example, a
previous study ((n.d.at)) found the decreased DLPFC connectivity within
the working memory network and suggested that patients with EOS
schizophrenia showed significant late developmental changes. Nielsen,
Madsen ((n.d.au)) found that first-episode schizophrenia had decreased
forward connectivity from the left inferior parietal lobe (IPL) to the
left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), which indicated the impaired working
memory modulation of the frontoparietal network and the failure of
context-sensitive coupling in the early phase of schizophrenia.
Moreover, the degree of impact on different working memory functions
varies, which perhaps means discrepant neuromechanism. A previous study
found the increased activation when patients engaged in the manipulation
plus maintenance task. Meanwhile, the changes of brain activation were
disproportionately less in the DLPFC and greater in the VLPFC. This
result suggested that manipulating function is selectively more affected
than storing function in working memory ((n.d.av)). In addition, some
researchers have found abnormal hyperactivation in the above-mentioned
brain regions, reflecting the use of compensatory cognitive strategy
while solving WM tasks ((n.d.aw)), which might be another sign of
working memory deficits. Furthermore, Loeb et al. ((n.d.aq)) also
pointed out that decreased activation and functional connectivity in the
working memory network in childhood-onset schizophrenia were associated
with the severity of the disease. To conclude, although there is no
consensus on the neuromechanism of schizophrenia, it's clear that no
matter in function or structure, numerous studies have offered enough
evidence that children with or at risk of schizophrenia develop with
apparent or potential working memory deficits and these deficits tend to
present relatively early during schizophrenia.

.. _s3:

Genetic susceptibility factors of working memory deficits in schizophrenia patients
===================================================================================

Previous studies provided sufficient evidence that schizophrenia is a
highly heritable disease. An early twin study showed that the estimate
of heritability in liability of schizophrenia was nearly 81% ((n.d.ax))
and this result was still supported by some recent studies ((n.d.ay),
(n.d.az)). Similarly, working memory deficits in patients with psychosis
are genetic with heritability estimates of up to 49% ((n.d.ba)). Thus,
numerous psychologists and psychiatrists have committed themselves to
exploring possible susceptible genes linked with working memory deficits
in patients with schizophrenia.

Previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have indicated some
susceptibility genes are significantly associated with schizophrenia.
The most compelling studies came from the psychiatric genomics
Association (PGC), which provided the largest sample size for the GWAS
study of schizophrenia. With the release of three PGC studies
((n.d.bb)–(n.d.bc)), researchers further clarified the genetic nature of
schizophrenia. In 2014, the landmark GWAS study conducted by the PGC
identified 128 independent single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 108
gene loci that met genome-wide significance ((n.d.bd)). Some
associations at DRD2 and several genes involved in glutamatergic
neurotransmission were consistent with previous leading
pathophysiological hypotheses and highlight molecules with known and
potential therapeutic relevance to schizophrenia. While 83 of 128 SNPs
have not been reported previously, providing entirely new insights into
etiology. In the recent GWAS study conducted by PGC, they identified 120
genes involved 106 protein-coding, of which more gene loci related to
neurodevelopmental disorders were found ((n.d.bc)). These GWAS studies
have identified multiple susceptibility genes significantly related to
schizophrenia. However, the specific mechanisms of these genes in
schizophrenia are still unclear, which hinders the determination of
promising drug molecular targets.

Some researchers chose to focus on the effects of schizophrenia
susceptibility genes identified in the GWAS study on cognition and its
brain mechanisms, many of which involved the working memory function.
For example, the rs1344706 within the zinc finger protein 804A gene
(*ZNF804A*) has been found a compelling candidate single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) for schizophrenia ((n.d.be)). Recent studies have
also provided support for altered brain activities among *ZNF804A*
variant rs1344706 schizophrenia carriers, such as influenced
hippocampal-DLPFC functional connectivity during resting-state
((n.d.bf)), abnormal prefrontal connectivity ((n.d.bg)), and altered
cortical network dynamics ((n.d.bh)). Some of them also play a
significant role in working memory performance and a previous
cognitive-measuring study has indicated higher polygenic scores of
*ZNF804A* were associated with poorer working memory ((n.d.bi)). Linden,
Lancaster ((n.d.bj)) has found worse working memory performance for face
processing among *ZNF804A* carriers. Additionally, impaired cognitive
control function in working memory has also been found ((n.d.bk),
(n.d.bl)).

The dopamine receptor type 2 gene (*DRD2*) polymorphism was also known
as one of the risk variants for schizophrenia ((n.d.bm)). The
polymorphism of *DRD2* (C957T) has been known to be associated with
schizophrenia ((n.d.bn)), while the result seems inconsistent in
different populations ((n.d.bo), (n.d.bp)). Meanwhile, the C957T variant
has showed closely connected to working memory performance, especially
in goal maintenance function ((n.d.bq)) but limited effect on executive
function (Working Memory, Response Inhibition, Cognitive Flexibility)
((n.d.br)). Moreover, researchers have also found that the rs1076560
variant of *DRD2* significantly contributes to abnormal prefrontal
activity and impaired working memory in several task-related studies
((n.d.bs), (n.d.bt)). Braun, Harneit ((n.d.bu)) have studied the role of
*DRD2* dopamine in whole-brain network dynamics and found decreased
stability of working memory representations. Pergola, Di Carlo
((n.d.bv)) comprehensively studied the *DRD2* co-expression network and
calculated a related polygenic index which could significantly predict
the abnormal prefrontal activity and insufficient working memory
processing.

Several GWAS studies have also identified the *CACNA1C* gene
polymorphism (rs1006737) as a susceptibility locus for schizophrenia
((n.d.bw)) which often comes with alterations in prefrontal activation
and fronto-hippocampal connectivity during emotional processing and
executive cognition ((n.d.bx), (n.d.by)) and finally lead to poor
working memory performance ((n.d.bz), (n.d.ca)), especially impact on
the encoding phase of working memory ((n.d.cb)). Beyond that, some other
SNPs in *CACNA1C* have been identified as risk loci for schizophrenia
over the past years ((n.d.cc)). However, we are still lacking in
profound understanding among them and more evidence is expected.

Moreover, *RELN* variants have been proved to contribute to the
endophenotypes of schizophrenia ((n.d.cd)) and regulate synaptic
plasticity and cognition in psychotic subjects ((n.d.ce)). Reproducible
studies have shown multiple *RELN* variants (7q21-32) are associated
with memory impairments ((n.d.cf), (n.d.cg)). In addition, a study in
healthy population carried with *RELN* (rs362691) has shown high
cognitive deficits, especially in executive function ((n.d.ch)).
Although more and more SNPs in *RELN* are confirmed to be related to
schizophrenia recently ((n.d.ci)), their effect on working memory awaits
deeper studies.

In addition, the transcription factor 4 gene (*TCF4*) ((n.d.cj),
(n.d.ck)), the microRNA-137 gene (MIR-137) ((n.d.cl)–(n.d.cm)), and the
type-3 metabotropic glutamate receptor gene (*GRM3*) have also been
found to be associated with working memory impairment by affecting the
functions of brain regions related to working memory processes,
including DLPFC, hippocampus, striatum and other regions.

Beyond that, Nicodemus, Kolachana ((n.d.cn)) proposed that statistical
interactions among multiple susceptibility genes should also be
considered. The polygenic risk score (PRS) has become a powerful
indicator of GWAS results. Identified SNPs were weighted by their
association odds ratio to construct a risk score for each individual.
The PRS was positively correlated with the genetic susceptibility of the
disease. Wang, Liu ((n.d.co)) calculated the PRS using the formula
developed by PGC and found that a higher PRS was significantly
associated with impairment in working memory. To sum up, a large number
of GWAS studies have shown us that schizophrenia susceptible genes
indeed account for working memory deficits. These findings will
undoubtedly provide enlightenment for improved treatment for cognitive
symptoms in schizophrenia patients in the future. In addition, many
newly identified genes are related to neurodevelopmental disorders
((n.d.bc)), which further suggests that we need to pay more attention to
the children with schizophrenia.

.. _s4:

Intervention with cognition deficits in children with schizophrenia
===================================================================

It has been commonly accepted that children, compared to adults, develop
with better neural and behavioral plasticity, so early intervention for
children with schizophrenia is necessary. In addition, although the main
treatment of schizophrenia is antipsychotics, some other therapies have
also been put forward to promote the recovery of cognitive function in
schizophrenia patients, which in turn help establish adaptive behaviors
and have gradually been introduced to children.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) refers to a class of interventions
that share the basic premise that mental disorders and psychological
distress are maintained by cognitive factors ((n.d.cp), (n.d.cq)).
Therefore, CBT approaches are often used in responding to some cognitive
symptoms in a wide range of psychiatric disorders and show a large
effect size ((n.d.cr)). A review of meta-analysis on the efficacy of CBT
has confirmed that the preferential application of CBT in children
helped to alleviate behavioral and emotional disorders in various
psychosis to some extent ((n.d.cs)). In the meantime, a randomized
controlled study ((n.d.ct)) has found that CBT with treatment as usual
(9 months) contributed to better global function and quality of life in
adolescents with early-onset schizophrenia, which is considered the
external sign of cognitive recovery. Another study on the CBT for
adolescents at high risk for serious mental illness (SMI) such as
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder indicated that patients asked to
engage in several interventions showed reduced difficulties in emotion
regulation, better frustration tolerance, and stronger motivation
((n.d.cu)). More importantly, CBT is proved to be highly acceptable and
feasible with few side effects ((n.d.cs), (n.d.cv)).

Another similar psychopharmacologic treatment commonly used for mental
disorders is mindfulness. The definitions of mindfulness are various and
have been divided into five dimensions including awareness and
attention, present-centeredness, external events, cultivation, and
present centeredness ((n.d.cw)). An early meta-analysis showed that
mindfulness intervention was moderately effective in treating psychotic
negative symptoms ((n.d.cx)). Recent meta-analyses have provided more
evidence for its efficacy and safety ((n.d.cy), (n.d.cz)). Furthermore,
mindfulness among children and adolescents has been suggested to have
certain clinical effects, while it still needs to be standardized
((n.d.da)). Therefore, Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for children
(MBCT-C) was developed ((n.d.db)) and significant effects were found,
including improved cognitive control, better emotional control, and
fewer behavioral symptoms ((n.d.dc)–(n.d.dd)). More importantly
mindfulness-based approaches were highly feasible among children and
adolescents ((n.d.de)). However, there are few studies on the efficacy
of MBCT-C for children, especially schizophrenia. More clinical studies
are expected and a comparison could be made between CBT and mindfulness.

However, the tremendous time and human cost of CBT and mindfulness
cannot be ignored. To solve this issue, many researchers have been
dedicated to intervention with specific cortexes via several
neuro-technologies, such as electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). ECT has
been proved to be well-tolerated, well-established, and efficacious in
multiple moods and psychiatric disorders including depression and
schizophrenia ((n.d.df), (n.d.dg)). However, the majority of results
from older studies in children and adolescents were mixed and its effect
on them could not be clearly explained. Nowadays, studies and
applications of ECT among children and adolescents with FEP become
popular and its efficacy has got some verification ((n.d.dh), (n.d.di)),
while more clinic researches are still required. In addition, the side
effect of ECT, particularly in cognitive function (e.g., memory loss),
has been in heavy discussion for a long time ((n.d.dj), (n.d.dk)).
Dossing and Pagsberg ((n.d.dl)) suggested that more attention should be
paid to cognitive dysfunction under ECT in further studies. To conclude,
ECT has been considered a reliable way especially for
antipsychotics-resistance patients, while the effect on cognitive
functions remains to be vague.

To avoid the argument about safety and enhance the feasibility of
neurotechnology, several non-invasive brain stimulation techniques were
developed. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) uses very brief high
intensity magnetic fields to induce currents and thus depolarize neurons
in small regions of the cortex ((n.d.dm)). A review showed that TMS has
been applied for the treatment of auditory verbal hallucinations in
schizophrenia patients and proved superior efficacy ((n.d.dn)). Another
repetitive TMS study in EOS patients ((n.d.do)) also reported a
significant improvement in the severity of auditory hallucinations and
global functioning over the left temporoparietal junction. Additionally,
the author appealed to concern about the TMS used in the treatment of
several cognitive functions, especially among children. Related studies
have shown that TMS in specific cortex like DLPFC contributed to the
improvement of inhibitory and executive function in children and early
adults ((n.d.dp), (n.d.dq)). However, recent meta-analyses indicate that
cognitive enhancement effects caused by TMS in patients with
schizophrenia or other neuropsychiatric conditions are moderate
((n.d.dr), (n.d.ds)) and researchers attribute the result to
insufficient subjects and lack of long-term TMS intervention. Therefore,
more studies in this field are desperately needed.

Another non-invasive brain stimulation technique is transcranial direct
current stimulation (tDCS), which has been the subject of great interest
owing to its easiness of operation and relatively low cost. tDCS takes
effect by applying a weak current over the scalp to modulate cortical
excitability by facilitating or inhibiting ongoing neuronal processes. A
review of tDCS in psychiatric disorders has demonstrated its high
tolerability in patients with schizophrenia and improvement in positive
and negative symptoms ((n.d.dt)). Meanwhile, one study has provided
support that tDCS also played a role in the treatment of cognitive
impairments, especially in working memory ((n.d.du)). On this basis,
some other researchers focus on the feasibility and safety of tDCS among
children and adolescents which is proved to be well-tolerated ((n.d.dv),
(n.d.dw)). A recent study of tDCS among children and adolescents with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) have indicated positive
result in attention and inhibitory control function ((n.d.dx)). Another
study has reported enhancing working memory performance in children with
ADHD under the intervention of tDCS over the left DLPFC ((n.d.dy)). In
addition, improved reward processing in children with ADHD has also been
found through tDCS in specific regions including the left DLPFC and the
right ventromedial prefrontal cortex ((n.d.dz)). However, a
meta-analysis showed little evidence that 1 to 5 sessions of tDCS
improve the cognitive measure of children with ADHD ((n.d.ea)), which
calls for a persistent tDCS study in psychopathic children. Moreover,
the study on the clinical effects of tDCS among children with
schizophrenia is limited and its real efficacy with cognitive
impairments remains to be further examined.

Above all, the current treatments of children with schizophrenia were
focused on antipsychotics, which could greatly improve some positive
symptoms such as hallucinations and paranoia. In addition, ECT could
further enhance the efficiency of treatment in conjunction. However, the
above- mentioned therapies are not very effective for negative symptoms
(e.g., avolition) and cognitive symptoms (e.g., working memory
deficits). Therefore, it is highly recommended to use TMS and tDCS.
Moreover, psychopharmacologic treatment including CBT and mindfulness
play an important role in helping children with schizophrenia improve
cognitive functions and adapt to daily life. Moreover, it is worth
emphasizing that persistent treatment is necessary no matter what kind
of therapy is chosen.

.. _s5:

Conclusion
==========

The current review mainly discusses the cognitive impairments in
patients with schizophrenia, especially in children. Previous studies
have confirmed that children with schizophrenia are prone to show worse
academic grades and more conflicting relationships, accompanied by poor
performance in several working memory tasks. In addition, numerous
neuroimaging studies have demonstrated altered activation of working
memory networks and weak functional connectivity in schizophrenia
children. To further explain the pathogenesis of schizophrenia, many
susceptible genes have been put forward to take effect in related
activities among specific cerebral cortexes which finally accounts for
working memory deficits in schizophrenia. Thus, findings of the early
presence of cognitive symptoms both in behavior and cerebral cortex
offer the opportunity for prevention and treatment of schizophrenia in
children. Currently, lots of psychologists and psychiatrists have
contributed to the enhancement of cognitive impairments of children with
schizophrenia by employing CBT, mindfulness, ECT, TMS, and tDCS.

Although studies on working memory deficits among children with
schizophrenia have been constantly emerging, several limitations still
exist. Firstly, most working memory tasks used in experiments are mainly
designed for adults, and their difficulty and duration might be
unsuitable for children. Thus, adapted working memory tasks are required
to assess multiple working memory functions more efficiently. Similarly,
the treatment for children with schizophrenia is nearly the same as that
of adults, and there is also a lack of child intervention studies.
Considering the better brain plasticity of children, the brain activity
of children might be different from that of adults, so more specific
treatment should be studied and developed. Furthermore, the intervention
duration of several existing studies on children is not enough which may
be one of the reasons for the inconsistent treatment effects. Therefore,
more long-term follow-up studies are needed.

In the future, the mechanism of working memory and other cognition
impairments in schizophrenia are needed to be explored. On this basis,
it is worth looking forward to the more effective and lower-cost therapy
for schizophrenia patients, especially for children.

.. _s6:

Author contributions
====================

WZ had full access to all the information in this review. WZ, JZ, and JL
managed the literature searches and selection. WZ and QZ reviewed the
logicality of the manuscript. PO and QZ polished the manuscript in
language expression. JZ wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All
authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

.. _conf1:

Conflict of interest
====================

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

.. _s7:

Publisher's note
================

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or
those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that
may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

We would like to thank all the volunteers from all the mentioned
studies.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B7

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B8

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B12

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B15

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B16

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B17

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B18

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B20

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B21

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B22

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B23

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B24

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B25

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B28

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B29

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B30

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B31

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B32

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B33

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B34

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B35

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B36

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B37

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B38

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B39

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B40

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B41

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B42

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B43

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B44

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B47

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B48

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B50

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B51

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B52

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B53

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B54

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B55

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B56

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B57

      n.d.ay.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B58

      n.d.az.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B59

      n.d.ba.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B60

      n.d.bb.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B61

      n.d.bd.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B62

      n.d.bc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B63

      n.d.be.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B64

      n.d.bf.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B65

      n.d.bg.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B66

      n.d.bh.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B67

      n.d.bi.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B68

      n.d.bj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B69

      n.d.bk.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B70

      n.d.bl.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B71

      n.d.bm.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B72

      n.d.bn.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B73

      n.d.bo.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B74

      n.d.bp.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B75

      n.d.bq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B76

      n.d.br.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B77

      n.d.bs.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B78

      n.d.bt.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B79

      n.d.bu.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B80

      n.d.bv.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B81

      n.d.bw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B82

      n.d.bx.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B83

      n.d.by.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B84

      n.d.bz.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B85

      n.d.ca.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B86

      n.d.cb.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B87

      n.d.cc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B88

      n.d.cd.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B89

      n.d.ce.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B90

      n.d.cf.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B91

      n.d.cg.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B92

      n.d.ch.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B93

      n.d.ci.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B94

      n.d.cj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B95

      n.d.ck.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B96

      n.d.cl.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B98

      n.d.cm.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B99

      n.d.cn.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B100

      n.d.co.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B101

      n.d.cp.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B102

      n.d.cq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B103

      n.d.cr.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B104

      n.d.cs.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B105

      n.d.ct.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B106

      n.d.cu.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B107

      n.d.cv.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B108

      n.d.cw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B109

      n.d.cx.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B110

      n.d.cy.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B111

      n.d.cz.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B112

      n.d.da.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B113

      n.d.db.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B114

      n.d.dc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B116

      n.d.dd.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B117

      n.d.de.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B118

      n.d.df.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B119

      n.d.dg.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B120

      n.d.dh.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B121

      n.d.di.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B122

      n.d.dj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B123

      n.d.dk.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B124

      n.d.dl.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B125

      n.d.dm.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B126

      n.d.dn.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B127

      n.d.do.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B128

      n.d.dp.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B129

      n.d.dq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B130

      n.d.dr.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B131

      n.d.ds.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B132

      n.d.dt.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B133

      n.d.du.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B134

      n.d.dv.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B135

      n.d.dw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B136

      n.d.dx.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B137

      n.d.dy.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B138

      n.d.dz.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B139

      n.d.ea.

.. [1]
   Edited by: Xiaoming Li, University of South Carolina, United States

.. [2]
   Reviewed by: Huang Gu, Henan University, China; Carlos M. Gómez,
   Sevilla University, Spain

.. [3]
   This article was submitted to Public Mental Health, a section of the
   journal Frontiers in Psychiatry
