==============================================================================================
CACNA1C Gene rs1006737 Polymorphism Affects Cognitive Performance in Chinese Han Schizophrenia
==============================================================================================

Mengyi Chen
Qi Jiang
Lei ZhangCorrespondence: Mengyi Chen, Department of Geriatric, Shanghai
Pudong New Area Mental Health Center, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China, Tel/Fax +8602168306699,
Email 1141134986@qq.com
:Date: 2022-8-10

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Objective
      :name: s2001

   To investigate the relationship between L-type calcium channel α1C
   subunit (CACNA1C) gene polymorphism and schizophrenia (SCZ) and
   cognitive function in the Han nationality, the main nationality in
   China.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: s2002

   Genotyping of CACNA1C SNP (rs1006737, rs1024582, rs2007044) in SCZ
   patients (n = 312) and healthy controls (n = 305) was performed.
   Cognitive function was assessed in the SCZ patients using Repeatable
   Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS).
   Then, the correlation between SNP and SCZ, as well as cognition, was
   calculated.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: s2003

   There was no significant difference in allele frequency and genotype
   distribution frequency of the three polymorphic loci of CACNA1C gene
   between the two groups. In cognitive tests, delayed memory scores in
   RBANS were significantly lower in rs1006737 “A” risk allele carriers
   than in non-carriers.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion
      :name: s2004

   There is no significant difference in allele and genotype frequency
   of CANCA1C Gene rs1006737, rs1024582 and rs2007044 between the
   schizophrenia patients and healthy controls. The cognitive function
   of schizophrenia patients is correlated with the rs1006737, and the
   delayed memory of “A” allele carriers is significantly reduced.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _s0001:

Introduction
============

Schizophrenia is a lifelong mental disorder with unknown etiology and
severe disability risk.(n.d.a) Due to the prolonged course of the
disease, easy recurrence and often accompanied by cognitive impairment,
patients often have varying degrees of social function loss, coupled
with poor treatment compliance, poor family and social support, suicide
and accidents and other factors, the average life expectancy of patients
with schizophrenia is significantly shorter than the general
population.(n.d.b) Based on the year lived with Disability (YLD) index
of the Global Burden of Disease Study, schizophrenia ranks 20th among
all diseases and third among mental disorders. It ranks 17th among all
diseases in China and 3rd among mental disorders.(n.d.c) Studies have
shown that genetic factors play an important role in the occurrence of
this disease.(n.d.d),(n.d.e)

Calcium channels are an important hub for converting electrical activity
into biochemical events in the central nervous system. Since nerve cells
containing L-type calcium channels α1C (voltage-dependent, L-type,
alpha1C, CACNA1C) account for more than 80% of mammalian brains,(n.d.f)
CACNA1C becomes the primary target for ion channel hypothesis of
schizophrenia. CACNA1C gene is located on the short arm of chromosome
12P13.3, spanning a genomic region of about 6.45 MB.(n.d.g) It mediates
calcium influx into cells by regulating L-type voltage-gated calcium
channels (LTCC), which play an important role in regulating dendrite
development, neuronal survival, synaptic plasticity, memory and
cognition.(n.d.h),(n.d.i) Recent molecular genetics studies have found
that the polymorphism of CACNA1C and abnormal expression were
significantly associated with schizophrenia. It also involves multiple
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP).(n.d.j) However, studies on the
association between specific genetic loci and schizophrenia have been
mixed. Recent meta-analyses have shown that CACNA1C associated rs1006737
is a susceptibility gene for schizophrenia in European and East Asian
populations.(n.d.k),(n.d.l) However, another study showed that the
influence of rs1006737 genotype on susceptibility to schizophrenia was
ethnically different.(n.d.m),(n.d.n) This feature is also reflected in
other CACNA1C-related gene segments.

Because schizophrenia patients are accompanied by cognitive
abnormalities during the course of disease or even before the
onset,(n.d.o) it is difficult to ignore the influence of CACNA1C-related
genes on cognition. Previous studies have shown that CANCA1C gene
rs2007044 polymorphism affects Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale
(PANSS) score of schizophrenia patients.(n.d.p) Therefore, we based on
the CHB (Chinese Han Origin in Beijing) data from dbSNF and HapMap
database, combined with the meta-analysis results of Zheng et al on
schizophrenia-related CACNA1C SNP in the Han nationality, the main
nationality in China,(n.d.q) then selected rs1006737, rs1024582 and
rs2007044 as target loci. We intended to determine the SNP of rs1006737,
rs1024582 and rs2007044 in the patient group and the control group,
respectively, to explore whether specific CACNA1C SNP is correlated with
schizophrenia, and measuring the cognitive level of the patient group to
discuss the influence of different genotypes on the cognitive function
of schizophrenia patients.

.. _s0002:

Methods
=======

.. _s0002-s2001:

Subjects
--------

This study was a case–control study, and a total of 312 patients with
SCZ and 305 healthy controls were enrolled. The study subjects were all
Han Chinese and were recruited from inpatients at Pudong New Area Mental
Health Center from March 2021 to March 2022, aged 20 to 65 years. All
patients were in a stable phase with antipsychotic medications for more
than 4 weeks, meeting the ICD-10 (International Classification of
Diseases, 10th Revision) diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, and were
diagnosed by two experienced psychiatrists. Exclusion criteria included
a history of other mental illness, a history of severe head injury
(including any closed or open head injury that may be related to current
symptoms or affect cognition), current acute psychotic episode,
substance abuse, and failure to coordinate cognitive test during the
period.

After excluding patients who did not meet the experimental criteria, the
study was explained to the patients by the clinician and
psychotherapist, including blood drawing and cognitive tests, and all
questions were answered. After the subjects signed the informed consent,
blood was drawn, and psychotherapist interviewed the patients to
complete cognitive tests. PANSS was used to assess the severity of the
illness in each schizophrenic patient.

The control group was socially recruited from the same area and matched
for age and education. They were screened by experienced psychiatrists
to exclude anyone with a family history of mental illness. Demographic
information of patients and healthy controls is shown in `Table
1 <#t0001>`__. This study was conducted in accordance with the
Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethics Committee of
Shanghai Pudong New Area Mental Health Center. All participants
completed written informed consent.Table 1Characteristics of SCZ
Patients and Healthy ControlsParametersSCZ (n = 312)Controls (n =
305)PAge (years)40.26±12.7040.60±13.320.743Gender
(female%)48.08%49.18%0.697Education
(years)11.43±3.2311.75±3.440.232Duration (years)16.46±11.87––Age at
onset (years)25.06±5.62––Hospitalization
times3.00±1.23––PANSS57.33±15.92––Mood stabilizers
(%)8.33%––Benzodiazepines (%)12.50%––SGA (%)96.47%–– [1]_

.. _s0002-s2002:

SNP Selection and Genotyping
----------------------------

Five milliliters of fasting peripheral venous blood was extracted from
the patient group, and DNA was extracted according to the standard
protocol of DNA separation kit (Genesky Biotechnologies, Shanghai,
China). Three SNP loci rs1006737, rs1024582 and rs2007044 were selected
for polymorphism detection. The target gene was amplified by PCR. DNA
was extracted according to the standard protocol of DNA isolation kit
(Genesky Biotechnologies, Shanghai, China). In order to ensure the
accuracy of genotyping, blind quality control was used during
genotyping. In addition, 5% of the samples were randomly selected for
retesting and the results were 100% consistent.

.. _s0002-s2003:

Cognitive Experiment
--------------------

Cognitive function was assessed in 312 SCZ patients using Repeatable
Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS). RBANS
consists of vocabulary learning, story retelling, graphics copy, picture
naming, line orientation, sumantio fluency, digit span, coding,
vocabulary memory, vocabulary recognition, stories memory and graphics
memory of 12 sub-tests, and evaluates cognitive function from 5
dimensions (Immediate Memory, Visuospatical/Constructional, Language,
Attention and Delayed Memory). Finally, the original score of each test
was converted into scale score according to the conversion norm.

.. _s0002-s2004:

Statistical Analysis
--------------------

Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) testing for SNP was done using the
SHEsis software (http://analysis.bio-x.cn/SHEsisMain.htm). SPSS 23.0
version and Graphpad Prism 9.0 version were used for other analyses. The
measurement data was expressed as Mean ± Standard Deviation (X ± S),
*t*-test was adopted, and the chi-square test was used for counting
data. Because the number of homozygous for some risk genes was small, we
considered the risk gene carriers as one group and the non-carriers as
another. Pearson correlation analysis was used for correlation analysis.
Significance was set at p < 0.05, two tailed.

.. _s0003:

Results
=======

.. _s0003-s2001:

Sample Characteristics
----------------------

There were no significant differences in average age, sex ratio and
education level between the SCZ group and the control group (P > 0.05),
as shown in `Table 1 <#t0001>`__.

.. _s0003-s2002:

Comparison of Genotype and Allele Distribution Frequency
--------------------------------------------------------

The results of HWE test of genotype distribution frequency of 3 SNP loci
in SCZ group and control group showed that rs1006737, rs1024582 and
rs2007044 all matched HWE. All 3 SNP loci in this study were included in
the subsequent analysis. Comparison of genotype and allele distribution
frequency between the two groups showed that there was no significant
difference in allele and genotype frequency of rs1006737, rs1024582 and
rs2007044 between the SCZ group and the control group (P > 0.05), as
shown in `Table 2 <#t0002>`__.Table 2Genotype and Allele Distribution
Frequency in rs1006737, rs1024582, rs2007044SNP
IDGenotypesGroups\ *X*\ :sup:`2`\ PSCZControlsrs1006737AA+AG/GG36/27631/2740.3380.845A%6.255.570.2530.615rs1024582TT+TC/CC30/28226/2790.7420.690T%4.974.590.0970.756rs2007044GG+GA/AA166/146161/1440.0350.983G%31.5731.150.0260.873 [2]_

.. _s0003-s2003:

Comparison of Cognitive Function with Different Genotypes
---------------------------------------------------------

The cognitive function in SCZ group was different among different
genotypes in rs1006737, that is, the delayed memory score of “A” risk
allele carriers was significantly lower that non-carriers (F=0.629,
P=0.045). However, there were no significant differences in Immediate
Memory, Visuospatical/Constructional, Language, Attention and total
scores. Furthermore, no significant differences were found in RBANS
total score and sub-item score among different genotypes in rs1024582
and rs2007044 (`Table 3 <#t0003>`__ and `Figure 1 <#f0001>`__). Pearson
correlation analysis showed that RBANS total score was negatively
correlated with age, disease course and PANSS score (`Figure
2 <#f0002>`__).Table 3Comparison of RBANS Scores Between Risk Allele
Carriers and Non-Carriers in SCZ GroupSNP IDIndex
ScoreCarrirerNo-CarrierFPrs1006737Immediate
Memory66.64±16.7969.29±18.242.3950.409Visuospatical/Constructional85.56±18.2287.52±18.870.1570.556Language76.42±19.7283.26±20.620.1550.061Attention78.33±21.0180.10±20.380.2330.626Delayed
Memory73.33±17.4380.00±18.840.6290.045*Total70.81±15.4975.26±16.630.2900.129rs1024582Immediate
Memory67.77±16.9969.11±18.211.4430.699Visuospatical/Constructional89.17±19.1687.09±18.760.0450.566Language78.13±21.5382.93±20.490.8500.226Attention84.37±22.8779.42±20.140.6640.208Delayed
Memory77.60±21.0979.40±18.550.9830.618Total75.07±16.6774.71±16.560.6940.911rs2007044Immediate
Memory68.73±18.0969.27±18.120.0060.791Visuospatical/Constructional88.10±18.6386.37±18.970.2610.417Language83.30±20.1781.52±21.111.1410.446Attention81.93±20.7577.58±19.870.1150.060Delayed
Memory79.63±17.8478.77±19.842.1870.685Total75.43±16.1973.96±16.950.4850.433 [3]_ [4]_
Figure 1Comparison of RBANS scores between risk allele carriers and
non-carriers in the SCZ group. \*P-value <0.05. In rs1006737, the risk
allele carriers had significantly lower scores than non-carriers, while
in rs1024582 and rs2007044, there was no significant difference between
the risk allele carriers and non-carriers.\ **Abbreviations**: RBANS,
Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status; SCZ,
schizophrenia.Figure 2Heat map of correlation between characteristics
and cognitive score in SCZ group. The RBANS total score of SCZ patients
were negatively correlated with age, duration, and PANSS, but had no
significant correlation with age of onset, education level, and
hospitalization times.\ **Abbreviations:** SCZ, schizophrenia; PANSS,
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale; RBANS, Repeatable Battery for the
Assessment of Neuropsychological Status.

.. _s0004:

Discussion
==========

In this study, genotypes and allele frequencies of 3 SNP loci
(rs1006737, rs1024582, rs2007044) were compared between SCZ patients and
healthy controls. It was found that there were no significant
differences in genotypes and allele frequencies of each locus between
SCZ patients and healthy controls. This result seems to suggest that the
CACNA1C SNP rs1006737, rs1024582 and rs2007044 are not associated with
SCZ susceptibility, which is contrary to the results of previous
studies. However, by observing other similar studies, we found that the
frequency of rs1006737 “A” allele in Chinese Han population ranged from
5.0% to 13.8%, and the SCZ group was 0.5 to 2 percentage points higher
than the healthy control group,(n.d.q) which was similar to this study.
Besides, many previous studies with statistically significant
differences had a sample size of more than 3000.(n.d.q) Therefore, if
the study continues to expand the sample size, more accurate results
will be obtained.

In this study, we found that the “A” risk allele carriers of rs1006737
gene in SCZ patients had delayed memory loss, reflecting cognitive
dysfunction. This is consistent with the results of previous studies.
Previous studies have shown that rs1006737 risk allele “A” was
associated with impaired spatial working memory in both SCZ patients and
healthy people.(n.d.r) Some studies on healthy people have further
demonstrated the impact of risk alleles on cognition. So far, studies
have shown that carriers of the “A” allele of rs1006737 are more likely
to show negative cognitive bias,(n.d.s) attention deficit,(n.d.t) and
slow response to reward.(n.d.u) With the development of magnetic
resonance technology, we can observe morphological changes in the brain
more directly. For example, Wang’s study showed that SCZ patients
carrying rs1006737 risk allele “A” had decreased gray matter volume of
thalamus, surface area of isthmus of cingulate cortex, and thickness of
cortex of transtemporal sulcus and superior temporal sulcus.(n.d.v)
Wolf’s study showed that there was also a significant difference in the
volume of the left and right amygdala in this group.(n.d.w) Mallas’s
study showed that diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) of such patients showed
decreased white matter integrity in several parts of the brain.(n.d.x)
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) experiments on first-degree
relatives of SCZ patients and healthy people also found some hemodynamic
abnormalities in the brain.(n.d.y) Unfortunately, such studies differed
greatly in the location of abnormal regions, so more accurate studies
could not be carried out. Researchers had targeted the gene by tracking
the messenger RNA, but found that the “A” allele carriers had abnormal
expression of CACNA1C messenger RNA in several different brain regions.
Later, other researchers attached importance to gender differences and
finally found that such cognitive and brain functional activity
abnormalities accompanied by risk alleles have slight gender
differences, that is, anxiety is more common in males, while hostility
is more common in females.(n.d.s),(n.d.z) In general, carriers of risk
alleles exhibit a different neurological phenotype from non-carriers at
a macro level, which is the key to such studies in clinical psychiatry
today.

Correlation analysis showed that RBANS scores of SCZ patients were
negatively correlated with age, course of disease, and PANSS, but had no
significant correlation with age of onset, education level, and
hospitalization times. However, previous studies generally believed that
education level was positively proportional to patients’
cognition.(n.d.aa) After further study of the experiment in the
population, we got the answer. This study was conducted in Shanghai,
where SCZ patients ranged in age from 20 to 65 years. In recent decades,
Shanghai has witnessed rapid economic development, and people have
increasingly attached importance to education. Therefore, for young
patients and elderly patients with the same education years, their
actual educational level may be far apart. So using years of schooling
as a parameter is not so accurate.

Due to the special significance of calcium channel in schizophrenia, it
is not difficult to imagine whether calcium channel antagonists (CCB)
can be used in the treatment of schizophrenia. In fact, as early as the
1980s, some clinicians tried to use CCB as an adjunctive treatment for
patients with refractory schizophrenia. In randomized controlled trials,
CCB was found to enhance learning and memory in schizophrenics with
tardive dyskinesia.(n.d.ab) Dyke’s team found that the group treated
with antipsychotic drugs in combination with CCB had significantly
better Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scores at multiple time points
than the group treated with normal therapy.(n.d.ac) However, a study on
the Korean schizophrenia population found that in the same group of
hospitalized patients, the CACNA1C SNP rs723672 and rs1034936 were
significantly correlated with the improvement of PANSS positive score,
which is suggested that different genotypes may influence antipsychotic
effects.(n.d.ad) Other studies showed that the mechanism of action of
some atypical antipsychotics might be related to calcium
channels.(n.d.ae) For instance, papperidone could effectively prevent
calcium influx by inhibiting voltage-gated calcium channels, thus
effectively delay nerve cell death.(n.d.af) In the latest study, the
researchers used mice to simulate perinatal fetal central nervous system
development and showed that the failure of LTCC in prematurity neurons
might lead to errors in nerve growth and cortical migration.
Interestingly, a range of symptoms caused by such errors could be
revised by postnatal correction of LTCC signal aberrations. This study
suggested that CACNA1C, as an important component of LTCC, might be a
perinatal therapeutic target for neurodevelopmentally related
psychiatric disorder.(n.d.ag)

This study also has some limitations. On the one hand, due to the
limitations of experimental conditions, we failed to conduct RBANS in
healthy controls, which to some extent affected the persuasion of the
experiment. If cognitive abnormalities were also found in carriers of
the rs1006737 “A” allele in healthy controls, it would be strong
evidence that CACNA1C gene polymorphisms affect cognitive function. On
the other hand, there are also differences in CACNA1C-related gene
polymorphisms in other psychiatric diseases, such as rs1006737
polymorphism is associated with bipolar disorder,(n.d.ah) rs1034936
polymorphism is associated with alcohol dependence and cocaine
abuse.(n.d.ae) Poor specificity is a common flaw in studies of SNP of
mental disease.

.. _s0005:

Conclusions
===========

There is no significant difference in allele and genotype frequency of
CANCA1C Gene rs1006737, rs1024582 and rs2007044 between the
schizophrenia patients and healthy controls. The cognitive function of
schizophrenia patients is correlated with the rs1006737, and the delayed
memory of “A” allele carriers is significantly reduced.

.. _s0006:

Abbreviations
=============

CACNA1C, L-type calcium channel α1C subunit; SCZ, schizophrenia; SNP,
Single nucleotide polymorphism; RBANS, Repeatable Battery for the
Assessment of Neuropsychological Status; YLD, year lived with
disability; LTCC, L-type voltage-gated calcium channels; CHB, Chinese
Han Origin in Beijing; ICD-10, international Classification of Diseases,
10th Revision; PANSS, Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale; HWE,
Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium; SGA, second-generation antipsychotics; DTI,
diffusion tensor imaging; FMRI, Functional magnetic resonance imaging;
CCB, calcium channel antagonists.

.. _s0007:

Ethics Approval and Informed Consent
====================================

The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Shanghai Pudong New
Area Mental Health Center (reference number: PDJWLL2020012)

.. _s0008:

Author Contributions
====================

All authors made a significant contribution to the work reported,
whether that is in the conception, study design, execution, acquisition
of data, analysis and interpretation, or in all these areas; took part
in drafting, revising or critically reviewing the article; gave final
approval of the version to be published; have agreed on the journal to
which the article has been submitted; and agree to be accountable for
all aspects of the work.

.. _s0009:

Disclosure
==========

The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0001

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0002

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0005

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0006

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0007

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0008

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0009

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0010

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0011

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0012

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0013

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0014

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0015

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0016

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0017

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0018

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0019

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0020

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0023

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0024

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0025

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0026

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0027

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0028

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0029

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0032

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0033

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0034

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0035

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0036

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0037

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0038

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0039

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-cit0040

      n.d.ah.

.. [1]
   **Abbreviations**: SCZ, schizophrenia; PANSS, Positive and Negative
   Syndrome Scale; SGA, second generation antipsychotics.

.. [2]
   **Abbreviations**: SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism; SCZ,
   schizophrenia.

.. [3]
   **Note**: \*\ \ *P*-value <0.05.

.. [4]
   **Abbreviations**: RBANS, Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of
   Neuropsychological Status; SCZ, schizophrenia; SNP, single nucleotide
   polymorphism.
