=====================================================================================================
Diagnosis stability and outcome of psychotic episodes in a Romanian group of children and adolescents
=====================================================================================================

Florina Rad
Mihaela Stancu
Lucia-Emanuela Andrei
Florentina-Ionela Linca
Alexandra Mariana Buică
Maria-Madalina Leti
Iuliana Dobrescu
Ilinca Mihailescu
Magdalena Efrim-Budisteanu*Correspondence: Alexandra Mariana Buică,
“Grigore Alexandrescu” Clinical Emergency Pediatrics Hospital, 010555,
Bucharest, Romania (e-mail: alexa_de_du@yahoo.com).
:Date: 2022-8-26

:Abstract:
   Studies on early onset schizophrenia are limited because of their low
   prevalence but the reported results stated that early onset is
   associated with a poorer outcome. The present research analyzed the
   stability rate of the psychotic-related disorders from childhood to
   adult life. The study was based on an observational, retrospective,
   descriptive analysis study. The subjects were selected from patients
   admitted to the pediatric psychiatry ward of “Alexandru Obregia”
   Psychiatry Hospital between 2009 and 2018 for a psychosis-related
   disorder, who were 18 years or older at the moment of data collection
   and who also had admissions into the adult’s psychiatry wards of the
   hospital. Of the 115 subjects, 93, representing 80.87% of the total,
   maintained a diagnosis of psychotic spectrum disorder into adulthood.
   The diagnosis was maintained in 82.4% of cases with onset before 13
   years old and 80.6% of cases with onset after the age of 13 years of
   age. Of the 42 subjects who presented affective symptoms during
   childhood, 71.43% also presented affective symptoms into adulthood.
   These findings indicate an important stability rate of psychosis from
   childhood and adulthood and come in accordance with the theory of
   overlap between psychotic and affective disorders. The results
   underline the importance of an accurate diagnosis of early and very
   early onset schizophrenia (VEOS), the need for early and multimodal
   intervention, but also the need for long-term management of these
   patients and continuing research regarding psychotic-related
   disorders in children and adolescents.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
1. Introduction
===============

Schizophrenia is a severe, chronic mental health disorder that
profoundly affects daily functioning and is usually firstly diagnosed in
adult age, but can also be identified in children and
adolescents.\ :sup:`[(n.d.a)]` Schizophrenia with onset under the age of
13 is called very early onset schizophrenia (VEOS), a rare disorder with
an estimated 1 in 10,000 prevalence.\ :sup:`[(n.d.b)]` Schizophrenia
with onset under 18 years of age is called early-onset schizophrenia
(EOS) and has an estimated prevalence of 1.4 out of
10,000.\ :sup:`[(n.d.c)]`

Studies on EOS and VEOS are limited due to the low prevalence of these
disorders. On the other hand, the diagnosis of schizophrenia in children
and adolescents was not differentiated from the diagnosis of autism
until the publication of the third edition of the diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM) in 1980,\ :sup:`[(n.d.d)]`
children and adolescents with schizophrenia being diagnosed according to
the same criteria as adults.\ :sup:`[(n.d.e)]` The same study, that
reviewed data published between 1980 and 2012, concluded that the
patients’ unfavorable outcome is proportional with the age of
onset.\ :sup:`[(n.d.e)]`

Currently, the diagnosis of schizophrenia in children and adolescents is
established using the same “ICD-10” or “DSM-5” diagnostic criteria as in
adults; however, it is specified that these children will never reach
the expected level of functioning.\ :sup:`[(n.d.f),(n.d.g)]` However,
the diagnosis at an early age is difficult to establish, the clinical
picture is often mixed with affective or behavioral symptoms. Moreover,
pervasive disorders with psychotic decompensation can mimic the clinical
picture of schizophrenia thus leading to false positive diagnoses. On
the other hand, adult-specific diagnostic criteria do not capture the
developmental aspects of childhood and adolescence (e.g., magical
thinking or developing psychic functions) and, as a result, there is a
risk of omitting the diagnosis of
schizophrenia.\ :sup:`[(n.d.h),(n.d.i)]` In a study published in 2006,
Remschmidt et al showed that in a group of children initially diagnosed
with schizophrenia, after applying the international classification of
diseases-10 (ICD-10) diagnostic criteria, only in 50% of them this
diagnosis was confirmed. The rest were confirmed with emotional
disorders or conduct disorders.\ :sup:`[(n.d.j)]`

The treatment in schizophrenia is a complex one and includes both
pharmacological and nonpharmacological interventions (patient and family
counseling, individual therapy, assistance for school and social
rehabilitation, family support) and the evolution is favorable only in a
low percentage of cases.\ :sup:`[(n.d.k)]` Lally et al (2017) examined
remission and recovery after the first episode of psychosis, including
affective psychoses. They concluded that 7 years after the initial
onset, the cumulative remission rate was 58% and the recovery rate was
38%; they also noted that recovery rates have not improved in recent
years.\ :sup:`[(n.d.l)]`

Fleischhaker study, published in 2005, regarding the outcome and
stability of psychotic symptoms with onset in childhood and adolescence,
conclude that the evolution is less favorable: 25% can recover, 50% have
occasional relapses, and 25% are severely affected.\ :sup:`[(n.d.m)]`
The same study evaluated the prognosis of 101 patients with VEOS, using
the Global Assessment Scale (GAS), concluding that trajectory of
symptoms and functionality on different life areas was less severe when
onset is in adolescence and presence of developmental disorders or
introverted personality structure are risk factors for unfavorable
prognosis.\ :sup:`[(n.d.m)]`

Regarding the factors that could be considered predictors for evolution,
it is considered that VEOS correlates with a low expected educational
level, poor social relationships, socio-economic difficulties in
adulthood, and the continuing need for psychiatric medical
care.\ :sup:`[(n.d.b)]` Several EOS/VEOS-related studies indicate that
approximately 20% of children and adolescents with psychosis have an IQ
< 80, a lower premorbid IQ (intelligence quotient) among young people
predicts later schizophrenia diagnosis and the most affected patients
are those who have associated moderate or severe intellectual
disability.\ :sup:`[14-17]` Schizophrenia has also been correlated with
neurodevelopmental disorders, multiple studies reporting the presence of
premorbid disorders in social, linguistic or motor areas and learning
disabilities as predictors for unfavorable
prognosis.\ :sup:`[(n.d.n),(n.d.o)]`

Therefore, most studies in the literature show a less favorable
prognosis of schizophrenia with onset in childhood and adolescence
compared to onset in adulthood. When the disorder begins in childhood,
the evolution is even less favorable.\ :sup:`[(n.d.m)]`

Our study brings to attention a pathology with a highly debilitating
character, evaluates the age-dependent predictors of chronicity of
psychotic symptoms, and highlights new perspectives regarding the
comorbidity that can precipitate a psychotic episode in small ages.
There is a growing literature that investigates the premorbid
characteristics of patients with psychosis and the stability of this
premorbid phenotype as the patient ages, our research adding information
on the impact of comorbidities at the age of the first diagnosis, the
personal and family medical factors that influence the course of the
disease. According to the results that will be debated below, the family
history of mental illness not only influences the predisposition to
develop mental health disorders but also predicts the early ages of
developing severe symptoms and the number of relapses.

The objectives of the study are:

#. To follow the evolution of children and adolescents diagnosed with
   psychotic-related disorders.

#. To determine the stability rate of the diagnosis of psychotic-related
   disorders with onset in childhood and adolescence into adulthood.

#. To identify possible factors that contribute in maintaining the
   diagnosis of psychotic-related disorders in adulthood.

2. Materials and Methods
========================

2.1. Participants and data collection procedures
------------------------------------------------

The participants in this study were selected using the electronic
database and the medical records of the “Alexandru Obregia” Clinical
Psychiatry Hospital. The following criteria must have been met for the
patients to be included in the study: (a) age at first admission in the
hospital <18 years (pediatric ward); (b) diagnosis of psychotic-related
disorder at the time of first admission in the hospital (<18 years); (c)
age >18 years at the time of data collection (2021); (d) at least one
admission in the adult psychiatry ward of the same hospital (>18 years
old). One hundred fifteen participants (67 males and 48 females) met the
criteria and were therefore included in the study.

All the participants included in the study were diagnosed by a child and
adolescent psychiatrist using the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria, with one of
the following psychotic-related disorders: schizophrenia, brief
psychotic disorder, severe depressive episode with psychotic symptoms or
psychotic mania. Other clinical data obtained from the medical records
form the pediatric psychiatric ward were the number of admissions, age
at first admission, secondary diagnosis and family history of psychosis.

Following the data collection from the pediatric psychiatric ward, the
medical records from the adult psychiatric ward of the 115 participants
enrolled in the study were analyzed. The data used from the medical
record of the participants from the adult psychiatric clinic were the
number of admissions in the adult psychiatric ward and the main and
secondary diagnoses.

2.2. Data analysis
------------------

Descriptive statistics was used to describe the number of admissions in
both pediatric and adult psychiatric wards and Spearman rank correlation
was used to assess the relationship between them. To have a better
estimate of the number of admissions, this was divided by the number of
years with the disease (the number of years that have passed between the
first diagnosis and the moment of data collection). The number obtained
was defined as the *Admissions/Year of disease Coefficient and*
descriptive statistics was used to describe it. The total number of
admissions was also divided into 2 groups (≤5 admissions, >5 admission)
and *χ*\ ² tests were performed to determine if there is an association
between the total number of admissions and the onset of the disease (≤13
years of age and >13 years of age). The stability rate of the diagnosis
was determined using the frequency of the psychotic-related disorders in
the medical records from the adult psychiatric ward. The stability of
the affective symptoms was also determined. Next, *χ*\ ² tests were
performed to assess the relationship between the stability of the
diagnosis into adulthood and age of onset, as well as the relationship
between the number of admissions in the adult psychiatric ward and the
presence of ASD (Autism Spectrum Disorder)/Intellectual disability, the
age of onset or the presence of a family history of psychosis.

Statistical analysis was performed using JASP software, SPSS software,
and R software. In all the performed tests, the level of significance
was set at 0.05.

3. Results
==========

The subjects’ age at the moment of the study varied between 19 and 28
years old, with a mean age of 23.57 ± 2.38 years. The subjects’ age at
their first admission into the pediatric psychiatry ward varied between
6 and 17 years old, with a mean age of 15.31 ± 2.00 years old. The age
of the first admission was also considered the age of the onset of
symptoms. Seventeen of the participants were <13 years old at the onset
of the disorder (14.74%), and 98 were over 13 years of age. 4 subjects
(3.48%) were <10 years old at the onset of psychotic symptoms.

Thirty-four participants (29.57%) were admitted only once in the
pediatric ward whereas 25 of the participants were admitted more than 5
times as children/adolescents. The maximum number of admissions per
patient was 16 and the mean number of admissions was 3.17 ± 2.65 (Fig.
`1 <#F1>`__).

.. figure:: medi-101-e30288-g001
   :alt: Number of admissions into the pediatric (PP) and adult’s
   psychiatry (PA) wards.
   :name: F1

   Number of admissions into the pediatric (PP) and adult’s psychiatry
   (PA) wards.

Regarding admissions into the adult psychiatric ward, the number of
admissions varied between 1 and 11, with a mean of 2.07 ± 1.94
admissions. The was no statistical correlation between the number of
admissions into the pediatric and adults’ wards (*P* = .106). The
Admissions/ Year of disease Coefficient varied between 0.13 and 3.66,
with a mean of 0.67 ± 0.49 (mdn 0.54).

The total number of admissions (both in pediatric and adults’ wards) was
5 or less for 73 subjects (63.48%). 42 subjects had more than 5
admissions in our hospital (36.52%). There was a significant statistical
correlation between the very early onset of psychotic symptoms (<13
years) and the number of admissions (*P* = .038). Of the subjects with
onset after the age of 13, 67.3% had 5 or less admissions, while 58.8%
with very early onset (<13 years old) had more than 5 admissions in the
hospital (Table `1 <#T1>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Crosstab age of onset and total number of admissions.

   ===================== ===================== ===== ====== ====== ==
   \                     >5 admissions         Total               
   ===================== ===================== ===== ====== ====== ==
   Debut.bf.13y          0                     Count 66     32     98
   % within debut.bf.13y 67.3%                 32.7% 100.0%        
   1                     Count                 7     10     17     
   \                     % within debut.bf.13y 41.2% 58.8%  100.0% 
   Total                 Count                 73    42     115    
   % within debut.bf.13y 63.5%                 36.5% 100.0%        
   ===================== ===================== ===== ====== ====== ==

Fifty-two of the subjects (45.22%), associated comorbidity of pervasive
disorder or mental retardation during childhood. Nineteen of the
patients had pervasive developmental disorder and 40 had intellectual
disabilities.

Regarding the diagnosis stability, we considered that all patients who,
after 18 years of age, met the criteria for schizophrenia, brief
psychotic disorder, severe depressive episode with psychotic symptoms,
or psychotic mania maintained a psychotic-spectrum diagnosis
first-expressed during childhood and adolescence. In the studied group,
from the initial 115 subjects, 93 of them (80.87%), maintained one of
the aforementioned diagnoses as adults. The patients who, as adults,
were diagnosed with either mania or depressive disorder without
psychotic elements or with a schizo-affective disorder were considered
to have shifted to the affective spectrum. Of the 22 subjects who did
not maintain a diagnosis of psychotic-related disorders, 8 met the
diagnosis criteria for an affective disorder, while 14 had other
diagnoses, including organic personality disorder, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, and intellectual disability (Fig. `2 <#F2>`__).

.. figure:: medi-101-e30288-g002
   :alt: Stability of psychotic and affective symptoms into adulthood.
   :name: F2

   Stability of psychotic and affective symptoms into adulthood.

Of the initial younger-than-18-years-old 115 psychotic patients included
in the study, 42 presented affective symptoms as well. Of the 42
subjects who presented affective symptoms during childhood, 30
(representing 71.43%) also presented affective symptoms into adulthood
(Fig. `2 <#F2>`__ and Table `2 <#T2>`__). At adult age, 41 patients were
identified to associate affective symptomatology, with 30 of them having
these elements identified since childhood (Table `2 <#T2>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Crosstab—presence of affective symptoms in childhood and into
      adulthood.

   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   |            | Affective  | Total      |        |       |        |
   |            | symptoms   |            |        |       |        |
   |            | in         |            |        |       |        |
   |            | adulthood  |            |        |       |        |
   +============+============+============+========+=======+========+
   | Affective  | 0          | Count      | 62     | 11    | 73     |
   | symptoms   |            |            |        |       |        |
   | in         |            |            |        |       |        |
   | childhood  |            |            |        |       |        |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   | % within   | 84.9%      | 15.1%      | 100.0% |       |        |
   | Affective  |            |            |        |       |        |
   | symptoms   |            |            |        |       |        |
   | in         |            |            |        |       |        |
   | childhood  |            |            |        |       |        |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   |            | 1          | Count      | 12     | 30    | 42     |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   | % within   | 28.6%      | 71.4%      | 100.0% |       |        |
   | Affective  |            |            |        |       |        |
   | symptoms   |            |            |        |       |        |
   | in         |            |            |        |       |        |
   | childhood  |            |            |        |       |        |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   | Total      |            | Count      | 74     | 41    | 115    |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   |            |            | % within   | 64.3%  | 35.7% | 100.0% |
   |            |            | Affective  |        |       |        |
   |            |            | symptoms   |        |       |        |
   |            |            | in         |        |       |        |
   |            |            | childhood  |        |       |        |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+

There was a significant statistical correlation between the presence of
affective symptoms into childhood and the presence of the respective
symptoms into adulthood (*P* < .001). 84.9% of the subject without
affective symptoms in childhood did not develop the presence of
affective symptoms into adulthood, while the diagnosis stability in
cases of present affective symptoms was 71.4%.

Regarding the diagnosis stability in relation to the age of onset, 82.4%
of cases with onset before 13 years old (VEOS) and 80.6% of cases with
onset after the age of 13 maintained their diagnosis. There was no
statistically significant difference between the 2 groups (*P* = .584)
(Table `3 <#T3>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Crosstable—age of onset/stability of diagnosis into adult age.

   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   |            | Adult      | Total      |        |       |        |
   |            | .psychosis |            |        |       |        |
   |            | .diagnosis |            |        |       |        |
   +============+============+============+========+=======+========+
   | Deb        | 0          | Count      | 3      | 14    | 17     |
   | ut.aft.13y |            |            |        |       |        |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   | % within   | 17.6%      | 82.4%      | 100.0% |       |        |
   | Deb        |            |            |        |       |        |
   | ut.aft.13y |            |            |        |       |        |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   |            | 1          | Count      | 19     | 79    | 98     |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   |            |            | % within   | 19.4%  | 80.6% | 100.0% |
   |            |            | Deb        |        |       |        |
   |            |            | ut.aft.13y |        |       |        |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   | Total      |            | Count      | 22     | 93    | 115    |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+
   |            |            | % within   | 19.1%  | 80.9% | 100.0% |
   |            |            | Deb        |        |       |        |
   |            |            | ut.aft.13y |        |       |        |
   +------------+------------+------------+--------+-------+--------+

Repeated admissions in the pediatric ward after the first psychosis
episode were considered relapses and were analyzed in relationship with
the diagnosis and associated factors. Ninety-eight of the participants
had up to 5 relapse episodes, and 17 had over 5 relapse episodes. There
are significant differences between patients who maintained their
diagnosis in terms of the number of relapse episodes taking into account
the existence of the diagnosis of autism (*P* < .05). Sixty-nine of the
participants maintained their diagnosis, had autism, and had a large
number of relapse episodes (Fig. `3 <#F3>`__ and Table `4 <#T4>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T4

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      *χ*\ ² tests.

   +-----------------------------------------------+-------+----+------+
   |                                               | Value | df | *P*  |
   +===============================================+=======+====+======+
   | *χ*\ ²\ :sub:`ASD, diagnosis maintained in    | 6.7   | 1  | .010 |
   | adults and number of relaps`                  |       |    |      |
   +-----------------------------------------------+-------+----+------+
   | *χ*\ ² :sub:`the presence of affective        | 2.69  | 1  | .101 |
   | elements in children, diagnosis maintained in |       |    |      |
   | adults`                                       |       |    |      |
   +-----------------------------------------------+-------+----+------+
   | *χ*\ ² :sub:`ID, diagnosis maintained in      | 0.083 | 1  | .643 |
   | adults and number of relaps`                  |       |    |      |
   +-----------------------------------------------+-------+----+------+
   | *χ*\ ² :sub:`the age of onset of the disorder | 43.1  | 10 | .001 |
   | and the number of relapses and the number of  |       |    |      |
   | hospitalizations in adult psychiatry`         |       |    |      |
   +-----------------------------------------------+-------+----+------+
   | *χ*\ ² :sub:`the family psychiatric history   | 18.17 | 10 | .040 |
   | and the number of relapses and the number of  |       |    |      |
   | hospitalizations in adult psychiatry`         |       |    |      |
   +-----------------------------------------------+-------+----+------+
   | *χ*\ ²\ :sub:`ASD, diagnosis maintained in    | 10.1  | 1  | .002 |
   | adults and age of onset`                      |       |    |      |
   +-----------------------------------------------+-------+----+------+

.. figure:: medi-101-e30288-g003
   :alt: Graphical representation of the relationship between ASD,
   diagnosis maintained in adults and number of relapses. ASD = autism
   spectrum disorder.
   :name: F3

   Graphical representation of the relationship between ASD, diagnosis
   maintained in adults and number of relapses. ASD = autism spectrum
   disorder.

There were identified significant differences between patients who
maintained their diagnosis in terms of the age of onset taking into
account the existence of the diagnosis of autism (*P* < .05). There is a
statistically significant relationship between the young age of onset of
the disorder and the number of relapses and the number of
hospitalizations in adult psychiatry, but also between the family
psychiatric history and the number of relapses and the number of
hospitalizations in adult psychiatry (*P* < .05) (Table `4 <#T4>`__).

Sixty-six subjects (57.40%), had a family history of psychiatric
disorders. There was a significant correlation between the presence of
family history and number of relapses (*P* = .040) (Table `3 <#T3>`__,
Fig. `4 <#F4>`__).

.. figure:: medi-101-e30288-g004
   :alt: Graphical representation of the relationship between the family
   psychiatric history and the number of relapses and the number of
   hospitalizations in adult psychiatry.
   :name: F4

   Graphical representation of the relationship between the family
   psychiatric history and the number of relapses and the number of
   hospitalizations in adult psychiatry.

4. Discussion
=============

This research evaluated the taxonomic changes of psychotic-related
disorder during adulthood, in a group of patients that were admitted
into the pediatric psychiatry ward between 2009 and 2018 and who were
subsequently admitted to the psychiatric services of the hospital after
turning 18. The first result that should be discussed is that a large
proportion of subjects from out-group presented onset of psychotic
symptoms after the age of 13 (early onset).

Onset age is an important prognosis factor, considering that in patients
with adolescent-onset psychosis, it is expected to notice a more severe
clinical and functional development than in adult-onset
cases.\ :sup:`[20,21]` A systematic review published in 2015
demonstrated that patients with EOS that presented multiple and severe
premorbid characteristics and prominent negative symptoms at initial
presentation present an unfavorable long-term course.\ :sup:`[(n.d.p)]`

According to data published by Rabinowitz et al a younger age at the
first hospitalization was associated with a higher probability of having
more than 1 hospitalization, a longer duration of the first
hospitalization, more readmissions, and more days of hospitalization per
year. Among patients being admitted for the first time before the age of
17, 82.5% had more than 1 relapse with readmission. Regardless of
gender, the relationship between age at first hospitalization and
readmission showed a linear trend. Thus, an early onset was correlated
with the severity and course of the disease as measured by relapses with
readmission and appears to have a prognostic value.\ :sup:`[(n.d.q)]`

85.22% of the subjects had 5 less than admissions into the pediatric
psychiatry ward after the onset, while 14.78% had more than 5 relapses.
93.04% of the subjects had 5 or less admissions into the adult
psychiatry wards, with only 8 subjects being admitted more than 5 times.
The total number of admissions (both in pediatric and adult wards) was 5
or less for 73 subjects, representing 63.48% of the total. Forty-two
subjects, representing 36.52% had more than 5 admissions in our
hospital. There was a significant statistical correlation between the
very early onset of psychotic symptoms (<13 years) and the number of
admissions (*P* = .038).

80.87% of our subjects maintained a diagnosis of psychotic spectrum
disorder into adulthood. The stability rate of over 80% regarding
psychotic symptoms is also cited in previous research papers. Several
researchers have studied the stability of the diagnosis of schizophrenia
with onset in childhood and adolescence. We note the research conducted
by Hollis (2000) who studied the stability after 11 years of the
diagnosis of schizophrenia with onset in childhood and adolescence (mean
age of onset 14 years) on a group of 51 patients. The stability rate
reported by Hollis was 80%.\ :sup:`[(n.d.h)]`

82.4% of cases with onset before 13 years old (VEOS) and 80.6% of cases
with onset after the age of 13 maintained their diagnosis. There was no
statistically significant difference between the 2 groups (*P* = .584).
Remschmidt et al (2006) followed the stability of the diagnosis of EOS
42 years after the first diagnosis. According to the data obtained by
them regarding the functioning of patients measured with GAS, only 16%
of patients had a favorable evolution, 24% (GAS score over 70) had a
moderately favorable evolution and 60% had an unfavorable evolution.
Remschmidt study demonstrates a stability rate of the diagnosis of
schizophrenia of 91% at 42 years after the first diagnosis. 9% of
patients were classified in other diagnostic categories, namely
depression or bipolar disorder.\ :sup:`[(n.d.j)]` The stability rate of
the diagnosis of schizophrenia was 100%, that of bipolar disorder was
79% and the diagnosis of major depression was 64% in a study reported by
Jarbin and Knorring (2003) emphasizing the continuity of diagnoses from
adolescence to adulthood.\ :sup:`[(n.d.r)]`

Chronicity of affective symptoms from childhood in a significant
proportion of patients of our study is in accordance with the theory of
overlap between psychotic and affective disorders, some authors
suggesting a possible genetic overlap with affective disorders such as
bipolar disorder or schizoaffective disorder.\ :sup:`[(n.d.s)–(n.d.t)]`

There are significant differences between patients who maintained their
diagnosis in terms of the number of relapse episodes taking into account
the existence of the diagnosis of autism (*P* < .05). Sixty-nine of the
participants maintained their diagnosis, had autism, and had a large
number of relapse episodes. These findings were in accordance to
literature data.\ :sup:`[(n.d.n)]` The outcome and prognosis of
psychotic disorders were correlated with the presence and severity of
developmental disorders, some studies suggesting that the presence and
severity of these developmental deficits may actually be a premorbid
phenotype for VEOS or EOS.\ :sup:`[(n.d.o),(n.d.u)]`

There is also a statistically significant relationship between the young
age of onset of the disorder and the number of relapses and the number
of hospitalizations in adult psychiatry, but also between the family
psychiatric history and the number of relapses and the number of
hospitalizations in adult psychiatry (*P* < .05).

Considering aspects related to the evolution of early-onset psychoses
and the stability of the diagnosis, the notion that symptoms may develop
during a continuous course of the disease has gained attention in recent
years, multiple genetic and environmental factors that could be
incriminated in this trajectory being investigated in these studies.
Among the identified factors, the family history of schizophrenia is the
strongest unique indicator of the individual risk of
schizophrenia.\ :sup:`[(n.d.v)]` In addition, the risk of clinically
diagnosed schizophrenia is associated with a family history of a wide
range of mental disorders, with several studies finding an increased
frequency of other mental health disorders in first-degree relatives of
patients with schizophrenia.

Schizophrenia is a debilitating and devastating disorder, especially if
it is diagnosed at an early age, during childhood or adolescence.
Despite the presence of several premorbid characteristics being
acknowledged, a viable premorbid phenotype is yet to be determined and
thus research on the physiopathology of this disorder is ongoing,
without a substantial systematically-proven target in sight. The
frequency and duration of psychotic episodes take a toll on the
neuropsychology, neurophysiology, and neural structure of the
individual, proving early and aggressive intervention as a key element
of effective care.\ :sup:`[(n.d.w)–(n.d.x)]` Once a schizophrenia
diagnosis is established, together with other comorbidities, clinicians
should approach this condition aggressively. The therapeutic
intervention should be a multi-disciplinary one, comprising of
psychopharmacological elements, as well as psychotherapy and early
psychosocial profiling and assistance, such as family support and
psychoeducation regarding the disorder and its course, especially during
the first years after diagnosis, as these elements have been proven to
improve the course of the disease.\ :sup:`[(n.d.y)]`

The study has several limitations. The first one relates to the
necessity to extend research on a group with a larger number of
patients. The study included patients with ages 19 to 28 and we consider
as future directions to investigate the dynamics of psychotic episodes
further this age. Another limitation relates to the lack of data
regarding presence/maintenance of the pharmacological/social
intervention before and after the first diagnosis. Another limitation
relates to selection of the patients exclusively from a hospital with
admittance profile/acute pathologies. It was not possible to monitor the
dynamics of patients who have been evaluated in outpatient services.

Future research should examine the outcome of patients older than 28
years old and replicate the results in patients that had in
childhood/adolescence psychotic episodes and continued psychiatric
follow-up in outpatient units.

5. Conclusions
==============

This paper and its results underline the importance of an accurate
diagnosis of early and VEOS, the need for early and multimodal
intervention, but also the need for long-term management of these
patients and continuing research regarding psychotic-related disorders
in children and adolescents.

Our research brings new information regarding the factors that can
influence the long-term course of EOS/VEOS, because even though is a
growing interest in identifying predictors in this category of patients,
there are still limited or contradictory evidence regarding these
individually characteristics that can shape the
maintenance/transformation of the psychotic picture.

The study results regarding the way that comorbidities, age of
diagnosis, the presence of family history of mental illnesses can
influence the outcome and intensity/frequency of relapses could help
identify patients at risk, intensify intervention methods and monitor
adherence to treatment to avoid relapses and hospitalization.

Author contributions
====================

**Conceptualization:** Florina Rad, Iuliana Dobrescu, Lucia-Emanuela
Andrei, Magdalena Efrim-Budisteanu.

**Data curation:** Florentina-Ionela Linca, Magdalena Efrim-Budisteanu,
Mihaela Stancu.

**Formal analysis:** Florentina-Ionela Linca, Ilinca Mihailescu, Mihaela
Stancu.

**Investigation:** Florentina-Ionela Linca.

**Methodology:** Florentina-Ionela Linca, Maria-Madalina Leti, Mihaela
Stancu.

**Project administration:** Florina Rad.

**Resources:** Florina Rad.

**Software:** Mihaela Stancu.

**Supervision:** Florina Rad.

**Validation:** Florina Rad, Magdalena Efrim-Budisteanu.

**Visualization:** Alexandra Buică, Iuliana Dobrescu, Lucia-Emanuela
Andrei.

**Writing – original draft:** Alexandra Buică, Lucia-Emanuela Andrei.

**Writing – review & editing:** Alexandra Buică, Ilinca Mihailescu.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R31

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R32

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R33

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R35

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R36

      n.d.y.
