=====================================================================
Metabolic syndrome in patients with schizophrenia: Why should we care
=====================================================================

Jichao Liu
Lijuan Fu*Correspondence: Lijuan Fu, Department of Psychiatry, Tianjin
Anding Hospital, No. 13, Liulin Road, Hexi District, Tianjin, China
(e-mail: 15143999559@163.com).
:Date: 2022-8-12

:Abstract:
   Metabolic syndrome (MS) is a serious disease in patients with
   schizophrenia; it is necessary to evaluate the characteristics and
   influencing factors of MS to provide reliable evidence for the
   management of schizophrenia.

   Patients with schizophrenia treated in our hospital from January 1,
   2018, to March 31, 2021, were selected. The characteristics and
   treatment details of MS and no-MS patients were evaluated. Pearson
   correlation analyses were applied for analyzing MS and related
   characteristics. Logistic regression analyses were conducted to
   evaluate the risk factors of MS in patients with schizophrenia.

   A total of 465 patients with schizophrenia were included, the
   incidence of MS in patients with schizophrenia was 18.06%. Pearson
   correlation analyses had found that age (r = 0.621), waist
   circumference (r = 0.744), body mass index (r = 0.691), diabetes (r =
   0.598), course of disease (r = 0.504), triglyceride (r = 0.532),
   high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (r = –0.518), low-density
   lipoprotein cholesterol (r = 0.447), and total cholesterol (r =
   0.523) were correlated with MS (all *P* < .05). Logistic regression
   analyses showed that age ≥55 years (odds ratio [OR]: 2.012, 95%
   confidence interval [CI]: 1.425–3.196), waist circumference ≥80 cm
   (OR: 1.944, 95% CI: 1.081–3.172), body mass index
   ≥24.5 kg/m\ :sup:`2` (OR: 2.451, 95% CI: 1.825–3.108), diabetes (OR:
   2.301, 95% CI: 1.944–2.881), course of disease ≥15 years (OR: 1.804,
   95% CI: 1.236–2.845), triglyceride ≥1.5 mmol/L (OR: 2.032, 95% CI:
   1.614–3.079), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ≤0.8 mmol/L (OR:
   1.226, 95% CI: 1.102–1.845), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol ≥2
   mmol/L (OR: 1.759, 95% CI: 1.236–1.987), and total cholesterol ≥4.5
   mmol/L (OR: 1.664, 95% CI: 1.422–1.852) were the risk factors of MS
   in patients with schizophrenia (all *P* < .05).

   MS is very common in patients with schizophrenia, which may be
   associated with many possible risk factors, and early interventions
   and nursing care targeted at those influencing factors are needed to
   improve the prognosis of schizophrenia.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
1. Introduction
===============

Schizophrenia is a brain disease characterized mainly by long-term
persistence or continuous aggravation of a variety of mental symptoms,
although there are cases with better prognosis which are
treatable.\ :sup:`[(n.d.a),(n.d.b)]` Compared with the general
population, patients with schizophrenia have a higher risk of all-cause
mortality, and a shortened life expectancy of about
20%.\ :sup:`[(n.d.c)]` Approximately 60% of death of patients with
mental illness has been observed to be related to cardiovascular
disease.\ :sup:`[(n.d.d)]` Therefore, the management of cardiovascular
disease is essential to the prognosis of schizophrenia.

With the development of economy and medical science, the prognosis of
patients with schizophrenia has undergone significant changes, such as
increased treatment and remission rates, improved compliance, reduced
serious adverse drug reactions, and improved quality of
life.\ :sup:`[(n.d.e)–(n.d.f)]` At the same time, due to the application
of antipsychotics, long-term hospitalization, or poor life and eating
habits, a metabolic syndrome (MS) that integrates various metabolic risk
factors such as obesity, abnormal glucose metabolism, dyslipidemia, and
hypertension has gradually become a prominent problem of schizophrenia
patients.\ :sup:`[(n.d.g),(n.d.h)]` In China, schizophrenia is generally
diagnosed with the tool of Chinese classification of mental disorder
(CCMD); it has been reported\ :sup:`[(n.d.i),(n.d.j)]` that CCMD have
similar diagnostic credibility of schizophrenia to an international
classification system such as the International Classification of
Diseases or Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. The
prevalence of schizophrenia in European and American countries is 30.14%
to 50.09%, and the prevalence in Asian countries is about 15.57% to
40.24%, which is 2 to 4 times higher than that of general
population.\ :sup:`[(n.d.k),(n.d.l)]` A previous study\ :sup:`[(n.d.m)]`
has pointed out that patients with schizophrenia have a higher
prevalence of MS compared with no schizophrenia controls (20.11% vs
5.45%). The related influencing factors of the high MS prevalence in
schizophrenia are still unclear. Therefore, this study analyzed the
clinical characteristics of patients with schizophrenia admitted to our
hospital to identify the predictors of MS in patients with schizophrenia
and to explore relevant countermeasures for the prevention and
treatments of MS.

2. Methods
==========

2.1. Ethical approval
---------------------

In this study, all methods were performed in accordance with the
Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology
statement. This present study obtained the ethical approval from the
ethics committee of Tianjin Anding Hospital with approval number:
180064. Written informed consents had been obtained from all the legal
guardians (the parents, the sons, or daughters) of included patients
with schizophrenia.

2.2. Patients
-------------

We selected patients with schizophrenia who were treated in our hospital
from January 1, 2018, to March 31, 2021, as the research population. The
inclusion criteria for patients were: age ≥18 years; disease diagnosis
met the Chinese classification of mental disorder (CCMD) version 3
diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia; patients accepted treatment in
our hospital; the guardians of included patients had been well informed
and signed the written informed consents. The patients were excluded if
the medical records were incomplete and the guardians or patients did
not agree to participate in this study.

2.3. MS diagnosis
-----------------

The diagnosis of MS adopts the diagnostic criteria recommended by the
International Diabetes Federation\ :sup:`[(n.d.n)]`: central obesity
(waist circumference ≥90 cm in men, ≥80 cm in women), combined with any
2 of the following 4 indicators: elevated triglycerides (TG >1. 7
mmol/L) or have received corresponding treatment; high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) is lowered (male HDL-C <0.9 mmol/L or
female <1.1 mmol/L); blood pressure is increased (systolic blood
pressure ≥140 or disystolic blood pressure ≥90 mm Hg); fasting blood
glucose is elevated (≥5.6 mmol/L).

2.4. Data collection
--------------------

Two investigators independent evaluated and collected the following data
and information: age, gender, waist circumference, body mass index
(BMI), alcohol drinking, smoking, hypertension, diabetes, drug
treatment, course of disease, and results of laboratory examinations
including TG, HDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), total
cholesterol, apolipoprotein A1, apolipoprotein B, C-reactive protein,
uric acid, creatinine, urea nitrogen, total protein, albumin, and
globulin.

2.5. Statistical analysis
-------------------------

We used SPSS 23.00 statistical software to process the collected data.
Measurement data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation;
independent sample *t* test was used for comparison between groups;
count data were expressed as percentage (%), and chi-square test was
used for comparison between groups. Pearson correlation analyses were
applied for analyzing MS and related characteristics. Logistic
regression analyses were conducted to evaluate the risk factors of MS in
patients with schizophrenia. In this study, a *P* value of <.05 was
considered as the difference between the groups was statistically
significant.

3. Results
==========

3.1. Characteristics of included patients
-----------------------------------------

A total of 465 patients with schizophrenia were included in this study,
of whom 84 patients had been diagnosed with MS; the incidence of MS in
patients with schizophrenia was 18.06%. As shown in Table `1 <#T1>`__,
there were significant differences in age, waist circumference, BMI,
diabetes, course of disease, TG, HDL-C, LDL-C, and total cholesterol
(all *P* < .05). There were no significant differences in the gender,
alcohol drinking, smoking, hypertension, drug treatment, apolipoprotein
A1, apolipoprotein B, C-reactive protein, uric acid, creatinine, urea
nitrogen, total protein, albumin, and globulin between MS and no-MS
groups (all *P* > .05).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      The characteristics of included patients.

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Variables   | MS group (n | No-MS group | t/          | *P* value |
   |             | = 84)       | (n = 381)   | χ\ :sup:`2` |           |
   +=============+=============+=============+=============+===========+
   | Age (y)     | 6           | 5           | 1.531       | 0.087     |
   |             | 1.24 ± 7.04 | 0.63 ± 8.27 |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Male/female | 45/39       | 204/177     | 2.206       | 0.124     |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Waist       | 86          | 75          | 7.227       | 0.009     |
   | ci          | .81 ± 20.14 | .44 ± 21.09 |             |           |
   | rcumference |             |             |             |           |
   | (cm)        |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | BMI         | 2           | 2           | 5.143       | 0.031     |
   | (kg/m       | 7.13 ± 1.29 | 2.62 ± 1.77 |             |           |
   | \ :sup:`2`) |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Alcohol     | 36 (42.86%) | 160         | 1.322       | 0.065     |
   | drinking    |             | (41.99%)    |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Smoking     | 29 (34.52%) | 128         | 1.425       | 0.103     |
   |             |             | (33.59%)    |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | H           | 55 (65.48%) | 211         | 1.813       | 0.052     |
   | ypertension |             | (55.38%)    |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Diabetes    | 62 (73.81%) | 90 (23.62%) | 1.885       | 0.011     |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Drug        |             |             | 1.063       | 0.089     |
   | treatment   |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   |  Clozapine  | 10 (11.90%) | 62 (16.27%) |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   |  Chl        | 24 (28.57%) | 94 (24.67%) |             |           |
   | orpromazine |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   |  Olanzapine | 10 (11.90%) | 48 (12.59%) |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   |             | 29 (34.52%) | 126         |             |           |
   | Risperidone |             | (33.07%)    |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   |  Quetiapine | 6 (7.14%)   | 26 (6.82%)  |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   |  Other      | 5 (5.95%)   | 25 (6.56%)  |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Course of   | 2           | 1           | 3.024       | 0.005     |
   | disease (y) | 1.56 ± 5.31 | 2.01 ± 6.18 |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | T           | 2.19 ± 1.14 | 1.12 ± 0.87 | 1.146       | 0.013     |
   | riglyceride |             |             |             |           |
   | (mmol/L)    |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | HDL-C       | 0.62 ± 0.24 | 1.04 ± 0.88 | 1.232       | 0.037     |
   | (mmol/L)    |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | LDL-C       | 2.68 ± 1.01 | 1.45 ± 0.96 | 1.055       | 0.016     |
   | (mmol/L)    |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Total       | 4.99 ± 1.76 | 4.13 ± 1.27 | 2.384       | 0.047     |
   | cholesterol |             |             |             |           |
   | (mmol/L)    |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Apo         | 0.98 ± 0.33 | 0.95 ± 0.29 | 1.131       | 0.112     |
   | lipoprotein |             |             |             |           |
   | A1 (g/L)    |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Apo         | 0.78 ± 0.27 | 0.61 ± 0.24 | 1.659       | 0.042     |
   | lipoprotein |             |             |             |           |
   | B (g/L)     |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | C-reactive  | 3.52 ± 2.09 | 3.24 ± 2.11 | 1.883       | 0.057     |
   | protein     |             |             |             |           |
   | (mg/L)      |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Uric acid   | 4.31 ± 1.76 | 4.28 ± 1.66 | 2.005       | 0.108     |
   | (μmol/L)    |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Creatinine  | 74          | 72          | 16.429      | 0.156     |
   | (μmol/L)    | .97 ± 21.04 | .78 ± 19.41 |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Urea        | 4.31 ± 1.68 | 4.32 ± 1.83 | 2.231       | 0.084     |
   | nitrogen    |             |             |             |           |
   | (mmol/L)    |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Total       | 78          | 76          | 9.114       | 0.055     |
   | protein     | .11 ± 27.43 | .38 ± 22.49 |             |           |
   | (g/L)       |             |             |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Albumin     | 4           | 4           | 11.286      | 0.112     |
   | (g/L)       | 5.06 ± 8.13 | 4.12 ± 9.34 |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Globulin    | 26          | 26          | 7.129       | 0.081     |
   | (g/L)       | .15 ± 11.27 | .35 ± 13.09 |             |           |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-----------+

3.2. Correlation of MS and related characteristics
--------------------------------------------------

As indicated in Table `2 <#T2>`__, Pearson correlation analyses had
found that age (r = 0.621), waist circumference (r = 0.744), BMI (r =
0.691), diabetes (r = 0.598), course of disease (r = 0.504), TG (r =
0.532), HDL-C (r = –0.518), LDL-C (r = 0.447), and total cholesterol (r
= 0.523) were correlated with MS (all *P* < .05).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Pearson correlation analysis of MS and related characteristics.

   ========================== ====== =========
   Variables                  r      *P* value
   ========================== ====== =========
   Age (y)                    0.621  .008
   Gender                     0.019  .125
   Waist circumference (cm)   0.744  .013
   BMI (kg/m\ :sup:`2`)       0.691  .022
   Alcohol drinking           0.115  .081
   Smoking                    0.074  .101
   Hypertension               0.105  .072
   Diabetes                   0.598  .029
   Drug treatment             0.078  .107
   Course of disease (y)      0.504  .042
   Triglyceride (mmol/L)      0.532  .015
   HDL-C (mmol/L)             -0.518 .032
   LDL-C (mmol/L)             0.447  .018
   Total cholesterol (mmol/L) 0.523  .025
   Apolipoprotein A1 (g/L)    0.114  .109
   Apolipoprotein B (g/L)     0.157  .087
   C-reactive protein (mg/L)  0.092  .101
   Uric acid (μmol/L)         0.178  .113
   Creatinine (μmol/L)        0.024  .125
   Urea nitrogen (mmol/L)     0.118  .099
   Total protein (g/L)        0.093  .106
   Albumin (g/L)              0.044  .158
   Globulin (g/L)             0.106  .074
   ========================== ====== =========

3.3. Risk factors of MS
-----------------------

The variable assignments of multivariate logistic regression are
presented in Table `3 <#T3>`__. Logistic regression analyses showed that
age ≥55 years (OR: 2.012, 95% CI: 1.425–3.196), waist circumference
≥80 cm (OR: 1.944, 95% CI: 1.081–3.172), BMI ≥24.5 kg/m\ :sup:`2` (OR:
2.451, 95% CI: 1.825–3.108), diabetes (OR: 2.301, 95% CI: 1.944–2.881),
course of disease ≥15 years (OR: 1.804, 95% CI: 1.236–2.845), TG ≥1.5
mmol/L (OR: 2.032, 95% CI: 1.614–3.079), HDL-C ≤ 0.8 mmol/L (OR: 1.226,
95% CI: 1.102–1.845), LDL-C ≥2 mmol/L (OR: 1.759, 95% CI: 1.236–1.987),
and total cholesterol ≥4.5 mmol/L (OR: 1.664, 95% CI: 1.422–1.852) were
the risk factors of MS in patients with schizophrenia (all *P* < .05).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      The variable assignments of multivariate logistic regression.

   ========================== =========== ==================
   Factors                    Variables   Assignment
   ========================== =========== ==================
   MS                         Y           yes = 1, no = 2
   Age (y)                    X\ :sub:`1` ≥55 = 1, <55 = 2
   Waist circumference (cm)   X\ :sub:`2` ≥90 = 1, <90 = 2
   BMI (kg/m\ :sup:`2`)       X\ :sub:`3` ≥26 = 1, <26 = 2
   Diabetes                   X\ :sub:`4` Yes = 1, no = 2
   Course of disease (y)      X\ :sub:`5` ≥15 = 1, <15 = 2
   Triglyceride (mmol/L)      X\ :sub:`6` ≥1.5 = 1, 1.5 = 2
   HDL-C (mmol/L)             X\ :sub:`7` ≤0.8 = 1, >0.8 = 2
   LDL-C (mmol/L)             X\ :sub:`8` ≥2 = 1, <1 = 2
   Total cholesterol (mmol/L) X\ :sub:`9` ≥4.5 = 1, <4.5 = 2
   ========================== =========== ==================

4. Discussions
==============

The problem of MS associated with mental illness especially
schizophrenia is receiving more and more attention from researchers and
clinicians. Different countries or organizations have proposed MS
diagnostic standards, and the degree of leniency and strictness of these
standards varies greatly.\ :sup:`[(n.d.o)]` Therefore, the prevalence of
MS in patients with schizophrenia varies greatly in different countries
and regions. Several studies\ :sup:`[(n.d.p)–(n.d.q)]` have shown that
the prevalence of MS in schizophrenia is higher than that of the general
population. This study shows that the prevalence of MS in schizophrenia
is 18.06%, which is significantly >14.10% of the general population in
Shanghai. Besides, we have found that age, waist circumference, BMI,
diabetes, course of disease, TG, HDL-C, LDL-C, and total cholesterol are
correlated with MS; early alertness and more attention are needed for
those patients.

The metabolic disorders of schizophrenia are multifaceted, including
disorders of sugar, lipid, and protein metabolism.\ :sup:`[(n.d.r)]`
Previous studies\ :sup:`[(n.d.s)–(n.d.t)]` have found that the abnormal
rates of waist circumference and HDL-C in patients with schizophrenia
are 70% and 61%, respectively, and those with abnormalities in 1 to 4
indicators are 20%, 28%, 34%, and 10%, respectively. The prevalence of
MS in the schizophrenia group (28.4%) is higher than that of no
schizophrenia group (3.3%), specifically the prevalence of female
patients (39.8%) is higher than that of male patients (22.4%), and the
prevalence of patients over the age of 39 years (30.9.3%) is higher than
that of patients with age <39 years (22.1%).\ :sup:`[(n.d.u)]` Sugawara
et al\ :sup:`[(n.d.v)]` report on the MS prevalence of Japanese
schizophrenia patients (27.5%), which is lower than that reported in the
United States and Canada (43% and 46%).\ :sup:`[(n.d.w),(n.d.x)]` These
results suggest that metabolic abnormalities in patients with
schizophrenia are very common.\ :sup:`[(n.d.y)]` When 1 or 2 indicators
are abnormal, attention should be paid to the timely adjustment of the
treatment plan or early preventive interventions.

The prevalence of MS in patients with schizophrenia is significantly
higher than that of the general population.\ :sup:`[(n.d.z)]` It has
been reported that in addition to general risk factors such as advanced
age, heredity, and bad living habits, patients with schizophrenia also
have risk factors closely related to the disease, such as drugs
use.\ :sup:`[(n.d.aa)]` This study has found that dyslipidemia
(increased TG and decreased HDL-C), obesity (especially central
obesity), and increased blood sugar are the most important risk factors.
However, the mechanism of these risk factors leading to MS is currently
not fully understood. Many studies\ :sup:`[(n.d.ab),(n.d.ac)]` suggest
that changes in dopamine and serotonin neurotransmitters and receptors
caused by schizophrenia or psychotropic drugs and changes in the
expression levels of certain genes may be the underlying pathogenesis.
Although the mechanism of these risk factors leading to MS is still
unclear, understanding those risk factors has important clinical
significance for the prevention and treatment of MS. The main drugs used
in the schizophrenia patients in this study were the chlorpromazine,
olanzapine, and risperidone. Such antipsychotic drugs have a very wide
range of applications in psychiatry. They can effectively block D2
receptors and 5-HT2A and have ideal antihallucination and antidelusional
effects. However, some patients are at risk of developing MS after
taking medication, and the current clinical mechanism for causing MS is
still inconclusive, which may be related to the blockade effects of
monoamine neurotransmitters such as histamine, norepinephrine, M
receptors, and 5-HT.\ :sup:`[(n.d.ad)–(n.d.ae)]` After the monoamine
neurotransmitter is blocked, the patient’s appetite is enhanced, and it
also has a sedative effect, which can increase the patient’s food
intake, reduce the amount of exercise, and increase the accumulated
energy in the body. It is easy to induce symptoms such as insulin
resistance and increased BMI, leading to abnormal glucose and lipid
metabolism in patients with schizophrenia. A previous
study\ :sup:`[(n.d.af)]` has pointed out that about 50% of patients who
take antipsychotic drugs for 6 months may have symptoms such as weight
gain or obesity, which will have a certain impact on their treatment
compliance, so it is difficult to ensure the stability of mental illness
treatment. Therefore, the impact of clinical drug use on MS is worthy of
further research in the future.

Previous research results\ :sup:`[(n.d.ag),(n.d.ah)]` have shown that
drug intervention can alleviate patients’ metabolic problems, but due to
drug side effects, nondrug interventions such as behavioral and
nutritional therapy may be the first choice for intervention.
Studies\ :sup:`[(n.d.ai)–(n.d.aj)]` have shown that exercise, diet, and
education interventions can help reduce and control weight gain.
Lifestyle interventions are safer and more effective in reducing or
maintaining weight and can improve the quality of life.
Studies\ :sup:`[(n.d.ak)–(n.d.al)]` have found that moderate-intensity
exercise may be beneficial to improve the positive and negative symptoms
and cognitive function of patients with schizophrenia and reduce the
risk factors of various common health problems, including MS and tobacco
and substance use. Although studies\ :sup:`[(n.d.am),(n.d.an)]` have
shown that doctors’ weight loss recommendations will generally affect
patients’ weight loss behavior and actual weight loss, the doctor’s
recommendations may not be strong enough to affect weight and metabolic
abnormalities. Besides, the cognitive dysfunction of patients with
psychiatric disorders limits their understanding of the basic advice
provided by psychiatrists. Therefore, future studies on the effects and
safety of MS intervention and nursing care are needed in patients with
schizophrenia.

There are some deficiencies in this study worth considering. First, this
study is a single-center observational study with limited sample size.
Second, the relevant influencing factors included in this study are
limited, and there may be other relevant MS influencing factors that we
did not include in the analysis. The risk factors of MS need to be
further confirmed by studies with a wider range and larger sample size.
Furthermore, more studies are warranted to investigate the preventative
and coping measures of MS in patients with schizophrenia, to improve the
prognosis of patients with schizophrenia.

5. Conclusions
==============

In summary, MS is very common in patients with schizophrenia. For
schizophrenia patients with age ≥55 years, waist circumference ≥80 cm,
BMI ≥24.5 kg/m\ :sup:`2`, diabetes, course of disease ≥15 years, TG ≥1.5
mmol/L, HDL-C ≤0.8 mmol/L, LDL-C ≥2 mmol/L, and total cholesterol ≥4.5
mmol/L, they may have higher risks of MS; early alertness and special
attention are needed for patients with those factors to reduce the MS in
patients with schizophrenia.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T4

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Logistic regression analysis on the risk factors of MS.

   ============================= ===== ===== ===== =========== =========
   Variables                     β     Wald  OR    95% CI      *P* value
   ============================= ===== ===== ===== =========== =========
   Age ≥55 y                     0.118 0.124 2.012 1.425–3.196 .013
   Waist circumference ≥80 cm    0.125 0.101 1.944 1.081–3.172 .034
   BMI ≥24.5 kg/m\ :sup:`2`      0.103 0.115 2.451 1.825–3.108 .024
   Diabetes                      0.114 0.127 2.301 1.944–2.881 .017
   Course of disease ≥15 y       0.187 0.129 1.804 1.236–2.845 .047
   Triglyceride ≥1.5 mmol/L      0.104 0.164 2.032 1.614–3.079 .011
   HDL-C ≤0.8 mmol/L             0.126 0.142 1.226 1.102–1.845 .028
   LDL-C ≥2 mmol/L               0.115 0.158 1.759 1.236–1.987 .033
   Total cholesterol ≥4.5 mmol/L 0.121 0.173 1.664 1.422–1.852 .016
   ============================= ===== ===== ===== =========== =========

Author contributions
====================

Lijuan Fu designed research, wrote the first draft of article, and had
primary responsibility for final content. Jichao Liu and Lijuan Fu
conducted research and analyzed data. All authors read and approved the
final article.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R29

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R31

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R32

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R33

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R35

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R36

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R37

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R38

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R39

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R41

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R42

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R44

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R45

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R46

      n.d.an.
