=======================================================================================================================================================================================
A visual step-by-step guide for clinicians to use video consultations in mental health services: NHS examples of real-time practice in times of normal and pandemic healthcare delivery
=======================================================================================================================================================================================

Gemma Johns
Jacinta Tan
Anna Burhouse
Mike Ogonovsky
Catrin Rees
Alka Ahuja

:Correspondence: Gemma Johns (gemma.johns3@wales.nhs.uk)

:date: 2020-12

:Abstract:
   Despite the increasingly widespread use of video consultations, there
   are very few documented descriptions of how to set up and implement
   video consultations in real-time practice. This step-by-step guide
   will describe the set-up process based on the authors’ experience of
   two real-time National Health Service (NHS) examples: a single health
   board use (delivered in normal time), and an All-Wales National Video
   Consultation Service roll-out (delivered during an emergency pandemic
   as part of the COVID-19 response). This paper provides a simple
   visual step-by-step guide for using telepsychiatry via the remote use
   of video consultations in mental health services, and outlines the
   mandatory steps to achieving a safe, successful and sustainable use
   of video consultations in the NHS by ensuring that video
   consultations fit into existing and new NHS workflow systems and
   adhere to legal and ethical guidelines.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

There is a large and growing evidence base of published data that
demonstrates an overall consensus of suitability, acceptability and
satisfaction regarding the use of digital
technology,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)–(n.d.b)` particularly video consultations for
the purpose of remote assessments and appointments in mental health,
known as ‘telepsychiatry’.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)–(n.d.d)` Telepsychiatry is
widely reported to be at least as efficient and effective as traditional
face-to-face care, providing improved clinical and quality of life
outcomes across a wide range of population groups and
settings.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)–(n.d.e)` Studies have compared video
consultations with standard in-person care and concluded that video
consultations might be superior to in-person consultations for some
forms of treatment and population groups.\ :sup:`(n.d.f),(n.d.c)` The
evidence base for telepsychiatry remains strong and consistent across
mental health studies for both adult and child
services.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)–(n.d.e)` It is commonly argued that mental
health and psychiatry are particularly well suited to video
consultations and that the psychiatric interaction translates
exceptionally well to the technological world. This is because many
treatments are based on interpersonal ‘talking therapies’ and medication
management, which typically do not require any other medical devices for
clinical use, perhaps in contrast to other specialties.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`
Video consultations have the potential to offer many additional benefits
to patients, families and clinicians besides treatment. They are
reported to improve and widen patient and family access to healthcare,
support co-production and self-management, increase efficiency and
improve clinical outcomes, as well as significantly reducing clinical
time and patient and family travel.\ :sup:`(n.d.f),(n.d.h),(n.d.i)`

.. _sec1:

Local evidence to support this step-by-step guide
=================================================

.. _sec1-1:

The CWTCH quality improvement project
-------------------------------------

In 2019, the Health Foundation\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` funded Aneurin Bevan
University Health Board (ABUHB) for 1 year to establish a telepsychiatry
programme with the objective of providing mental health appointments to
children and adolescents within Gwent mental health services. This ABUHB
programme is called Connecting with Telehealth to Children in Hospital
and Healthcare (CWTCH). It is a National Health Service (NHS) quality
improvement project that provides faster and more efficient appointments
in child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) using a
communication platform called Attend Anywhere
(https://www.attendanywhere.com). The programme tested the suitability
and acceptability of telepsychiatry and measured satisfaction across a
wide range of settings and uses, including paediatric wards for
emergency assessments, out-patient appointments, medication reviews,
autism assessments, school postvention clinics for pupil suicides,
virtual groups and more. It demonstrated that telepsychiatry in CAMHS is
a highly suitable adjunct to routine ways of working; once people became
familiar with this way of holding appointments, it was rated as
acceptable and satisfactory by patients, families and
clinicians.\ :sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.l)`

.. _sec1-2:

Rebranding of CWTCH and Royal College of Psychiatry endorsement
---------------------------------------------------------------

CWTCH has now been rebranded and is called CWTCH Cymru. It has received
local and national recognition for its success and is now considered an
exemplar of good practice across Wales. CWTCH Cymru and its guiding
principles\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` have also been endorsed by the Welsh Royal
College of Psychiatrists.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`

.. _sec1-3:

Partnership and development of the national roll-out of video consultations
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 emergency, CWTCH Cymru went
into partnership with Technology Enabled Care (TEC;
https://digitalhealth.wales/tec-cymru) and the Welsh Government to form
a National Video Consultation Service.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` This service is
currently rapidly scaling up the routine use of video consultations
across Wales, using the Attend Anywhere communication platform, to all
appropriate primary, secondary and community care services, including
mental healthcare for all ages. The National Video Consultation Service
has a fully resourced website, with helpful guides, videos and toolkits,
which can be accessed and used in addition to this
paper.\ :sup:`(n.d.n),(n.d.o)`

.. _sec1-4:

Video consultation experience and lessons learned
-------------------------------------------------

The experience gained from working on two very different sized projects
(small versus large scale) and in two very different contexts (normal
versus pandemic) has demonstrated that regardless of the scale and rate
of adoption, there are distinct challenges in introducing video
consultations as a new way of working in the NHS for clinicians.
Clinician acceptance and use of video as an accepted alternative to
established ways of working were found to be rate-limiting factors with
respect to adoption and spread. This challenge is defined by the authors
as ‘clinician need versus clinical need’. This definition suggests that
video consultations are more likely to be adopted and accepted as a
feasible approach to healthcare delivery when the ‘need’ for this way of
working is defined and accepted by the clinician or service, compared
with when they are defined and accepted as a clinical need. In other
words, video consultations are generally more successful and sustainable
when a clinician or service perceives the need themselves and requests
the service, rather when they are motivated by the projection of need or
want from their patient population. It is therefore essential to
establish and define this ‘need’ within a service, seeing
clinician/service ‘pull’ for video consultation as an essential
criterion for successful adoption. When the perceived need for video
consultations by clinicians and services increased in the pandemic
context, there was greater willingness to test new ways of working and
overcome perceived or internal barriers to change. This has significant
implications for how video consultations should be introduced into
services and organisations, highlighting the need to focus on both the
technical and the cultural aspects of the adoption process. These
findings mirror the work of Greenhalgh et al and their ‘NASSS’
(non-adoption, abandonment and barriers to spread, scale-up and
sustainability) framework.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)`

.. _sec2:

Rationale and objectives
========================

Despite the increasingly widespread use of video consultations, there
are very few visual and fully documented descriptions of how to set up
and implement such consultations in real-time practice with specific
attention to features such as fitting into existing systems and the
legal and ethical requirements of video consultations. This step-by-step
guide will describe the process based on two examples: a single health
board project (delivered in normal time), and an All-Wales National
Video Consultation service roll-out (delivered during the COVID-19
pandemic emergency).

.. _sec3:

Methods
=======

This paper was designed to be a simple and visual step-by-step guide
describing how to set up and use video consultations for mental health
services, including a range of ‘technical’ skills and knowledge that
clinicians and services may find helpful for the adoption of video
consultations. This paper will describe the various steps that have been
taken by the authors in their real-time experience to initiate and
implement a new video consultation programme in an existing NHS systems.
The visuals used on the TEC website and in this paper are adaptations
and syntheses of work from other recent video consultation reports in
the UK.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)–(n.d.r)` Note that the visual diagrams and
infographics used in this paper are examples based on the communication
platform Attend Anywhere (https://www.attendanywhere.com); therefore,
descriptions and instructions may differ slightly depending on the type
of platform used in your health service.

Ethical approval was obtained from all seven Welsh research and
development departments. Consent was obtained from all participants in
both CWTCH and the National Video Consulting Service.

.. _sec4:

Results
=======

.. _sec4-1:

Step-by-step guide
------------------

This section of the paper will provide a step-by-step guide that is
divided up into three distinct sections. The first section demonstrates
how to set up video consultations in an existing healthcare workflow.
The second section provides the appropriate steps regarding ethical and
legal principles. The third section discusses how to use video
consultations in a secondary care health service, with the help of an
infographic diagram.

.. _sec5:

A guide to setting up video consultations in existing systems
=============================================================

.. _sec5-1:

Managing the video consultation service
---------------------------------------

Within your healthcare service, you will need to identify a lead
clinician who will decide how best to set up, use and manage the video
consultations (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). This person will be the ‘point of
call’ for your service and its use of video consultations. Fig.
1Workflow visual guide. Diagram from the Welsh National Video
Consultation Service Toolkit.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`

.. _sec5-2:

Setting clinical criteria
-------------------------

Your healthcare service will need to define and agree on clinical
criteria for video consultations and the suitability and appropriateness
of appointment types. Following this agreement, a template for triage or
suitability would need to be developed and provided to the person(s) in
charge of making video appointments, e.g. a receptionist.

.. _sec5-3:

Making and managing appointments:
---------------------------------

Your service will need to identify how video consultations will be made,
and who will make and deliver these appointments. Your service will also
need to identify how appointment links and information will be sent to
patients – for example, via a letter, verbally or via an SMS text or
email – and how appointment slots will be offered, documented and given
to the delivering clinician. In addition, your service will need to
decide how the video consultation will be managed, how clinical
templates and coding will be used for video consultations, and how these
will be matched to existing systems. Your service will need to have a
contingency plan for possible scenarios or problems (for both technical
and clinical possibilities). Finally, your service will need to consider
how clinical information is later documented, for example, similarly to
the hand-written notes used in usual practice.

.. _sec5-4:

Setting up the clinical space
-----------------------------

Your health service will need to identify how video consultations will
be set up. For example, you will need to think about factors such as the
room layout, e.g. whether it is well-lit and well-positioned,
confidentiality issues and clinical appropriateness. More about this can
be found in the following sections.

.. _sec5-5:

Additional considerations
-------------------------

Your service will need to decide how to deal with providing additional
information; for instance, if the picture definition obtained via a
video consultation is not good enough to allow accurate visualisation
and identification of skin lesions, your service needs to decide how to
obtain this additional information. It is important that patients are
able to receive patient information leaflets as they would in a standard
consultation. Your service needs to decide the best mechanism for
communicating this information to them. For example, you could email
them. Your service would also need to consider additional plans for
in-person contact, such as for collection of prescriptions.

.. _sec6:

A guide to risk, safeguarding and ethical guidelines
====================================================

Key considerations in the use of video consultations include legal and
ethical issues, such as defining and documenting patient suitability and
the role of the clinician, risk assessments and contingency planning,
privacy, confidentiality, security and consent (`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__).
Appropriate strategies covering ethical issues will be necessary, such
as taking informed consent and ensuring confidentiality and security
while using technology, and procedures for conducting risk assessments.
Fig. 2Legal and ethical visual guide. Diagram from the Welsh National
Video Consultation Service Toolkit.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`\ VC, video
consultation.

.. _sec6-1:

Define and document clinical suitability and appropriateness
------------------------------------------------------------

Your healthcare service will need to define and agree to clinical
criteria for video consultations and the suitability and appropriateness
of appointment types. This defining and documentation process would need
to include the roles and responsibilities of clinical staff.

.. _sec6-2:

Risk, safeguarding and ethical considerations
---------------------------------------------

All types of mental health services using video consultations,
regardless of their level of risk, should consider conducting risk
assessments, and abide by safeguarding principles and ethical
guidelines.

To start thinking about the population your service will deliver a video
consultation to, and the risk exposure that may arise, it is advised to
conduct an initial ‘process mapping’ of your service. Process mapping
will help your team to define video consultations in the context of your
service, understand who is responsible for what and where, and to flag
up any potential concerns or risk exposures. Process mapping and risk
assessment will help your service to start thinking about and
understanding what types of risks may arise in specific situations, and
possibly how to avoid them.

You would need to think about the following. •Would using video
consultations instead of in-person care increase risk in any way?•If so,
what are these risks, and can they be resolved?•Is the risk of using
video consultations greater than not seeing the patient at all?•Would
these risks be the same if the service was delivered in person?•What
other types of risks might there be – such as the setting, environment
and clinical outcome?

On completion of process mapping and initial risk assessments, the next
step would be to start thinking about – and formally agreeing to and
documenting – clear and concise safeguarding contingency plans for your
video consultation service. This would involve a ‘what to do’ plan in
the event of an emergency or concern arising during a virtual
appointment. It is advised to list a wide range of scenarios, ranging
from low- to high-risk possibilities. Make it as specific to your
service as possible, to make potential scenarios relatable to your
staff. When developing the contingency plan, think about who is best
suited to develop it and who will be following it, and consider a wide
range of opinions and possibilities. Develop a list of all possible
scenarios and all levels of risk exposure, and make them specific,
applicable and relatable to your service.

.. _sec6-3:

Ethical guidelines
------------------

Video consultations, like any other form of healthcare delivery, will
need to be treated exactly the same way as in-person care with regards
to ethical guidelines and procedures. However, owing to the obvious
remoteness of a virtual appointment, there are additional ethical
considerations which need to be considered and applied, such as
confidentiality, privacy and security issues.

It is essential that a video consultation service replicates an
in-person appointment or assessment as much as possible. For example,
the setting of an appointment room would ideally need to be the same as
an in-person appointment room, e.g. if your service would normally use a
private room for an in-person appointment, then a virtual appointment
would also need this. It is also important to ensure that the platform
used for video consultations is safe and secure, and that it meets your
existing health systems standards, including software encryption. Many
popular video chat platforms such as FaceTime and WhatsApp are not
compliant with healthcare standards; therefore, you would need to seek
out a safe and secure platform such as Attend Anywhere
(https://www.attendanywhere.com).

Informed consent is the process of seeking agreement from a person
before taking a course of action that requires consent. Informed consent
is required from any person who is receiving a video consultation. There
are two types of consent. •Implied consent (or tacit consent), which is
signalled by the behaviour of an informed person in agreement. This type
of consent is typically used in the delivery of ‘in-person’
healthcare.•Explicit consent is when a person actively agrees, either
verbally or in writing. This type of consent is highly recommended for
video consultations, as signalled (implied) behaviour may be more
difficult to capture remotely.

To obtain consent, the person giving it would need to be considered to
fully understand the process and to have full capacity to do so. A
person with incapacity, such as a child or vulnerable adult, may not be
able to give informed consent; therefore, parental or guardian consent
(known as assent) would be required.

.. _sec7:

A guide to conducting the video consultation
============================================

The final step of this guide describes how to use video consultations in
a secondary healthcare service (`Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__). Fig. 3How to use
video consultations visual guide. Diagram from the Welsh National Video
Consultation Service Toolkit.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`

.. _sec7-1:

Define and document clinical suitability and appropriateness
------------------------------------------------------------

As shown in the above `Figs 1 <#fig01>`__ and `2 <#fig02>`__, your
healthcare service will need to define and agree to clinical criteria
and patient suitability for video consultations. This is considered the
most important step for video consultations.

.. _sec7-2:

Contact the patient and send instructions and video call link
-------------------------------------------------------------

Depending on the type of communication platform (e.g. Attend Anywhere)
you will be using, the patient will need to be offered the video
appointment; they will then need to agree to it, after which they will
need to be sent the patient information sheet and URL link to access the
video call.

.. _sec7-3:

Set up video call and start consultation
----------------------------------------

Again, depending on the type of communication platform you will be
using, there will need to be clear steps set out to determine how best
to use video consultations in your service.

.. _sec7-4:

Evaluation component
--------------------

To ensure that the use of video consultations is properly integrated
into your health service, it is important to capture feedback on use,
acceptability, suitability and satisfaction. It is therefore advisable
to establish an evaluation framework to capture this. An example of this
may include attaching a basic satisfaction survey to the end of the
video consultation, asking a few ‘how did it go’ questions.

For additional information, please see the TEC website
(https://digitalhealth.wales/tec-cymru), which provides a detailed
step-by-step guide on setting up a video consultation (`Fig.
4 <#fig04>`__), healthcare-specific toolkits, including examples of
information sheets, suggested scripting for clinicians, technical guides
to the Attend Anywhere communication platform and much more. Fig.
4Infographic visual guide: video consultations in secondary care.
Diagram from the Welsh National Video Consultation Service
Toolkit.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`

.. _sec8:

Conclusions
===========

This paper outlines a simple visual step-by-step guide to help
clinicians to set up and use video consultations in mental health
services. This resource has been used to support clinicians to gain the
technical skills and knowledge required to routinely use video
consultations in practice. In addition, we found that there is an
important ‘cultural’ aspect to successful adoption of video
consultations, where the rate-limiting factor for successful adoption is
the ‘need’ and ‘pull’ for this way of working to be defined and accepted
by the clinician or ser vice.

When the perceived need for video consultations by clinicians and
services increased in the pandemic context, there was greater
willingness to test new ways of working and overcome perceived or
internal barriers to change. It will be interesting to see whether
having made the change to this new way working in the pandemic context,
clinicians and services actively choose to maintain these newly gained
technical skills – and also whether patients and carers, having
experienced video consultations for the first time, increase their
demand for this to become a new ‘routine’ way of working. As use of
video consultations increases, we will also undoubtedly learn how to
titrate this offer according to need, circumstance and demographics, and
discover which healthcare treatments can best be deployed or augmented
through the use of video consultations.

This paper provides a guide to using video consultations in the NHS,
based on personal experience of the authors and feedback from their
evaluation. However, it is still early days for video consultations in
Wales, and more research is needed to understand more about their use,
particularly what can and can't be done using video consultation, as
this is still unspeculative and unproven.

**Gemma Johns** is Research & Evaluation Lead of CWTCH and TEC Cymru
ABUHB, Wales, UK. Gemma worked on both the CWTCH and National Video
Consultation project and led the evaluation for both. **Jacinta Tan** is
a Child and Adolescent Mental Health Consultant Psychiatrist and Project
Manager of CWTCH, ABUHB. **Anna Burhouse** is the Health Foundation QI
Adviser for CWTCH and supported the evaluation of the National VC
programme, Northumbria Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust. **Mike
Ogonovsky** is Assistant Director of Informatics ABUHB and Senior
Responsible Officer of TEC Cymru. **Catrin Rees** is at Life Sciences
Hub, Welsh Government, and is a Graphics & Web Designer for TEC Cymru.
**Alka Ahuja** is a Child and Adolescent Mental Health Consultant
Psychiatrist, Clinical Lead for TEC Cymru, Chief Investigator for CWTCH.

G.J. contributed to the main write up and development of the paper; she
developed the manuscript draft, designed the template of the visual and
infographics, and was involved in the overall structure and design, and
in making amendments to the final manuscript. J.T. helped structure the
manuscript and contributed clinical understanding to the guidelines,
visuals and infographics. A.B. contributed some of the written text in
the paper and wrote up the conclusion, and also helped structure the
final manuscript and helped with amendments. M.O. contributed to the
development, structure and reading of the manuscript (draft and final),
and provided a technical and overall National Programme perspective on
the paper and its guidelines. C.R. redesigned the draft templates into
the final graphics for this paper, including the four visuals and the
infographic, and also contributed to the structure and reading of the
manuscript. A.A. was responsible for overseeing the entire development
of the paper, helped structure the manuscript (draft and final),
developed and shaped the clinical and technical perspective on the
clinical guidelines provided in the paper, and helped develop the
visuals and infographic.

The CWTCH project was funded by the Health Foundation as a quality
improvement project in Aneurin Bevan University Health Board in Wales.
The National Video Consultation Programme is currently being funded by
the Welsh Government to test video consultation across all of Wales.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec9:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.71.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.r.
