---
abstract: |
  This article reviews the family foster care model practised in the
  small Belgian town of Geel. A historical introduction is followed by a
  description of a family foster care project in its current form.
  Issues are raised as to whether the current culture of care pathways,
  managed care, payment by results and an emphasis on 'cure' are
  conducive to recovery as promoted by the recovery model. Finally, the
  lessons from Geel are summarised and it is argued that there is much
  that can be learned from this way of working to support the recovery
  movement.
author:
- Henck P. J. G. van BilsenCorrespondence to Henck P. J. G. van Bilsen
  (<henck.vanbilsen@waikatodhb.health.nz>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1Waikato District Health Board, New Zealand
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
title: "Lessons to be learned from the oldest community psychiatric
  service in the world: Geel in Belgium"
---

Recovery and rehabilitation have become fashionable words in mental
health and psychiatry. In the current Zeitgeist this emphasis on
recovery is accompanied with an ever increasing emphasis on further
professionalisation and bureaucratisation of mental healthcare.

The achievements in mental healthcare in the past 50 years are enormous.
We have better drugs and better psychosocial treatments are available
for our patients. However, with the vast improvements came two trends
that the family foster care project in Geel (Belgium) has not succumbed
to.

The first problem is over-bureaucratisation of healthcare. Problems with
the quality of care are countered with greater emphasis on demonstrating
(with paper or digital records) that the required care is provided.
Activity focused on bringing people back to health is in constant
competition with completing the paperwork that is seen as evidence that
carers are doing the right thing. Thus, tension exists between providing
good-quality care, care that works and is evidence based, and care that
constantly demonstrates on paper or by digital means that the rules are
followed. Unfortunately, all too often the perspective that 'the care
given' only counts when it is written down prevails.^1^

In this article I will attempt to make a case for a style of recovery
'par excellence'. Not recovery that demands but recovery that accepts
what is and invites the patient to find their own and perhaps very slow
path to better health. Geel in Belgium, the oldest therapeutic community
in Europe, may be such an example of real, patient-focused recovery. The
Geel model does not rely on large amounts of rules and regulations and
staff do not need to administratively demonstrate that these rules are
followed. In the Geel model, people, patients and carers are allowed to
'be' and discover their mutual road to understanding and recovery.

The second problem that emerged with advances in psychiatric treatments
is the presumption that all patients will get better following
predetermined pathways and time frames. The current trend in mental
healthcare seems to be focused around care that follows predetermined
pathways, with a recommended length of stay and session-limited
outpatient psychological therapy. Unfortunately, there will always be
people who do not fit these care pathways and protocols owing to the
severity and chronicity of their psychiatric problems. These patients do
not fit the profile of ever-improving patients who can be rehabilitated
to a level of independent functioning within set time frames. These
patients seem to be 'broken' people who in an atmosphere of firm
kindness and with opportunities to 'be as they are without a demand for
change' might recover far more than in a system that demands of them to
participate in psychosocial treatment. What we are offering many
patients with a chronic mental illness is a pressure cooker model of
recovery. The Geel model seems to be respectfully offering a slow cooker
model.

# Recovery {#S1}

Psychosocial rehabilitation and recovery have as their mission the
acknowledgement of the patient as a person and enabling them to become a
contributing citizen again. Recovery interventions are focused on
teaching people how to manage their mental illness and ensuing
limitations. The aim is to achieve an optimal integration in society.

The emergence of a recovery model in the 1990s in the USA has been
considered to have been the result of the physical disability movement
and deinstitutionalisation within psychiatry.^2^ New Zealand has long
followed this philosophy in its approach to mental healthcare. In the
UK, the concept of recovery has been built on the legislative
foundations of disability rights, anti-discrimination and the civil
rights movements of the 1960s and 1970s. The concept of recovery emerged
from those people who had first-hand experience of mental health
difficulties^3^ and is arguably a political response to an
unsatisfactory mental health system that focuses on maintenance of
disorders.^4^ In the mental health system we do things to and with
patients in order to offer treatment, but frequently these 'treatments'
cause more problems: the acute stress of being admitted to hospital far
away from home; the mind-disabling effects of electroconvulsive shock
therapy; medications with side-effects for which new medications need to
be prescribed; psychological therapies that have a re-traumatising
impact on patients. This is eloquently highlighted in Breggin\'s work,
most notably in *Brain-Disabling Treatments in Psychiatry*.^5^

Today 'recovery' is a term that is synonymous with mental healthcare.
There is no one single definition of recovery as it is deemed to be a
personal and individual concept. However, there are a number of
definitions which have sought to capture the philosophy of recovery.
Recovery is, "'a deeply personal, unique process of changing one\'s
attitudes, values, feelings, goals, skills, and/or roles. It is a way of
living a satisfying, hopeful, and contributing life even with
limitations caused by illness. Recovery involves the development of new
meaning and purpose in one\'s life as one grows beyond the catastrophic
effects of mental illness.'^6^" Deegan^7^ says of recovery that 'The
goal of recovery is not to become normal. The goal is to embrace the
human vocation of becoming more deeply, more fully human.'

The extent to which we are achieving a true recovery-focused model in UK
mental health services is debatable. However, one place where this is
not in doubt is the family foster care project in Geel.

# Geel: the oldest therapeutic community in Europe {#S2}

Van Dale, the main Dutch language dictionary,^8^ lists under the word
'Geel': 'Expression: bound to go to Geel, to come from Geel: to be
mentally ill'. A more humorous expression about the people of Geel is:
'Half Geel is entirely crazy: and entire Geel is half crazy'.^9^

The small provincial town of Geel in Flemish Belgium is host to a
centuries-old mental health project. Belgium is generally famous for
beers, fries, chocolate and the interesting form of federalised
government it adopted. Geel is a city with around 35 000 inhabitants
located in the Belgian province of Antwerp. On a visit to Geel and the
family foster care system in 1977 with a small group of fellow
psychology students, I found many things wrong with the Geel system.
Perhaps due to the arrogance or naivety of youth, I thought it was pure
'neglect' that most of the patients cared for were not receiving some
form of intensive psychological therapy. Another sign of 'neglect' was
that many patients were just doing what they wanted to do and were not
involved in what we saw as meaningful occupational or psychological
therapy. To our horror, we also learned that the families that were
looking after these patients hardly received any form of training at
all. As a group, we imposed our own youthful standards on the Geel
project and decided that it was not good enough! With the hindsight of
experience (and age) I can now see how wrong we were. Geel truly is the
first psychiatric therapeutic community in Europe.^10,11^

In this article I would like to introduce the Geel family foster care
system to a wider audience and focus on what we can learn from Geel.

## Origins of family foster care in Geel {#S3}

Since the year 600, so the story goes, and certainly since the 13th
century, Geel has been a haven for those with mental illness.^12^ The
first written patient records from Geel are dated 1693. The selection of
Geel as a locality for the treatment of people with mental illness
starts with the story of St Dymphna and her acceptance by the church as
the patron saint of the mentally ill. Dymphna was an Irish princess,
raised in the Christian faith, from what is now known as County Tyrone.
A conflict erupted between the princess and her father. She fled her
homeland but was finally caught and murdered by her father, in a fit of
madness, in the forest near the present site of Geel. The day was 30 May
600 [ad]{.smallcaps}, and Dymphna was buried at the site, where the
church of St Dymphna was later erected. This was at a time when the
symptoms of what we now call mental illness were attributed to being
possessed by the devil. This was combined with the belief that this
'possession' could be lifted if the person was brought in contact with
religious relics of certain saints. St Dymphna was supposed to be such a
saint.^13^

The fact that Dymphna had resisted the clearly 'possessed' king made her
attractive as a saint who could cure possession. During pilgrimages to
Dymphna\'s tomb it was hoped she might intercede on behalf of the
'possessed' souls and end their suffering. Miraculous cures were
reported to occur in Geel. With the dissemination of Dymphna\'s legend,
Geel became increasingly renowned as a centre for the cure of the
'possessed' (mentally ill). Inhabitants of Geel and farmers from the
surrounding villages started to offer accommodation to the
pilgrims/patients during their stay in Geel. Some pilgrims stayed on
after they had completed their religious rituals and so the family
foster care tradition was born. Before the first psychiatric hospital
was established in the early 15th century in Valencia in Spain, the
family foster care system was already in place in Geel.^14^ The Geel
initiative was not based on the initiative of a churchman as in Valencia
or a physician as in Pinel\'s hospital in Paris, but was an initiative
from the people (peasants and burghers of Geel).

The church continued guardianship of this project until 1852 when the
work was taken over by the state and placed under medical direction. The
high point of the Geel project came just before the Second World War,
when almost 4000 patients were looked after in the family foster care
system. Most patients were Belgian, but many were Dutch, French, and
even English. There were also several Spaniards and Russians. Patients
represented the complete range of mental health problems. The cost of
family foster care was paid for by the patient\'s relatives or by the
community from which the patient came. There was some kind of selection
with respect to families that could look after these patients. To be
qualified (or 'certified' in Geel-ian terms) required that the family
had a good record, meaning that no family member had ever been in legal
or moral trouble (behaving in a manner that went against the moral code
of the time). Certification was a matter of pride and social standing;
not to be certified meant that something was not right with the family.
The desire to do this work was instilled long ago, and it became a
*raison d\'être*, a tradition handed down for generations. Certain
families were known for the adept guidance of certain types of patients,
a point of considerable importance and source of personal pride.

An infirmary where patients could be admitted if they became completely
unmanageable or ill was also set up. The patients were returned to their
boarding homes after recovery. If boarding-out was inadvisable, patients
were transferred to a closed mental hospital.

On admission to the infirmary the normal course was a brief period of
observation. Afterwards, the medical staff and representatives from the
town of Geel decided the best course for the individual. It was all
quite informal; one of the staff might opine that the patient should
best go with a certain family. If there was consensus, the transfer was
made. Occasionally, but not often, several shifts from homes were
necessary early in the colonial life of an individual until the patient
found their proper niche. There were more homes available than there
were patients. Geel was able to retain 80% of all persons sent there for
boarding care.

# Geel now {#S4}

The idea that mental health crises might be managed in a setting other
than a traditional in-patient ward has a long history. However, we know
remarkably little about such alternatives, their availability and
distribution, the service models they employ, the clinical populations
they serve, and the outcomes they achieve. A key question is whether,
within a modern mental health system, alternatives to traditional
in-patient care can achieve good outcomes for patients whose clinical
and social difficulties are so severe that in-patient admission would
otherwise be required. Is Geel such a place?^15--18^

Geel in the 21st century has developed into a professional and
progressive institute offering mental health treatment. On its website
it states: The 'Openbaar Psychiatrisch Zorgcentrum (OPZ) -- Geel' is an
integrated psychiatric centre which coordinates three autonomous
divisions. One of these divisions is the family foster care project. The
OPZ helps every human being in need of psychiatric care, regardless of
his/her gender, background and beliefs
([www.opzgeel.be/nl/home/htm/intro.asp](www.opzgeel.be/nl/home/htm/intro.asp)).

## Profile of the patients {#S5}

Currently, the number of patients looked after by the family foster care
project is just above 500. The patients suitable for family care
typically have chronic psychiatric problems such as schizophrenia or
psychotic, personality and mood disorders. There are three target
groups: young people, adults and older people. At the moment there are
200 foster care families.^19^

## Criteria for acceptance {#S6}

It is important that the acute phase of a psychosis or other problems
has passed. Aggressive behaviour needs to be reasonably well under
control and there is no history of sexual offences or serious crime. A
significant group of patients have comorbid intellectual disabilities.
Patients should be capable of emotional attachment, some form of
communication and doing things independently.^20^

## Admission procedure {#S7}

The admission procedure seems to be one of finding the right match
between patient and foster family. This is not a one-sided process,
rather a three-way system: the patient, the foster family and the
clinicians all need to have confidence in the 'match'.

When patients first come to Geel, they are formally admitted to the
hospital. During the day they attend a programme in the Observation
House where a maximum of eight patients live together with two coaches.
Patients have domestic duties (shopping, cooking, ironing, gardening),
work on their general skills and find out what it means to live
together, assume responsibilities and share. Meanwhile, coaches find out
what the patients\' wishes, desires and expectations are and they
monitor and assess their behaviour and potential. The coaches regularly
report to the admission team headed by the medical
director/psychiatrist.

From the point of view of patients, who have possibly spent years living
in a hospital ward, the potential advantages of living in a family and
participating in a larger community are endless.

## Beyond admission {#S8}

From the moment the patient starts to be part of a family, they regain
an identity. They are a member of a family again, possibly with
children, grandchildren, aunts and uncles. They belong to a social
network (neighbours, friends, acquaintances, etc.). They have
responsibilities (doing the dishes, laying the table, peeling the
potatoes, unpacking the shopping, mowing the lawn, etc.).

## Not cure but care {#S9}

There are expectations, but no demands. Patients are allowed to function
on their optimal level. If someone is capable of 'pottering around' in
the garden of the foster family then that is OK; just as it is OK for
another patient to join the local football club. Accepting what is, not
demanding what should be, seems to be the motto.

Often people live in the same family for years. The average stay in the
family care programme is currently 30 years. Thanks to their general
well-being and sense of security, levels of medication often drop
significantly.

Another crucial factor is the support of the community of Geel. People
are used to having psychiatric patients around and are eager to help.
Local schools, the arts centre and sports associations are keen to get
involved.

## Profile of the families {#S10}

Foster families are from a wide range of backgrounds. What is important
is that the homes are caring, stable and able to cope with stressful
situations. Apart from that a regular income is required and sufficient
space to lodge one or more guests. Of course, the children need to agree
and everyone needs to be fully aware of what it means to live with a
psychiatric patient.

Families do not receive training about psychiatric illnesses. The secret
of the success of family care lies in the ordinary, common-sense
approach. The aim seems to be to surround the patient with normal
expectations, normal demands in an atmosphere I would like to describe
as radical compassion and kindness, beautifully demonstrated in the DVD
that accompanies the Goosens & van de Walle book.^20^

In recognition of their commitment, families receive a monthly allowance
of approximately €500, which is of course significantly less than
conventional hospital admission rates.

In return for their care, foster parents receive company, friendship and
a helping hand from their guests. In some cases roles are eventually
reversed: patients attend to their ageing foster parents or look after
them in difficult times (e.g. death or illness of a partner).^21^

## Support team {#S11}

Twelve district nurses are central to psychiatric family foster care.
They each look after the best interests of approximately 40 patients.
They act as contacts, confidents and advocates for the patient and
family. They monitor the interaction between the patient and the family.
They regularly visit the family to ensure that everything is going
smoothly and to deliver the prescribed medication. In case of problems,
they mediate, report on the patient\'s behaviour or intervene if
necessary. In difficult times there is daily contact. Somebody is on
'stand-by' to help around the clock.

## Work, occupation and leisure {#S12}

Half of all patients in the family care system work at the OPZ or attend
occupational therapy. The other half remains at home. The type of work
patients do depends on their age, general skills and personal
inclination. The OPZ provides jobs in sheltered workshops
(semi-industrial work, bike shop, bookbinding, printing shop,
woodcarving, gardening) and in local businesses (shop, gardening centre)
for those patients who can handle the responsibility and are eager to
work.

Apart from that, the OPZ runs three community centres in the city which
carefully balance work and leisure. For the older and infirm patients,
the OPZ has set up a club which aims to create a pleasant ambience and
entertainment. A team of people are in charge of leisure activities, day
trips and travel abroad, whereas another team of dedicated sportsmen and
-women organise weekly sports activities tailor-made for every group:
'Our patients are keen tennis players, challenge local soccer teams;
take part in fundraising drives like the swimming marathon, etc. It is
amazing how fit some of them are at the blessed age of seventy'.^19^

## Length of stay {#S13}

Family foster care is in general not a short-term option. Verbiest *et
al*^19^ provide an overview that shows that in 2014 the majority of the
patients had been in family foster care for more than 20 years, with two
patients of more than 75 years. This is of course only possible from a
multi-generational perspective: children and grandchildren of the
original foster parents continue to offer a home to their *kostganger*
(boarder).

## The cost {#S14}

The total cost of family foster care is at the moment €47 per day. For
comparison, the day price in a psychiatric hospital in Belgium is €280
and supported living is €90 (2014 figures).^19^ Family foster care
certainly does not break the bank. It is a more than affordable
provision of mental healthcare, with a heart and in the heart of a
community.^17^

# The 'secret' to Geel\'s success {#S15}

Following a 10-year study of Geel\'s foster family care system, the Geel
Research Project sociologist Leo Srole observed that the foster family
takes in a stranger who becomes a functioning member within the family
structure. The role of the family as caretaker, teacher, natural
supportive parent and behavioural model allows the boarder to function
in the 'normal' social world in spite of their illness. Geel
psychologist Marc Godemont,^22^ after 28 years in Geel\'s mental
healthcare system, describes what he believes to be the 'secret' of
Geel\'s success, i.e. factors that are present today and, to some
degree, have probably always been present: Geel acknowledges the
idiosyncratic needs of boardersthe community responds to those needs by
providing social opportunities and meaningful work in the
communitypeople with mental illness in Geel are members of both a foster
family and a foster community.

From a theoretical perspective, the community of Geel has created a
learning environment whereby people with mental illness are exposed to
as much 'normal' behaviour from others as is possible. This modelling of
'normal' will have an impact. Also, normal expectations, with normal
prompts and rewards are in that same environment. This creates a
'collective efficacy'^23^ which can be defined as "a group\'s shared
belief in its conjoint capabilities to organize and execute the courses
of action required to produce given levels of attainment' (p. 477).^22^
According to Bandura,^23^ there is nothing more effective in influencing
people\'s behaviour than seeing effective practices in use.

A good insight in the practice of family foster care is provided by the
excellent documentary that accompanies the Goosens & van de Walle
book.^20^ It interviews several *kostgangers* and families and follows
them as they go about their daily business. The principles of modelling
and positive reinforcement of desirable behaviours and of integration in
the community are beautifully demonstrated in this documentary.

# Conclusions {#S16}

The most positive aspects of the Geel family foster care project are
social integration, care in the community and normalisation. The World
Health Organization\'s 2001 report on mental health states: 'One of the
best examples of how communities can become carers of the mentally ill
is to be found in the Belgian town of Geel, the site of what is
undoubtedly the oldest community mental health programme in the western
world.'^24^

In sum, if you had to go into a mental healthcare system, would you
rather be going into a family community project like the one in Geel or
to an in-patient hospital ward environment?

The family foster care system will not be perfect, but it certainly
focuses the mind on what is important in mental healthcare for patients
with serious and enduring problems: heart. In the current system and
structure in the UK, sometimes the heart is snowed under the tornado of
bureaucracy that needs to be completed to demonstrate that one is fully
compliant with all the applicable rules and regulations. If one were to
apply the 'modelling' perspective of the behaviour that nurses model to
patients, then it would be completing paperwork in an office.

Mental healthcare is about people helping people -- the family foster
care project is certainly that. With radical kindness and compassion
ordinary people help other ordinary people to lead more fulfilling
lives. Belgium is not only the land of chocolates and beer; it is also
the birthplace of revolutionary thinking in mental healthcare.

The example of the family foster care project in Geel challenges our
view of mental healthcare as a series of interventions and care pathways
leading to specific outcomes. Perhaps Geel just offers one intervention:
radical compassion and kindness. And the outcomes are lives lived.

[^1]: **Henck P. J. G. van Bilsen**, consultant clinical psychologist,
    Rural Mental Health and Addictions Service, Waikato District Health
    Board, New Zealand
