---
author:
- Brian Martindale[^1]
date: 2016-4
title: A Straight Talking Introduction to Psychiatric Diagnosis
---

The lead up to the publication of DSM-5 was accompanied by a great deal
of debate and argument within psychiatry. The director of the American
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) stated of current diagnostic
systems that 'Patients ... deserve better ... the weakness is \[the
systems'\] lack of validity' and that NIMH would be re-orienting its
research away from DSM categories.

As this excellent pocket book makes clear, giving a psychiatric
diagnosis, whatever its usefulness, may have serious consequences. The
book is one of a series that highlights alternative perspectives on
mental health problems. It is written not only for psychologists and
people with personal experience of mental disorder, but also for
psychiatrists.

There are many psychiatrists who genuinely think about their 'patients'
in psychosocial, biological and developmental terms, but there is much
research evidence referred to in this book which supports my own
experience that, sadly, much of psychiatric thinking and practice sees
mental illness as essentially organic. The author herself equates the
medical model with an organic one, rather than understanding that a
medical model that does not pay attention to psychosocial factors is
very limited.

Nevertheless, the book is concise, well written and with full
references. Johnstone states the arguments clearly and lays out short
chapters giving a well-balanced mix of theory, research evidence and
personal experiences. She gives an introduction to an alternative to
diagnosis: that of building formulations with patients. She gives sound
reasons why she prefers formulation as an alternative, rather than an
addition, to diagnosis. I agree with her that there can be a risk to
many patients in giving a diagnosis, but there can also be benefits.

The book should be useful in the training of all psychiatrists, for
continuing professional development (CPD) and for team development.

[^1]: **Brian Martindale** is a consultant psychiatrist and
    psychotherapist at Nuffield Health, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospital,
    Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, email: <brian.martindale@stw.nhs.uk>
