---
abstract: |
  Healthy professional one-upmanship is exemplified in Philippa
  Garety\'s position as a professor of clinical psychology, a clinical
  director and a joint leader of a psychosis clinical academic group.
  Julia Bland sought to discover whether psychiatrists have anything
  substantial to offer that psychologists cannot.
author:
- Julia Bland[^1]
date: 2016-4
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
title: "Profile: Professor Philippa Garety"
---

![Professor Philippa Garety, Clinical Director and Joint Leader,
Psychosis Clinical Academic Group](103f1){#F1}

Philippa Garety sounds like she ought to be quite a cosy, girlish,
slightly old fashioned, innocent granny in a rocking chair. You
couldn\'t be more wrong. She is a ground breaker, albeit in a polite,
non-ball breaker way. She is not really interested in self-promotion.
And was slightly anxious, and wanting to check my copy before it went
out. She does not want to make waves, certainly not destructive ones,
and is deeply serious about her role and responsibility, without any
grandiosity.

Her preferred modus operandi is harmonious: she leads, jointly, the
biggest clinical academic group in one of the biggest mental health
trusts in the UK (South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; there
are approximately 5000 patients under the care of recovery teams, about
1000 under early intervention, and another 1000 in complex
care/rehabilitation, Trust-wide). Her style rests on negotiation, mutual
respect, scientific evidence, consensus. But make no mistake, she is not
a pushover and has the ideas, vision and the 'intellectual
self-confidence' (as she put it) to have taken on this new and
high-profile role.

Instinctively collaborative, she was attracted to the job by the
triumvirate power-sharing. She is the clinical lead, with an academic
lead, Professor Philip McGuire, and a service lead, Lucy Canning, and
they work closely together. The shared leadership model attracted her as
a way of getting away from a medical director with clinical
responsibility often 'keeping distance from the service director in
order to be able to critique the service director'. She genuinely
believes that the new collaborative style of leadership is 'more
supportive of innovative and excellent clinical practice with a
strategic focus'. They are trying to improve delivery of mental health
services across the psychosis spectrum, from early onset, first episode,
through longer term and recovery. The approach is non-doctrinaire,
pragmatic, aiming for excellence in a cash-strapped health environment,
not a task for the faint hearted. It has meant convincing staff,
managers and finally commissioners that continual cutting of funding has
the perverse consequence of increasing costs, by increasing instability
and bed usage, and overwhelming staff who in turn become less effective.
They have pulled off a piece of magic, successfully persuading local
commissioners that investment is more effective at cost containment than
disinvestment: boosting community services, along the lines successful
with early intervention for psychosis, with a view to reducing bed usage
and thus costs in the longer term -- 'It\'s early days, but bed usage is
going in the right direction'. Strategy needs to be logical: 'I know
data can be used in different ways, and that there is no simple identity
between data and reality, but over the years we have seen decisions
being made which are highly politicised and/or pragmatic, without really
looking for the information.'

There is 'some evidence' for early intervention 'when case-loads are
sensible, there is good leadership, the best range of interventions is
available and staff are sufficiently skilled, and supervised to offer
them'. She also emphasised the need for 'understanding about the
importance of engagement, working with families and carers, excellent
medical intervention, vocational specialists'. And how often is that the
case on the ground, I wondered?

We talked about the evidence for supportive generic outreach versus more
specific and formal structured interventions. She acknowledged the
importance of continuity in the relationship between service user and
service deliverer, whatever they think they are delivering. She also
agreed that the sophisticated nurse, psychologist or psychiatrist
actually uses a range of therapeutic skills within any one consultation,
which are difficult to measure.

Nevertheless, it is clear that she respects scientific research
methodology: it may be difficult to ask the right questions, and to
deliver robust answers to questions about what is most useful and why,
but this does not obviate the need to try to get the most reliable
answers we can, and base policy on those rather than on mere hunch.

Over the course of our conversation, I came to the conclusion that her
drivers are simple and unfashionable: compassion and a passion to
provide the optimum treatment (psychological, social or pharmacological)
for people with psychosis, who, as we all know, suffer enough without
incompetent service delivery. Philippa Garety is not preachy, and she
certainly did not directly state this motivation. But it shone through
her lack of vainglory.

She was brought up in Mill Hill, in North London, and was sent to a
convent by her Catholic parents. Her Christian roots have moved to the
Church of England, and although it felt too intrusive to press her on
theological matters, I got a sense that this is solid and important to
her. At Cambridge, she studied philosophy for 2 years, with the
intention of becoming a lawyer, but decided it would be 'too boring'.
She came to the (then) Institute of Psychiatry to become a clinical
psychologist in 1979, and perhaps it is not entirely coincidental that
this institution has recently been renamed the full mouthful of the
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience.

I wanted to know how philosophy had informed her thinking as a
psychologist. She has described her curiosity being piqued, when, as a
young psychologist, a patient stated baldly, 'You put my mother in the
washing machine'.

She brings epistemological questions to bear on psychotic experience --
'how can we claim to know what we know?' Wittgenstein and linguistic
philosophy was the hot area during her time in Cambridge, but she was
drawn to the philosophy of science and epistemology; how different
models of understanding arise, how meaning is attributed. Personally,
she is a flexible thinker, able to see different perspectives, and is
allergic to the doctrinaire: 'one can operate within certain frameworks,
as long as they seem useful, but they don\'t have to be seen as
representing single notions of reality'. Perhaps this flexibility has
enhanced her interprofessional capacities? Working, as she does,
constantly, with psychiatrists, described as 'my closest colleagues'.

# Interprofessional rivalry: why bother with psychiatrists? {#S1}

Philippa Garety\'s sweetly reasonable stance did not make for an
exciting discussion of interprofessional rivalry. Being interviewed for
a psychiatric journal aside, I failed to elicit any personal animus
towards psychiatrists.

She points out that historically clinical leadership has been attached
to psychiatry and nursing rather than psychology, and 'there are far
more of you'. She almost makes me feel sorry for psychologists who she
claims are 'more inclined to lead other psychologists, and psychological
services, but not so comfortable with other professionals'. I wonder
whether she could be referring to us overconfident medics.

We discussed the unequivocal challenge to psychiatric hegemony from
Allan S. Mariner, an American psychologist, who sees medical training as
largely irrelevant to mental health practice: "'in the mental health
field ... only three professional activities ... are firmly
operationally connected with medical training: performing physical
examinations, prescribing drugs, and giving electroshock treatment ...
the mental health practitioner, whether he be psychiatrist,
psychologist, psychiatric social worker, or lay analyst, is *basically
practising applied psychology* \[my italics\]. A truly relevant
curriculum leading to a doctorate in mental health must be developed
from the curriculum in clinical psychology, not the medical
curriculum'.^1^" Neuropsychiatry and liaison psychiatry aside, does Dr
Mariner have a point? But Professor Garety is too tactful to make any
superior claims for psychology (in spite of the better research training
we do agree that psychology trainees receive).

In her peacable world, promotion should be based simply on the best
person for the job, profession immaterial. Although this is eminently
sensible, it does not describe the reality of mutual suspicion,
ignorance, rivalry and disrespect, which I have seen in several dark
corners of mental health provision.

Her one criticism of contemporary clinical psychology was the lack of
social mix in the intake to training. It is so hard to be accepted for
clinical psychology training that the system inevitably favours those
whose parents can support them while they do unpaid work to spruce up
their CVs. 'It\'s the internship argument', she says. I suggest that the
preponderance of middle-class blonde women becoming clinical
psychologists does not make for a profession that mirrors the diversity
of the service users they serve, and she agrees that there is a worrying
bias in gender and class.

# CBT for psychosis {#S2}

But Professor Garety has not entirely avoided controversy. As a leading
researcher in the psychological treatment of psychosis, she was
instrumental in the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
guidelines recommending cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) and family
intervention for psychosis (2003, updated 2014).^2^ Later studies have
attacked the effectiveness of CBT for psychosis in preventing relapse.
She concedes this may be true, but still supports the symptomatic relief
that CBT affords. 'It is fairly clear on about 12 meta-analyses that CBT
does offer benefit on a range of outcomes with a small- to medium-effect
size ... Oddly enough it seems that CBT is better for symptom relief but
not so effective in preventing relapse, while \[family intervention\] is
the other way round.'

So is it still worth trying to roll out CBT? An unequivocal yes: 'But of
course it\'s not a panacea. The next generation of CBT will be more
targeted for the individual, addressing command hallucinations, paranoia
or depression more specifically, I hope'. She also sees future trials as
being more targeted to specific symptoms.

One of her own main research interests is the emotional and cognitive
context of delusions, clearly still fuelled by being intrigued by the
philosophical as well as clinical questions around derivation of meaning
for the individual. She still sees patients one afternoon a week.

Her empathic and sensible view is of circular reinforcement: anxiety
increases the negative appraisal of self and others, promoting paranoid
thoughts, which in turn increase anxiety. Social isolation and adverse
environments clearly play into this cycle.

The clinician\'s attitude to the person with psychosis should be
validating and normalising: the 'anyone who had been through what
you\'ve been through' approach, relating to the patient as someone who
has experienced adversity and is coping with confusing and distressing
experiences. The mental health professional has to be not only
non-colluding but also non-confrontative, attempting to develop a
collaborative understanding with the patient of the patient\'s own
thinking. Easier said than done.

Her service-based research includes a randomised controlled trial of
community-based assertive outreach in first-episode psychosis, with
Professor Tom Craig. She has looked at the psychological effect of the
deprived urban environment on individuals with persecutory delusions,
and at how factors such as increased social support in a low expressed
emotion environment can increase the flexibility of delusional belief.

What about life beyond psychology and psychosis? Her happiest weekends
are full of family and fresh air: she and her partner (a woman and
Anglican priest) sail, walk and spend time with the extended family.
Philippa is the youngest of six, several of whom are also keen sailors
and have houses in the same village on the Hampshire coast. Generally
upbeat, she minimises the difficulties she has experienced around coming
out as gay in a Catholic family, but admits that it has got easier as
she has got older.

Family life is not all play: the long haul of helping her elderly
parents maintain as much independence for as long as possible has taken
its toll.

Her unlived life is that of a farmer, but in her world after psychology,
she will settle for an orchard, although 'definitely not fiddling with
making jam'. From the perspective of her current busy professional life,
she does harbour a pull towards a more contemplative, outdoors life,
with more room for silence: 'I think I\'m quite an introvert'. All the
more decent then, of this thoughtful, intelligent and energetic woman,
to place her time at the disposal of a hectic organisation which demands
constant interaction with people, psychotic and otherwise.

[^1]: **Julia Bland** is Consultant Medical Psychotherapist, co-Director
    MedNet service, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK,
    email: <julia.bland@slam.nhs.uk>
