---
abstract: |
  Surveys of people\'s opinions are fraught with difficulties. It is
  easier to obtain information from those who respond to text messages
  or to emails than to attempt to obtain a representative sample.
  Samples of the population that are selected non-randomly in this way
  are termed convenience samples as they are easy to recruit. This
  introduces a sampling bias. Such non-probability samples have merit in
  many situations, but an epidemiological enquiry is of little value
  unless a random sample is obtained. If a sufficient number of those
  selected actually complete a survey, the results are likely to be
  representative of the population. This editorial describes probability
  and non-probability sampling methods and illustrates the difficulties
  and suggested solutions in performing accurate epidemiological
  research.
author:
- Stephen Tyrer
- Bob HeymanCorrespondence to Stephen Tyrer (<stephen.tyrer@ncl.ac.uk>)
  [^1]
date: 2016-4
institute:
- 1Newcastle University, UK
- 2University of Huddersfield, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
title: "Sampling in epidemiological research: issues, hazards and
  pitfalls"
---

It is wise to be chary of surveys and polls, and to always read the
figures carefully. In the heady excitement just before the vote on
Scottish independence many observers thought that allowing teenagers to
vote would propel Scotland to self-government. After the referendum, the
*Straits Times* in Singapore stated 'Young people voted in droves to
break up the centuries-old union', based on an exit poll that showed
that 71% had voted 'yes' to independence.^1^ This poll only included the
very small number of 14 people in this age bracket, 4 of whom had voted
'no'. A later, more representative YouGov poll with a much larger sample
reported that 51% of 16- to 24-year-olds had voted 'no'.^2^ In whatever
way the first sample had been selected, its small size would have made
it highly susceptible to sampling error. When there is a strong
expectation that a particular event is going to result there is a strong
inclination to believe the anticipated outcome.

# Sampling in epidemiological studies {#S1}

Sampling for health-related research does not usually need to be as
precise as sampling for political surveys but in epidemiological
investigations every effort should be made to select a representative
sample. Often this is not achieved. Concern has been expressed for years
about the number of prisoners who have mental health problems. In a 1979
study in the USA to estimate the prevalence of mental illness in
prisoners, 33 male prisoners were selected and interviewed by a
psychiatrist using an instrument called the Psychiatric Status
Schedule.^3^ Of those interviewed 3% were diagnosed as having a mental
disorder and 27% had a drug or alcohol problem.^4^ The main problem with
this paper is the number of people sampled and how they were selected.
Although it is stated that the prisoners were selected at random, the
number of prisoners selected for interview is on the low side. The
procedure for randomisation is not indicated. Female prisoners were not
included. The determination of the prevalence of mental illness from a
survey in one prison in one state in the USA cannot be extrapolated to
the whole country, where there are more than six grades of prisons
according to the degree of security required. There is no indication in
the paper about how the sampling procedure controlled for the proportion
of inmates that were detained and those that were sentenced. Apart from
sampling errors, justifiable criticism can also be made of the
reliability of only having one psychiatrist reviewing all prisoners, the
categorical method of diagnosis (mental disorder or drug or alcohol
misuse) and the use of the Psychiatric Status Schedule, which is
reported to have consistency in many of its scales. Under these
circumstances it is unsurprising that the estimate of prevalence of
mental disorder in this survey did not accord with a recent systematic
review examining studies over a 40-year period which found 14% of
prisoners had a diagnosed psychiatric disorder.^5^

When carrying out any survey of any type it is essential for the
researcher to clearly define the target population that they wish to
sample. On some occasions the population will be sufficiently small, and
the researcher is able to include the entire population in the study.
This is termed a census study. Much more frequently the population is
too large for all its members to be contacted and so a sample is chosen
to reflect the characteristics of the population from which it is drawn.

# Sampling methods {#S2}

Sampling methods are described as either probability or non-probability
methods ([Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}).^6^ In probability
samples, each member of the population has an exactly equal chance of
being selected. Types of probability sampling include random sampling,
stratified and systematic sampling. Probability sampling is a more
accurate method in determining the true characteristics of the
population but it is not perfect. Sampling error refers to the
variations from the true population parameter which can result from
random sampling. With true probability samples sampling error is reduced
by having larger samples. In non-probability sampling, the degree to
which the sample differs from the population is unknown.

**Box 1** Sampling methods

Census study: whole population under enquiry

Probability sampling: randomsystematicstratified

Non-probability sampling: conveniencejudgmentquotasnowball

Qualitative research: purposive

## Sample size {#S3}

To estimate how large the sample should be to reflect the total
population the confidence level of the mean of the results, a measure of
the variance of the responses of the sample (standard deviation) and an
estimate of the margin of allowable error need to be determined. The
calculation is not difficult and help can be readily accessed
([www.qualtrics.com/blog/determining-sample-size](www.qualtrics.com/blog/determining-sample-size)).

# Types of probability sampling {#S4}

## Random sampling {#S5}

In random sampling every member of the population has the same chance
(probability) of being selected into the sample. Using a random sample
it is possible to describe quantitatively the relationship between the
sample and the underlying population, giving the range of values, called
confidence intervals, in which the true population parameter is likely
to lie. Random does not mean arbitrary. Choosing a random sample relies
on an objective mechanism to select elements from the population. This
is usually done by a computer, but rolling dice or using random numbers
are also acceptable options.

## Stratified and systematic sampling {#S6}

Stratified sampling is often used when one or more of the strata
(subsets of the population) have a low incidence relative to the other
strata. It can also be used to reduce sampling error.

In systematic sampling every 5th, 10th, 20th or *n*-th record is
selected from a list of population members. It is no more than a form of
random sampling.

# Non-probability sampling {#S7}

In non-probability sampling members are selected from the population in
any form of non-random manner. Examples include convenience sampling,
judgement sampling, quota sampling and snowball sampling.

## Convenience sampling {#S8}

Convenience, accidental or opportunistic sampling is used to find out a
cheap estimate of the truth. An easily accessible non-random selection
of the population under enquiry is chosen. A frequently used method is
contacting people by email.

## Judgement sampling {#S9}

An extension of convenience sampling is judgement sampling. Thus, when
carrying out a national enquiry on the frequency of depressive illness,
one specific town and one rural area that are thought to be typical of
the country as a whole may be selected. Ideally, the chosen sample needs
to be representative of the entire population and this is difficult to
determine.

## Quota sampling {#S10}

Quota sampling is the non-probability equivalent of stratified sampling.
In the first instance the investigator identifies the strata and their
frequency in the population. Convenience sampling is then used to select
the required number of participants from each stratum.

## Snowball sampling {#S11}

Snowball sampling is a special non-probability method used when there
are difficulties in identifying members of the population or if the
desired sample characteristic is rare. This technique relies on existing
study participants recruiting future participants from among their
acquaintances. It is often used when it is anticipated that individuals
may be reluctant to be identified, for instance when surveying illegal
drug users. Although inexpensive, major bias may result because a
balanced cross-section of the population is not identified.

# Which sampling method to use? {#S12}

Which sampling method to use depends on the nature of the survey
proposed. Epidemiological research requires a representative sample but
there is a great deal of health research that does not need one. Service
evaluations and randomised controlled trials (RCTs) do not require a
survey design. In an RCT the main purpose is to compare groups within
the sample, members of which are placed into them randomly, such as
treatment *v*. placebo. Similarly, health psychometrics (e.g. design of
health measures), experimental studies, theoretical-based research
studies (e.g. testing a theory or proposing a new theory), observational
studies (e.g. looking for relationships of theoretical constructs, such
as depression and self-esteem) are mostly conducted using opportunistic
samples. Precisely accurate statistics may not be required.

Qualitative researchers are often concerned with what exists rather than
how much,^7^ and seek to delve into complex processes such as responding
to long-term illnesses. Purposive sampling, one of the most common
sampling strategies, groups participants according to pre-selected
criteria relevant to a particular research question. There are more:
Kuzel^8^ identified 13 different forms of qualitative sampling strategy,
including maximum variation, theory-driven, critical case and deviant
case. One case is sufficient at times to illustrate a point. For
example, Heyman *et al*^9^ explored the experiences of a female patient
who had 'risked exploding', according to a colorectal nurse, by
absconding from hospital to have sexual intercourse with her boyfriend
immediately after anal cancer surgery. The aim of the study was to
understand why one particular individual had behaved in such a medically
risky and highly unusual way. A recent introduction to qualitative
research methodology is provided by Silverman.^10^

# Hazards of non-probability sampling {#S13}

When performing a survey there is a strong temptation to obtain
information from as much of the population as possible in the belief
that accuracy can be increased in this way. An example is given to show
that this may be fallacious.

Many of us are interested in psychiatrists\' views about service issues.
A researcher wishes to find out the opinions of psychiatrists about
policy regarding controlled drugs. A questionnaire is designed with a
number of statements ranging from tighter control over existing drugs to
decriminalisation of all unscheduled agents. Respondents have to select
which statement best accords with their views. The researcher is also
interested in the responses of grades of psychiatrist to see whether
there are different attitudes about the issue between consultants and
trainee psychiatrists. The Royal College of Psychiatrists holds the
names of all psychiatrists in the UK, and the researcher is given access
to this list. It is proposed that as many psychiatrists as possible are
required, and so all the psychiatrists are contacted by email and asked
their views. When all the questionnaires are returned online the
response rate is 38% with 5128 psychiatrists completing the
questionnaire. The analysis of the replies of this large number of
people takes a good deal of time but this is completed after a few
months and the paper is written. It is submitted to a prestigious
psychiatric journal and is rejected. What were the reasons?

A proportion of the individuals would not have been contactable by
email, and this group may have different attitudes from the rest. The
nature of the responses of those individuals who failed to reply to the
questionnaire, the majority, is unknown. They might have differed from
respondents if, for instance, busier or more stressed psychiatrists were
less likely to participate. As a result, the sample identified by the
researcher may not have been representative and the findings cannot be
safely generalised to all those working in this field. This is a
non-probability sample and, as such, statistical inferences cannot be
validly made from the results. Notwithstanding, the results of this
survey are not valueless. Although they cannot be reliably generalised
to the total population of psychiatrists, they could still be useful for
piloting purposes. Certain questions on the survey could be refined
and/or alternative questions included in a later enquiry.

# How to conduct a probability sample {#S14}

In the example referred to above the sample size should be determined
(see earlier) and the names of those selected for interview entered into
a sampling frame. Attempts should be made to contact all those included
to ensure that the results are representative. Multiple efforts must be
made to persuade those selected to complete the survey questionnaire. If
most of the initially identified sample do provide information, the
results can be analysed statistically and valid conclusions can be
drawn.

The researcher will need to decide whether to aim for a simple
probability sample or to stratify the sample by predetermining the
numbers to be selected randomly into relevant categories, for example,
in this case, occupational grade (consultant, specialist registrar,
etc.), gender. Stratification ensures that the sample is representative
of the population with respect to the chosen population parameters if
known; or, more commonly, to ensure that categories with smaller numbers
in the population (e.g. associate specialists) are adequately
represented for comparative purposes. An introduction to stratified and
other forms of complex probability samples is provided by Bryman.^11^

## Selection bias {#S15}

Selection bias can arise if insufficient numbers of individuals
identified in the sampling frame fail to complete the questionnaire. The
greater the number of non-respondents who fail to complete the exercise
the more scope there is for the sample to be skewed in an unknown
direction. As a rule of thumb, the researcher should aim for at least a
minimum of 60% completion by those selected from the sampling frame and
every effort should be made to achieve more than this. If the percentage
of those completing the questionnaire is less than 100%, as it almost
invariably will be, there are a number of strategies the investigator
can adopt to manage non-response bias.

## Avoiding non-response bias {#S16}

In the first instance, the non-respondents should be approached asking
them again to complete the questionnaire. In those who fail to respond
again a third attempt should be made to urge them to reply. Comparisons
can then be made between first-, second- and third-time responders. If
the responses are similar then extra sampling may not be needed. If the
responses of the late respondents are very different to the rest of the
study then it may be necessary to contact more of the non-respondents.
This depends on the proportion of respondents completing the survey, the
larger the number the better.

It may not be necessary to obtain more data as it has been shown that
the observations of late responders are more like non-responders than
are first-time responders,^12^ so the responses of the late responders
can be applied to those who failed to respond to the enquiry. This
cannot be assumed, however, and late respondents in some surveys behave
like earlier participants.^13^

It has also been shown that if a small random sample of non-respondents
is selected and all can be contactable and complete the survey, the
results can be extrapolated to the remainder of the non-respondents. The
relatively small number of 20 is considered to be sufficient for this
purpose if all complete the questionnaire.^14^ In practice, it is very
difficult to ensure such a 100% response in a survey of this nature and
this aim may not be achievable.

We hope this article will persuade the reader to examine the methods
that have been used to perform surveys of opinions and other issues. Let
us quote a final example. A *Mail On Sunday* poll in August 2011 showed
that the majority of those surveyed backed the reintroduction of capital
punishment.^15^ One thousand people took part in this survey which was
said to be representative of British public opinion. The consumer panel
from which these people were selected were contacted online so those
without email access were not included. Furthermore, members of this
panel are paid for a registration of their interest and for each poll in
which they give their opinion. They are possibly representative of the
*Daily Mail* readership but not of the general population whose views
may or may not correspond to those of the sample.

Those intending to perform surveys can find more information in this
document:
[www.sagepub.com/upm-data/40803_5.pdf](www.sagepub.com/upm-data/40803_5.pdf).
Those wishing to carry out surveys on psychiatric topics, particularly
if involving the membership of the Royal College of Psychiatrists,
should contact the College Registrar.

We thank Dr Jonathan Tyrer, Genetic Epidemiology Group, Department of
Oncology, Cambridge University, for helpful advice on the manuscript.

[^1]: **Stephen Tyrer** is Associate Clinical Lecturer at the Campus for
    Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle University and **Bob Heyman** is
    Honorary Professor of Health Care Risk Management, University of
    Huddersfield.
