---
abstract: |
  The *Broadening the Foundation Programme* report has led to an
  expansion in the number of psychiatry foundation placements. This
  change will have far-reaching benefits for foundation doctors doing
  psychiatry, no matter what their future career intentions. Doctors
  will develop a better understanding of mental illness, they will
  improve their communication skills and they will gain experience of
  working within multidisciplinary teams. Recruitment into psychiatry is
  also likely to improve. The Royal College of Psychiatrists is putting
  in place a number of measures to ensure that placements are of a high
  quality so that foundation doctors have a good experience of
  psychiatry.
author:
- Jennifer Perry
- Ann Boyle
- Simon WesselyCorrespondence to Jennifer Perry
  (<jenperry@doctors.org.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
- 2Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust
- 3King\'s College London
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
title: "The expansion of the Foundation Programme in
  psychiatry^[†](#fn1){ref-type=\"fn\"}^"
---

Our society is changing; increasing numbers of people are living for
longer and with more complex and chronic conditions. Although the
importance of mental health in the context of health, illness and
well-being is not new, what is new is the increasing acceptance of this
and the recognition that there is indeed 'No health without mental
health'.^1^ Whether we call it 'patient-centred', 'whole-person',
'holistic' or by any other name, people are now demanding a healthcare
system that integrates the physical, psychological and social spheres,
as recognised in the priorities of the recent *Five Year Forward View*
proposed by NHS England^2^ and endorsed across the healthcare spectrum.
Doctors\' education, embedded in the Foundation Programme, must follow
these developments.

# Changes to the Foundation Programme {#S1}

One tangible result of these transformations has been a substantial
change in the foundation years, the obligatory 2 years that all doctors
must undertake before moving into specialty training. Within their
foundation year 1 (FY1) and foundation year 2 (FY2) posts, doctors
undertake a number of placements, usually lasting 3--4 months each. From
August 2015, the targets set are that at least 80% of foundation doctors
should undertake a community or integrated placement and from August
2017 this will rise to 100%. Psychiatry is counted as a community
placement.^3^ The target set by the psychiatry taskforce is to have
22.5% of all FY1 and 22.5% of all FY2 placements in England in
psychiatry.^3^ This means that nearly half of all doctors will
participate in at least 4 months of postgraduate psychiatry training,
which represents a significant increase.

The purpose of these changes is to ensure that future doctors have more
transferable skills such as communication and empathic understanding.
They will develop the ability to work successfully in multidisciplinary
teams and will acquire a better understanding and appreciation of the
importance of mental health, irrespective of their subsequent career
pathway. Exposure to psychiatry will also help to challenge the stigma
of mental disorder.^4^ Finally, it may encourage recruitment into the
specialty. Health Education England recognises that there are problems
with recruitment into psychiatry and it is working with the Royal
College of Psychiatrists to improve this.^5^

The Royal College of Psychiatrists recognises the importance of these
changes, and has made the expansion of the foundation year programme one
of its key priorities.

## Numbers {#S2}

[Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"} shows the most recent figures from the
UK Foundation Programme Office (UKFPO). Currently, 10.4% of all FY1 and
13.4% of all FY2 placements are in psychiatry and it should be noted
that there is variation between the UK countries: England has the
highest proportion of FY1 placements (20.9%), with Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland having very few. The figures show that there is still
some way to go to achieve the psychiatry taskforce targets.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Proportion of foundation placements in psychiatry in the UK
:::

|                  | Placements in psychiatry,^[a](#TFN2){ref-type="table-fn"}^ % |      |
|:-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------:|-----:|
| England          |                                                         20.9 | 11.8 |
|                  |                                                              |      |
| Scotland         |                                                          4.6 | 20.1 |
|                  |                                                              |      |
| Wales            |                                                          5.3 | 13.1 |
|                  |                                                              |      |
| Northern Ireland |                                                          0.0 | 31.2 |
|                  |                                                              |      |
| UK total         |                                                         10.4 | 13.4 |

FY, foundation year.

Source: The UK Foundation Programme Office,
[www.foundationprogramme.nhs.uk](www.foundationprogramme.nhs.uk).
:::

## Quality of placements {#S3}

Health Education England have mandated that the targets set out in the
*Broadening the Foundation Programme* report^3^ are achieved. However,
it is one thing to ensure the fulfilment of a target, as this is merely
a means to an end, not the end in itself. It is essential that these new
placements are of high quality if they are to deliver on the goals
previously stated. Put simply, unless foundation doctors have good
professional and learning experiences during their placements, the
results may be at best neutral, and at worst counterproductive. So we
must ensure not just the number, but also the quality, of the new
placements.

## Impact on recruitment {#S4}

It is well recognised that there have been serious problems in
recruitment to specialty training in psychiatry, nevertheless some
improvements have recently been noted. In its report, the Centre for
Workforce Intelligence indicates that recruitment into psychiatry
training in England at the core trainee (CT1) level is improving, with
fill rates increasing from 87 to 97% between 2009 and 2013.^6^ However,
at higher specialty training fill rates have fallen from 82 to 80%
between 2013 and 2014. Old age psychiatry has the lowest fill rates,
which is of concern given the ageing population and the actual and
predicted demand. There are also regional variations: south west and
north east regions of England had the lowest number of specialty trainee
(ST4) doctors in training per capita. The report highlights the risk of
the future consultant psychiatrist workforce supply being unable to meet
the predicted increase in patient demand.

A paper by Goldacre *et al*^7^ stresses that the experience of
psychiatry as a student and in early medical training is important in
determining career choice. A study by Kelley *et al*^8^ found that there
was a significant association between a foundation psychiatry placement
and appointment to core psychiatric training.Their paper describes how,
proportionally, significantly more doctors with a Foundation Programme
placement in psychiatry went into psychiatry training compared with
foundation doctors with no psychiatry placement. We can look more widely
at the literature to examine what might attract foundation doctors into
psychiatry. Brockington & Mumford^9^ look at recruitment and discuss
factors which encourage medical students into psychiatry, which include
the opportunity to undertake a holistic approach to caring for patients,
the opportunity to get to know patients in-depth, the breadth of the
field and its interactions with other disciplines.^10^ Dein *et al*^11^
found that the most important factors for consultant psychiatrists in
their choice of career were empathy for patients, working conditions and
experience of the subject as a student. These factors could also play a
role in the recruitment of foundation doctors.

Old age psychiatry placements are particularly suitable for foundation
doctors as they provide a wide view of services and address the key
issue of integrating training across the health and social care system.
This enables doctors to acquire important transferrable competencies.
Foundation placements in old age psychiatry also provide an opportunity
to introduce doctors to a specialty which is currently experiencing
significant recruitment difficulties.

# What is the College doing? {#S5}

The Royal College of Psychiatrists is putting in place a number of
measures to support the expansion of psychiatry posts in the Foundation
Programme. The College offers free associate membership to foundation
doctors, which enables them to access journals and learning resources.
There are College-sponsored events, newsletters, regional and national
prizes and bursaries which are aimed specifically at foundation doctors.
The College has recently produced national guidance on the quality
control and quality management of posts^12^ to help ensure they are of a
high standard. Educational resources are being created to support
trainers in supervising foundation doctors. There will be a focus on the
development of academic psychiatry foundation posts and on setting up a
national network for psychiatry foundation leads.

# Opportunities and risks {#S6}

We cannot overemphasise that the purpose of the expansion of the
foundation years is not to recruit more psychiatrists; if that happens
it would be a welcome, and indeed likely, side-effect. Trainers need to
recognise that most of the new foundation doctors will not opt for a
career in psychiatry. Nonetheless, this is a unique opportunity to
create a future generation of doctors with greater mental health
literacy. Given the fact that most of the people with mental disorders
are not treated by secondary mental health services, this may have a
greater impact on the mental health of the nation than improvement in
specialty recruitment.

We must therefore openly acknowledge some of the opposition to this
programme that may come from outside but also from within our own ranks.
We know that other doctors may have preconceived negative views about
foundation psychiatry placements, which may echo those of the doctors in
training.^3^ It is pleasing and reassuring to note that preliminary
evidence is suggesting that these negative views are starting to begin
to change. Feedback from recent College meetings with foundation doctors
who have completed psychiatry placements has been remarkably positive.
Many of these doctors reported that they enjoyed their placements, in
particular the 1 h per week protected time for supervision with their
consultant. However, many described how multidisciplinary teams continue
to treat them like medical students, seeing them as observers rather
than doctors in their own right. Foundation doctors are at the beginning
of their professional careers and teams need to recognise this.

Many doctors voiced concerns about professional and social isolation and
losing contact with their colleagues in the acute hospitals; this is
something which programme directors need to be mindful of. It can, in
part, be tackled by foundation schools ensuring foundation doctors in
psychiatry are grouped together, or by developing posts in specialties
such as liaison psychiatry where doctors still remain in the acute
hospital. Some mental health trusts have developed mental health
teaching programmes and Balint groups specifically for foundation
doctors, which provide further opportunities for peer support.

A lack of exposure to acute care or procedural experience relevant to
the curriculum was also raised at the meetings. To counter this, local
education and training boards can consider designing posts where
psychiatry foundation doctors spend 1 day a week in the acute trust or
doing medical on-call work. Opportunities to acquire core medical skills
within their day-to-day clinical work (e.g. undertaking physical health
assessments of newly admitted in-patients) should also be available to
foundation doctors and care should be taken to ensure this is well
supervised.

In summary, the expansion of the Foundation Programme in psychiatry is
an opportunity to give doctors a positive and valuable experience of
working in the specialty. Preliminary evidence relating to foundation
doctors\' experience of psychiatry posts is positive. The College has a
responsibility to ensure that posts are of a good quality, as the
literature shows that experiences of psychiatry in early medical
training are important in determining career choice.^6^ If posts are not
of a high quality, then this will simply reinforce existing prejudices
and diminish, not increase, the chances that junior doctors will add
psychiatry to their list of possible career options. Enhancing the
foundation doctors\' experience of psychiatry will be one of the Royal
College of Psychiatrists\' biggest challenges, but if done well, it
potentially has far-reaching benefits.

[^1]: **DrJennifer Perry**, Faculty of Medical Leadership and Management
    clinical fellow in leadership and management, Royal College of
    Psychiatrists, St Andrew\'s Healthcare, Psychiatry Specialist
    Trainee, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust. **Dr Ann
    Boyle**, consultant old age psychiatrist, Leicestershire Partnership
    NHS Trust, and specialist advisor for the Foundation Programme,
    Royal College of Psychiatrists. **Professor Sir Simon Wessely**,
    chair of Psychological Medicine, King\'s College London, director,
    King\'s Centre for Military Health Research, and president, Royal
    College of Psychiatrists.
