---
abstract: |
  The publishing world is changing rapidly. Innovations include the move
  to open access, the rise of social media and the transition to
  digitalisation. In the light of these developments and with
  ever-increasing pressures on early career psychiatrists and trainees
  to publish papers in journals with a recognised pedigree, the *BJPsych
  Bulletin* is piloting an author mentoring scheme. Mentors will help
  clinicians and aspiring academics develop articles from a pedestrian
  manuscript to one that will hopefully provoke important debate and aid
  changes in current practices. The scheme will run on a trial basis for
  approximately 12 months and will then be reviewed. Mentoring has been
  found to have an important effect of research output including
  publication and grant success; the hope is that this new initiative at
  the *BJPsych Bulletin* will result in such dividends to all involved.
author:
- Jonathan Pimm
- Niall GalbraithCorrespondence c/o BJPsych Bulletin
  (<pb@rcpsych.ac.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-2
institute:
- 1East London NHS Foundation Trust
- 2University of Wolverhampton
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
title: "*BJPsych Bulletin* author mentoring scheme -- helping trainees
  become published authors"
---

The pace of change in scientific publishing is giddying. Fast-evolving
developments include a growing pressure to publish open access, the
transition to digitalisation and the rise of social media. And although
industry experts are unable to predict the ultimate appearance of the
academic journal landscape, they are all in agreement that it will
continue to evolve for quite some time.^1^

In addition to these innovations and changes there are ever-increasing
pressures on early career psychiatrists, trainees and other budding
academics to publish in well-recognised journals: such an achievement
might provide the necessary edge to succeed at a job interview or in a
grant application. The *BJPsych Bulletin* has gained a reputation for
providing a platform for nascent researchers to begin publishing their
work. And so, to help scientists in the mental health field navigate the
scientific publishing industry and compete in the career market, the
*BJPsych Bulletin* is now piloting a mentoring scheme for authors that
have submitted papers to the journal.

Mentoring has a long history as a key component providing assistance to
junior staff looking for career progression. It was developed in the USA
in the 1970s within large private sector organisations. Formal mentoring
schemes for medical students and early career doctors began to be used
in the late 1990s.^2^ Primarily, mentoring has been seen as an aide for
budding academics keen to develop their research portfolio, but a
systematic review of mentoring in academic medicine concluded that it
was an important influence on personal development, career guidance,
career choice and productivity. Furthermore, it was found that mentoring
had an important effect on research output, including publication and
grant success.^3^ Although the provision of hard evidence demonstrating
clear links between mentoring and important outcomes is limited, surveys
of mentees have found that mentored students rate their overall
well-being as higher.^2^

The success of mentoring schemes depend on a variety of factors
including the characteristics of the mentee (e.g. younger age),
experience and skills of the mentor and the quality of the relationship
between those involved.^4^ The aim of the *BJPsych Bulletin* mentoring
scheme is to provide input to articles with potential that are in need
of revising before reaching a sufficient standard whereby they can be
sent out for review. Feedback will focus on the study design and
statistical analyses as well as writing tips including how to
contextualise the paper in light of the current scientific thinking,
both in the UK and internationally. In addition, mentors will advise
about how to maximise the article\'s impact through the use of
search-engine friendly titles, abstracts and keywords. The remit of the
papers appropriate for the *BJPsych Bulletin* will be unchanged: service
provision and development, teaching and education, legal, technological
and cultural advancements relating to treatment and delivery of care,
case reports and miscellaneous articles on governmental policy.

Mentors will help clinicians and aspiring academics understand the
difference between a solid but pedestrian manuscript and one that will
provoke important debate and aid the development of current practices.
Mentors will be experienced researchers or academics -- in some cases
members of the editorial board of the *BJPsych Bulletin* -- with
top-level teaching skills and bags of motivation!

The idea is that mentors and mentees will agree a predetermined
timetable of tasks and activities. Although there will be no formal
contract, it is important to avoid acrimonious disputes which sometimes
arise if a paper undergoes multiple revisions and reviews;
understandably, the more time invested and the more changes made, the
more some authors become convinced of the value of their work. To
minimise this possibility, the mentor will have the final word over the
whole process and if at any stage it appears that the article will not
reach the standard required for reviewing, it will be up to the mentor
to decide when to draw stumps.

With the understanding that time is a precious commodity to all
healthcare professionals, it is envisaged that the average mentoring
process for a paper, from start to finish, would require a maximum of
about 12 hours over a period of up to 6 months: this estimate comes from
a belief that no paper needing more than six revisions each taking about
2 hours will have reached the threshold for inclusion in the scheme.

Authors wishing to have papers considered for mentoring should submit
them through the website (<http://submit-pb.rcpsych.org/>) along with a
cover letter requesting entrance into the scheme. In addition, authors
of articles already submitted to the *BJPsych Bulletin* but which the
Editor or a member of the Editorial Board determines would benefit from
mentoring will be contacted with an offer. If the paper is eventually
published, credit will be given to the mentor by an acknowledgement
added to the end of the article.

The scheme will run initially on a trial basis for the first 12 months
and will be subject to regular informal reviews. These evaluations will
be assessed by the journal\'s Editorial Board at the end of the year to
decide the feasibility of continuing the scheme. We are very excited
about this new initiative to help trainees with publication and we
invite you to take part.

[^1]: **Jonathan Pimm** is a consultant psychiatrist in the East London
    NHS Foundation Trust and an honorary senior clinical lecturer at
    Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of
    London. **Niall Galbraith** is a chartered psychologist and a senior
    lecturer in psychology at the University of Wolverhampton, West
    Midlands.
