---
abstract: |
  Service development is guided by outcome measures that inform service
  commissioners and providers. Those in liaison psychiatry should be
  encouraged to develop a positive approach that integrates the
  collection of outcome measures into everyday clinical practice. The
  Framework for Routine Outcome Measurement in Liaison Psychiatry
  (FROM-LP) is a very useful tool to measure service quality and
  clinical effectiveness, using a combination of clinician-rated and
  patient-rated outcome measures and patient-rated experience measures.
  However, it does not include measures of cost-effectiveness or
  training activities. The FROM-LP is a significant step towards
  developing nationally unified outcome measures.
author:
- George TadrosCorrespondence to George Tadros (<george.tadros@nhs.net>)
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1Aston Medical School, Aston University and Birmingham and Solihull
  Mental Health Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
subtitle: ": Commentary on ... a multidimensional Framework for Routine
  Outcome Measurement in Liaison Psychiatry
  (FROM-LP)^[†](#fn1){ref-type=\"fn\"}^"
title: "Intelligent outcome measures in liaison psychiatry: essential
  even if not desirable"
---

We have firmly moved on from a time when service provision was planned
largely to meet a demand for specific unmet needs and practice that was
deemed to be safe was considered to be good enough. We have now entered
a new era in which current practice has been dominated by outcome
measures demanded by a multitude of commissioners and monitoring
organisations. Some clinicians resent the whole notion of outcome
measures as abomination and some accept them as part of the modern,
forced reality, others view it as an opportunity to improve practice,
develop evidence for the effectiveness of their work and promote their
specialties. The right combination of academic approach, clinical
expertise and managerial support seems to be essential for this kind of
forward thinking.

Though this is true to all specialties, it poses a great challenge to
psychiatric service providers in particular owing to the nature of our
work. There are multiple factors that could influence our patients\'
journey and outcomes arising from prevention to recovery: times of
crisis, relapses and need for social and family support. This challenge
is even greater and more difficult to subjugate in liaison psychiatry,
owing to the added layers of complexity caused by the influence of
physical comorbidity. The nature of health provision in the acute
hospital, usually focusing on a physical health agenda, the urgency in
crisis presentations, the difficulty of proving the singular effect of
liaison psychiatry in the midst of many other parallel initiatives, the
reliance on external pathways for patient management and the existence
of individual and organizational stigma towards patients with mental
health issues create a complex picture when attempting to examine
outcomes.

Intelligent outcome measures should provide a balance between three main
domains: performance (especially response time), service quality and
cost-effectiveness. Focusing only on one aspect can be misleading and
unhelpful for future planning. Liaison psychiatry has a variety of roles
in urgent and emergency psychiatric crisis within acute trusts. These
roles could have influence on every aspect of acute hospitals\'
performance, including staff skills, with implications on service
provision and patient life beyond hospital walls. This commentary will
examine the utilisation of outcome measures in quantifying the
effectiveness of liaison psychiatric services with critique for the use
of the FROM-LP as proposed by Peter Trigwell and colleagues.^1^

# Performance and rapid response {#S1}

The ability to provide a rapid response to a request for psychiatric
assessment has become an essential criterion for successfully operating
liaison teams, mainly because of increasing scrutiny of the accident and
emergency department 4-hour targets^2^ and a desire to reduce length of
stay on in-patient wards.^3^ Rapid response can have a very positive
effect on patient journey and outcome measures. The timing of
psychiatric consultation is an essential factor in determining a
patient\'s length of stay in hospital,^4--6^ especially when
psychosocial assessment is completed in the first few days of admission
to a general hospital ward.^7,8^ The difficultly is that patients
presenting with more severe psychiatric symptoms, such as suicidal
ideation, florid psychosis or behavioural problems, tend to receive more
timely consultations than those with less demanding presentations.
Consequently, patients with less obvious psychiatric symptoms have a
tendency to either go undetected or wait for a long time before being
referred to liaison psychiatry for assessment,^9^ which can lead to
poorer outcomes.^10^ To achieve the best outcome, identifying patients
who need psychiatric assessment as early as possible, through an
effective triage system, is as important as responding rapidly to a
referral for liaison psychiatry. The factors associated with delayed
referral to a psychiatry liaison team usually include stigma,^11--13^
lack of mental health training and skills, unclear referral pathways,
perceived lack of efficacy to change patient outcomes, and patient\'s
refusal of a psychiatric assessment. The presence of physical illness
has been found to delay the identification of psychiatric disorders and
hinder referrals to psychiatric liaison teams.^14^ On the other hand,
rapid response has been associated with higher level of acute hospital
staff satisfaction with service provision.^15^

The Framework for Routine Outcome Measurement in Liaison Psychiatry (the
FROM-LP) clearly identifies performance as a priority, focusing on
recording outcomes for patients using the Identify and Rate the Aim of
the Contact model. This would be essential in demonstrating the inwards
and outwards referrals as well as the services and support offered. For
the good reasons identified above, the FROM-LP also collects information
regarding response time, whether for a single contact or a series of
contacts. However, there is no attempt to quantify the length of time
taken before mental health issues are detected and the patient is
referred to the liaison team. It is a missed opportunity to encourage
proactive work to promote early referral and more accurate detection.

# Quality service {#S2}

Although performance-based data are important to measure activities,
they would not mean much unless they bring quality to the services
patients receive through those activities. Liaison psychiatry teams
should always aim to improve quality of care that is provided to
patients with physical and psychiatric comorbidities, as about 27% of
patients admitted to medical wards have mental illness fulfilling DSM-IV
criteria.^16^ Another layer of quality improvement would be achieved
through up-skilling acute hospital staff to manage patients with
psychiatric manifestations. Reports suggest that staff attitudes towards
patients who attend hospital for reasons other than physical health may
be negative,^11^ mainly because of lack of training,^17^ stigma^18,19^
and perceived difficulties in managing such patients\' complex needs in
an environment that is designed mainly for acute medical
illnesses.^20,21^ This is particularly applicable to older persons,
especially those with dementia.^22^ Staff up-skilling could be achieved
through direct and indirect training as well as joint case-working.
Research suggests that education can help to both eliminate
discrimination of those with mental illness and up-skill acute hospital
staff.^23^ The Rapid Assessment Interface and Discharge (RAID) service
in Birmingham attributed a significant portion of their cost savings to
supporting and training staff to manage patients who have not been
referred for liaison psychiatry (RAID influence group).^24^ This sort of
quality improvement usually leads to an increase in the number of
referrals through enhanced detection of mental illness.

The FROM-LP clearly measures service quality and clinical effectiveness
using a combination of clinician-rated outcome measures (CROMS),
patient-rated outcome measures (PROMS) and patient-rated experience
measures (PREMS). It provides a good description of clinical improvement
from the clinician\'s outlook. In addition, it offers a variety of
satisfaction measures from the patient, friends and family, and the
referrer perspectives.

The FROM-LP offers an array of service quality outcome measures that are
appropriate to liaison psychiatry, easy to administer and create
measurable data. There is currently no attempt to measure training
activities and their outcomes, nor to identify patients whose care
quality has improved indirectly through the work of a liaison psychiatry
team. Unfortunately, the FROM-LP authors offered some condition-specific
assessment scales which are not related to outcome measures and some of
them have already been updated by their authors, for example
Addenbrooke\'s Cognitive Examination (ACE-R), or are inappropriate for
older people, for example the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test
(AUDIT-C).

# Cost-effectiveness {#S3}

Having established that a well-operating liaison team would perform well
with rapid response and would deliver valuable quality to patient care,
it is still desirable to measure the team\'s cost-effectiveness for the
purpose of future commissioning, which in the current climate is
frequently a team survival need and a lever to improve service funding.
However, it could occasionally lead to more pressure and a negative
effect, especially if a team is compared with better funded teams or
expected to achieve some unrealistic or specific cost savings in a short
period of time.

Evidence for cost-effectiveness has been frequently established for
specific liaison models or services such as hip fracture.^25^ The RAID
model in Birmingham has been extensively evaluated, first
internally,^24^ then by an NHS-Confederation-commissioned independent
evaluation,^25^ which estimated that the cost/return ratio was £1: £4.
More recently, an independent evaluation commissioned by the regional
commissioning support unit^26^ showed similar savings: cost/return ratio
of £1: £2.97. This was achieved through reducing admissions via accident
and emergency, length of stay and re-admissions for in-patient groups.
The majority of savings come from working with older people, especially
those with dementia.^24,26^ This is despite the fact that two-thirds of
hospital beds are occupied by elderly patients.^27^ Older patients on
acute wards who experience lengthy admission and delayed discharges tend
to develop anxiety regarding discharge destination, and report low mood,
frustration, anger, disappointment and feeling disempowered.^28,29^ With
increasing numbers of patients with dementia (850 000 according to the
latest census
([www.alzheimers.org.uk/statistics](www.alzheimers.org.uk/statistics))),
working with this group of patients becomes essential to fully achieving
the saving potential.^24,25^ Hence the stress on good-quality dementia
care in general hospitals in the government\'s National Dementia
Strategy.^30^ Intelligent outcome measures should provide an encouraging
framework for older adult liaison work.

Measuring cost savings provides a further challenge because of the
complexity and variations of individual patients\' features and the
known paucity of clinical information and diagnostic coding concerning
retrospective patient groups with mental health issues in general
hospitals. There is no easy way to collect cost-saving data as it
usually requires sophisticated statistical analysis and computer
modelling. Nevertheless, it is essential that liaison teams are prepared
for cost-effectiveness scrutiny. Intelligent outcome measures should
collect data that would help with measurement of cost-effectiveness,
such as illustration of work done to avoid admission, length of stay
when admitted, discharge destination, rate of readmission at 28 days and
90 days, and breaches at the emergency department. The FROM-LP does not
prompt for cost-saving data collection.

# Challenges in using outcome measures in liaison psychiatry {#S4}

Most liaison psychiatry team members would like to consistently gather
data to demonstrate the value that they hold in patient care and their
journey through acute hospitals. However, unless electronic patient
records are developed to accommodate data collection for outcome
measures, the whole concept might be seen as time-consuming, despite its
necessity. This perception leads to low response rate and a lot of
missing data, which could hinder future analysis power. Most of the
suggested CROMS, PROMS and PREMS rely heavily on clinician\'s and
patient\'s subjectivity, which could lead to unavoidable bias. Moreover,
patients\' and referrers\' satisfaction, or lack of it, could be a
reflection of other components of the patient\'s journey or outcome that
is not directly related to liaison psychiatry.

RAID services use an outcome form (RAID Discharge Outcome Form;
<https://raidnetwork.org/content/resources>), which has been developed
as part of patient electronic records, to improve compliance and reduce
duplication. This electronic outcome form has its own weaknesses and the
same inherited subjectivity flaws; however, it could complement the
FROM-LP, especially in the cost-effectiveness domain. Nevertheless,
there is a real need to have nationally agreed, consistent outcome
measures for liaison psychiatry that would allow data combination and
comparison for further research and future developments.

# Conclusions {#S5}

Outcome measures are essential for clinical teams to evaluate their
work, show their effectiveness and plan for future development.
Measuring outcomes in a scientifically robust fashion is generally
difficult in psychiatry but particularly challenging in liaison
psychiatry. The the FROM-LP, using a combination of CROMS, PROMS and
PREMS, provides a very useful framework. It is now readily available and
helpful in measuring team performance and clinical quality, but it fails
to measure delay in time from admission to referral to the liaison
psychiatry service, which usually has negative effect on length of stay.
It equally fails to collect data related to cost-effectiveness. In
addition, it does not measure training activities which could have great
significance in improving care quality and outcomes.

As subjectivity and bias are still strong barriers to overcome, there is
a great need to develop independent measures. Until we succeed in
developing electronic digital solutions for outcome measures, as part of
patient records, clinicians will continue finding it difficult to comply
with filling in forms for outcome measures in addition to simultaneously
conducting full clinical and risk assessments and updating patient
records.
