---
abstract: |
  In the field of liaison psychiatry, as in all areas of healthcare,
  there is an essential need for well-organised and consistent
  collection of information on outcomes, from a range of perspectives.
  This special article introduces, and describes the development of, the
  multidimensional Framework for Routine Outcome Measurement in Liaison
  Psychiatry (FROM-LP). This was challenging owing to the variety of
  service settings and types of intervention which characterise liaison
  psychiatry. Similar challenges may be faced by other specialties and
  this, along with the direct relevance of much of the eventual content
  of the framework, will broaden the interest of this article.
author:
- Peter Trigwell
- James KustowCorrespondence to Peter Trigwell
  (<peter.trigwell@nhs.net>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1Yorkshire Centre for Psychological Medicine, Leeds and York
  Partnership NHS Foundation Trust
- 2Barnet, Enfield and Haringey Mental Health NHS Trust, London
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
title: "A multidimensional Framework for Routine Outcome Measurement in
  Liaison Psychiatry (FROM-LP)^[†](#fn1){ref-type=\"fn\"}^"
---

This article introduces the Framework for Routine Outcome Measurement in
Liaison Psychiatry (FROM-LP), of key importance for all clinicians
working in the field of liaison psychiatry and psychological medicine.
The framework is also of relevance to others working in mental health
who need to introduce an organised approach to outcome measurement in
their own field or service, as much of the content is directly
transferable.

The FROM-LP has been published as a faculty report by the Royal College
of Psychiatrists.^1^

# Background {#S1}

Over the past few years, in common with many areas of practice within
the National Health Service (NHS), there has been an increasing focus on
outcome and performance measurement in liaison psychiatry services.
Various options and approaches have been considered during that period,
but this did not lead to the identification of an agreed way forward.
This became particularly important owing to the fact that, although
there is mounting evidence for the economic benefit of liaison
psychiatry services,^2^ there is a relative lack of information and
evidence relating to clinical and other outcomes.^3^

The wider context also includes an increasing emphasis across the NHS on
the need to establish the collection of outcomes data as a matter of
routine. All of this has been moving forward in the context of the NHS
quality agenda,^4^ which is underpinned by three themes: effective
services, safety and positive patient experience.

Three main types of outcome measures have been proposed and are now seen
as an absolute requirement within NHS services: clinician-rated outcome
measures (CROMS)patient-rated outcome measures (PROMS)patient-rated
experience measures (PREMS).

Various attempts have been made, particularly by the College\'s Faculty
of Liaison Psychiatry, to reach a conclusion as to what measures should
be recommended for use across all liaison psychiatry services. This has
involved work at strategy days and in workshops at two annual
residential conferences, with elements of this informing work
subsequently carried out by colleagues at the Centre for Mental Health
and culminating in a report.^3^ This report provided a clear and
structured account of the challenges faced in attempting to measure
outcomes consistently in liaison psychiatry. The difficulties
particularly relate to the variety of liaison psychiatry service
settings and types of intervention. These include in-reach work within
general hospital emergency departments and/or medical and surgical
in-patient wards, the provision of specialist out-patient services
(generic or single-condition/service area), and in some cases designated
liaison psychiatry in-patient beds. Within these various settings,
contacts and interventions may include: single assessments, multiple
assessments, diagnosis/formulation, guidance/advice, changes to current
treatment, brief interventions, triage into and signposting of other
services, longer-term psychotherapeutic and/or biopsychosocial
interventions, and so on.

# The aim: developing a framework {#S2}

Taking this complexity into account, a working group within the Faculty
of Liaison Psychiatry undertook to extend the findings of the Centre for
Mental Health report^3^ by creating a framework to enable routine
outcome measurement across liaison psychiatry services, with the
inclusion of specified measures for all services to use.

The key points from the Centre for Mental Health report were: outcome
and performance measurement in liaison psychiatry services is at present
very variable in content and qualityliaison psychiatry services operate
in a number of different settings and clinical environments, carrying
out a wide range of different activities in support of patients with
many different types of clinical problemsmost measurement frameworks for
assessing quality and performance of services build on the 'logic model'
developed in the 1960s, which focuses on the following three
aspects:structure -- the key resources or inputs available in the
settings concernedprocess -- what is actually done in the delivery of
healthcare in terms of specific activities, with measurement based on
quantifiable outputs such as the numbers of patients seen/treatedoutcome
-- referring to any consequence of healthcare in terms of changes or
benefits which result from the activities and outputs of the service in
question.^5^

As also identified in the report: the optimal strategy for assessing
quality and performance is to include a mix of indicators drawn from the
three dimensions of structure, process and outcome: the so-called
'balanced scorecard' approachthe complexity and heterogeneity of the
service provision in liaison psychiatry necessarily rules out any
(single) very simple, all-purpose approach to the measurement of the
outcomes of performance in this context.

Accepting that no single instrument can be universally applied across
the whole of liaison psychiatry, necessitating different groups of
outcome measures (i.e. scorecards) for different contexts, the working
group considered it essential to ensure that the approach is simple,
easy to apply and consistently deliverable. In line with this aim, the
FROM-LP has been developed and is proposed for adoption across all
liaison psychiatry services in the NHS. Both the framework and this
proposal have the full support of the Royal College of Psychiatrists\'
Faculty of Liaison Psychiatry.^1^ NHS devolution introduces some
differences for patients and clinicians across the four countries of the
UK, but well-organised outcome measurement is essential, whether
services are in England, Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland.

# The framework: the FROM-LP {#S3}

The FROM-LP has been constructed in such a way as to enable consistency
of data collection and the effective reporting of outcomes in individual
liaison psychiatry services, thereby allowing the various 'customers' of
liaison psychiatry (patients, carers, referrers and commissioners) to
understand and have confidence in the beneficial effects of our
services.

This initiative is being introduced at a critical time, when liaison
psychiatry services need to move rapidly to a position of being able to
provide meaningful data on relevant outcomes.

Improvements to the approach may come later, perhaps as a result of
experience of using the framework, but there is a clear need to move
forward with this as a matter of some urgency. To continue to discuss
and attempt to find a 'perfect' approach before introducing anything
would be unwise.

With reference to the logic model outlined above, the proposal is for
structure (inputs) to be an issue for local services, informed in part
by the Psychiatric Liaison Accreditation Network (PLAN), the
College-based accreditation scheme which services are being encouraged
to sign up to
([www.rcpsych.ac.uk/workinpsychiatry.qualityimprovement/ccqiprojects/liaisonpsychiatry/plan/aspx](www.rcpsych.ac.uk/workinpsychiatry.qualityimprovement/ccqiprojects/liaisonpsychiatry/plan/aspx)).

The FROM-LP will focus on brief, simple and deliverable data collection
regarding process and in particular outcomes. As noted above, it is
important for outcome measurement to include elements covering
clinician-rated clinical outcomes, patient-rated clinical outcomes and
patient-rated satisfaction, but the FROM-LP also includes a fourth
element: referrer-rated satisfaction. Given the broad range of
clinicians and services which refer to liaison psychiatry, whether
frequently or infrequently, the working group considered it important
for liaison psychiatry services to be able to collect feedback from this
particular category of their customers.

To keep the approach as straightforward as possible, the FROM-LP defines
only two clinical case types, according to whether they involve a single
clinical contact (case type 1) or a series of clinical contacts (case
type 2) by the liaison psychiatry team. It is felt that the setting
itself need not determine the measurement approach, rather the type of
clinical contact. It is acknowledged that services may have some
additional local data collection requirements, beyond those stipulated
in the framework.

The FROM-LP summary table is presented in [Fig. 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"},
and all outcome measurement requirements, as well as relevant tools and
scales cited in the summary table, are available in the College\'s
faculty report FR/LP/02 (Appendix 1 and 2).^1^

![Framework for Routine Outcome Measurement in Liaison Psychiatry
(FROM-LP) content. CGI, Clinical Global Impression -- Improvement scale;
CORE-10, Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation (10-item version);
IRAC, Identify and Rate the Aim of the Contact.](194f1){#F1}

# Conclusion {#S4}

The FROM-LP was published as a faculty report in May 2015, with the
intention that it be adopted by liaison psychiatry services across the
NHS. The initial response has been very encouraging, with numerous
services having already implemented it. PLAN is considering its utility
within their accreditation scheme, potentially by establishing standards
to promote its widespread use as 'best practice', and it is also being
used by the Royal College of Psychiatrists as a model to stimulate the
development of outcome measurement frameworks across other College
Faculties. In addition, the devolved Scottish Government is exploring
the possibility of its application not only within the field of liaison
psychiatry but across the whole of mental health, in an amended form.

Our initial aim was to provide an effective approach to enable liaison
psychiatry services to demonstrate their clinical outcomes and
effectiveness, and in so doing to further justify and support investment
in this important and growing specialty. A broader utility appears to be
emerging, and we are hopeful that the framework will have a wider impact
over time.

We would like to acknowledge all members of the Outcomes Measurement
Working Group of the Liaison Psychiatry Faculty Executive Committee of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists, with whom we produced the FROM-LP
Framework: Dr Alastair Santhouse, Dr Ranjith Gopinath, Dr Peter Aitken,
Dr Steven Reid, Ms Nicola Wilson, Dr Katie Martin. Also the team at the
Centre for Mental Health, Matt Fossey, Michael Parsonage, for crucial
input at previous stages and Professor Elspeth Guthrie of the University
of Manchester for her input in relation to the creation of the IRAC
element of the framework.

[^1]: **Peter Trigwell** is consultant in liaison psychiatry and
    clinical lead, Yorkshire Centre for Psychological Medicine, Leeds
    and York Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, and **James Kustow** is
    consultant liaison psychiatrist, Barnet, Enfield and Haringey Mental
    Health NHS Trust, London.
