---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method**

  The Transitions of Care from Child and Adolescent Mental Health
  Services to Adult Mental Health Services (TRACK) study was a
  multistage, multicentre study of adolescents\' transitions between
  child and adult mental health services undertaken in England. We
  conducted a secondary analysis of the TRACK study data to investigate
  healthcare provision for young people (*n* = 64) with ongoing mental
  health needs, who were not transferred from child and adolescent
  mental health services (CAMHS) to adult mental health services mental
  health services (AMHS).

  **Results**

  The most common outcomes were discharge to a general practitioner (GP;
  *n* = 29) and ongoing care with CAMHS (*n* = 13), with little
  indication of use of third-sector organisations. Most of these young
  people had emotional/neurotic disorders (*n* = 31, 48.4%) and
  neurodevelopmental disorders (*n* = 15, 23.4%).

  **Clinical implications**

  GPs and CAMHS are left with the responsibility for the continuing care
  of young people for whom no adult mental health service could be
  identified. GPs may not be able to offer the skilled ongoing care that
  these young people need. Equally, the inability to move them decreases
  the capacity of CAMHS to respond to new referrals and may leave some
  young people with only minimal support.
author:
- Zoebia Islam
- Tamsin Ford
- Tami Kramer
- Moli Paul
- Helen Parsons
- Katherine Harley
- Tim Weaver
- Susan McLaren
- Swaran P. SinghCorrespondence to Zoebia Islam
  (<z.islam@warwick.ac.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-6
institute:
- 1Leicestershire and Rutland Hospice, Leicester
- 2University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter
- 3Imperial College London
- 4University of Warwick, Coventry
- 5South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
- 6Middlesex University, London
- 7London South Bank University
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
- id: R37
- id: R38
title: "Mind how you cross the gap! Outcomes for young people who failed
  to make the transition from child to adult services: the TRACK study"
---

Nationally^1,2^ and internationally^3,4^ policy makers and service
providers have stressed that young people should have access to
appropriate mental health services as they grow into adulthood. UK
services for teenagers are split between child and adolescent mental
health services (CAMHS) and adult mental health services (AMHS). The
time point when a young person transfers to AMHS differs according to
local service design (e.g. locality *v*. regional, generic *v*.
diagnosis-specific services)^5,6^ and can lie between the ages of 16 and
18 years.^6^

As adult services focus on severe mental illness,^7^ young people with
other ongoing mental health disorders, such as emotional,
neurodevelopmental (e.g. autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)) or emerging personality disorders can
fall through the CAMHS--AMHS gap.^8^ There is concern that these young
people have poor outcomes (e.g. increased rates of attendance at
accident and emergency departments, employment problems, contact with
criminal justice and social care systems).^9,10^ They may present to
adult services later, when in crisis or having developed severe and
enduring mental health problems.^11--13^

The Transitions of Care from Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
to Adult Mental Health Services (TRACK) study was a multistage,
multicentre study of adolescents\' transitions between CAMHS and AMHS,
undertaken in the English National Health Service (NHS). It included an
audit of policies and procedures relating to transition,^6^ a case-note
survey, an organisational analysis^13--16^ and a qualitative exploration
of the views of patients, carers and mental health professionals on the
process of transition.^17^ This paper provides further data and
transition outcomes for young people with ongoing mental health needs
who did not transfer to AMHS.

# Method {#S1}

The full details of the TRACK methodology have been reported
elsewhere.^13,18^ Briefly, from September 2003 in London and from
January 2006 in the West Midlands, TRACK followed over 1 calendar year
the journey of a prospectively identified cohort of young people who
reached the service-specific transition boundary in six mental health
trusts (providers of mental health services) within the NHS in
England.^13,16^ These trusts covered a sociodemographically diverse
population of 8.1 million in urban and rural areas and provided
specialist (secondary care) mental health services, free at the point of
delivery. Epidemiological studies suggest that the prevalence of
impairing psychiatric disorder among young people at 8--18% of the
school-age population with about half persisting into young
adulthood,^19,20^ and that in Great Britain approximately 25% of
school-age children with a disorder will access mental health services
over the following 3 years.^21^ All specialist CAMHS teams that referred
to local AMHS within these trusts were included. Highly specialist
tertiary CAMHS (such as national centres) were excluded because of the
atypical populations they served and the logistical problems created by
their interfaces with AMHS from around the country, most beyond the
participating trusts.

To identify CAMHS teams that met the inclusion criteria the local
collaborators for each site were asked to identify services and set up
face-to-face meetings with the lead clinician for each, who, in turn,
were also asked to identify suitable teams. Within each included team,
actual and potential referrals were identified from the preceding year
using a two-stage process: phase 1 -- central databases\' searchesphase
2 -- asking individual clinicians within teams to identify actual and
potential referrals in the preceding year.

The exact dates for the preceding year differed for each trust owing to
data being collected at different time periods, but the data were
collected from all sites for a 12-month period between 2005 and
2007.^13,18^

Following case identification, young people\'s journey from CAMHS,
across the transition boundary and for up to 3 months following referral
to AMHS was 'tracked' using a case-note survey. For this reason the term
'cases' rather than participants will be used throughout this paper. The
data extraction tool used had been piloted for reliability, and included
sociodemographic and clinical, transition pathway and transition outcome
details.^18^

## Diagnoses {#S2}

As the majority of CAMHS case records failed to record a diagnosis,
presenting problems were identified and independently assigned by three
CAMHS psychiatrists (M.P., T.F. and T.K.) to the following seven
diagnostic groups: serious and enduring mental disorders (including
schizophrenia, psychotic disorders, bipolar affective disorder,
depression with psychosis)emotional/neurotic disorders (including
anxiety, non-psychotic depression, post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), obsessive--compulsive disorder)eating disorders (anorexia
nervosa, bulimia nervosa, atypical eating disorder)conduct disorders
(including other behavioural disorders)neurodevelopmental disorders
(including autism spectrum disorder, ADHD, intellectual
disability)substance use disorders (alcohol and/or drug misuse)emerging
personality disorder. Cases could be assigned to more than one category.
Discrepancies in assignment to diagnostic categories were resolved
through discussion.

## Cases tracked {#S3}

As previously reported,^13,16^ CAMHS cases were tracked. One case was
excluded from subsequent analysis as transition was to an adult
neurology and not a mental health service. The sample consisted of 78
(51%) males and 76 females, with a mean age of 18.12 years (s.d. =
0.824) at the time of data collection. The majority ethnic groups were
White (*n* = 47, 31%) and Black (*n* = 36, 23%), but no ethnicity was
recorded for a large portion of the sample (*n* = 41, 27%). Other
sociodemographic details of the cohort have previously been reported in
Singh *et al*.^13^

Over four-fifths of the TRACK cohort cases were considered suitable for
transfer by CAMHS (*n* = 131, 85.1%), but over a third of these (*n* =
52, 40.0%) were not referred by CAMHS to any AMHS. Of those who were
referred, 3 cases were pending a decision from AMHS and 20 cases (13.0%)
had at least one AMHS referral rejected at the cessation of data
collection. Of those initial 20, 11 (7.1%) were successfully accepted by
another AMHS and 2 had decisions pending at the point of data
collection, leaving 7 (11%) who were unsuccessfully referred to AMHS.

Overall, there were 64 young people with ongoing mental health needs who
were not transferred to AMHS and who form the basis of the current
analysis: 5 cases (8%) were pending a decision from AMHS at the point of
data collection, 7 (11%) were unsuccessfully referred and the remaining
52 (81%) were not referred to AMHS by CAMHS.

## Analysis {#S4}

This secondary analysis focuses on the 'potential cases': those young
people who were not accepted by AMHS, regardless of the reason of the
failed transition. Young people who are not potential cases ('actual
cases') are those in the TRACK cohort who successfully crossed the
transition boundary from AMHS and were accepted by an AMHS.

After the potential cases were identified from the TRACK database,
variables of interest were re-coded to allow for comparison between the
three different types of potential cases. Where multiple options were
recorded categories were combined (e.g. carer or young person refused
AMHS referral) or a new category created (e.g. comorbid diagnosis;
multiple reasons for no referral to AMHS), depending on frequency of
category use.

# Results {#S5}

## Diagnostic categories {#S6}

The majority of the 64 cases with ongoing mental health needs not
transferred to AMHS were young people with emotional/neurotic disorders
(*n* = 31, 48.4%). It is alarming that two young people recorded as
having serious and enduring mental illness were among this group. Others
had neurodevelopmental disorders (*n* = 15, 23.4%); comorbidity (*n* =
6, 9.4%); an eating disorder or no recorded diagnosis (*n* = 4, 6.3%
each); or conduct disorder and substance misuse (*n* = 1, 1.6% each).

## Unsuccessful referrals to AMHS {#S7}

As [Fig. 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"} illustrates, three out of the seven
unsuccessful referrals were offered alternative services by the
rejecting AMHS; all had a diagnosis of emotional/neurotic disorder but
one also had a comorbid neurodevelopmental disorder. One case did not
list the alternative service, one case suggested crisis support and one
case was suggested referral to community mental health services. All
three cases were subsequently closed by CAMHS and referred back to
primary healthcare, i.e. their general practitioner (GP). Of the
remaining four young people who were not signposted to other services,
two had a diagnosis of emotional and neurotic disorder; their cases were
closed by CAMHS and they were discharged to their GP. The other two
young people had diagnoses of neurodevelopment disorder and continued to
receive care from CAMHS beyond the transition boundary, as an
alternative service could not be found.

![The outcomes of unsuccessful transitions.  
AMHS, adult mental health services; CAMHS, child and adolescent mental
health service; GP, general practitioner.  
a. Emotional/neurotic and neurodevelopmental disorders.](144f1){#F1}

## Cases referred to AMHS and pending AMHS decision {#S8}

[Figure 2](#F2){ref-type="fig"} shows that of the five pending cases,
one was subsequently closed by CAMHS without any subsequent care. This
young person had a dual diagnosis of conduct and neurodevelopmental
disorders, but no information about further care was recorded. Three
cases were still open to CAMHS at the time data collection was
completed. One case, with an emotional/neurotic disorder, had received
ongoing care for 46 weeks beyond the transition cut-off age; one case
with a neurodevelopmental disorder had received ongoing care for 7.6
weeks at the time data collection was completed. The third open case
also had a diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorder, and although it was
marked as not closed at the time of completion of data collection, there
was no record of how long ongoing care had been received at CAMHS after
the referral was made. The final pending case was of a person with dual
diagnosis of emotional/neurotic and neurodevelopmental disorders.
Although this case had not been formally closed by CAMHS, care was not
continued and the young person was effectively discharged to their GP.

![Outcomes of pending cases.  
AMHS, adult mental health services; CAMHS, child and adolescent mental
health service; GP, general practitioner.  
a. Dual diagnosis of conduct and neurodevelopmental disorders.  
b. Dual diagnosis of emotional/neurotic and neurodevelopmental
disorders.](145f2){#F2}

## Cases that were not referred {#S9}

The outcomes of the remaining 52 potential cases are illustrated in
[Fig. 3](#F3){ref-type="fig"}. The most commonly cited reason for CAMHS
not making a referral to an AMHS was that the referral was refused by
the young person, their carer or both parties (*n* = 11 cases, 21% of
not referred cases). The next most commonly cited reasons were that, by
then, there was no further clinical need for treatment (*n* = 9, 17%) or
that the young person had disengaged from services (*n* = 5, 10%). The
remaining cases (*n* = 8, 15%) were not referred either because: cases
were assumed not to meet AMHS referral criteria and AMHS were perceived
by CAMHS not to have the required expertise (in one of these three cases
the young person was pregnant) or because the immigration status of the
young person was uncertain (one case); the reason was not recorded in
one casethe plan was to refer later as: the immigration status of the
young person was uncertain at the time (one case), the young person was
in prison (one case), referral was being refused by the young person and
parent/carer at the time (one case) or no reason recorded (one case).

![Outcomes of potential referrals.  
AMHS, adult mental health services; CAMHS, child and adolescent mental
health service; GP, general practitioner.](146f3){#F3}

The most common healthcare outcomes were discharge to GP (*n* = 29, 56%)
and ongoing CAMHS care (*n* = 13, 25%). Four cases (8%) had multiple
outcomes recorded: one was reported to have some ongoing CAMHS care,
discharged to GP, disengaged, which implies that adults were worried
about the young person and trying to re-engage themsome ongoing CAMHS
care then closed by CAMHS, discharged to GP and other service (asylum
services), lost to follow-updischarged to GP and alcohol recovery
servicedischarged to GP and other service (not stated).

Emotional/neurotic disorder was the most common recorded diagnosis among
both those who were discharged to their GP (*n* = 14, 54% of this
diagnostic group) and young people who continued to have support from
CAMHS (*n* = 9, 35% of diagnostic group). Neurodevelopmental disorders
were the next most common diagnoses among young people with both
outcomes (*n* = 7, 64% of those referred to their GP; *n* = 3, 27% of
diagnostic group with continuing care from CAMHS).

# Discussion {#S10}

Previous papers reporting TRACK findings have highlighted that AMHS
accepted 93% of referrals they received^18^ and that the main reasons
for non-referral to AMHS were refusal by adolescents or parents/carers,
CAMHS clinicians thinking AMHS would not accept the referral/that AMHS
had no appropriate service or that CAMHS were still planning to refer to
AMHS.^16^ This paper focuses on transition outcomes for the significant
proportion of cases (34% of cohort) who had not been referred to AMHS on
reaching the transition boundary, despite having ongoing mental health
needs. These cases typically had neurodevelopmental or
emotional/neurotic disorders, highlighting that young people with these
disorders are those most likely to fail to access secondary healthcare.
Failure to transfer to AMHS resulted most commonly in discharge to a GP,
raising questions about the extent to which their ongoing needs would be
met by primary care. It is unclear whether GPs have sufficient training
or expertise to manage or deliver mental healthcare to young adults
presenting in this way.^22^

Over half of those who did not transfer to AMHS, however, continued to
receive some CAMHS care after crossing the transition boundary, with a
large number of these cases yet to be closed by CAMHS at the time of
completing data collection, i.e. at least 3 months following crossing
the transition boundary. This finding has implications for the capacity
of CAMHS, which often struggle to meet the demand for new referrals,
resulting in long waiting lists for assessment or treatment.^23^

Although a small proportion of cases were referred to another service,
this was often in tandem with referral to primary care. Additional
services, such as asylum services, were not always focused on the mental
health needs of the young person. The most common reason for CAMHS not
making a referral to AMHS was rejection of the referral by the young
person and/or their carer, followed by the resolution of clinical need.
The latter might reflect a plan to complete an episode of care, for
instance finishing a course of cognitive--behavioural therapy, and seems
an appropriate outcome. The next most common reason was CAMHS failing to
refer to AMHS. CAMHS practitioners can come from a multitude of
disciplines, each with different training and perspectives, which may
lead to different conceptualisations of the same child\'s difficulty and
different levels of competence in assessment and formulation or
diagnosis.^24^ In some quarters, there is particular antipathy towards
'the medical model'; psychiatrists in particular face criticism for the
perception that they apply narrowly focused 'disease' concepts to
psychopathology.^25,26^ It may be that cultural differences between the
conceptualisation of difficulties between practitioners working in CAMHS
and AMHS, particularly those from a non-medical background, may lead to
a failure in communication that undermine efforts to transfer the care
of young people as they become adults. Although data were not collected
on this aspect, it is possible that CAMHS clinicians may quite
appropriately not refer to AMHS because of knowledge and prior
experience of local AMHS referral criteria and patterns of refusal of
referrals. This remains a hypothesis to be tested by research, however,
TRACK organisational findings suggest that working cultures, lack of
clarity on service availability and eligibility issues can also
influence transition.^14,15^ Ideally, CAMHS clinicians should refer to
AMHS in order to document the need for provision and better
commissioning for these young adults. Retaining cases in CAMHS also
risks young adults disengaging from services that are not age
appropriate as well as reducing the capacity of CAMHS to respond to new
referrals. It suggests gaps in service provision discussed below,
particularly for young people with emotional or neurodevelopmental
disorders.

Although there has been increasing acknowledgement by many professionals
that ADHD persists into adulthood, many adult mental health
professionals remain sceptical about the validity of ADHD as a true
disorder and in particular as a disorder that affects adults.^27--30^
The UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) ADHD
guideline group concluded that ADHD is a valid disorder that continues
into adulthood and that adults with ADHD should be identified and
managed within the NHS.^31^ At the moment, however, health services
research would suggest that many adults with ADHD are refused services
by adult mental health teams as ADHD is perceived as falling outside
their remit or expertise. Where services do not exist, notably those for
young people with neurodevelopmental disorders, unmet needs should be
systematically documented and made clear to AMHS providers and
commissioners.

Since our study was conducted, there has been expansion of relevant
alternative provisions for emotional disorders such as Increasing Access
to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) services or integrated disability
services, accessed through social care. For adults, IAPT provides
additional capacity to deliver psychological therapy for affective
disorders. IAPT post-dates our data and so if we re-ran our study now,
young adults with emotional and neurotic disorders might have more
options once they turn 18. Equally, it should be noted that the time
taken for referrals entering into such services can be lengthy and vary
by region.^32^

Additionally, although third-sector (voluntary and independent)
organisations might be commissioned or available to young adults with
mild to moderate mental health problems or disorders, we found little
third-sector service use in this case study. Future research should
clarify to what extent these newer services have taken up cases that are
graduating from CAMHS. It is clear, however, that intervention for some
conditions, such as ADHD requiring medication,^33^ would not be provided
by these services.

The TRACK study in the UK was the first systematic attempt to understand
the policy, process, outcome and experience of transition from CAMHS to
AMHS. The population studied was large and diverse, making findings
generalisable to other services in the UK. The finding of this paper --
that GPs and CAMHS are being given responsibility for the continuing
care of young people for whom no AMHS can be identified -- should be of
interest to those working in different service structures nationally and
internationally.

## Limitations {#S11}

Limitations of the study include the small identified cohort,
difficulties identifying cases and problems with data collection largely
owing to inadequate CAMHS databases at the time of the study, as
reported previously.^13,16^ Case notes may not have accurately reflected
the quality and content of service provision or decision-making. Despite
these issues, even if every case missing from this cohort had an ideal
outcome, we have documented a large quantity of cases with likely unmet
mental health needs after leaving CAMHS. The data-set is also a few
years old and, since implementation of the Health and Social Care Act
2012 in England, 'any qualified provider' can now be commissioned to
provide services. There is also a move towards provision of youth
services^4^ and '0--25' mental health services^34^ in some areas, but
these are not yet widespread.The cases we see in CAMHS may be the cases
seen in future years in adult services and new computerised notes (e.g.
RiO electronic patient records) may demonstrate this. A future study
exploring AMHS data could potentially detect how many cases have been
known to CAMHS.

In the next 10 years, mental health problems are expected to increase
among children and young people, with current predictions estimating at
least a 50% increase in incidence rates.^35^ According to the US
Department of Health and Human Services, by 2020 mental illness will be
one of the five most common causes of morbidity, mortality and
disability among children and young people.^36^ Loss of cases at the
transition boundary constitutes a risk of ongoing and deteriorating
mental health issues. The break in service between CAMHS and AMHS occurs
at a key life stage; choices about education, occupation and
childbearing during the teenage years can have a profound impact on
subsequent life chances, whereas behaviours that predicate future
health, such as diet, exercise, sexual activity and psychoactive
substance use, develop during adolescence.^37^ Successful transition is
important to facilitate recovery alongside mental health promotion and
mental illness prevention in those vulnerable to ongoing mental health
need. It also has the potential for future cost savings: the presence of
mental illness during childhood and adolescence leads to ten times
higher costs during adulthood.^38^

Overall, this study demonstrated that GPs and CAMHS have been left with
the responsibility for the continuing care of young people for whom no
AMHS could be identified. This decreases the capacity of CAMHS to
respond to new referrals and may leave some young people with only
minimal support on leaving CAMHS. Further research is required to show
whether recent changes in commissioning, post-implementation of the
Health and Social Care Act 2012, have plugged the gap for young people
who do not meet the criteria for AMHS or who refuse referral but leave
CAMHS with ongoing mental health needs.

The TRACK study is funded by the National Institute of Health Research
(NIHR) Service Delivery and Organisation (SDO) programme,
[www.sdo.nihr.ac.uk](www.sdo.nihr.ac.uk) (Reference number: SDO/117).
The study team included Professor Swaran Singh, Dr Ruth Belling, Dr
Jenny Dale, Dr Navina Evans, Dr Tamsin Ford, Dr Nicole Fung, Ms
Katherine Harley, Dr Daniel Hayes, Ms Kimberly Hovish, Dr Zoebia Islam,
Dr Bob Jezzard, Dr Tami Kramer, Professor Susan McLaren, Dr Moli Paul,
Dr Anne Rourke, Dr Tim Weaver and Dr Sarah White.

[^1]: **Zoebia Islam** is Senior Research Fellow, LOROS, Hospice Care
    for Leicester, Leicestershire and Rutland, and Birmingham and
    Solihull Foundation Trust, and Honorary Lecturer and Researcher, De
    Montfort University and Warwick University. **Tamsin Ford** is
    Professor in Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Exeter
    Medical School, Exeter. **Tami Kramer** is Consultant Child and
    Adolescent Psychiatrist and Senior Clinical Research Fellow,
    Imperial College London. **Moli Paul** is Honorary Associate
    Clinical Professor, Division of Mental Health and Wellbeing, Warwick
    Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry. **Helen Parsons**
    is Senior Research Fellow, Division of Health Sciences, Warwick
    Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry. **Katherine
    Harley** is Clinical Psychologist, Croydon Child and Adolescent
    Specialist Service, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust,
    London. **Tim Weaver** is Associate Professor of Mental Health
    Research, Middlesex University, Department of Mental Health, Social
    Work and Integrative Medicine, London. **Susan McLaren** is Emeritus
    Professor, Faculty of Health and Social Care, London South Bank
    University. **Swaran P. Singh** is Head of Division, Mental Health
    and Wellbeing, Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick;
    Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist, Birmingham and Solihull Mental
    Health Foundation Trust; and Commissioner, Equality and Human Rights
    Commission.
