---
abstract: |
  The UK government\'s Prevent programme affects professionals and the
  people who rely on their services across the public sector,
  particularly now that workers are legally bound to report their
  concerns about individuals they believe to be at risk of
  radicalisation. This article discusses the risks that the strategy
  presents to the work of teachers and the bonds of trusts between staff
  and students.
author:
- Stephanie ReedCorrespondence c/o *BJPsych Bulletin*
  (<pb@rcpsych.ac.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-4
institute:
- 1State secondary school, London, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
title: "The Prevent programme: an ethical dilemma for teachers as well
  as psychiatrists"
---

Many teachers have raised concerns about Prevent,^1^ the UK
government\'s anti-radicalisation programme, which requires public
sector workers to report (so-called) 'at-risk' individuals. Criticisms
centre around the fallacy that underpins the programme: that certain
individuals must have specific, identifiable 'psychological
vulnerabilities' that make them more likely to engage in terrorism.
Meanwhile, most research (including leaked guidance provided to the
Cabinet) states that radicalisation is not 'a linear "conveyor belt"
moving from grievance, through radicalisation, to violence'.^2^ Teachers
also worry about the lack of protection for the staff now legally
obliged to report their concerns, and the dangers of inviting teachers
to profile students based on their race and religion. Serious, almost
inevitable, abuses have been reported. A student was referred to Channel
(the multi-agency panel, part of the Prevent programme, which focuses on
providing support at an early stage to people who are identified as
being vulnerable to being drawn into terrorism; the panel must include a
police representative) for wearing a 'free Palestine' badge; another for
quoting 'the history of the Caliphate' in his homework; a third
interviewed about his involvement with IS after saying the word
'eco-terrorism' when discussing environmental activism.^3^ More
worrying, however, is the day-to-day effect Prevent has on all Muslim
students.

It is axiomatic that education means more than memorising facts and
regurgitating them in an exam; it includes developing skills and
abilities and broadening intellectual and emotional horizons. Perhaps
most important is what Bernard Crick^4^ called 'political literacy': the
ability to think critically about, question, and engage with the
political process. Educational researcher Dr Aminul Hoque recently
listed behaviour which might exemplify this, including 'speaking out
against social injustice', 'challenging the status quo' and 'questioning
those in power to be held accountable for their actions'.^5^ This is
disturbingly similar to some of the 'warning signs' that a young person
is vulnerable to radicalisation. For example, a leaflet recently
distributed to parents in north London described 'showing a mistrust of
mainstream media reports' and 'appearing angry about government
policies' as traits 'specific to radicalisation'.^6^ In essence, this is
what teachers are told to watch out for, not as signs that we have done
our job properly, but as signs that our students are potential dangers
to society. Teachers have a duty to create a free and safe space for the
type of discussions that help our students become intelligent, active
members of society. Prevent hinders that.

The effects will be felt most in subjects that necessitate discussion of
controversial issues, such as politics. However, curriculum content
aside, most of my students are politically engaged young Londoners: they
come in each morning bursting to discuss the latest news and, like many
of us, have grievances to air. Something will be lost from their
education if they no longer feel safe doing this with, or even in front
of, their teachers. Research shows that students perform better
academically if importance is attributed to issues that matter to them
personally;^5^ pretending that issues such as racism, community divides
and radicalisation are somehow off-limits for discussion is probably the
most dangerous thing we could do.

Forcing a consensus papers over the problem rather than solving it. We
should be encouraging students to speak openly and showing them that it
is not a crime to disagree with someone or have 'difficult' opinions,
even if that means they say things we dislike. This approach would allow
children to open up to their teachers, rather than keeping opinions a
secret; only then can we try to talk them down, address their concerns
or try to reshape their outlook. This would require a bond of trust
between student and teacher. If students feel they cannot trust teachers
with their opinions, or worries, they will find other outlets to explore
their ideas, and organisations such as IS are adept at fostering these
spaces in the dark shadows of the internet. But how can our students
trust us, if we are legally obliged to report anything other than
government-approved opinions?

In my school, where around 85% of students are Muslim, Prevent has
become the subject of jokes; last term a group of girls threatened to
report me for trying to indoctrinate them into an ancient cult (I teach
Latin). For staff, meanwhile, Prevent effectively tells us that, on
discovering that a student suffers from depression, isolation or a
difficult home life, our first reaction should be to start a process
that would end with a police investigation. For teachers, who have their
students\' welfare at heart, this reaction is inconceivable; referring a
teenager already suffering from social exclusion to the police seems
counter-productive and designed to create the very issue it seeks to
prevent. IS for one capitalises on feelings of isolation, drawing its
recruits closer the more they feel ostracised from their own society. By
encouraging teachers to treat Muslim students and their problems
differently, Prevent could exacerbate one of the central issues that
drive teenagers to extremism.

Deeyah Khan, maker of the documentary *Jihad: A British Story*, revealed
that IS spends hundreds of hours recruiting each member via Skype, an
online communicator: 'IS takes the yearning, the sadness, the anger,
preys on that and draws people into becoming cannon fodder \[...\] It
starts out as a human need that is not being met, and with love and
loyalty between the recruiter and the follower'.^7^ Who would be better
placed to compete with this level of care and attention than teachers?
We spend many hours a day with our students, know them well and
genuinely care about them; most of us would hope that students have at
least one person at school whom they trust, with whom they would feel
able to share anything -- something they might not get anywhere else.
Prevent risks fostering mistrust between students and teachers, and
destroying that invaluable bond.

The Prevent strategy is right in its assumption that education is key in
countering radicalisation, but its approach is wrong. Rather than
turning us into spies, shutting down spaces for discussion and forcing
students to censor themselves, we should be allowed to do what we do
best: encourage free speech, discussion and thought, develop the
critical skills that will allow young people to see through extremist
rhetoric, and show students we are there to help them confront the
issues that affect them.

[^1]: **Stephanie Reed** is an Academic Mentor at a state secondary
    school in Bethnal Green, London.
