---
author:
- D. D. R. Williams[^1]
date: 2016-6
title: "In the Chair: How to Guide Groups and Manage Meetings"
---

My introduction to ward meetings at Claybury Hospital and departmental
and staff meetings during my psychiatric training were negative
experiences. I soon came to the view that these activities were largely
unproductive and best avoided. In contrast, as a young consultant I soon
realised that to enjoy a full professional life, participating
effectively in, influencing the outcome of and chairing meetings were
essential skills. I acquired several standard texts on committee work
and the art of being a good chairman but they were not very useful. The
bulk of their contents were about rules of etiquette and procedure based
on the British parliamentary system. This model is now arcane and
outmoded as the Westminster bubble remains in a time warp, while the
world outside has moved on so that now committees and meetings are
conducted in a more informal and relaxed way. In addition, these old
texts had few useful tips about how to manage a big problem in
committees -- the difficult disruptive individual with an axe to grind.

Andrew Green\'s new book is very welcome. It is an excellent guide to
those who perform a very important but underrated role of chairing
groups and committees. Furthermore, it deals with how groups, committees
and meetings should be run and how individuals can participate
effectively. The author is well placed to write this book. From 1998 to
2013 he was head librarian and chief executive of the National Library
of Wales, one of the five legal deposit libraries in the UK and a major
archive repository. He has acted as chair of a large number of
voluntary, public sector and official bodies. He has also been able to
observe at first hand the technique of others chairing committees and
meetings. To be a member of a committee with a superb chair can be a
real pleasure and I regret that for me this did not occur more often.

The book deals in detail with the responsibilities of the chair for
planning meetings, the task of chairing a board of a public body or
company and the relationship between the chair and the chief executive.
It also covers annual meetings, appointment panels and those
quasi-judicial meetings: disciplinary and grievance hearings. Green is
good on the two sections dealing with the mechanics and dynamics of
conducting meetings. He places great emphasis on thorough preparation,
the value of background work and of taking up issues with individuals
outside the meeting itself. There are useful tips about how to steer a
meeting through a period of turbulence and how to deal with the awkward
committee member who starts up, 'with great respect Mr Chairman',
clearly bristling for a fight.

It is a practical, comprehensive guide with a good index and references
for further reading. I would strongly recommend it as essential reading
for a young consultant psychiatrist who wants to establish a sound
foundation for an important component of a rewarding professional
career. In addition, it acts as a manual to be kept at hand for guidance
when one is asked to accept a new responsibility such as attending an
advisory appointments committee. Recently, it was mooted that I would
have to participate in a telephone conference call about my long-term
research project. This would be a new experience for me and I was glad
to dip into this book for some helpful advice.

[^1]: **D. D. R. Williams** is honorary consultant psychiatrist at
    Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University Health Board, Swansea, Wales, UK,
    email: <donwilliams@osduk.com>
