---
abstract: |
  This paper describes the need for commissioners and service providers
  to consider the development of a whole-system approach to providing
  rehabilitation services for patients with complex psychosis, in the
  context of the current economic pressures and emergence of a
  competitive market in this area of mental health. The practical and
  organisational arrangements for the management of risk with such
  services are described, taking into account the varying provision of
  rehabilitation services across the UK and considering how these can be
  developed against the care clustering system and interfaces with other
  mental health services.
author:
- Tom Edwards
- Rob Macpherson
- Martin Commander
- Alan Meaden
- Sridevi KalidindiCorrespondence to Tom Edwards
  (<thomas.edwards@dwmh.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-6
institute:
- 1Dudley and Walsall Mental Health Partnership NHS Trust
- 22Gether NHS Foundation Trust
- 3Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust
- 4South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
- id: R37
- id: R38
title: "Services for people with complex psychosis: towards a new
  understanding"
---

Mental health rehabilitation services in the UK focus on providing
locally delivered and intensive long-term care, which is cost effective
and aims to maximise independence for patients with particularly complex
mental health needs.^1^

A recent national survey of the provision of in-patient rehabilitation
services^2^ showed that almost all National Health Service (NHS) trusts
in England have at least one type of in-patient rehabilitation unit.
Around 60% of these units were located in the community, 11% were wards
within a psychiatric hospital and 29% were separate units within the
grounds of a psychiatric hospital. The need for long-term care provision
in mental health has also been acknowledged in various studies. Craig
*et al*^3^ reported that around 14% of patients under an early
intervention service made no recovery over the 18-month period of the
study, with the implication that over time they may be likely to require
longer-term care, including from rehabilitation services. Furthermore,
the 10-year follow-up to the Aetiology and Ethnicity in Schizophrenia
and Other Psychoses (AESOP) study also reported that 23% of 345 patients
had no remission of symptoms of 6 months or more during the 10 years,
and of these patients 46% had prominent negative symptoms.^4^

# Fragmentation of rehabilitation services {#S1}

Across England, a range of services are commissioned for patients with
severe and enduring mental illness. Such services were previously
specified through the policy implementation guide produced to support
functional teams,^5^ but increasingly provision is defined more by local
decisions and independent of national/regional review processes. The
services include: assertive outreach and early intervention
teamscommunity rehabilitation teamsNHS rehabilitation in-patient
unitsindependent sector rehabilitation in-patient unitscommunity
forensic teams.

Appropriate services, providing practical and emotional community
support, housing and community-based treatments, are essential elements
in the recovery-oriented care of many patients with mental health
problems. In modern, post-deinstitutionalised mental healthcare, these
services, which are increasingly provided through a mixed economy of
NHS, private and charitable provision, are overseen by commissioning
teams which are sometimes partly based in provider trusts.

However, with the current drive to reduce costs, there are pressures in
many areas for specialist services to be scaled down in scope or closed.
In *The Forgotten Need for Rehabilitation*, Holloway^6^ described the
marginalisation of rehabilitation services. The paper appeared to
foresee disinvestment from and closure of a number of English assertive
outreach teams.^7^ Where this has occurred, their decommissioning teams
have terminated a specific locality focus on engagement with a complex,
high-risk patient group. This leaves community rehabilitation units and
teams (where they exist), community forensic provision (also being cut
back) and in-patient rehabilitation facilities as the only locally
available support with a dedicated focus specifically for this patient
group. In their absence, all patients\' care defaults to community
mental health teams (CMHTs), with their extensive roles and limited
resources, or the wide range of charitable/private services which have
arisen providing domiciliary care and accommodation support packages.
Functional teams such as assertive outreach were originally developed in
response to perceived failings of CMHTs, to adequately engage or reach
out to marginalised and poorly treated, revolving-door patients, as in
the case of Christopher Clunis.^8^ Assertive outreach teams focus on
dual diagnosis and treatment-resistant psychosis, managing transitions
between forensic or out-of-area placements and the long-term management
of patients with impaired daily living skills and risk behaviour.

Holloway\'s paper^5^ also noted the diversification of rehabilitation
in-patient provision involving the independent sector, often at a
distance from the patient\'s home. In out-of-area placements a
patient\'s rehabilitation is delivered remotely, with often limited
opportunity for a more graduated rehabilitation process involving
services from their home area and the ability to reintegrate patients
successfully back into their local community.

Furthermore, although the closure of NHS in-patient rehabilitation units
has achieved local cost savings, such decisions appear to have
contributed to inappropriate use of acute in-patient psychiatric beds
and often lengthy delays while alternative rehabilitation in-patient
placements are identified, highlighting the likelihood that such
patients have been inadequately supported in the community.
Coincidentally, traditional supported accommodation models such as
supported lodgings and group homes, which were part of the
deinstitutionalisation movement, are now becoming outdated and this may
have contributed to a perception that residential care is less
'institutional' when provided by non-mental health trained staff.

Such changes fragment care pathways for this patient group and it is
more difficult for commissioners and NHS trust providers to monitor the
care quality and cost of such services.

# Reinstitutionalisation {#S2}

A study in nine European countries^9^ showed that between 2002 and 2006,
the number of psychiatric beds fell but in most countries, including
England, there was an increase in the number of psychiatric patients in
forensic in-patient services, places in supervised/supported
accommodation and in prisons. This development has been termed
'reinstitutionalisation', but it is important to note that the new
sheltered and supported housing developments are not typically
'institutional' in character and less than 10% of prison inmates have
psychosis.^10^ Thus, although it is possible that there may have been
some reinstitutionalisation of people with mental health problems from
'open' hospitals to secure and high-dependency in-patient rehabilitation
settings, it is unlikely that there has been much reinstitutionalisation
back to prison. Increases in supervised and supported housing are not
simply explained by changes in morbidity or prevalence rates of severe
and enduring mental illness. Changes in family structures, which have
resulted in the loss of extended support to those with mental ill
health, may be a factor and concepts of mental illness may have
broadened,^11^ so that people with conditions such as personality
disorder may be more likely to receive support services. Alternatively,
as part of a business model, private companies may have effectively
widened their 'market share' in providing for this form of institutional
care.^12^ Reinstitutionalisation indicates that whether or not
commissioners pay for complex psychosis services in NHS trusts, services
will need to be ensured for this patient group, whether in the public or
independent sector. Despite the changing political and cultural
environment, the need for services in a locality remains and appears to
be relatively stable.

# New models of care {#S3}

For several decades, UK government policy has increasingly promoted a
market philosophy encouraging competition between different private
residential care providers (not-for-profit and for-profit), at times in
direct competition with state providers.^12^ This has also happened
across Europe.^13^ The Supporting People strategy^14^ was set up
explicitly to ring-fence and coordinate all housing support for
vulnerable people, including those with mental health problems. The
initiative seems to have been implemented variably, in some areas
leading to greater understanding and coordination of supported
accommodation, but elsewhere a lack of clear priorities has led to
concerns about reduced access to services. An evaluation of the
programme^15^ concluded that integrated services worked best when the
service was determined by patient characteristics rather than
pre-existing organisational structures, and that statutory services
tended to be less flexible and more defined by professional and
organisational priorities than in the voluntary sector.

A newly developed form of support for patients with severe mental
illness has been the 'tailor made' care package. These have been
developed in many areas, sometimes replacing highly supported
hostel/24-hour nursed care provision. This model of supported
accommodation, which has been used in some areas of the UK and also in
the USA, is becoming more established in mainstream mental health
services. Benefits include use of standard housing stock and a move away
from transitional, staffed, shared accommodation models, which have
become less acceptable to patients.^16^ Services may be provided through
the voluntary sector, housing associations or private/independent
organisations. Sometimes partnerships between these organisations and
the NHS are in operation, with one organisation owning/running the
building and another providing staffing/outreach support.

The funding and management of these placements is complex, with the
involvement of both the NHS and Social Services. Some mental health
providers and commissioners have specialist teams that ensure that care
packages are scrutinised and move-on as well as changes are facilitated,
as and when appropriate, in order to avoid stagnation of such
placements.

# The forensic service interface {#S4}

Violence or threatening behaviour is common in in-patient psychiatric
settings and may be a precipitant for admission. A review^17^ of 11
studies found a median rate of 15% of patients committing a violent
assault prior to admission (range 10--40%). It is, however, notable that
a small minority of patients tend to be responsible for a large
proportion of incidents.^18^ A study^19^ of problematic behaviour in a
UK new long-stay population across 208 acute hospital beds identified 38
patients and of these 16% had harmed another, and 34% had been
threatening or intimidating towards others.

In one study across a range of community rehabilitation units, long-term
complex care units and high-dependency units,^20^ 50% of all patients
had a history of serious violence or dangerousness, with this rising to
85% of the patients currently in the high-dependency units, and this was
considered to be a significant barrier to discharge.

Between 1998 and 2008, the provision of mental illness beds in the NHS
decreased by 62%, whereas the rate of involuntary admissions increased
by 64%. Over this time, the number of non-secure beds reduced by about
two-thirds, and secure bed provision increased by over 250%. The rise in
involuntary admissions was due to an increase in the rate of civil
involuntary admissions. However, forensic involuntary admissions
fluctuated and were 15% lower at the end of this period.^21^ Provision
of secure psychiatric beds in the independent sector in England has in
recent times steadily increased.^22^ These changes have led to concerns
regarding the costs of secure hospital care in private and third-sector
hospitals, the geographical separation of these vulnerable patients from
their homes, families and community backgrounds, the quality of the care
provided and the availability of links to base services for monitoring
and return of the patients.^23^ Attention has been drawn recently^24^ to
the shift to use 'locked rehabilitation units' as a less expensive and
less rigidly specified form of longer-term in-patient rehabilitation
care.

The commissioning split between NHS England and local clinical
commissioning groups has set up possible 'perverse incentives' which
could affect patients\' progress along their rehabilitation pathways.
Although secure in-patient services have grown, there has been a
disinvestment in community forensic services, resulting in forensic
community patients receiving standard care through community mental
health teams, generally with no additional training. There is now a
complex and risky interface between forensic and community mental health
services.

# Care clustering {#S5}

As part of a move towards payment by results in mental health, the NHS
directed in 2012/2013 that currencies comprising 20 care clusters would
be made for the majority of adult mental health services in England.
Each care cluster describes a group of patients with shared
characteristics, classified with a mental health clustering tool. The
cluster is linked to care packages, which have an overall cost and
associated tariff. The system has been criticised, not least by the
Royal College of Psychiatrists, who highlighted concerns over the lack
of validity or reliability of this model of case identification,
recommending specifically that diagnosis and a wider notion of
complexity should also be included in the currency to improve
reliability, validity and predictive value.^25^

The care clustering system is based largely on the CMHT component of the
pathway. Acute in-patient, older adults and rehabilitation care pathways
do not seem to have been considered and as a consequence, there is a
risk of misrepresenting the care needs and subsequent funding for this
particular patient group, whose needs can have associated high costs. In
this context, the Royal College of Psychiatrists\' Rehabilitation and
Social Psychiatry Faculty, with other College specialties, is developing
its own version of a clinical assessment/monitoring system. The
College\'s position statement on clustering^25^ suggested that the
process may undermine the organisation of mental health systems from a
service and financial perspective. It remains unclear how far funding of
mental health services will be based on the clustering system, but at
this time English mental health NHS trusts are routinely collecting and
reporting on these data.

The care cluster most relevant to rehabilitation in-patient units is
care cluster 13 (complex needs, high support) and to community
rehabilitation teams is care cluster 12 (complex needs, medium support).
In addition, the care clusters most relevant for patients under the care
of assertive outreach teams are care clusters 16 (dual diagnosis) and 17
(psychosis and affective disorder, difficult to engage).^26^

# The place of assertive outreach {#S6}

A recent review^27^ reported on the evidence from studies outside Europe
of reduced hospital bed usage, improved engagement and higher levels of
satisfaction by patients under assertive outreach teams, noting that
this has not been replicated by studies in the UK. The UK700 study^28^
looked at intensive case management without other aspects of assertive
outreach teams and failed to deliver reductions in bed use. The REACT
study^29^ included assertive outreach teams with more fidelity to the
original assertive outreach model, and although reductions in bed use
were noted, these did not reach statistical significance. However, it
was suggested that this study was underpowered. Despite this, the REACT
study also reported that assertive outreach teams might be better at
engaging patients and lead to greater satisfaction with services. In a
10-year UK follow-up study of 93 patients,^27^ there was a reduction in
hospital bed usage from 72 days per year prior to assertive outreach
treatment to 44 days per year during assertive outreach treatment.

Other authors^30^ have suggested that the assertive outreach approach
should be maintained and it appears that current provision in England is
variable, with some areas moving entirely to exclusively CMHTs, some
retaining full assertive outreach teams and some areas developing hybrid
models such as the Functional Assertive Community Treatment Team (FACT)
approach which has been deployed extensively in Holland.^31^

We believe that there remains a group of patients who, despite the
national reduction of assertive outreach service provision, have a high
level of need and complexity and may present challenging engagement
issues and high levels of disability alongside complex risk issues.
There may also be complex family pathology or other factors affecting
physical health or risk. In many cases, they need a long-term intensive
level of support and many would fit within the patient group described
in care clusters 16 and 17.

However, with the re-integration of assertive outreach teams into CMHTs,
there is a risk of these patients becoming increasingly difficult to
follow up, repeating the cycle of disengagement and adverse events which
led to the development of assertive outreach services in the first
place. The reduced support available from a care coordinator working in
a busy CMHT, coupled with the loss of the assertive outreach team
approach, seems inevitably to risk disengagement and a failure to
address relapse at an early stage. A team approach is crucial given the
multiple needs of this patient group and is less likely to be available
in already stretched CMHTs. Access to psychological interventions is
particularly challenging in these services and attendance at out-patient
appointments may not be feasible. There is a risk that patients with
greatest levels of disability, who may be least able to express their
needs, will become chronically ill and neglected in the community.

Disinvestment from assertive outreach teams in the UK has also
paradoxically coincided with the development and implementation of the
community treatment order (CTO) (implemented by the 2007 amendments to
the Mental Health Act 1983), which in England and Wales has been taken
up at a far higher rate than was expected.^32^ Although the OCTET
study^33^ reported that CTOs were ineffective, others have questioned
this conclusion.^34--36^ Despite this continuing wider debate, recent
research^37^ has suggested that the use of the CTO in an assertive
outreach context was specifically associated with a dramatic decline in
hospital usage. Treatment adherence rose from 11 to 84% and the authors
noted the importance of intensive case management alongside the use of
the CTO.

# A whole-system approach {#S7}

The fragmentation of rehabilitation services described in this paper
presents a range of challenges. [Figure 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"} provides
a diagrammatic representation of a 'whole system' of support for
patients who require such services. These patients could be under the
care of one or more of NHS services, private companies and voluntary
agencies. The relevant care clusters are configured into the diagram and
show how the various parts of mental health rehabilitation services can
be mapped against the care clustering system.

![Rehabilitation services for patients with complex mental health needs.
NHS, National Health Service.](159f1){#F1}

In practice, this is a dynamic system, with a flow of patients across
the different elements, including step down from forensic services to
local rehabilitation services. A whole-system approach allows the
inclusion of services provided within the NHS, as well as the private
and charitable sector, and implies that a failure to develop support of
one type may be compensated by the provision of another. There is also
an implicit suggestion that an absence of effective local services may
result in an increase in the numbers of patients who require out-of-area
services.

The recent separation of social care from healthcare provision in many
areas of England has resulted in greater complexity in the
decision-making arrangements by funding panels around costly support
packages. For this whole system to work effectively, there is a
requirement for cooperation across statutory and private care providers
and this is a particular challenge considering the initial intention in
the new commissioning arrangements to create more competition.

Rehabilitation services for patients with complex mental health needs
([Fig. 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}) focus on the area of rehabilitation as
described in *Guidance for Commissioners of Rehabilitation Services for
People with Complex Mental Health Needs*^38^ and can be adjusted within
a particular geographical locality to take into account various factors,
such as historical provision, local morbidity/comorbidity prevalence
rates and levels of deprivation. In this context, whatever amount of
contraction might have occurred in NHS rehabilitation services at a
local level over time, [Fig. 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"} also demonstrates
what provision is necessary to appropriately manage the risk and deliver
the intensive levels of working required for this high-need but
low-volume patient group. This can also involve patients moving to more
independent living with support from the already described tailor-made
care packages. Such a service would also help alleviate some of the
emerging pressures within CMHTs and provide a focused commitment to the
review of patients in out-of-area placements, which are coming under
increasing financial scrutiny by commissioners.

The various services necessary to provide rehabilitation support for
patients with psychosis and complex needs might include: an assertive
outreach servicea community rehabilitation serviceclose interface
working with forensic servicesintegrated working with in-patient
rehabilitation services within the NHS trust (where
available)comprehensive out-of-area reviewing arrangementsdedicated
input into supported or semi-supported accommodation and tailor made
care packages within the rehabilitation pathway.

This article is not prescriptive in the exact specifications of the
operational components of such a service. This is owing to the differing
levels of demand between urban *v*. rural locations, the historical
reasons as to what is still available locally and also what is planned
to remain in the current economic climate. However, with the demise of
assertive outreach teams and the varying availability of community and
in-patient rehabilitation services across NHS trusts, there is an
evident need for a complex psychosis service to be developed.

# Conclusions {#S8}

The absence of current government policy regarding rehabilitation
services, combined with the economic pressures on the NHS and the
political landscape of mixed providers operating in a progressively
competitive market of rehabilitation services in the UK, has produced an
increasingly complex pattern of service provision in this area of mental
health. Commissioners and providers need to consider carefully which
services for patients with complex mental health needs are needed and
how the quality and performance of these services will be evaluated.

We strongly advocate for 'a local, whole system, integrated
rehabilitation pathway', as described in a recent paper.^1^ The
rehabilitation pathway is set within a changing health economy and needs
to be dynamic and able to respond to changing patient need over time. It
should ideally be combined with systems to monitor the quality and
availability of services in each local healthcare region and area and to
capture relevant clinical, service (including financial) and patient
identified outcomes. Resource cuts create dilemmas for both
commissioners and service managers and are set against the backdrop of
the newly developed care clustering system. Adequate provision of
services with a rehabilitation approach and a recovery orientation are
needed to support these patients, with their individual paths towards
recovery, over time.

[^1]: **Tom Edwards**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Dudley and Walsall
    Mental Health NHS Partnership Trust; **Rob Macpherson**, Consultant
    Psychiatrist, 2Gether NHS Foundation Trust; **Martin Commander**,
    Consultant Psychiatrist, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS
    Foundation Trust; **Alan Meaden**, Consultant Clinical Psychologist,
    Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust;
    **Sridevi Kalidindi**, Consultant Psychiatrist, South London and
    Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust.
