---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** We report the results of a clinical audit of
  patients\' reactions to two types of talking therapy groups
  facilitated by assistant psychologists and psychology graduates on
  three acute wards. Patients\' experiences of problem-solving and
  interpersonal group formats were explored via focus groups and
  structured interviews with 29 group participants.

  **Results** Both group formats generated high satisfaction ratings,
  with benefits related mostly to generic factors.

  **Clinical implications** Adequately trained and supported assistant
  psychologists and psychology graduates can provide supportive talking
  groups that patients find helpful.
author:
- Jonathan Radcliffe
- Laura BirdCorrespondence to Jonathan Radcliffe
  (<jonathan.radcliffe@slam.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
- 2Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
title: "Talking therapy groups on acute psychiatric wards: patients\\'
  experience of two structured group formats"
---

UK acute psychiatric wards typically have a day or less of weekly input
from a qualified psychologist.^1^ Talking therapy groups are a
cost-effective method of promoting social interaction and access to
psychotherapeutic interventions. In-patient groups are challenging to
facilitate -- wards can be busy and chaotic, there is high patient
turnover, and patients can be disturbed or disruptive in the group.^2^
The evidence base for the outcome of in-patient groups of short duration
is limited owing to the difficulties in demonstrating the benefits of
brief interventions which are part of a larger, heterogeneous treatment
regime and where there are complex patient variables.^3^ However,
well-run groups can improve social interaction for patients, many of
whom are withdrawn and isolated, as well as providing other benefits
derived from talking and thinking.^4^

# Study setting and design {#S1}

In the current acute psychiatric unit, in-patients can attend groups
throughout their admission. Qualified psychological staff facilitate
groups such as recovery, social cognition and psychodynamic groups. In
addition, assistant psychologists, essentially psychology graduates
trained on the job, have facilitated groups for several years. They
learn by being apprenticed to experienced colleagues and through
fortnightly group supervision. Group facilitation can also be carried
out by junior doctors and nursing staff, thus providing valuable
training experiences.

The present study focused on two types of groups: a problem-solving
format (group 1) and an interpersonal format (group 2), each facilitated
by assistant psychologists and psychology graduate volunteers.

## Problem-solving group format {#S2}

Problem-solving deficits have been found in individuals diagnosed with
schizophrenia^5^ and other disorders.^6^ Targeted therapies have been
shown to be effective in improving problem-solving skills, remediating
verbal problem-solving deficits and helping patients cope with
symptoms.^7^ Problem-solving groups can be effective with patients from
a range of educational backgrounds.^8^

Grey\'s^9^ problem-solving format was used on the unit for 4 years, but
to our knowledge, it has not been evaluated previously. In this format,
hypothetical scenarios of commonly encountered problems are read out to
the group by an attendee, and the group then apply three stages of
problem-solving: (1) identifying the core aspects of the problem, (2)
generating solutions, (3) evaluating these solutions. In addition to
improving problem-solving ability, the format aims to provide
stimulation and improve social engagement, collaborative working,
awareness of others\' views and concentration.^10^

Over the preceding year, group 1 (problem-solving format) attendance
averaged 5.7 patients per one 1 h session (46 weekly sessions, range
1--9 patients per session, 164 patients attended at least once). Two or
three patients attend from each ward, selected after discussions with
staff. Patients likely to be highly disruptive are excluded, but
otherwise patients who understand English sufficiently can attend.

## Interpersonal group format {#S3}

Interpersonal theory emphasises the role interpersonal format deficits
play in contributing to and maintaining mental health problems. Doerfler
*et al*^11^ found 25 to 38% of in-patients had interpersonal format
difficulties prior to admission. Interpersonal format groups facilitate
patients relating to each other in the 'here and now' to help them
communicate more clearly, express positive emotions, identify mannerisms
that attract or deter others, listen, be supportive, foster disclosure
and initiate relationships.^12^

Our interpersonal group uses Hajek\'s^13^ adaptation of Yalom\'s^4^
approach for lower functioning in-patients, whereby a topic is
introduced to facilitate personal disclosure; for example, 'Describe an
important change in your life' and 'Where do you imagine yourself to be
in five years?' Participants then express their feelings and discuss
their experiences, give and receive interpersonal feedback. The aims are
for patients to engage with each other, reduce isolation and
hospital-related anxieties, provide an opportunity to be helpful to
others, and help patients realise that they have problems in common,
leaving them feeling less alone ('universality'). For an illustration of
interpersonal format group work with in-patients, see Hajek.^14^ Weekly
group 2 (interpersonal) attendance at 41 sessions over the year averaged
4.8 patients (range 1--9) and 121 individuals attended at least one
group.

# Aims {#S4}

The aim of this study was to explore patients\' experience of two
non-qualified therapist-led therapeutic groups in relation to the stated
aims of each format (problem-solving or interpersonal format).

# Method {#S5}

An exploratory, sequential, mixed-methods design was used,^15^
integrating qualitative and quantitative methods. In phase one,
qualitative data were gathered in two focus groups. These were used to
generate a series of qualitative and quantitative questions to be used
in phase two, which consisted of individual interviews (questionnaire
available from the authors on request). Quantitative results are
reported, together with qualitative data used to offer explanations and
illustrate the diversity of views. In the discussion, facilitators\'
reflections aid a further interpretation of the findings.

## Focus groups {#S6}

Two focus groups using a standard method^16^ were set up to generate the
questions for the individual interviews. Four to five patients
participated in each group. The focus groups took place immediately
after the therapy groups so participants\' experiences were fresh in
their minds.

Additional questions for the individual interviews were generated from
aims specified in the manuals for each group format.^4,9,13^ The
questionnaire consists of 28 closed and open-ended questions and was
used for evaluating both group formats, with the exception of a question
relating to the three stages of problem-solving, which was omitted for
group 2 attendees. One of the authors (L.B.) piloted the questionnaire
with five in-patients, after which some questions were deleted and the
wording of others improved.

## Individual interview participants {#S7}

All patients who attended a group over a 4-month period were invited to
take part. In all, 29 patients completed 30 semi-structured
questionnaires, 15 for each format, and 1 patient completed a
questionnaire for both formats; 16 patients had attended both formats,
and the rest had attended only one.

## Procedure {#S8}

Participants were interviewed on the ward by an independent interviewer
not involved in the groups, who emphasised confidentiality and wrote
down responses. Interviews took 15--20 min. Respondents had attended an
average of 1.4 groups of the format in question. They were interviewed
up to 3 days after attending the group.

## Analysis of questionnaire responses {#S9}

Descriptive statistics were applied to closed-question responses and a
thematic analysis^17^ to open-ended responses. The thematic analysis
followed six phases:^17^ (1) familiarisation with the data; (2)
generating initial codes; (3) searching for themes; (4) reviewing
potential themes; (5) defining and naming themes; and (6) producing the
report. As similar ideas were shared across the various open questions,
the coded responses were themed together where similar ideas were being
communicated. Another investigator (J.R.) checked coding and themes for
credibility.

# Results {#S10}

## Generic benefits {#S11}

Overall satisfaction rates were high as shown by closed-ended questions
([Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}).

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Satisfaction rates for problem-solving (group 1) and interpersonal
(group 2) formats based on the number of positive (Yes) responses in
both groups
:::

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;">Did you …</th>
<th style="text-align: right;">Group 1<br />
<em>n</em> = 15</th>
<th style="text-align: right;">Group 2<br />
<em>n</em> = 15</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Enjoy the group?</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">14</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">15</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Feel the group was supportive?</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">14</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">13</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Find using the task difficult?</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">3</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">5</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Find the group helpful?</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">15</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">13</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Find the structure of the group
useful?</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">13</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">13</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Find the task helped you talk about your
own experiences?</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">11</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">9</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Find the group relevant to you?</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">10</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">12</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Find out useful practical information
within the group?</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">8</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">9</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Find it helped you feel more able to cope
with your own challenges?</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">10</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">13</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
:::

When asked what aspects of the group the participants liked or found
helpful, several referred to the value of doing something active off the
ward (group 1 (problem-solving format), *n*=6; group 2 (interpersonal
format), *n*=1). Six group 1 attendees enjoyed being with others in a
group, whereas six group 2 attendees valued the opportunity to talk
freely with others in a supportive environment. With regard to the
aspects of the groups the participants disliked or found unhelpful, more
group 2 (*n*=8) than group 1 (*n*=1) patients referred to other
patients\' behaviour, for example talking too much or too little,
interrupting and walking out of the group.

Respondents from both groups thought their groups worked well together
(group 1, *n*=14; group 2, *n*=10) and helped them to concentrate (group
2, *n*=13; group 1, *n*=14). Both formats aimed to help patients become
more aware of others\' viewpoints, but more group 1 respondents thought
it was useful to hear other patients\' views than group 2 respondents
(*n*=15 and *n*=10 respectively). When asked why this was important,
group 2 responses were more interpersonally oriented, for example, 'I
have realised that I am not the only one with problems\' and 'It is
useful to hear somebody else speak about what they think -- not feeling
different or alone'.

Although the interviews involved questions about the group that patients
had attended most recently, nine participants had also attended the
other type of group. Of these, five preferred the problem-solving format
(of group 1) and four the interpersonal format (of group 2).

## Problem-solving skills {#S12}

When asked whether they had developed problem-solving skills,
unsurprisingly, more group 1 respondents felt they had done so (*n*=11;
group 2, *n*=4). When asked how the group helped them achieve that,
group 1 members said focusing on a scenario helped, for example 'It made
me think more and sort things out', 'It showed how I can deal with a
situation if I put my mind to it'. Although most group 1 patients felt
that they had learned to solve problems better, only one could name the
three stages of problem-solving used in the group; six recalled one or
two stages.

## Interpersonal learning {#S13}

A key aim in an interpersonal group format is for patients to learn more
about themselves. Participants in both groups were asked whether they
had learned anything new about themselves, and there were no differences
between the groups, with nine participants in each group saying 'yes'.
When asked the follow-up question, group 1 attendees tended to make
general affirmative statements such as 'I like people', 'I am able to
communicate with people, I can express myself' and 'I am more
intelligent than I thought I was', whereas group 2 attendees' responses
included 'I learned to stay calm and listen to others', 'I was able to
be more open in front of others and express myself more without getting
anxious' and '\[I was able to\] get on with other people and how to
listen to them'.

Another aim of the interpersonal group format is to facilitate
disclosure of personal information and feelings. There were no
differences between the groups in this respect, however, some
differences were revealed by the follow-up qualitative question. Group 1
attendees expressed their views in relation to solving the problem
(*n*=6 *v. n*=0 in group 2), whereas group 2 respondents said that they
had talked about personal or emotional experiences (*n*=8 *v. n*=1 in
group 1), for example, 'I shared my experience of bipolar \[disorder\]'
and 'How I deal with anger or don\'t'. Moreover, attendees said it was
good to discover that others had similar experiences and problems. These
experiences correspond to Yalom\'s interpersonal format aim of
'universality' (*n*=4; group 1: *n*=1).

# Discussion {#S14}

The Department of Health emphasises the value of groups with
psychological focus.^18^ Researchers have demonstrated the benefits of
having a varied therapeutic programme containing different types of
group.^19^ Yalom^4^ describes the generic benefits of in-patient groups
common to a range of groups as well as benefits that are specific to
each particular type. Yalom\'s generic benefits include engaging
patients in a therapeutic process, discovering that talking helps,
identifying problems, reducing isolation, being helpful to others and
reducing hospital-related anxiety. There are few studies that compare
patients\' experience of different kinds of group, and none that
separate generic from specific benefits. The present study was not an
outcome study, but an exploratory investigation of patients\'
experiences of these benefits.

The main limitations of this project were the constraints imposed by the
type of data and the small sample size, which meant that inferential
statistics were not possible. Moreover, the individual interview
questions were somewhat leading. Scaled responses would have improved
the design. Nevertheless, several findings that may be relevant for
clinical practice have emerged.

The key result was that nearly all attendees were satisfied with the
groups. The cited benefits of group attendance were primarily 'generic',
although there were indications of specific format benefits. The generic
benefits included sharing experiences, patients becoming more aware of
others\' points of view, expressing themselves, improved concentration,
learning something new about themselves and hearing others\' views.
These are consistent with Yalom\'s generic aims of engaging clients in
the therapeutic process and combating social isolation. The results
support the notion that ward groups improve morale.^20^ Approximately
equal numbers preferred each format showing the value of variety of
format. The findings of specific benefits demonstrate the value of using
different formats.^19^

An unexpected benefit of the problem-solving format was patients
disclosing information about themselves and becoming more aware of
others\' points of view. Despite these being interpersonal
format-specific aims, this suggests these are generic benefits. However,
interpersonal group respondents tended to describe sharing personal
information rather than sharing their ideas.

Even though problem-solving group attendees could not identify the
problem-solving stages, they said that the group helped them think about
problems. It is possible that identifying elements of problematic
situations, thinking creatively, evaluating solutions and using language
to express these is valuable, especially when problems relate to current
frustrations. Going through each stage may teach patients to think more
logically and sequentially about problems. However, this needs
evaluating.

More patients complained about other patients\' behaviour in the
interpersonal format group. Qualitative data suggested that attendees
found the interpersonal format group more challenging and felt more
contained in the problem-solving group. This is consistent with the
second author\'s experience of the problem-solving group, which provided
a more tightly imposed structure, making it especially suitable for
patients with anxiety, although facilitators tend to prefer the
interpersonal format group as it is less repetitive to facilitate.
Disclosing personal feelings can make some patients feel anxious. On the
other hand, comments showed that patients especially valued sharing more
personal information in a supportive environment. The facilitators\'
view is that when the interpersonal format group works well, patients
find sharing their experiences satisfying and this creates a sense of
togetherness. In both formats, the facilitators set ground rules that
patients should respect each others\' opinions and give each other a
chance to speak. In the more open agenda of the interpersonal format
group, facilitators sometimes find it difficult to ensure everybody gets
to speak, particularly if a group comprises more vocal patients or those
who are less assertive. Patients deviate from the ground rules more in
the interpersonal format group with its more fluid structure. The
problem-solving group has the advantage in terms of the facilitator
being able to direct the group to the task. Although Yalom describes
interpersonal format group difficulties that emerge during a session as
'grist for the mill', it is difficult for less experienced staff to use
the 'grist' therapeutically. Facilitating and handling social feedback
requires more skill, for example when patients criticise others and
anger or distress each other. Overall, interpersonal format groups may
provide deeper benefits but require more skill and longer time shadowing
an experienced practitioner. The more structured problem-solving groups
may be more suitable for less experienced staff. Further comparative
research is needed.

The phased mixed-methods approach gave validity as the individual
interview questions were partly derived from the focus groups.
Methodology could be improved in future studies through more detailed
analysis of focus groups transcripts which would produce a richer
picture of themes and differences. Individual interviews similarly would
have greater empirical precision with more cautious avoidance of leading
questions. Mean age of interviewees, gender make-up, diagnoses, length
of stay would add value, as well as control for number and type of
groups previously attended. A third non-talking group could be added to
provide further basis for exploration of generic benefits of groups,
such as a relaxation group.

To conclude, the study found good satisfaction with groups, showing that
suitably trained, less qualified staff can provide valuable experiences
for in-patients as part of a therapeutic programme. At a time when
resources are limited, further research could explore whether it is
primarily the process of taking part in groups that benefits patients,
how much the format of the group matters, and which core principles make
an intervention valuable. With respect to facilitation of groups, future
research could compare the core skills and attributes needed to run
different types of groups, and the efficacy of groups facilitated by
less qualified staff such as graduate volunteers or peer support
workers.

Thanks to Lenka Oborná for help with conducting the interviews.

[^1]: **Jonathan Radcliffe** is consultant clinical psychologist,
    Lewisham Hospital, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust,
    and **Laura Bird** is trainee clinical psychologist, Surrey and
    Borders Partnership NHS Foundation Trust.
