---
author:
- Sarah Cornick[^1]
date: 2016-2
title: "Lean Behavioral Health: The Kings County Hospital Story"
---

With ever increasing pressure on budgets and an emphasis on quality,
safety and efficiency of healthcare services, quality improvement has
become part of everyday practice in the UK, making this book a
particularly topical read. Lean is a way of thinking derived from the
Toyota car industry, which looks to define value from a customer\'s
perspective and create value by eliminating waste throughout the chain
of processes required to deliver a product. The idea of continuous
improvement is inherent within a lean system. Lean systems have been
utilised in the manufacturing sector with varying degrees of success,
but more recently the principles and techniques of lean have been
transferred to other sectors, including healthcare. This book outlines
how lean principles and tools were utilised to lift psychiatric services
at The Kings County Hospital out of crisis and promote a culture of
continuous improvement in the quality of services delivered.

The book was not always the easiest read and there were several sections
where a further copy-edit would have been beneficial. It took time to
become familiar with the language of lean and the acronyms used,
although a glossary at the start of the book assisted in the learning
process. Earlier chapters set the scene, explaining lean and the
background to the crisis facing the hospital, and gave brief details of
many improvement projects that were undertaken. However, at this point
the exact nature of problems within different departments, solutions
identified and how lean methodologies had assisted the process were not
always clear. Later chapters revisited some of the examples on a
department-by-department basis and gave a better sense of the value of
lean tools in identifying and solving problems with the aim of
sustainable change and creation of a culture of continuous improvement.
Figures supplementing the text gave an indication of the scope of
various lean events but it was impossible to read the detail of what had
been discussed due to their small size. Although this book was not
aiming to act as a manual for the application of lean in a healthcare
setting, at times it was frustrating that detail in examples and figures
was lacking because this would have strengthened understanding of the
difficulties facing the organisation prior to and during change events
and the value of lean in helping to identify solutions and guide teams
through the change process.

At The Kings County Hospital, application of lean thinking typically
involved initial work to establish the current state of all activities
in a process requiring improvement, creation of a target state, and
corresponding gap analysis between the two states. Identified problems
were then addressed through rapid improvement events (during the course
of a 4.5-day event waste was identified, solutions tested and
improvements made), longer projects and immediate 'just do its'.
Evidence was provided that where lean principles were successfully
implemented within the organisation, there were consequent benefits:
financially, to staff productivity and morale, to the quality, safety
and efficiency of clinical services delivered, and in the experience of
patients. For example, in the psychiatric emergency room, the physical
flow of patients through the department and collection of patient data
were streamlined, with clear standards of work developed for staff
involved in each step in the process. This led to elimination of
previous duplication of work, shorter nursing and psychiatric triage
times and improved standards of patient care.

Overall, the book did provide a thought-provoking and, at times,
inspirational commentary on real-life and wide-ranging changes to
working practices across the hospital\'s psychiatric emergency,
in-patient and out-patient services. It demonstrated how improvement
methodologies can help to establish a new organisational culture, reduce
waste and improve quality in any process pathway. As well as commenting
on successful changes, the book also offered insights into changes which
had not worked so well and reasons for that, acknowledging that the
process of improvement is ongoing and that the organisation continues to
strive towards an ideal state. The book offers a good case study as a
starting point for anyone interested in incorporating improvement
methodologies at any level of an organisation, demonstrating the
benefits of thinking outside of the healthcare box and utilising
successful quality and value improvement strategies developed in other
sectors.

[^1]: **Sarah Cornick** is an ST5 in general adult psychiatry, South
    London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK, email:
    <sarah.cornick@slam.nhs.uk>
