---
abstract: |
  Personal health budgets (PHBs) were piloted in the National Health
  Service (NHS) in England between 2009 and 2012 and were found to have
  greater positive effects on quality of life and psychological
  well-being for those with mental health problems than commissioned
  service, as well as reducing their use of unplanned care. The
  government intends to extend PHBs in England for long-term conditions,
  including mental health, from April 2015. Given the importance of
  engaging clinicians in the next phase of PHB development, we provide
  an overview of the approach, synthesise the evidence from the national
  pilot and debate some of the opportunities and challenges. Balancing
  individual choice and recovery with concerns for risk, equity and the
  sustainability of existing community services is the central tension
  underpinning this innovation in mental health service delivery.
author:
- Vidhya Alakeson
- Jed Boardman
- Billy Boland
- Helen Crimlisk
- Charlotte Harrison
- Steve Iliffe
- Masood Khan
- Rory O\'Shea
- Janet PattersonCorrespondence to Jed Boardman
  (<jed.boardman@slam.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-2
institute:
- 1NHS England
- 2Institute of Psychiatry, King\'s College London
- 3Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust
- 4Sheffield Health and Social Care Foundation Trust
- 5South West London and St George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust
- 6University College London
- 7Royal College of Psychiatrists
- 8Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Trust
- 9Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
title: Debating personal health budgets
---

Direct payments and personal budgets in social care have been introduced
as part of a move towards the personalisation of care,whereby a person
is able to choose the services best placed to meet their unique needs.
Their equivalent in healthcare, personal health budgets (PHBs;
[www.personalhealthbudgets.england.nhs.uk](www.personalhealthbudgets.england.nhs.uk)),
are not yet widely available, but has been subject to pilot testing in
England and, since October 2014, all individuals who are eligible for
continuing healthcare have the right to have a PHB.^1^ Around 56 000
people are eligible for continuing healthcare. These people have the
highest level of ongoing health and support needs and the National
Health Service (NHS) pays for their health and social care. Adults with
mental health conditions are not often eligible for continuing health
care because they often do not have high nursing care-type needs, but
older adults with dementia are more likely to qualify as are some people
with intellectual disabilities. The roll-out of PHBs for other groups,
such as those with mental health problems, is currently at the
discretion of local decision makers, although NHS England expects
clinical commissioning groups to lead a major expansion of PHBs in
2015-2016. The policy and plans for PHBs are limited to the NHS in
England.

Many clinicians may be unaware of the developments in PHBs^2^ and only a
few psychiatrists were involved in the national pilot which suggested
that PHBs may be of value to people with mental health conditions. The
purpose of this paper is to introduce the concept of PHBs and to
highlight some of the opportunities and challenges that the use of PHBs
presents. Our intention is to extend the debate on the use of PHBs and
their value in mental health services.

# What is a personal health budget? {#S1}

A personal health budget is an individual allocation of NHS resources
that can be used to meet identified health and well-being needs in
possibly new and innovative ways outside of traditionally commissioned
services. The national evaluation identifies a wide range of purchases
made with a PHB, from traditional clinical services such as therapies
and nursing care, to social care-related services such as meal
preparation and social activities, to well-being services such as gym
memberships, computers and art classes.

A PHB is not intended to cover all aspects of NHS care: in-patient care,
emergency services, general practitioner (GP) services and
pharmaceuticals are all excluded, and certain goods and services are
prohibited. PHBs are focused on meeting ongoing needs where bringing
together the lived experience of individuals and the learned expertise
of clinical professionals can improve the quality and outcomes of care.
In this respect, they have much in common with other approaches to
personalising the management of long-term conditions such as the house
of care model^3^ and shared decision-making.

At the centre of a PHB is a care plan which is developed by the
individual in conjunction with their clinical team and signed off by the
NHS from a clinical and financial standpoint. Individuals can choose to
manage their PHBs in different ways depending on the level of financial
responsibility they wish to take.

# The evidence supporting the roll out of personal health budgets {#S2}

There is some evidence for the impact of personal budgets on people with
mental health problems in social care, but this is limited. A recent
systematic review of 15 studies in this area found mainly positive
outcomes.^4^ However, owing to methodological limitations, the findings
were judged to be insufficiently robust and not adequate to inform
policy and practice.

There is some evidence for the value of PHBs. The national personal
health budget evaluation was based on an independent, 3-year
longitudinal trial conducted by the Personal Social Services Research
Unit (PSSRU), involving a total of just over 2000 people across
treatment and control groups and a mixed-methods design with
randomisation in some, but not all, local areas.^5^ Outcomes for the PHB
and control groups were compared at a target 12th month after initial
recruitment. The total sample size was adequate and provided sufficient
statistical power. The subgroup analyses for individual health
conditions had lower numbers and consequently less power. Participants
had a range of health conditions, with 412 experiencing mental health
problems. The 'mental health conditions' group was not homogeneous and
contained a broad range of conditions and severities. The average annual
PHB for mental health was £3602.

Overall, the evaluation found that individuals with a personal health
budget reported higher levels of care-related quality of life and
psychological well-being than those receiving care as usual. PHBs were
cost-effective for people with mental health problems and those
receiving NHS continuing healthcare, but cost analyses for those with
other health conditions were inconclusive owing to small subsample
sizes. Those with mental health conditions had lower indirect costs as a
result of using fewer in-patient, emergency and GP services.
Consequently, personal health budgets were found to provide greater net
benefits than conventional services for those with mental health
problems. Overall costs for the PHB group showed a 12% decrease at
follow-up compared with the 8% increase in costs seen in the control
group. Importantly, the way in which PHBs were implemented was found to
have an effect on individual outcomes. Offering PHBs so that individuals
were able to choose how their budget was spent and managed had a
positive impact on outcomes. One restrictive model of implementation
used for 18% of the overall PHB sample resulted in less positive impacts
for PHB holders than for the control group.^5^

Other studies, including evidence from similar programmes in the USA,
also report positive outcomes for individuals, but these are descriptive
or pre/post studies.^6^

# Debating personal health budgets {#S3}

Opinion on PHBs is divided: there are opportunities, but also potential
risks. The rest of this article presents five such aspects. In each
case, we set out the opportunities and risks and discuss how risks can
be managed. Case studies are used to illustrate each point of debate.

## Personal health budgets and the role of evidence-based medicine {#S4}

PHBs can be spent in ways that do not conform to the current
understanding of evidence-based medicine. Individuals are not restricted
to treatments that are approved by the National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE). The flexibility of a personal health budget
presents a clear opportunity for the NHS to respond to each
individual\'s needs rather than expecting individuals to fit into
commissioned services. It is these additional inputs and supports that
are often crucial in determining a person\'s recovery ([Box
1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}). This can be particularly valuable for
patients for whom current therapeutic options have not proved successful
and who may otherwise disengage from services. Furthermore, literature
on the self-management of long-term conditions highlights the importance
of individual engagement which PHBs can facilitate.^7^

However, there is also a risk that by not following NICE guidelines,
resources are poorly spent and care is either not effective or, at
worst, harmful. Important questions remain about how clinicians weigh up
the pros and cons of alternative purchases such as a holiday in place of
respite and evaluate whether such choices genuinely meet needs. Working
with PHBs may necessitate different clinical skills from those required
by evidence-based medicine and these new conversations could reshape the
doctor/patient relationship.

## Balancing individual choice and risk {#S5}

Supporting individuals to exercise choice using a PHB can be an
effective means of increasing their sense of personal control and
opportunities. Furthermore, engaging individuals closely in the
development of their care plan can help facilitate their management of
risk and safety. Planning PHBs involves working in partnership with
individuals to identify risks and how they can be managed safely to
achieve the outcomes desired by patients. All PHB plans have to be
approved by a clinician and plans should only be signed off if they
fully address risk and identify contingencies.

**Box 1** Case study 1: Personal health budget used for additional
supports

Alex suffered a stroke which left him with a mild physical and cognitive
disability and very anxious and depressed. He had become very fearful of
bad news arriving in the post and therefore tended to leave letters
unopened and bills unpaid. He used his personal health budget to hire a
personal assistant to help him manage his post and other administrative
issues and to monitor his medications and diet. He also made several
one-off purchases. He bought a satellite navigation device to help him
drive without getting lost because the stroke had affected his
short-term memory. This enabled him to be an active part of local stroke
groups and to drive others to meetings, giving him a renewed sense of
purpose. He bought a tablet computer to rebuild his confidence and IT
skills. Finally, he bought a drum kit as an alternative to physiotherapy
and one that he finds a lot more fun. He attends weekly drum lessons
rather than regular physiotherapy. Since getting a PHB he has reduced
his use of the community mental health team to three times a year

At the same time, by making different choices from those clinicians
would make on their behalf, PHBs can allow individuals to make choices
that would increase rather than mitigate their symptoms or put them at
greater risk ([Box 2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"}). For example,
individuals may choose to use complementary therapies that are unproven
rather than traditional talking therapies or untrained personal
assistants rather than regulated providers. Approving alternative
choices can be perceived to be in conflict with the duties of a doctor
as set out by the General Medical Council given the lack of established
evidence or quality assurance procedures for many alternatives to
clinical care.

## The opportunity for greater prevention or the risk of falling back on the NHS {#S6}

Through the development of person-centred plans, PHBs provide an
opportunity for individuals to better manage their ongoing heath and
avoid unplanned use of in-patient and crisis care. This is supported by
the national evaluation which found that PHB holders made less use of
other NHS services, including in-patient care, than those not using
PHBs. The difference in service use amounted to, on average, £3050 a
year for those with mental health problems.^5^

However, for those individuals whose choices turn out to have limited
effectiveness in their mental health management, there is a risk that
they may exhaust their PHB without having their needs met. This could
leave them either without the care they need or cost the NHS more
overall because they fall back on existing services.

In terms of access to needed care, PHBs do not differ from the NHS as a
whole. Individuals who are unsuccessful in treatment, be that
traditional or through a PHB, are not denied care. To ensure that the
choices individuals make are more likely to be effective, clinicians
should be closely involved in the development of PHB plans, adding their
clinical expertise to the lived experience of individuals ([Box
3](#box3){ref-type="boxed-text"}).

**Box 2** Case study 2: Croydon\'s personal health budget pilot for
substance misuse treatment and recovery

In the evaluation of the Croydon pilot, the lead health professional
described how conflict between the choice and wants of service users and
the professional opinion of staff played out in one particular case:
"'We did have one client who, when he looked at the cost of what he was
recommended for, in-patient detoxification, was surprised at how much it
cost. His instinct was immediately to minimise the amount of money that
was spent on his medical intervention because he wanted to spend more
money on other aspects of his recovery. That led us into a difficult
situation and he did relapse and ended up needing another detox, but
again only wanted another short detox. So we had that issue about "it\'s
my budget, it\'s my money".'"

In the end, the PHB for the individual was stopped.^8 p.38^

## Balancing individual choice, equity and efficiency {#S7}

PHBs are based on a transparent allocation of resources at the
individual level that seeks to protect equity within the NHS while
allowing individuals greater choice. The approach underpinning PHBs is
to maximise outcomes for each individual rather than ensuring that each
person receives the same service. Encouragingly, the national evaluation
found no differences in the impact of PHBs by gender, ethnicity or
income.

The concerns for people who lack capacity are the same for PHBs as for
other decisions made for this group -- how to make sure that choices are
being made in someone\'s best interests. Family members may effectively
act as representatives for individuals who lack capacity or support
those with capacity to access a PHB. Those with fluctuating capacity may
be encouraged to plan for the future when they are well. Third parties
may hold the budget where there are concerns about financial
exploitation by family members. As commissioners and clinicians have to
approve plans, a plan which is not in the best interests of the patient
would not be approved.

There is a risk that PHBs create long-term dependency and a sense of
entitlement to support rather than the value of the PHB being reduced as
an individual recovers. Furthermore, the expansion of PHBs will have a
knock-on effect on the wider service system. If enough individuals use
their PHB to make different choices, it may be difficult to maintain a
service such as a community mental health team for those who want to
continue to use it. This is of particular concern because PHBs are to be
implemented from within existing funding and services are already
struggling with current levels of resources. There is a risk that those
who lose out will be the most vulnerable, whereas those who are better
able to choose go elsewhere.

**Box 3** Case study 3: Using a personal health budget to fund
psychotherapy

Mary was eligible for a PHB as part of her trust\'s community mental
health pilot. She has depression, anxiety and a personality disorder and
has been using mental health services for 10 years. In the year prior to
the pilot, she had 18 overnight in-patient stays, three respite stays
and 49 contacts with professionals from the community mental health
team.

The main thing that Mary wanted to do differently with her PHB was to
access long-term psychotherapy as and when she felt she needed it rather
than in a 12-week block. A short course of NHS psychotherapy in the past
had started to work for her so she negotiated to reduce the input from
her care coordinator and psychiatrist and used her PHB to support
further engagement in private psychotherapy.

After a year of having a PHB, Mary had only taken one overdose, had
reduced her medications, was seeing her care coordinator less often and
had started to reconnect with her children and grandchildren.

## Freeing up psychiatrists to focus on clinical care or increasing bureaucracy and workload {#S8}

The experience of many clinicians working with personal budgets in
social care is that they have increased bureaucracy and have made it
more difficult to access services for individuals. In part, this is
because personal budgets have been implemented at the same time as
significant cuts to social care funding and in social care they are
still subject to means testing. Critics of PHBs argue that they pose
similar risks to the NHS, leading to overly complex processes,
bureaucracy and additional costs.^9^

Personalisation does not necessitate greater bureaucracy or work for
psychiatrists. Non-clinical staff can support individuals to develop a
care plan, seeking input from psychiatrists rather than psychiatrists
taking a lead. In fact, experience has shown that non-clinical brokers
can be better placed to support individuals to think differently ([Box
4](#box4){ref-type="boxed-text"}).^10^

However, to limit bureaucracy, two things matter. First, there needs to
be adequate investment in the infrastructure for PHBs, particularly the
necessary support for care planning and avoidance of exploitation. The
national evaluation estimated this to be on average £146 000 per
clinical commissioning group in the first 2 years, with costs reducing
over time.^11^ Second, it is essential to establish clear local
guidelines, which can reduce the occurrence of arbitrary
decision-making. Decisions should be made with the individual\'s needs
in mind, but the lack of established guidelines can allow prejudicial
decisions to creep in.

# Conclusions {#S9}

Personal health budgets present an opportunity to improve outcomes for
those with long-term mental health conditions. When well implemented to
offer choice and flexibility, they offer one potentially effective tool
for facilitating people\'s personal recovery, offering the chance of
better outcomes for individuals at lower overall cost to the NHS.
However, they are not without their risks and challenges, particularly
to the long-term sustainability of existing community-based services.
Greater clarity from government about the nature and timetable for the
roll-out of PHBs in mental health will be essential. Full engagement
with psychiatrists will be critical to the success of PHBs but the
profession has so far not been significantly involved in shaping the
policy or its implementation. We invite you to continue the debate.

**Box 4** Case study 4: Using a social care budget for external support

Paul is a man in his 30s with obsessive-compulsive disorder and Asperger
syndrome. He had found it very difficult to be socially active, but with
the support of community mental health team psychiatry, psychology and
occupational therapy he began to access groups for people with Asperger
syndrome. Although he became more engaged in the community, it created
challenges for him as he encountered difficult feelings that he
interpreted as mental health crises and began using mental health
services more frequently. He used a social care budget to hire a support
worker from the National Autistic Society who helped him discuss,
understand and manage these feelings as they arose. His use of mental
health services has subsequently reduced and he also feels happier.

This paper was developed in collaboration with the Policy Unit and the
Personal Health Budgets Advisory Group of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists.

[^1]: **Vidhya Alakeson** MSc is mental health lead, Personal Health
    Budgets Delivery Programme, NHS England; **Jed Boardman** PhD
    FRCPsych, consultant/senior lecturer in social psychiatry, South
    London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, and Health Services and
    Population Research Department, Institute of Psychiatry; **Billy
    Boland** MRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist, Hertfordshire
    Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust; **Helen Crimlisk**
    MRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist, Sheffield Health and Social Care
    Foundation Trust; **Charlotte Harrison** MRCPsych, Consultant
    Psychiatrist, South West London and St George\'s Mental Health NHS
    Trust; **Steve Iliffe** FRCGP, Professor of Primary Care for Older
    People, Department of Primary Care and Population Health, University
    College London; **Masood Khan** BSc, Policy Analyst, Royal College
    of Psychiatrists; **Rory O\'Shea** MRCPsych, Consultant in Old Age
    Psychiatry, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Trust; **Janet
    Patterson** MRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist, Oxford Health NHS
    Foundation Trust.
