---
abstract: |
  Both psychologists and psychiatrists are trained to write formulations
  of their patients\' illnesses, with some differences in how they do
  this. Psychologists focus on psychological understanding, while
  psychiatrists\' formulation brings together aetiology, functioning and
  a management plan. Mohtashemi et al\'s study records how some
  psychiatrists understand formulation and its usefulness. Time pressure
  was an important barrier to making a full formulation, and some
  believed the medical role of the psychiatrist was a priority. The
  study illustrates some of the challenges facing psychiatrists working
  in the NHS in terms of maintaining high clinical standards and a
  holistic approach to patient care.
author:
- Patricia M. HughesCorrespondence to Patricia M. Hughes
  (<phughes@sgul.ac.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1St George\'s, University of London
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
subtitle: ": Commentary on ... Psychiatrists\\' understanding and use of
  psychological formulation^[†](#fn1){ref-type=\"fn\"}^"
title: Psychiatrists\' use of formulation
---

For most of my career, good clinical practice for a psychiatrist seeing
a patient for the first time was to make a full assessment and outline a
management plan, then extend the plan to include the views of other
members of the team, including the psychologist, if the team was lucky
enough to have one. And once upon a time, long, long ago, there was also
a social worker and an occupational therapist; this is now a distant
memory. I was engaged by the lively picture of current mental health
practice described by Mohtashemi and colleagues,^1^ although I did find
some of it rather depressing. So while the paper is titled
'psychiatrists' use of formulation\', some explanations for non-use are
equally important. This is a relevant sub-theme, touching on the real
difficulties psychiatrists working in the National Health Service (NHS)
now have in finding time to maintain some of the standards of good
practice. The daunting mountain of work and information-gathering
demanded of doctors is in danger of obliterating the reflection, the
discussion of possibilities, and the holistic approach that makes our
specialty so worthwhile and intellectually challenging.

The paper derives from a research project for a clinical psychology
doctoral thesis, and offers a fresh view of psychiatric practice.
Guidelines on how to write a formulation are published by the British
Psychological Society^2^ and by the Royal College of Psychiatrists.^3^
The former strongly emphasises psychological formulation, while that for
psychiatrists in training is broader, summarised in a recent editorial
in the *British Journal of Psychiatry* as a balanced evaluation 'that
brings together aetiology, severity and functioning and should lead to a
management plan'.^4^ The researchers argue that what was missing from
the assessment of most psychiatrists was a psychological formulation,
and they may be correct, but I suggest there is a semantic gap here:
there is a wide range of views on what constitutes a psychological
formulation or a psychological component of a formulation. Until
recently, I was an NHS consultant psychiatrist in psychotherapy and I am
psychoanalytically trained. The psychological formulation that I, as a
specialist, would have expected to provide would have a different
emphasis from that of a trainee psychiatrist or a community mental
health team (CMHT) consultant psychiatrist. While I might have offered
something closer to that of my psychology colleagues, the model for
psychiatrists in acute services would include a broad assessment, and
incorporate factors that contribute to diagnosis and to the development
of a care plan. In my experience, the vast majority of experienced
general adult psychiatrists, or specialists in other acute psychiatric
settings, recognise the psychological or developmental component of a
formulation, but it would be only a part of a larger and broader
formulation. The researchers\' view was that the psychiatrists
interviewed were less certain than their psychology colleagues about
what a formulation ought to include: if this is the case, then our
training and the MRCPsych exam are failing their purpose. Surely at some
stage in their training, psychiatrists will have to be signed off or
examined as making a satisfactory assessment, thinking about what
triggered the illness or episode, evaluating how severe it is, finding
out something about usual functioning and social support, thinking about
personality, and from these producing a management plan?^3^ And yet,
there was indication in Mohtashemi *et al*\'s paper that in real life a
busy psychiatrist may not have time for these luxuries.

Data analysis indicated that psychiatrists see diagnosis as 'the
foundation of their role, prioritised alongside medication'. But if the
formulation is to help diagnosis, is there any conflict here? On the
other hand, many psychiatrists, indeed, arguably all good doctors,
believe that patient care goes beyond a diagnostic category, and that
good care needs a wider understanding of the context and other factors
that can help or impede recovery. The authors appear to be concerned
that if psychiatrists do not formulate in a more comprehensive way, then
practice will become, or may have already become, a dichotomy of
'psychiatric diagnosis versus psychological formulation'. Bracken and
colleagues\' plea^4^ is to recognise the place of 'relationships and
values' in mental healthcare, in a climate which, in their view,
idealises a neuroscience model. Mohtashemi and colleagues see the
apparent increased emphasis on diagnosis as the doctor\'s prime role, as
a symptom of this medicalisation of healthcare, and some of their
interviewees\' comments seem to support this. One doctor says 'if
someone is bipolar \[they\'re\] bipolar \[...\] you don\'t need to
formulate ... you do a diagnosis'. Others felt medication was not the
best approach for a particular patient, but time constraints meant that
they had to 'come across as doing something'.

That brings us to the most interesting, and disquieting, aspects of the
paper, 'Barriers to formulation', and 'Making a Frankenstein monster'.
The researchers note that 'a large amount of time \[in interviews\] was
spent in talking about \[...\] the politics surrounding psychiatry and
limitations within NHS services.' How familiar. Of more concern,
however, was that 'participants perceived themselves to be faced with
multiple barriers that affected their ability to formulate and think
reflectively.' One interviewee complained of being under 'immense
pressure' to make quick decisions in assessing risk and making a
diagnosis, which did not allow for 'reflective practice'. Of course,
sometimes a quick decision is essential, usually with an acutely ill
patient; it does not mean no subsequent formulation, nor does it mean
that treatment options are not discussed at some point with the patient.
It was a pity that we did not know how many participants were trainees,
and how many were more experienced doctors. I imagine that psychiatrists
with greater experience can balance core tasks such as risk assessment
and diagnosis with a richer assessment of the patient\'s problems and
management needs. Consultants have learned to be efficient with their
time. Although I was a trainee in a very different health service, more
than 30 years ago, I do recognise some of the experience described by
the interviewees. I was slow. It took forever to write letters, which
were ridiculously long. I saw patients more often than was necessary,
because I was afraid of missing something, spent weeks preparing for
presentations. But there did seem to be time to think about patients,
speak to colleagues, and explore the factors contributing to the
patient\'s illness. I do not remember that we were ever under pressure
to make a quick diagnosis and prescribe unless there was a clear
clinical indication that rapid intervention was important.

Reassuringly, most participants in the study perceived professional
rivalry as unhelpful, and wanted to see 'a \[...\] process of \[...\]
integration of psychologists and psychiatrists'. The researchers believe
different disciplines have specialist skills and that the psychiatrist
and the team should use the skills of the psychologists where they can.
Participants in the study overall supported this. Some, however, are
reported as seeing some psychologists as anti-psychiatry. How unwise,
when there is so much work to do. One would imagine anyone with any
sense at all would welcome another pair of able hands. On balance, the
impression was that psychiatrists value psychological understanding, and
value the skills of psychologists. Yet how frustrating to know that your
patient could benefit from psychological treatment, but resources are
slender, waiting lists long, and the immediate imperative is to get the
patient treated and 'off the books'. As the paper remarked, certain
services, such as forensic, must formulate: management is long term,
patients are high risk and publicly so, and every resource must be
called upon. In contrast, most community services are swamped with work,
are constantly threatened with yet more cuts, and are primarily alert to
patient safety and to containing workloads. Participants suggested that
psychologists could train nurses in basic formulation skills, implied as
psychological formulation. Interesting that they did not suggest
psychologists train psychiatrists -- I would guess psychiatrists
generally believe their ability to understand psychological issues is
not very different from psychologists, but consider they cannot devote
time to offering psychological treatment.

Oddly, no one mentioned the demands of the online data recording. In my
latter years as a consultant this occupied a huge amount of time,
compared with earlier, less intensively regulated recording of patient
information. This must be a generation that has grown up with this
expectation and knows no different. And perhaps this is also a
disincentive to write a formulation, as it will be swallowed by a
database, out of sight and not so readily accessed as case notes were in
their day. And no one mentioned the relentless demand for mental health
tribunals, another painful drain on clinical resources.

This paper was written in an NHS where money is tight and getting
tighter. Managers have to make savings, and at the coalface,
psychiatrists must see patients as quickly as possible, and must offer
some kind of intervention. It is not good medicine, however, if being
seen to do something, even if inappropriate, is accepted by
practitioners as adequate. Nor is it good management if a service is
selected to be axed because it will save exactly the sum needed, or
because the waiting lists for the service are long. These examples are
both true. Annual 'cost improvements', seeing more patients for less
money, replacing senior psychologists with junior ones, doctors with
nurses, trained nurses with healthcare assistants, must in the end lead
to a different and inferior service which may not be more
cost-effective. We will be denying reality and indulging in omnipotent
fantasy if we allow ourselves to think that we can do the same with
fewer resources; we are dishonest if we claim that things are getting
better and better, when in reality they are struggling to remain half
decent.

What is the future for psychiatrists? Will the next generation of
psychiatrists be permitted to do only what no one else is allowed to do?
Diagnosis and prescription, mental health tribunals, arguing for
resources, and maintaining existing good services. We may be thought too
expensive to be allowed to spend more than a few minutes with individual
patients. Postgraduate training may be limited to skills approved for
psychiatrists, perhaps more towards the pharmacological end of the
spectrum than the psychological, so a skill such as family therapy may
be reserved for less costly colleagues. We will learn about management,
for this will be a crucial interface in organising and planning our
services. What an impoverished career!

However, I am an old psychiatrist not a young one, and shroud waving is
a temptation for the old. So let us look at the positives before I end.
My experience in the latter part of my career of most trainees entering
psychiatry filled me with hope for the future of our specialty. And
despite the complaints, and the real worry about lack of time to
practise good psychiatry, the doctors interviewed for this paper sounded
like people who did think, who found time to speak to the researchers,
and while not happy with the present system, could see what was wrong
and how it could be improved. They cared about their patients, and were
articulate and imaginative. I hope they fight for the right to give
patients the holistic care that they deserve.

And the young psychologist whose research was the basis of the paper
completed a useful piece of work, which must have needed perseverance,
patience and original thought. The future may not be hopeless.

[^1]: **Patricia M. Hughes** is Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry and
    Education at St George\'s, University of London.
