---
abstract: |
  The number of reports of political activists falling victim to the
  political abuse of psychiatry is increasing. When the USSR first
  disintegrated, this practice virtually ceased to occur. What came in
  its place, however, was a disturbing collection of other forms of
  abuses, including human rights abuses, caused by a lack of resources,
  outdated treatment methods, a lack of understanding of individual
  human rights and a growing lack of tolerance in society. The number of
  cases of political abuse of psychiatry has increased since the 21st
  century began, particularly over the past few years in Russia, Belarus
  and Kazakhstan.
author:
- Robert van VorenCorrespondence to Robert van Voren
  (<rvvoren@gip-global.org>) [^1]
date: 2016-2
institute:
- 1Human Rights in Mental Health-Federation Global Initiative on
  Psychiatry, The Netherlands
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
title: "Ending political abuse of psychiatry: where we are at and what
  needs to be done"
---

Over the past years, an increasing number of reports on the internment
of political activists in former Soviet republics and particularly in
Russia^1^ led to a resumed interest in the issue of the abuse of
psychiatry for political purposes. Political abuse of psychiatry refers
to the misuse of psychiatric diagnosis, treatment and detention for the
purposes of obstructing the fundamental human rights of certain
individuals and groups in a given society. The practice is common in,
but not exclusive to, countries governed by totalitarian regimes. In
these regimes abuses of the human rights of those politically opposed to
the state are often hidden under the guise of psychiatric treatment. In
democratic societies whistle-blowers on covertly illegal practices by
major corporations have been subjected to the political misuse of
psychiatry.^2^ Even though these abuses have been a frequent and ongoing
practice throughout the 21 century in the People\'s Republic of
China,^2^ that fact did not alert the world that this perversion of
medical science has not come to an end. Rather, reports on individual
cases of such abuses in former Soviet republics such as Belarus,
Kazakhstan and Russia caught the attention and made people realise that
25 years after the conditional return of the Soviet psychiatric
association to the World Psychiatric Association (WPA) the practice has
still not been eradicated. Among the cases that have attracted wide
public attention are those of the Pussy Riot band members (Russia),
Mikhail Kosenko (Russia), one of the accused Bolotnaya Square
protesters, who has been sentenced to mandatory treatment, and the
psychiatric assessment of the Ukrainian pilot Nadezhda Savchenko,
detained by the Russian government over the deaths of two Russian
journalists in a mortar attack during the Ukraine conflict.

# Why abuse psychiatry politically? {#S1}

The first question is why authorities resort to the internment of
political or religious dissenters, or other types of 'bothersome
citizens', in psychiatric hospitals. On the basis of 35 years of
research and involvement in combating such practices, I have come to the
conclusion that in most cases it is a combination of expedience and
ideology.

Sending people to a psychiatric institution is particularly practical
because hospitalisation has no end and thus, if need be, people can be
locked away forever, or as long as they continue to have views that are
considered politically or socially dangerous, or remain inconvenient to
the authorities. One might think that such practices also exclude the
need to have a lengthy pre-trial investigation and a bothersome court
case, but often this is not true: dictatorial or totalitarian regimes
tend to follow their own rules to the finest detail and document their
repression meticulously, and thus in many cases the same legal
procedures are followed as in the case when the person would be normally
prosecuted and sentenced. Only in cases of short-term hospitalisations
are these procedures sometimes bypassed, in particular when the
internment is somewhere in the provinces out of the public eye and
carried out to scare a person into submission or to settle an old
dispute with a local authority.

At the same time, declaring a person mentally ill provides a perfect
opportunity not to have to respond to their political or religious
convictions, as they are the product of an ill mind and do not have to
be taken seriously. In particular, when the views threaten or challenge
the prevalent or only correct ideology (or religion), such a way out is
especially welcome to the authorities, as one can maintain the claim
that there is no opposition and one has a one hundred percent support of
the population. As Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev stated in 1959: "'A
crime is a deviation from the generally recognised standards of
behaviour frequently caused by mental disorder. Can there be diseases,
nervous disorders among certain people in Communist society? Evidently
yes. If that is so, then there will also be offences that are
characteristic for people with abnormal minds ... To those who might
start calling for opposition to Communism on this basis, we can say that
... clearly the mental state of such people is not normal.'^3^" In the
Soviet Union, the political abuse of psychiatry greatly benefitted from
the fact that since 1950 only one view on psychiatry was permitted,
which resulted in a virtually complete monopoly of the Moscow School of
Psychiatry headed by Professor Andrei Snezhnevsky. Documentation shows
that its leaders quite cynically allowed their profession to be used as
a means of repression (see, for instance, a manuscript whose authors are
kept anonymous for security reasons).^4^ However, the majority of Soviet
psychiatrists were totally excluded from contact with international
psychiatry and were truly convinced that people who opposed the Soviet
regime were indeed suffering from mental illness and that their forced
treatment was therefore correct and justified. In addition, the general
tendency in society to comply with authoritarian orders out of fear of
possible repercussions, such as the loss of jobs or income, played its
role. Psychiatry was, in short, moulded into total subjugation to the
needs of the existing political order.^5^

# Political abuse of psychiatry {#S2}

## The former Soviet Union {#S3}

From the moment the issue of political abuse of psychiatry attracted
public attention in the late 1960s/early 1970s, it focused mainly on the
Soviet Union. The systematic abuse of psychiatry in that country was a
central issue during WPA debates in the period 1971-1989. It eventually
led to the Soviet withdrawal from this international body in 1983 and an
conditional return 6 years later (for an extensive discussion on the
issues of Soviet psychiatric abuse and the reaction of world psychiatry,
see Bloch & Reddaway^6,7^ and Van Voren^5^).

## Other countries {#S4}

The Soviet Union was certainly not the only country where political
abuse of psychiatry took place. Quite extensive documentation has been
collected on similar abuses in other countries, notably some of the
(socialist or communist) Eastern European countries. In particular,
there have been extensive reports in the 1980s on systematic political
abuse of psychiatry in Romania. Cases of abuse were also reported in
Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Bulgaria, but these were isolated cases and
there was no evidence that any systematic abuse took place. In the early
1990s an extensive research on the situation in Eastern Germany came to
the same conclusion, although in this socialist country politics and
psychiatry appeared to have been very closely intermingled.^8^

Outside of Eastern Europe and the former USSR, most reports concerned
other socialist or collectivist societies, such as Cuba^9^ and the
People\'s Republic of China.^2^ In China the abuse also involves people
who are hospitalised for non-medical reasons because they are considered
a burden owing to their constant complaints. Many victims are so-called
'petitioners', people who travel to Beijing from the provinces to issue
complaints against local officials. Instead of being heard they are
hospitalised and frightened with psychiatric 'treatment'. Interestingly,
a clear case of psychiatric abuse has been reported from The
Netherlands, in the course of which the Ministry of Defence tried to
silence a social worker by falsifying several of his psychiatric
diagnoses and pretending his behaviour was the result of mental health
problems.^10^ Still, one can conclude that the systematic use of
psychiatry for political purposes is limited to countries that are
characterised by a totalitarian monistic view and where dissent is seen
as a threat that needs to be forced into the straightjacket of the
existing political order.

# The post-Soviet period {#S5}

When in 1991 the USSR imploded and all 15 Soviet republics gained or
regained their independence, the dominance of Communism as the only
permitted ideology ended. With it disappeared this monistic view on
reality and thus also one of the main preconditions for the existence of
a system of political abuse of psychiatry seemed to have vanished. And
indeed, the practice of using psychiatry against political opponents
virtually ceased to exist. Some cases surfaced, notably in 1996 in
Turkmenistan and a few years later in Uzbekistan.^1^ What came in place,
however, was a very disturbing collection of other forms of abuse,
including human rights abuses owing to lack of resources, corruption,
outdated methods of treatment, lack of understanding of individual human
rights and a growing lack of tolerance in society. This includes
'economic abuse' (e.g. having relatives declared mentally ill in order
to take control of their possessions) or criminals buying their way out
to freedom by bribing psychiatrists to deliver false diagnoses, as well
as general human rights violations in psychiatric institutions, such as
adverse living conditions, abuse by staff, unlawful incarceration and
inhumane treatment.

However, although on the outside the political climate in the former
Soviet republics might have changed, in the minds of the citizens much
of the psychological climate remained virtually unaltered. As a result,
the effect of a monistic world view continues to dominate societies in
most of the former Soviet republics, particularly in Central Asian
republics, the Russian Federation and Belarus, and in some the communist
ideology has been replaced by a nationalist or even neo-fascist world
view that is as totalitarian as its predecessor.

Beginning with the 21st century, the number of individual cases of
political abuse of psychiatry has increased, in particular over the past
few years in Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan.^1^ So far though, it does
not appear to be a systematic repression of dissidents through the
mental health system. In most cases, citizens fall victim to regional
authorities in localised disputes or to private antagonists who have the
means to bribe their way through the courts.

# How should psychiatry respond? {#S6}

Interestingly, as a result of the debates concerning Soviet political
abuse of psychiatry, the world psychiatric community focused much more
extensively than before on issues of human rights, the rights of
patients, issues of coercion and compulsory treatment. For instance, the
WPA adopted an ethical code that condemns the use of psychiatry for
non-medical purposes. This code was updated and expanded several times
and mechanisms were installed to investigate complaints of violations of
these regulations. The Hawaii Declaration of 1977 had been drawn up by
the Ethical Sub-Committee of the Executive Committee of the WPA set up
in 1973 in response to the increasing number of protests against the use
of psychiatry for non-medical purposes. One of the principles embedded
in the Declaration was that a psychiatrist must not participate in
compulsory psychiatric treatment in the absence of psychiatric illness,
and there were other clauses that could be seen as having a bearing on
the political abuse of psychiatry. The Declaration was amended in Vienna
in 1983 and in 1996 succeeded by the Madrid Declaration of 1996, which
was further expanded in 1999. In addition, the WPA set up committees on
ethics and on the review of abuse of psychiatry. In that sense, the
debates surrounding Soviet psychiatric abuse had a very important
corrective effect on world psychiatry, but that did not stop authorities
-- and psychiatrists -- altogether from using psychiatry as a means of
political repression.

At this moment, most of the political abuses reported are from communist
or formerly communist states, notably the People\'s Republic of China
and several former Soviet republics. However, on a positive note,
international protests regarding cases of political abuse might have
stopped the expansion of these practices and one of the most well-known
victims, Mikhail Kosenko, was released from mental hospital already 6
months after his hospitalisation started, a clear sign that
international attention works.^11^

In the 1970s and 1980s, the main drive of the opposition to Soviet
psychiatric abuse was focused on expulsion of the Soviet society from
the world psychiatric community, notably the WPA. In that case it
worked, as loss of face played an important role in terminating the
abuse. Importantly, rank and file psychiatrists did not suffer from this
isolation, as they had no access to the world psychiatric community
anyway. In a 21st-century society such total isolation is impossible,
whatever measures authorities in countries such as China and Russia take
to curb freedom of information, access to the internet and the use of
social media.

Mental health professionals are now, at least in theory, able to have
access to and participate in the world mental health community. Thus,
the opposite approach to cutting off communication might now be
effective: stimulating communication and access, providing training in
issues of medical ethics and human rights, and translating key documents
and manuals into local languages may make it impossible for the public
to remain uninformed. In the case of the Russian Federation, a key
element in the continued dominance of the Moscow School lies in the fact
that 80--90% of the rank and file Russian psychiatrists do not know any
second language. Therefore, when books, articles and documents are not
available in Russian, it remains possible for the psychiatric leaders
(many of whom hail from Soviet times) to pretend that the diagnosis used
for Soviet dissidents -- 'sluggish schizophrenia' -- is quite accepted
in the world and even part of ICD-10.^12^ Information is a weapon, and
should be used maximally and extensively.

[^1]: **Robert van Voren** is Chief Executive, Human Rights in Mental
    Health-Federation Global Initiative on Psychiatry, Hilversum, The
    Netherlands.
