---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** A retrospective evaluation was undertaken of the
  clinical and economic effectiveness of three in-patient rehabilitation
  units across one London National Health Service trust. Information on
  admission days and costs 2 years before and 2 years after the
  rehabilitation placement, length of rehabilitation placement and the
  discharge pathway was collected on 22 service users.

  **Results** There were statistically significant reductions in
  hospital admission days in the 2 years following rehabilitation
  compared with the 2 years before, further reflected in significantly
  lower bed costs. Longer length of rehabilitation placement was
  correlated with fewer admission days after the placement. A
  substantial proportion of the sample went into more independent
  living, some with no further admissions at follow-up.

  **Clinical implications** The findings suggest that in-patient
  rehabilitation is both clinically and cost effective: if benefits are
  sustained they will offset the cost of the rehabilitation placement.
author:
- Mel Bunyan
- Yogesh Ganeshalingam
- Ehab Morgan
- Donvé Thompson-Boy
- Rebekah Wigton
- Frank Holloway
- Derek K. TracyCorrespondence to Derek K. Tracy
  (<derek.tracy@oxleas.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-2
institute:
- 1Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
- 2King\'s College London
- 3South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
- id: R37
- id: R38
title: "In-patient rehabilitation: clinical outcomes and cost
  implications"
---

Mental health rehabilitation services work with 'low volume, high need'
individuals^1^ with complex long-term mental health and social care
needs. National policy on appropriate levels of in-patient
rehabilitation provision has been lacking,^2,3^ although the majority of
mental health trusts provide such care.^4^ The National Service
Framework for Mental Health^5^ focused on specialist community services,
and a relative reduction of rehabilitation services has followed its
publication.^2,6,7^

Mental health services in the UK are facing the uncertain challenges of
moving to clinical commissioning groups, with the parallel drive to
evidence outcomes (or at least activity) through payment by results.
This must be further filtered through the reality of a mandated £20
billion in efficiency savings in the National Health Service (NHS) by
2014,^8^ creating competition for ever-reduced resources.^9^ There are
specific dangers for rehabilitation services in this context: a lack of
clear governmental policy support and a limited -- though generally
positive -- scientific evidence base could result in a loss of money to
competing services. Commissioners\' knowledge of the role and
effectiveness of rehabilitation is uncertain, although specific guidance
to assist commissioning has been produced.^1^

In this study, we explored objective clinical (bed use), economic (bed
costs) and psychosocial functioning outcome data in three in-patient
rehabilitation units across a single NHS mental health trust. We
hypothesised that there would be measurable improvements in
individuals\' lives provided in a cost-effective manner, and that data
could help inform commissioning decisions about rehabilitation service
provision.

# Method {#S1}

The study retrospectively explored clinical and costing markers in 22
individuals sequentially discharged from three in-patient rehabilitation
units in a single NHS trust in the 2 years prior, the time during and
the 2 years after rehabilitation care.

## Rehabilitation units {#S2}

Within a wider rehabilitation service, Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust has
three in-patient rehabilitation units, one in each of three London
boroughs that encompass both inner and outer London (covering a total
population of 796 000),^10^ providing a total of 46 placements. They
each provide 24-hour nursing care, offer a range of professional inputs
and can accommodate patients detained under the Mental Health Act 1983.

## Participants {#S3}

The sample was drawn from the 24 individuals who were discharged from
the three units between 1 October 2009 and 30 September 2010: two
patients were excluded as they had spent fewer than 6 weeks on a unit,
leaving a sample of 22. The mean length of admission was 701 days (s.d.
= 385, range 132-1434). Referrals came from acute psychiatric wards (*n*
= 14), closed rehabilitation units (*n* = 2), forensic in-patient units
(*n* = 2) and a private hospital (*n* = 1). Three people were referred
directly from the community, although these were more 'intensive'
community services rather than standard community mental health teams.
Mean age was 49 years (s.d. = 12.23, range 22--71). All had a primary
psychotic diagnosis, with paranoid schizophrenia most common (*n* = 13);
12 had at least one secondary diagnosis and these included substance
misuse (*n* = 4), intellectual disability (*n* = 4), personality
disorder (*n* = 3) and an anxiety disorder (*n* = 2). Twelve patients
were detained under Section 3 of the Mental Health Act.

## Procedure {#S4}

Ethics approval for retrospective data collection and dissemination was
obtained through the trust research and development office. Data were
collected on: bed occupancy and costs (amalgamated costs are shown for
acute, psychiatric intensive care unit, low secure, private and
rehabilitation beds), risk and meaningful social activities in the 2
years before and 2 years after the placement, length of stay in the
rehabilitation unit, and the pathway from referral to discharge.
Information was obtained from the trust\'s electronic record system,
RiO: where information prior to RiO\'s implementation in 2006 was
needed, this was taken from paper notes. Differences in bed occupancy
and costs were assessed for significance using paired *t*-tests and
Spearman\'s *r~s~* correlation coefficient; α = 0.05 was adopted for all
comparisons.

# Results {#S5}

## Admission and discharge data with costs {#S6}

Patients demonstrated a statistically significant reduction in admission
days after rehabilitation, spending significantly less time in hospital
in the 2 years after rehabilitation than the 2 years before (*t*~(21)~ =
3.052, *P* = 0.006) ([Fig. 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}).

![Mean number of admission days in the 2 years pre- and 2 years
post-rehabilitation.](25f1){#F1}

Fitting with a reduction in admission days, the costs
post-rehabilitation were statistically significantly lower than the
costs of admissions pre-rehabilitation ([Table
1](#T1){ref-type="table"}). Linear regression analysis incorporating
both age and gender as predictors failed to identify either factor as a
significant predictor of bed days or costs.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Admission costs per year pre- and post-rehabilitation
:::

|                              | Pre-rehabilitation | Post-rehabilitation | Statistics                     |
|:-----------------------------|:-------------------|:--------------------|:-------------------------------|
| Individual cost, mean (s.e.) | £66 000 (£10 000)  | £18 000 (£9000)     | *t*~(21)~ = 3.200, *P* = 0.004 |
|                              |                    |                     |                                |
| Total cost (*n* = 22)        | £1324 000          | £386 000            |                                |
:::

The five individuals who had been in continuous admission for the 2
years before rehabilitation remained in rehabilitation care longer than
average (mean admission 953 *v.* 701 days). Of this subgroup four were
discharged to residential care, one to an independent flat, and three
had no admissions in the follow-up period.

Five individuals required 3--4 years of rehabilitation input, and this
subgroup continued to require a substantial amount of post-discharge
care, with four discharged into residential care, although none were
readmitted in the 2-year follow-up period. Of the 11 who stayed less
than 18 months, 2 were discharged into long-term in-patient care (1
forensic team, 1 older adults\' service): these were the only 2 patients
in the sample who went into continuous in-patient care and,
speculatively, the shorter duration of input may represent a clinical
recognition that the rehabilitation programme was not going to progress
effectively.

## Psychosocial functioning {#S7}

Pre-rehabilitation there was no information available in the notes for
three people regarding their functioning, and for ten others, despite
detailed information being available, there was no evidence of
engagement in regular daytime activities. Of the remainder, where there
was evidence of regular activities: three were having regular contact
with family members, five were attending ward groups or occupational
therapy activities and one was doing voluntary work. Greater levels of
activity were recorded in the period post-rehabilitation, with only
three patients having no evidence of any form of meaningful activity.
Ten were engaged in community groups, three were service user
representatives, two were engaged with ward occupational therapy, two
had re-established meaningful links with their families, one was at
college, and one was undertaking voluntary work. Quite a few were doing
more than one activity; for the purposes of this report, we documented
what we deemed to be each person\'s highest level of achievement.

## Risk {#S8}

Most of the sample had complex risk histories: eight had a forensic
history including firesetting, assaults, actual bodily harm, carrying
weapons and shoplifting; five had a history of substance misuse; nine
had a history of substantial acts of self-harm or suicide attempts; and
almost all had some degree of self-neglect. Sixteen of the 22
individuals had one or two, and 3 individuals had three to five major
risk incidents (defined as self-neglect, self-harm, damaging property,
verbal or physical abuse, absconding or inappropriate sexual behaviour)
in the 2 years preceding their rehabilitation placement.
Post-rehabilitation half the sample had no major risk incidents in the
follow-up period, five had one major risk incident, four had two such
incidents, and two individuals had four major risk events.

# Discussion {#S9}

A limited evidence base exists for in-patient rehabilitation services.
About 80% of rehabilitation services users have a primary diagnosis of
psychosis,^11^ and the rationale for input may include treatment
resistance, comorbidities such as neurodevelopmental disorders and
substance misuse, behavioural disturbances, and an inability to effect
discharge from an acute ward.^12^ It has traditionally been argued that
the majority of rehabilitation patients are not hard to engage despite
their needs^7^ -- unlike a typical assertive outreach cohort -- and
under current UK NHS criteria will usually fall under payment by results
'cluster 13'. However, this assertion might be challenged given the
general reduction in in-patient beds and often in the provision of
assertive outreach services, and rehabilitation case-loads might be
changing with time. The first national survey of 133 rehabilitation
units in England^11^ found a mean of 14 beds per unit and 16 admissions
in the previous year. Median service user characteristics included an
age of 40, an admission of 18 months\' duration, a 13-year history of
contact with mental health services and 4 previous in-patient
admissions.

A 5-year prospective follow-up of 72 individuals 'difficult to place'
following a hospital closure^13^ demonstrated positive outcomes of
greater independence, fewer episodes of aggression and problematic
behaviour from a rehabilitative approach. Participants showed
significant gains in skills despite persisting or worsening symptoms but
a 'slow-stream' approach was required, with improvements taking over a
year to manifest. Killaspy & Zis^14^ analysed clinical outcome data on
141 users of an inner London rehabilitation service retrospectively: 40%
had positive outcomes 5 years after initial assessment -- defined as
achieving and sustaining a less supported placement -- with 10% moving
to independent accommodation and sustaining a tenancy, and 27% had
unchanged support. Adherence to medication was the most significant
factor positively affecting outcomes at 5 years, although, conflicting
with the finding of Bredski *et al*,^15^ a longer time from first
contact with mental health services to contact with rehabilitation
services was also associated with better outcomes. In the national study
of rehabilitation units in England^11^ positive scores in the seven
domains measured by the Quality Indicator for Rehabilitative Care
(QuIRC)^16^ were associated with better subjective experiences of care
and the therapeutic environment.

A case--control study (34 discharged, 31 non-discharged residents) by
Bredski *et al*^15^ demonstrated that serious self-harm, high-dose and
polypharmacy antipsychotic use, past forensic input and longer past
duration of hospital admission(s) were significantly associated with
non-discharge. Killaspy *et al*^11^ showed that older patient age was
significantly associated with worse outcomes. This national survey
identified delayed discharges in 14% of rehabilitation patients, whereas
a lack of suitable move-on accommodation -- particularly from lower
intensity community units -- was noted in another, ten-unit survey by
Cowan *et al*:^17^ over half of the patients had no clear community team
follow-up. A lack of appropriate follow-up for those with high levels of
disability, a quarter of whom ended up under the care of assertive
outreach teams, was identified as a gap.

Our data indicate that the majority of people using the three evaluated
rehabilitation units appeared to derive significant benefit in terms of
increased stability, with fewer hospital admissions and the ability to
live in more independent settings. The duration of rehabilitation
placement varied, tailored to individual need rather than specific time
scales, with a considerable range in duration, although the majority
moved through the units in well under 2 years. Interestingly, a greater
duration of rehabilitation input was significantly associated with
better outcomes as measured by readmission data. Although on one level
this might appear intuitive as a proxy marker of quanta of clinical
input, it is also reasonable to consider that those least well and most
in need would necessitate the greatest input and potentially have worse
outcomes -- though as noted, two individuals who were transferred to
continuous in-patient care had such a move made relatively early. These
data thus fit with Trieman & Leff\'s^13^ concept that rehabilitation
care takes time to effect change. It was particularly pleasing to see
that a number of people who had spent extended periods of their lives in
hospital were able to move into the community and maintain this progress
in the follow-up period, and that 16 of the sample had no admissions
during this time. From a service perspective, this led to cost savings
on hospital admissions of around £48 000 a year per individual treated
in the follow-up period, compared with the 2 years pre-rehabilitation.
This of course must be weighed against the cost of the rehabilitation
placement: in these specific units this would be recouped within 3.5
years of discharge if such gains were sustained, although we do not yet
have such longer-term clinical data.

It was harder to determine the secondary measures of whether people had
been able to pursue other personally meaningful goals and aspirations,
and to reliably assay their risk profile: the sample size was small and
validated scales were not utilised. Overall, the findings are concordant
with the somewhat similarly designed retrospective work by Killaspy &
Zis^14^ in terms of positive outcomes following rehabilitation care,
although that larger study focused more on the nature of placement after
rehabilitation rather than admission days and costs, and it was powered
to evaluate factors correlated with outcome such as medication
adherence.

## Limitations {#S10}

A major limitation of this work is the lack of a control group: although
the data show reduced readmissions and related cost savings, as well as
improvements in psychosocial functioning and reduction in risk, it
remains possible that such gains would have occurred without the
rehabilitation-specific input. A randomised control trial would be
necessary to determine causality. Hospital admission and cost are
clearly directly related factors, although we have reported them
separately, and the former is only an indirect marker of clinical state.
However, particularly in the current economic climate, much
service-related research has neglected the issues of costings, and we
believe our model could be applied to parallel services such as
assertive outreach, early intervention and crisis teams, to assess their
cost-effectiveness over time. Nevertheless, the opportunity cost of
standard community 'treatment as usual' is not factored into the overall
costs in this current work.

Data collection was retrospective and analysis of psychosocial
functioning and risk was descriptive rather than through the use of
objective and validated scales. Linear regression analysis did not
identify age or gender as predictors of bed days or costs, but the
sample size was too small to allow any meaningful attempt to evaluate
clinical or demographic predictors of outcome and caution should be
exercised in the interpretation of this negative finding. However, this
was not a primary study aim, and we note the general lack of such
markers both in mental health rehabilitation and more general psychosis
studies to date. Finally, although this study covered three boroughs,
encompassing both inner and outer London, we recognise this is from a
single NHS trust in one city, which may limit the generalisability of
the results.

## Rehabilitation services -- future outlook {#S11}

Rehabilitation services evolved as a development of the broader process
of deinstitutionalisation and the end of the asylum era,^18,19^ but have
suffered in recent years in relation to specialist community teams.
Assertive outreach, early intervention and crisis teams are themselves
open to challenge about their evidence base and effectiveness,^20^ but
they appear in favour with service developers and national drivers for
change, and might be perceived as producing more active research.
Rehabilitation might be relatively 'unfashionable',^3^ but if this is
the case then the rehabilitation psychiatry subspecialty must accept
some responsibility for this. Rehabilitation has historically been an
under-researched branch of mental health,^4,17^ despite the cost of such
services^21^ and the obvious challenge of severe and enduring mental
distress.^22,23^ Killaspy *et al*\'s^4^ description of the field as an
'evidence free zone' remains, if no longer wholly accurate, nevertheless
still apposite a decade after the statement was made.

In the face of clinical commissioning groups and payment by results,
continuing practice as usual is not a valid proposition for any branch
of mental health, and recent history augurs badly for rehabilitation
without active, ongoing self-evaluation to justify continuance -- let
alone increase -- of funding. However, there are positives such as the
development of the QuIRC toolkit^16^ and the large multi-site
Rehabilitation Effectiveness for Activities for Life (REAL) study in
progress.^24^ Some of the difficulties in identifying demographic or
clinical predictors of outcome are common to the larger field of
psychosis research,^25,26^ but the evidence that does exist is broadly
favourable in terms of rehabilitation input producing positive outcomes.

Psychosis research presents new developments in many areas, from new
pharmacotherapeutics,^27-29^ neuroimaging^30,31^ and nascent genetics
work,^32^ to positive results for individual cognitive--behavioural
therapy^33^ and family systems approaches,^34^ sometimes without
psychotropic medication. However, excitement about these assessment and
therapeutic tools can be juxtaposed with the reality that despite
advances in treatments and knowledge, psychosocial disability remains as
much a problem now as it did half a century ago, and many diagnosed with
psychosis continue to struggle to live satisfying and meaningful
lives.^35^ Although learning to place the lived experience of the
patient at the heart of our thinking is perhaps a more recent concept,
the recovery philosophy has become a guiding principle for mental health
services.^36,37^ Of all fields of mental health practice, the
rehabilitation tradition may have the longest convergence with the
recovery model, supporting people who face the greatest mental health
challenges in establishing meaningful lives.^38^ We believe our data
support the evidence for rehabilitation services, which continue to be
neglected in policy and local planning. Rehabilitation embodies the
humanistic heart of mental health: it has, perhaps, just been too silent
for too long. The arrival of clinical commissioning groups and payment
by results could present an opportunity to help change this.

[^1]: **Mel Bunyan** is a consultant psychologist, **Yogesh
    Ganeshalingam** is a consultant psychiatrist, **Ehab Morgan** is is
    a consultant psychiatrist, and **Donvé Thompson-Boy** is a lead
    occupational therapist, all at Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust, London,
    UK. **RebekahWigton** is post-doctoral researcher at the Cognition,
    Schizophrenia and Imaging Laboratory, Institute of Psychiatry,
    Psychology & Neuroscience (IoPPN), King\'s College London, UK.
    **Frank Holloway** is emeritus consultant psychiatrist at South
    London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Derek K. Tracy** is
    a consultant psychiatrist and the Associate Clinical Director for
    Rehabilitation, Crisis and Inpatient Services at Oxleas NHS
    Foundation Trust and an honorary researcher at IoPPN, UK.
