---
author:
- Meera Roy
- Ashok Roy
date: 2016-4
references:
- id: R1
subtitle: ": Formerly Consultant in Psychiatry of Intellectual
  Disability, Lea Castle Centre, Wolverly, Nr. Kidderminster,
  Worcestershire"
title: Dr John Hurst MB, DPM, FRCPsych
---

![](110f1){#F1}

Dr John Hurst\'s approach to the treatment of people with intellectual
disabilities was ahead of its time. In the early 1970s, John, who has
died aged 79, developed the pre-discharge unit at South Ockenden
Hospital, Essex, as a therapeutic community, as well as a number of
community group homes. He also introduced one of the earliest community
nursing services in intellectual disability there between 1972 and 1975.
Between 1974 and 1977, as Chair of the Outward Housing Group in Waltham
Forest, he was instrumental in bringing together housing associations,
Mencap and community nursing to provide supported group homes for former
in-patients. Through the Clifford Trust at Leytonstone Hospital, he was
involved in fostering work with children with profound disability who
were placed in institutions and used music therapy to increase their
awareness and communication. He moved to Lea Castle Hospital in 1978,
initially as the consultant responsible for the deaf/blind unit, where
he introduced the teaching of Makaton signing for people with severe
intellectual disabilities and deafness.

In 1982 -- following an incident in which a 20-year-old woman with mild
intellectual disability had to spend 6 months in custody because the
courts could find no suitable placement for her -- John became the
consultant to a newly created unit for people with mild intellectual
disabilities and mental illness, implementing therapeutic community
principles to meet patients\' emotional needs. He was a pioneer in the
use of psychotherapy for people with intellectual disabilities and
published on the benefits of holiday homes for people with intellectual
disabilities and their families. He was pivotal in the setting up of
community teams to support people with intellectual disabilities in
Telford and Malvern during his time as community consultant there,
preferring to work directly with people with intellectual disabilities
and their carers, rather than take the wider managerial role often
expected of National Health Service (NHS) consultants.

He was a member of the mental health charity MIND working party on
intellectual disabilities in 1977 and gave evidence to the Royal
Commission on the NHS about services for people with intellectual
disabilities. He was nominated to serve on the Mental Health Act
Commission and was active in the development of the Code of Practice of
the Mental Health Act 1983. John was a member of the Board of Examiners
for the Royal College of Psychiatrists for several years and was
actively involved in teaching psychiatric trainees in the Birmingham
rotation. A generation of consultants in intellectual disability in the
West Midlands have fond memories of not only being trained by him, both
as registrars and senior registrars, but also of being fed delicious
meals at his home during their placement with him.

John was born in London on 16 September 1935 but his family moved to
Oxfordshire where he grew up with a sister with an intellectual
disability. He and his family were closely associated with the growth of
the Oxfordshire Spastics Society and its facilities. He went to
Kidlington Infants School and remembered knitting balaclava helmets for
the forces during the Second World War. He attended Bicester Grammar
School and qualified in medicine from Birmingham Medical School in 1960.
He undertook training in psychiatry in Birmingham, obtaining the Diploma
in Psychological Medicine (DPM) in 1968. He undertook further training
in the psychiatry of intellectual disability in Birmingham and was
appointed consultant psychiatrist in South Ockenden Hospital, Essex, in
1970. He was a Foundation Member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists
and became a Fellow in 1986. He was the first author of a paper
published in 1994 describing a specialist unit for people with
intellectual disabilities and mental illness.^1^

John lived with his long-term partner Ian and their home was a haven of
peace for stressed ex-trainees and friends. He and Ian entered into a
civil partnership in 2006 at a touching ceremony at the 'Plough and
Harrow' in Birmingham. John had a lifelong passion for classical music
and opera and used to entertain his friends\' children telling them how
he used to listen at the door of churches in Oxford as a child. After
his retirement in 1991, he and Ian travelled extensively, putting pins
on the world map in their conservatory to mark the many places they had
visited.

In the summer of 2011, John became ill with septicaemia secondary to
cellulitis around a foot ulcer which he developed on a cruise to Turkey,
just before the world cruise he and Ian had planned. He spent 3 months
in hospital, sadly developing cognitive changes. He was always a gentle,
loving person and even as he stopped being able to do things for
himself, his warm personality shone through. He had several hospital
admissions in his last year and whenever we visited him, we were always
greeted with a delightful smile. He slipped away in his sleep on 9
October 2014 after he had had a cup of coffee and a chat with his
physiotherapist. The nurse in charge said that telephoning Ian that day
was the most difficult telephone call she had to make in all her life.

John was a wonderful and caring clinician, teacher and friend who could
find something good in everyone and never said a harsh word about
others. He leaves behind his partner Ian and his extended family of
ex-trainees and their children, all of whom miss him greatly.
