---
author:
- Gerald Russell
date: 2016-2
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
subtitle: ": Formerly Professor of Psychiatry and Honorary Consultant
  Psychiatrist, University of Southampton (1970--1986)"
title: James Leo Gibbons (MD (Newcastle), FRCP, FRCPsych)
---

![](52f1){#F1}

James Gibbons, who died recently at the age of 90, was responsible for
the new finding that plasma cortisol levels are elevated in patients
with depressive illness. This remarkable discovery came early in his
career, while working in the metabolic unit at the Maudsley Hospital.
The result was the landmark article which appeared in 1962^1^ and
established the relationship between cortisol and depression. The impact
of this article was profound and it soon became a citation classic, with
161 citations by other scientists, including 17 since 2010. The
importance of this article is confirmed because the citations came from
workers who were the pioneers in the field of
psychoneuroendocrinology.^2^ Furthermore, it demonstrated the
state-related nature of plasma cortisol elevations in patients with
depression through an interaction with the rated severity of the
clinical features.

In a supplementary study Gibbons used another index of adrenocortical
function. This was based on a radiocarbon dilution method after
administering a small dose of 4-C14 labelled cortisol. The cortisol
secretion rates were estimated one week after admission and again after
recovery or improvement from depression. A highly significant lowering
was found on the repeat estimation. This second study confirmed the
original finding, namely that patients with depression as a group showed
increased adrenocortical activity. These findings led directly to the
dexamethasone suppression test for melancholia.

Later on in his career, as professor of psychiatry at the University of
Southampton, Gibbons changed the direction of his research, undertaking
a survey of psychiatric services based on the district general
hospital.^3^ Collaborating with his wife Jane, he followed up a large
group of patients with schizophrenia using rating scales to supplement
the clinical appraisals. At the end of one year the findings were, on
the whole, rewarding. Only a small minority of the patients were still
living in a mental hospital, half were living in private households with
a supporter (spouse or parent), and the remainder were in a variety of
sheltered accommodation. But almost half the patients were classified as
psychotic on the Personal State Examination (PSE) Catego program.
Disturbed behaviour and restricted social performance were frequent, and
there was evidence of some hardship in most of the households.^3^
Regrettably, as a result of a cut in funding, some of the research had
to be abandoned and the psychiatric register closed.

James was born in Felling (Co. Durham) on 8 June 1925, the son of a
headmaster. He attended Ushaw College, a Catholic school, where he
concentrated on the classics. His decision to follow a medical career
was taken rather late and he needed to catch up on the sciences. After
graduation and house appointments he served as medical officer in the
Royal Air Force. While in junior posts he published articles on
demyelinating diseases. He was appointed to the Maudsley Hospital in
1955. He soon became first assistant to Professor Aubrey Lewis and based
in the metabolic unit which had special facilities for the clinical
bioscience research which suited him very well. He was appointed senior
lecturer at the Institute of Psychiatry and honorary consultant to the
Maudsley Hospital in 1961. From 1963 to 1970 he worked as Reader in the
Department of Psychological Medicine and honorary consultant
psychiatrist, University of Newcastle. The remainder of his career was
spent as professor of psychiatry at the University of Southampton.

Other distinctions were the award of travelling fellowships. In 1962 he
obtained the William Waldorf Astor Fellowship enabling him to spend 4
months in the Department of Neuroendocrinology, Walter Reed Army
Institute of Research, Washington DC. In 1964 he was awarded the
Commonwealth Fellowship to visit medical schools in the USA and study
the use of elective time in the medical curriculum.

After leaving the Maudsley, his clinical commitments grew at the cost of
his time for research, especially while he was working in Southampton.
He and his team had become responsible for the psychiatric service to a
deprived area of the city. He accepted this as he believed that
professors of psychiatry should be full clinicians as well as academics.

In personality, James tended to be serious minded and reserved.
Strangely, these qualities suited him well in the role of an informal
teacher. His listeners were always astounded by his erudition. He would
share his knowledge generously whether this was over cups of coffee or
in the laboratory. Invariably considerate in his personal relations, his
kindness to his patients knew no bounds. Although he seldom showed
extremes of emotion, there were exceptions, as when he openly wept while
hosting his department\'s farewell to a seriously ill colleague.
Although most of his colleagues knew James to be staunchly Catholic in
his religious beliefs, mutual reticence led to avoiding this as a
subject of conversation.

James took a slightly early retirement on health grounds in 1986. He
then divided his time between Saxmundham and London. He loved good food
and wine, and good restaurants. He visited Venice annually as long as he
could. He enjoyed musical concerts and opera.

James\'s first marriage was to Joan Farrall, who died in 1971. In 1974
he married Jane Bunch, lecturer in social work at the University of
Southampton. James died peacefully at home in Saxmundham on 17 June
2015. He is survived by Jane and Timothy, son of his first marriage, now
working in Cambodia.
