---
abstract: |
  Borderline intellectual functioning is an important and frequently
  unrecognised comorbid condition relevant to the diagnosis and
  treatment of any and all psychiatric disorders. In the DSM-IV-TR, it
  is defined by IQ in the 71--84 range. In DSM-5, IQ boundaries are no
  longer part of the classification, leaving the concept without a clear
  definition. This modification is one of the least highlighted changes
  in DSM-5. In this article we describe the history of the
  classification of borderline intellectual functioning. We provide
  information about it and on the importance of placing it in the right
  context and in the right place in future DSM editions and other
  classification systems such as the International Classification of
  Diseases.
author:
- Jannelien Wieland
- Frans G. ZitmanCorrespondence to Jannelien Wieland
  (<j.wieland@centrumkristal.nl>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1Kristal Centre for Psychiatry and Intellectual Disability,
  Rivierduinen, The Netherlands
- 2Leiden University Medical Centre, The Netherlands
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
title: It is time to bring borderline intellectual functioning back into
  the main fold of classification systems
---

One of the least highlighted changes in the DSM-5 is the modification of
the classification of borderline intellectual functioning.^1^ Contrary
to earlier DSM versions, IQ boundaries are no longer part of the
classification, leaving the concept without a clear definition. IQ
scores are, over most of the range, well described by a normal
distribution. The term borderline intellectual functioning describes a
group of people who function on the border between normal intellectual
functioning and intellectual disability, between 1 and 2 standard
deviations below the mean on the normal curve of the distribution of
intelligence, roughly an IQ between 70 and 85. According to the normal
curve, as much as 13.6% of the population falls into this category.

Borderline intellectual functioning has always been a difficult concept.
It had different names, different boundaries, and travelled through
earlier DSM editions starting as a solid element of mental deficiency in
the DSM-I and ending, in DSM-5, as a V-code literally in the last place.
Its classification in DSM-5 has followed a similar path as in the
ICD.^2--4^ And although ICD-11 is not due until 2017, it will likely
share the same view as DSM-5.

In DSM-5, similar to the new classification of intellectual disability,
IQ test scores are removed from the diagnostic description of borderline
intellectual functioning. This is detrimental to the concept, since it
was the only criterion left. Within the classification of intellectual
disability, even in DSM-5, the importance of standardised IQ scores is
well described. As a V-code, borderline intellectual functioning
ultimately has been defined solely by IQ, but by removing the IQ
criterion, DSM-5 no longer provides any criteria for what exactly
borderline intellectual functioning is. ICD-11 will probably do the same
or might score out the classification of borderline intellectual
functioning altogether. This is in spite of the fact it is critically an
important and frequently unrecognised comorbid condition vastly relevant
to the diagnosis and treatment of any and all psychiatric disorders.
Here we describe the history of the classification of borderline
intellectual functioning and provide information about it as well as on
the importance of placing it in the right context and in the right place
in future editions of the DSM and other classification systems such as
the ICD.

# History of borderline intellectual functioning {#S1}

## DSM {#S2}

Before DSM-I, different cut-offs in IQ scores were used when it comes to
what is now called intellectual disability or intellectual developmental
disorder. Consequently, intellectual disability included what we now
call borderline intellectual functioning. In DSM-I, borderline
intellectual functioning was called mild mental deficiency, listed in
the section 'Mental Deficiency'.^5^ The classification applied when
there was both an IQ of about 1 to 2 standard deviations below the mean
(equalling an IQ between 70 and 85) and functional impairment. DSM-I
already made a plea for a classification based on more than a
standardised IQ test alone. It states that cultural, physical and
emotional determinants, as well as school, vocational and social
effectiveness, should be taken into consideration.^5^

In DSM-II, borderline intellectual functioning was called borderline
mental retardation. It had a place in the section 'Mental
Retardation'.^6^ The boundaries of borderline mental retardation (IQ
68--83) differed slightly from those of mild mental deficiency in the
DSM-I, but the other criteria remained the same. The place of borderline
intellectual functioning dramatically changes in DSM-III,^7^ where it is
no longer part of what were then called intellectual disorders. Mental
retardation is now covered in the chapter of disorders usually first
evident in infancy, childhood or adolescence, whereas borderline
intellectual functioning is now a V-code 'exiled' to the chapter
'V-Codes for Conditions Not Attributable to a Mental Disorder that are
the Focus of Attention or Treatment' in the far back of the DSM. The
V-code borderline intellectual functioning is to be used when the focus
of attention or treatment is associated with borderline intellectual
functioning, i.e. an IQ in the 71--84 range. Where in the classification
of mental retardation it is still recognised and described that IQ
should not be the only criterion in making a diagnosis of mental
retardation or in evaluating its severity, in the V-code borderline
intellectual functioning the IQ is now the only criterion left.

## ICD {#S3}

In the ICD, borderline intellectual functioning has a similar history,
being excluded from the section of mental retardation at about the same
time as in the DSM.^2,3^ This change obviously caused a significant
decrease in the prevalence of intellectual disability. In the DSM-III
the argument was that the large majority of individuals with borderline
intellectual functioning does not have significantly impaired adaptive
behaviour.^7^ For more than 30 years the classification of borderline
intellectual functioning then does not change and the DSM-III, DSM-IV
and DSM-IV-TR all use the V-code it was assigned. During the same time
in the ICD borderline intellectual functioning got shifted to the
residual code R41.8, a rather non-specific code referring to 'other and
unspecified symptoms and signs involving cognitive functions and
awareness'.^4^

Now, DSM-5 has further stripped the definition of borderline
intellectual functioning. The V-code is listed in 'Other Conditions That
May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention', under 'Other Circumstances of
Personal History'. It ceases to provide any description of what
borderline intellectual functioning entails. The DSM-5 just states that
the V-code can be used when an individual\'s borderline intellectual
functioning is the focus of clinical attention or has an impact on their
treatment or prognosis.

# Vulnerability and mental health {#S4}

According to DSM and ICD, borderline intellectual functioning is not a
disorder. But people with borderline intellectual functioning, or an IQ
between 70 and 85, do comprise a vulnerable group. Genetic liability,
biological causes such as perinatal difficulties, and epigenetic factors
such as socioeconomic status and maternal stress all contribute to
borderline intellectual functioning.^8^ Children with borderline
intellectual functioning are uniquely at risk for receiving poor
parenting.^9^ Mothers of children with borderline intellectual
functioning were less positive and sensitive, and showed less positive
engagement, even though their children did not exhibit more difficult
child behaviour. Given the importance of positive and sensitive
parenting for secure attachment and adaptive regulatory capabilities,
children with borderline intellectual functioning might be at risk at a
very early age.^9^ In adult life, contrary to the DSM-III statement,
perhaps increasingly so owing to the growing complexity of society, many
people with borderline intellectual functioning do have problems in
adaptive functioning. In fact, they face difficulties across all areas
of ordinary life.^10--14^ They are at increased risk of experiencing
physical problems,^13^ poverty,^15^ have more difficulties with
activities of daily living,^11^ have limited social support^11,12^ and
no access to specialised services.^15^ They often live problematic
lives, functioning under high strain but unnoticed by the rest of
society.^15^ Many people with borderline intellectual functioning do not
have psychiatric disorders, but they are more vulnerable to the
development of mental health problems than people of average or above
average intelligence and may also be more vulnerable than people with
mild intellectual disability.^11,15--20^ Several studies show increased
risk for the development of almost all psychiatric disorders in
childhood as well as in adulthood, including substance misuse and
personality disorders.^11,12,16,17,21,22^

When such people do develop psychiatric disorders, especially when there
are additional problems in adaptive functioning, borderline intellectual
functioning and its impact on the presentation, diagnostics and
treatment of the psychiatric disorder should not be overlooked. Even
though borderline intellectual functioning is not a disorder, nor a
disability in itself, it is an impediment in diagnostics and treatment
when a psychiatric disorder develops.

Unfortunately, despite the fact that borderline intellectual functioning
is a vulnerability and has impact on comorbid disorders, people who are
thus affected are almost invisible in research and -- when they develop
comorbid psychiatric disorders -- are rarely identified as having
borderline intellectual functioning in mental healthcare. The DSM-5
classification as is, is not likely to improve on this problem.

# Why paying serious attention to borderline intellectual functioning remains important {#S5}

As is the case with many psychiatric diagnoses, being classified as
having borderline intellectual functioning can have a stigmatising
effect. People with a low IQ often try to prevent their limited
intellectual capabilities being exposed by painstakingly trying to
behave 'normally' and masking their disabilities and special needs.
Also, society as a whole tries to look away from borderline intellectual
functioning. For example, people thus affected are not entitled to the
special support services for people with intellectual disability because
their IQ is deemed too high. Unlike other countries, in The Netherlands,
individuals with borderline intellectual functioning and comorbid
psychiatric disorders are eligible to the same specialised mental
healthcare services as people with intellectual disability. In this way
special attention to the impact of borderline intellectual functioning
on comorbid psychiatric disorders and the special skills training that
mental health workers need to treat this patient group adequately are
guaranteed. It is doubtful whether general mental healthcare services
are able to deliver the same adequate care. It is important to take
borderline intellectual functioning into account as a complicating
factor from the start of diagnostics and treatment and to train mental
health workers in this respect.

At this time, however, most mental healthcare professionals are not
trained in recognising borderline intellectual functioning and miss the
extra skills needed for effectively treating psychiatric disorders in
such patients. Psychiatric patients with borderline intellectual
functioning in regular mental healthcare are more likely to get
psychotropic drugs (and more likely antipsychotics and sedatives than
antidepressants) than psychotherapy.^11,23^ Psychiatric treatments in
regular mental healthcare are not adapted to the cognitive limitations
of such patients, such as deficits in memory function.^17^ Results from
daily clinical practice show that many forms of treatment can be adapted
to the cognitive abilities of such people but also that neglect of
borderline intellectual functioning in psychiatric patients leads to
longer duration of treatment, more need for crisis intervention^11,18^
and limited or even adverse treatment effect.

# Conclusions {#S6}

We recommend a renewed regard to the concept of borderline intellectual
functioning and its place in the DSM and other classification systems
such as the ICD. A well-defined classification can improve visibility of
patients with borderline intellectual functioning in mental healthcare,
bridging the gap between high prevalence and low recognition.
Recognition and acknowledgement of patients with borderline intellectual
functioning and attention to their specific mental healthcare needs is
likely to substantially improve the quality of mental healthcare for a
group of people that comes last too often.

[^1]: **Jannelien Wieland** is psychiatrist, Kristal Centre for
    Psychiatry and Intellectual Disability, Rivierduinen, Leiden, and
    **Frans G. Zitman** is emeritus professor at the Department of
    Psychiatry, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
    Netherlands.
