---
abstract: |
  There have been significant changes to how vulnerable people are
  treated in the court system, including the introduction of special
  measures to support people both as witness and as accused. This paper
  summarises the use of special measures and their application to people
  with mental health diagnoses or cognitive impairment.
author:
- Penny Cooper
- Janet GraceCorrespondence to Janet Grace (<janet.grace@ncl.ac.uk>)
  [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1Institute for Criminal Policy Research, Birkbeck, University of
  London
- 239 Essex Chambers, London
- 3Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle
- 4KITE Newcastle University Business School
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
title: "Vulnerable patients going to court: a psychiatrist\\'s guide to
  special measures"
---

It is not uncommon for psychiatric patients to be involved in court
proceedings and as many psychiatrists know (some from first-hand
experience) going to court can be a stressful event. In addition, mental
illness, neurocognitive impairment or developmental disorder can create
a barrier to access to giving evidence or to being able to take part in
a trial. In recognition of this, major changes in the judicial approach
have been made, including the use of 'special measures' for certain
witnesses. This article summarises the latest judicial approaches and
considers their clinical applications.

# The criminal justice system leads the way {#S1}

Over the past 10 years the criminal justice system has led the way in
making adjustments for vulnerable witnesses and defendants. Every
judge\'s primary duty is to ensure that there is a fair trial and judges
in criminal cases have at their disposal a range of special measures for
'vulnerable' and 'intimidated' witnesses.

Any person under 18 years or whose ability to take part in a trial,
either as a defendant or a witness, is affected by a mental or physical
disorder or impairment of their intellectual or social functioning is
potentially vulnerable and eligible for special measures. The person\'s
views must be taken into account. Even if no party applies for them, the
judge can decide that special measures should be used.

Witness special measures (note the legislation makes it clear these are
not for the defendant) are set out in the Youth Justice and Criminal
Evidence Act 1999 (Sections 23--30).

-   'Screening witness from accused': a curtain (usually) can be drawn
    around the witness box so that the vulnerable (or intimidated)
    witness can enter the court and give evidence unseen by the
    defendant. The witness can, however, be seen by the judge, jury and
    the advocates.

-   'Evidence by live link' (also known as TV link): a witness can give
    evidence over the closed-circuit television usually linked to
    another room in the court building. Sometimes witnesses give
    evidence by live link from a remote location such as a hospital or a
    care home. A judge may also direct that a witness 'supporter' can be
    present with the witness while they give evidence.

-   'Evidence given in private': the judge can order that the public
    gallery is cleared.

-   'Removal of wigs and gowns': not all vulnerable witnesses prefer
    this. Some prefer judges and advocates to wear their easily
    recognisable 'uniform'.

-   'Video-recorded evidence in chief': the police usually interview
    vulnerable witness in a video suite and the DVD of that interview
    (edited down if necessary) can be played as an alternative to the
    witness giving their account in the witness box.

-   'Video-recorded cross-examination or re-examination': so far this
    has only been trialled in three Crown Courts but the anecdotal
    feedback thus far has been mostly positive. Under the pilot scheme
    witnesses do not have to wait for the trial to give their evidence
    'live' but instead go to court (often within weeks of the defendant
    being charged) and are recorded being questioned by the defence
    team. The tape of the questioning is then played in place of them
    attending at the trial for cross-examination.

-   'Examination of witness through intermediary': the intermediary role
    was first introduced in 2003 and is defined in the legislation as
    something akin to an interpreter; however, intermediary practice has
    evolved greatly since those early days such that the role is now
    much broader than first envisaged.^1^ The police or Crown
    Prosecution Service can request the services of an intermediary^2^
    (a communication specialist) who will assess the witness, then
    advise the court and the advocates what steps should be put in place
    to ensure that the witness understands the questions and the answers
    that they give are understood. The intermediary can monitor
    communication in court (usually sitting alongside the witness) and,
    for example, intervene during cross-examination if the question has
    not been put in a way that the witness can deal with.

-   'Aids to communication': there is no set definition of communication
    aid so that could be anything from using maps and photographs to a
    computerised system for the witness to spell out their answers.^3^

Special measures can be, and frequently are, used in combination.

# Defendants as well as witnesses {#S2}

The Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 specifically excluded
the accused from special measures. However, the Police and Justice Act
2006 allows vulnerable defendants to give evidence by live link.

Section 104 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 allows for certain
vulnerable accused individuals to give oral evidence at trial with the
assistance of an intermediary. That section has not yet been
implemented, and registered intermediaries are therefore not available
for defendants. In trials in which a defendant has communication or
other difficulties, the judge has a duty to ensure that there is a fair
trial by making such adaptations to the trial process as are in the
interests of justice to ensure the defendant\'s effective participation.
If it is deemed to be in the interests of justice the judge will direct
an intermediary for the vulnerable defendant either for the whole trial
or, less usually, only if the defendant gives evidence.

# Best practice for court {#S3}

The Criminal Practice Directions,^4^ guidance that clarifies the
practical application of the law, made clear and specific
recommendations about vulnerable witnesses and defendants.

> ' ... many other people giving evidence in a criminal case, whether as
> a witness or defendant, may require assistance: the court is required
> to take "every reasonable step" to encourage and facilitate the
> attendance of witnesses and to facilitate the participation of any
> person, including the defendant (Rule 3.8(4)(a) and (b)). This
> includes enabling a witness or defendant to give their best evidence,
> and enabling a defendant to comprehend the proceedings and engage
> fully with his or her defence' (CPD, 3D.2).

The responsibility for identifying vulnerability in witness or defendant
is not identified in the Criminal Practice Directions and lies with
those professionals who interact with the person at various steps within
the process, namely police, solicitors and barristers. If anyone is
uncertain about the witness\'s or defendant\'s vulnerability, they may
request an expert psychiatric report and/or an intermediary assessment.

Frequently psychiatrists will be asked to assess a defendant\'s fitness
to plead and one possible conclusion is that the defendant could benefit
from the assistance of an intermediary. Psychiatrists should not express
the opinion that an intermediary will ensure the defendant is fit to
plead, but instead the defendant might be fit to plead if assisted by an
intermediary. The impact of this special measure on the defendant\'s
fitness to plead will not be known unless and until the intermediary has
assessed the defendant\'s communication needs and abilities and
determined how, if at all, the defendant will benefit from their
assistance at trial. The Law Commission^5^ is currently undertaking a
review of the law in relation to fitness to plead, including the
provision of intermediaries for vulnerable defendants, and by the end of
2015 it is likely there will be a proposal for new legislation.

**Box 1** Case example 1

L.M. is a 34-year-old man with autism and mild intellectual disability
who lives in long-term residential care. He copes badly with change, has
agoraphobia and becomes incoherent and anxious when faced with stressful
situations. He has a variety of reassuring rituals, including tapping,
wearing a baseball cap low over his face and at times turning his back
to the person he is talking to. L.M. was a witness to a series of
physical abuse to his peer in a previous residential unit. When seen by
the consultant psychiatrist he was able to give an internally consistent
account of what had happened. When the psychiatrist spoke to the court,
L.M. was allowed to give his evidence via a video link, wearing his
baseball cap, with an allowance for breaks if needed.

**Box 2** Case example 2

J.K. is a 57-year-old man with stroke-related memory problems. He has a
Mini-Mental State Examination^6^ score of 23/30 and has difficulty
retaining information. In day-to-day life, he is reliant on support from
statutory services and his family. He uses notes and a diary and will
often need information repeated to be able to retain it. He is accused
of theft from a shop. He is keen to go to court but is worried about
being able to follow the trial. Following advice by his treating
psychologist, J.K. is offered an intermediary to help him note down and
retain information with breaks scheduled into the court process to allow
him to review his notes and discuss events with his legal team with the
assistance of the intermediary.

Information from the treating team about the vulnerable witness or
defendant may also be requested in the context of a court case arising
within the period of treatment by secondary or tertiary mental health
services. Two clinical scenarios are described in [Box
1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"} and [Box
2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"}.

Judges have a wide discretion to put in place special measures to ensure
a fair trial. They are not limited to the special measures set out in
the legislation.^7^ Any adjustments to the traditional court process
will of course be specific to the witness or defendant but may include
such diverse interventions as: requiring everyone throughout the trial
to slow down and use plain and simple languageallowing the defendant to
sit next to counsel (as opposed to the usual place in the
dock)scheduling extraordinary breaks throughout the trialuse of a stress
toy or similar for state management (e.g. use of a sponge stress toy for
the defendant to squeeze while in the dock with dock officer
agreement)allowing the defendant to wear certain clothing (e.g. a
baseball cap in court).

# Ground rules hearings {#S4}

An application to the judge for special measures should be made at the
earliest opportunity. Closer to the trial the parameters for the fair
treatment and questioning of the vulnerable person must be discussed by
the trial judge, advocates and intermediary (if there is one) at what is
called a 'ground rules hearing' (Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Rules
2015). If the ground rules that are being discussed are based on the
psychiatrist\'s recommendations, the psychiatrist may be asked to attend
to assist the court at the ground rules hearing. As well as discussing
the practicalities for implementing special measures at this hearing,
the judge may require the advocates to go through their
cross-examination questions with the intermediary or the psychiatrist.
'Advocates must adapt to the witness, not the other way round', said the
vice-president of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division), Lady Justice
Hallett DBE in *R v Lubemba* \[2014\].^8^ In that judgment Lady Hallett
also endorsed The Advocate\'s Gateway
([www.theadvocatesgateway.org](www.theadvocatesgateway.org)), which
provides free, research-based guidance for advocates on questioning
vulnerable people and working with witnesses and defendants with mental
health disorder.

# Other courts follow suit {#S5}

Special measures are not simply for criminal cases. Other courts,
although lagging far behind the criminal justice system with respect to
vulnerable witnesses, are now working hard to catch up and are adopting
the vocabulary and practices of the criminal justice system. For
instance, in individual cases family civil and mental health tribunal
judges have adopted the ground rules approach and directed special
measures.^9,10^ New rules and practice directions about child witnesses
and vulnerable parties in the family courts are due to be in place by
the beginning of 2016. Whether your patient is a witness in a criminal
trial, a defendant charged with a criminal offence, a parent in a family
court dispute about their child, a claimant in a personal injury case,
etc., they are entitled to be considered for special measures. The
psychiatrist\'s advice on the most appropriate adjustments can play a
key role in ensuring a fair trial, as illustrated in the final case
study in [Box 3](#box3){ref-type="boxed-text"}.

**Box 3** Case example 3

I.J. was a patient taking a significant amount of medication to control
psychiatric symptoms. Her ability to give coherent testimony was much
improved in the afternoon when her medication had the chance to start
working and her mental state was most stable. The court schedule was
adjusted so that she gave her evidence in the afternoons.

# Conclusions {#S6}

Recent significant changes to court practice are designed to facilitate
fair hearings for all. An awareness of special measures and this fast
developing area of law will allow psychiatrists to ensure that patients
who are required to attend court can participate to the best of their
ability.

To view a free training film demonstrating the use of an intermediary
and other special measures, go to
[www.theadvocatesgateway.org/a-question-of-practice](www.theadvocatesgateway.org/a-question-of-practice)

[^1]: **Professor Penny Cooper** is an honorary senior research fellow
    at the Institute for Criminal Policy Research and an academic
    associate at 39 Essex Chambers. She co-founded and chairs The
    Advocate\'s Gateway. **Janet Grace** is a consultant
    neuropsychiatrist at Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation
    Trust and an honorary research fellow at University of Newcastle
    Business School (KITE).
