---
author:
- 
- Brian Humblestone
- Tony Mansi
date: 2016-2
subtitle: ": Formerly Consultant Psychiatrist, Greenwich District
  Hospital and Bexley Hospital"
title: Harry Kaye Rose (LRCP, LRCS, DPH, DPM, FRCPsych)
---

![](51f1){#F1}

A spell of service in the Merchant Navy provided Harry Kaye Rose, who
has died aged 89 years, with the eye-opener that led him to develop an
interest in alcoholism and a realisation of its importance to
psychiatry. He worked closely with Dr Max Glatt in the 1950s when the
study of the subject was in its infancy. He was instrumental in setting
up one of the few centres of excellence in Warlingham Park Hospital. The
treatment model that he and Max Glatt developed was to be the forerunner
of that employed in today\'s Priory clinics. They also established the
first treatment centres for drug and alcohol misuse in the prison
service. In the early 1960s, drawing on his own experiences at sea, Dr
Rose published with Dr Glatt influential academic papers on the health
of the merchant seaman and alcoholism.

After leaving Warlingham Park Hospital, he was appointed to be the
senior consultant in psychiatry at the new Greenwich District Hospital.
He undertook regular consultancy work at the nearby Mabledon and
Greenwich hospitals, and was a consultant in forensic psychiatry for the
Home Office for several years.

At the Mabledon Hospital he worked with George Bram, treating
traumatised and shell-shocked Polish refugees and soldiers who could not
return to Poland after the Second World War. It was here that he struck
up a friendship with one of Field Marshall Józef Piłsudski\'s daughters,
Wanda.

In addition to his work in the National Health Service, Dr Rose had an
extensive private practice with a patient load that read like a
selection from *Who\'s Who*. He treated government ministers, members of
the House of Lords, television and film stars, chief executives of FTSE
100 companies, rock stars and royalty as well as some of the most
dangerous and notorious criminals in the country. He also did a great
deal of work pro bono for people who were unable to afford treatment.

Dr Rose came from a middle class Jewish family in Glasgow and won many
undergraduate prizes in medicine at the University of Glasgow Medical
School before qualifying in 1947. He was an outstanding student who
gained many awards and prizes during his time at university, including
two gold medals. He did his national service as a Captain in the Royal
Army Medical Corps, mostly in Colchester. Desperate to travel, he was
disappointed that he failed to obtain an overseas posting and, on
discharge from the army, joined the Merchant Navy as a ship\'s surgeon.
He travelled the world on both mixed-passenger and cargo vessels. One of
his duties was to entertain the passengers, so he had his own table,
having to sit through two sittings of seven-course meals every day. It
was here that he learnt his extraordinary powers of dietary
self-control, later to stand him in good stead when he developed
diabetes in his fifties.

After retirement he settled in Devon where he lived for his last 9
years. He died on 30 September 2013, leaving his wife, a daughter, a
son, and three grandchildren.
