---
abstract: |
  A recent Royal College of Physicians\' study on assessment raises
  serious questions for workplace assessment. To address these, a system
  is recommended that bridges the gap from competence to performance and
  integrates supervised learning events (SLEs) that are formative in
  purpose with summative assessment of performance by entrustable
  professional activities (EPAs).
author:
- Denis O\'Leary
- Hasanan Al-Taiar
- Nicholas Brown
- Tomasz Bajorek
- Marjan Ghazirad
- Farshad ShaddelCorrespondence to Denis O\'Leary
  (<denis.oleary@msd.ox.ac.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-4
institute:
- 1Royal College of Psychiatrists, London
- 2Health Education Thames Valley
- 3Oxford University
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
title: Workplace assessment in crisis? The way forward
---

Workplace assessment is once again a matter for discussion, following
the recent findings of a pilot study by the Royal College of Physicians
(RCP).^1^ Acting on recommendations from a General Medical Council (GMC)
working party on assessment,^2^ the RCP revised its assessment processes
to differentiate between assessments of development and assessments of
performance. The former are formative and aim to identify a trainee\'s
areas of strength and development; the latter are summative and aim to
determine fitness to progress. To underscore these differences in
purpose the RCP adopted the terms supervised learning events (SLEs) and
assessment of performance (AoP) proposed by the GMC. Of note is that the
same workplace-based assessment (WPBA) tool can be used for each type of
assessment; the assessment\'s purpose is the discriminating factor.

As a working group on assessment in psychiatry we were interested in the
RCP findings, which represent a significant milestone in studies of
workplace assessment. Although there are important methodological and
interpretative limitations -- e.g. small numbers of respondents to
questionnaires and focus groups; their confusion regarding the purpose
of assessments and how they inform a trainee\'s fitness to progress to
their next stage of training (determined in the UK by Annual Review of
Competency Progression (ACRP) panels) -- arguably the findings reveal a
crisis in postgraduate workplace assessment. To understand the
implications for psychiatry, we summarise in this editorial the
report\'s objectives, findings and recommendations. We then present
proposals for the future direction of workplace assessment that
integrate formative and summative assessment in the workplace in a way
that builds on existing practice, educational theory and the study\'s
findings.

# RCP study on workplace assessments: findings {#S1}

The RCP aims were to evaluate the feasibility, validity and educational
value of using existing WPBA tools but for different assessment purposes
(formative and summative) and processes, i.e. SLEs and AoP. SLE
judgements purposefully excluded any numerical descriptors in order to
focus on their formative purpose (feedback, reflection and
action-planning); AoP were judged as pass/fail in keeping with their
summative purpose. The study commenced in August 2012 for a period of
one academic year across three Deaneries and included all trainees (546
core, 309 higher) and 669 trainers across nine medical specialties. A
mixed-method qualitative approach was used to generate triangulated
findings from responses to a series of questionnaires and focus groups.

In terms of educational value, it is important to note the study\'s
finding that neither trainees nor trainers considered WPBAs to be of
educational value before participating in the revised system. They
subsequently responded that in the new approach SLEs, but not AoPs, had
some educational value, although as noted above their purpose and
differences between them were understood poorly. Adherence with the
prescribed conduct of WPBA tools was variable (e.g. observational tools
were rated retrospectively and without direct trainer observation) and
even for SLEs their educational gain was limited by the lack, delay and
poor quality of feedback and action-planning. Undertaking SLEs and AoPs
was feasible, although there were work and time constraints. Additional
constraints pertained to trainer engagement across each type of
assessment and trainee engagement with AoPs. SLEs were considered to
have construct validity, but AoPs were not -- only 1% of AoP assessments
judged a performance as below the standard expected. Such low rates of
recorded underperformance were attributed to poor definition of the
required standards and reluctance by trainers to risk potential trainee
confrontation. The report recommends that AoPs as used in the study be
discontinued but that SLEs continue alongside recommendations for
improved training on the purpose and conduct of WPBAs, feedback and
action-planning, and consideration of their inclusion in the ARCP
process.

# Implications for psychiatry {#S2}

What are the implications for psychiatry, where similar WPBA tools are
used, although not in the way recommended by the GMC? Are we to abandon
WPBAs to inform assessment of performance? Where does that leave the
reliability and validity of decisions on training progression? How can
levels of trainer engagement and the training value of assessment be
improved? It is our view that an assessment system that integrates SLEs
and 'entrustable professional activities' (EPAs)^3,4^ will help address
not only the issue of summative ('high stakes') judgements on
performance but the wider issues cited here as well. This statement
requires further elaboration, beginning with a description of EPAs.

# Entrustable professional activities {#S3}

An EPA is a core unit of work essential to clinical practice and
performed to a specified level of entrustability or clinical
supervision, for instance a new out-patient assessment presented to the
clinical supervisor over the telephone (distant supervision). These are
new in practice, although used in the USA across several specialties
(family and internal medicine, paediatrics) and undergraduate
programmes.^5^ More significantly for psychiatry, they have been
developed and incorporated into curricular design and training
programmes by the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatry
(RANZCP).^6^

As well as a clear title and description of the work and context, EPA
content is underpinned by a competency framework (and curriculum) and as
such can be supported by formative assessment using specific SLEs and
existing WPBAs. Although necessary and in keeping with SLEs\' formative
purpose, when making a judgement on an EPA the outcome of these SLE
assessments is integrated with other evidence, formal and informal,
about a trainee\'s workplace performance on this unit of work. As such,
the EPA/summative judgements, triangulated across several sources of
evidence, can contribute to ARCP/progression decisions. Additionally, as
the EPA criteria specify increasing levels of entrustability (decreased
need for supervision), they can be used to demonstrate performance over
time towards the expected and growing level of independent practice --
or distant supervision for trainees. Such 'progressive independence in
training'^7^ is facilitated by clinical and educational supervisors, and
improved trainee confidence, motivation and identity as a psychiatrist
are considered best practice in experience-based learning.^8^ Such
improved proficiency is included by Harden^9^ as one of four 'exit
learning outcomes', alongside increased clinical depth, breadth and
utility of application.

# Advantages of the proposed system {#S4}

Although it is likely that these proposed changes to the assessment
process will improve the formative value of WPBA, the key questions are,
will they improve the level of trainer and trainee engagement in
workplace assessment of performance and judgements on whether
performance meets satisfactory standards. We believe they can as in
terms of engagement: initial design of the requisite EPAs requires value
judgements by trainers and trainees alike on what represent core units
of workthe approach focuses the use of WPBAs as formative tools with
self-assessment and reflection input by the trainee, feedback from the
clinical supervisor and joint action-planning^10^inclusion of the
required level of supervision as part of SLE feedback enables future
decisions on meeting performance standardsthe outcome of SLEs can be
included in documentation for the ARCP panel (as suggested by trainees
in the survey)^1^the requirement that the outcomes of specific SLEs are
used to inform judgements on specific EPA sign-off will focus assessment
on key units of professional activity underpinned by the curriculum,
thus moving away from current requirements based on numbers of WPBAs
aloneEPAs, being triangulated, can contribute directly and more
meaningfully to ARCP progression decisionsthe approach is likely to be
more meaningful to both trainees and trainers and is consistent with
educational models of postgraduate training that emphasise the role of
the clinical supervisor as facilitator and the trainee as part of a
community of practice.^9^

The process will enable judgement on performance standards through the:
use of several sources of information (increasing triangulation) rather
than the outcome of a single workplace assessment -- the outcomes of
specific SLEs are necessary but not sufficient;the addition of a 'level
of required supervision' criterion will support EPA judgements and
places patient safety at the heart of the process;generally, although
WPBA may not identify underperformance at the same prevalence as formal
examination testing, nevertheless it is reasonable to expect that when
it does judge underperformance it is identifying a population at high
risk of poor performance across testing generally.

While being mindful of the multi-determined nature of assessment and the
reality that any new system aims for improvement rather than perfection,
we conclude that the Royal College of Psychiatrists should pilot a
revised assessment system that: (i) adopts the GMC\'s recommendation on
types of WPBA; (ii) aligns SLEs (formative assessments) that are
conducted against a competency framework using existing WPBA tools
modified to improve the quality of reflection (self-assessment on
performance), feedback and action-planning and to provide a statement on
the level of ongoing clinical supervision required; and (iii) enables
the outcome of a specified number of targeted SLEs to contribute to
summative judgements by educational supervisors on trainee performance
across specified EPAs. The pilot should test the system\'s feasibility,
validity and educational impact and the findings considered alongside
any evaluation from the RANZCP process. Without such an initiative a
crisis of confidence in workplace assessment will serve only to erode
best educational practice.

[^1]: **Denis O\'Leary** MD, MEd, MRCPsych, Chair of Oxford Medical
    Education Fellows, College Assessment Advisor, Royal College of
    Psychiatrists, past Head of School, Consultant Psychiatrist and
    Honorary Senior Clinical Lecturer, Oxford University; Senior
    Assessment Advisor, NCAS. **Hasanan Al-Taiar** MBChB, MRCPsych,
    Specialist Registrar, Forensic Psychiatry and Oxford Medical
    Education Fellow, Member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists\'
    International Medical Graduates scoping group, Iraq Subcommittee and
    Diaspora Organisations Committee. **Nicholas Brown** MRCPsych,
    Senior Assessment Advisor for NCAS and a retired consultant general
    adult psychiatrist, Specialist Advisor for Assessment for the Royal
    College of Psychiatrists. **Tomasz Bajorek** BA Hons (Oxon), BM,
    BCh, BA, MRCPsych, ST5 Dual Trainee in General Adult and Old Age
    Psychiatry, recent Clinical Education Fellow in Health Education
    Thames Valley. **Marjan Ghazirad** MD, MRCPsych, Psychiatry
    Specialist Registrar and Medical Education Fellow, academic tutor,
    Oxford University, member of advisory body to External Reference
    Group, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. **Farshad
    Shaddel** MD, MRCPsych, Psychiatry Specialist Registrar and Medical
    Education Fellow, Honorary Clinical Lecturer, Oxford University,
    Member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists\' Examination\'s
    Sub-Committee and Approval Panel, NHS England South.
