---
author:
- Julia Bland[^1]
date: 2016-8
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
title: "Profile: Professor Ian Jones"
---

Bespectacled Professor Ian Jones is an unpretentious, fluent and
animated man with a dazzling set of credentials, including over 18 500
citations of his research output.

His Chair, at Cardiff University School of Medicine, in the Department
of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neuroscience, is in Perinatal
Psychiatry. He is the director of the National Centre for Mental Health
(NCMH), and runs the Bipolar Disorder Research Network (BDRN). In 2013,
he won the Royal College of Psychiatrists\' Academic Researcher of the
Year Award.

What I immediately liked about him was his pragmatic determination to
improve the quality of clinical performance by whatever means comes to
hand. Ian Jones does not see himself as a purist researcher: 'The
ultimate goal of research is making things better for people with these
conditions ... via the development of services and stigma reduction.
I\'m primarily a clinician rather than a scientist'.

His first exposure to research was doing an MSc in Cardiff as a
psychiatric trainee, subsequently a Wellcome training fellowship in
Birmingham, and a year in the USA, all looking at bipolar disorder and
postnatal issues, before settling in Cardiff. He is a Welshman from the
Rhondda Valleys. His grandfather had to leave school aged 15 to go down
the mines because his father had died in a mining accident. Jones\' own
father was a schoolteacher who became a Minister, and the family moved
to England when Ian Jones was a child. He remains grateful for the
opportunity he had to get a medical education without student debt, and
fears for the potential narrowness of medical school intake in these
harsher times. He now lives in Worcester with his GP wife, so he is well
attuned to the difficulty of accessing secondary psychiatric care. They
have three children between the ages of 13 and 19 and he is a fan of
modern British folk music and the Worcester Warriors (rugby, of course,
not football).

While not wishing to be too politically provocative, he admits that
leaving the NCMH deliberately ambiguous (Wales, the nation or the whole
UK?) is a tacit challenge to all the London institutions which do not
hesitate to call themselves 'national'. On the other hand, he fully
acknowledges that they are funded by Welsh healthcare research money.

Professor Nick Craddock has been a career-long mentor, a role Jones
describes as 'particularly important for clinical academics'.

Jones appreciates the particular opportunities being a clinical academic
affords: 'you still treat patients but you have a bit more flexibility
than in a pure NHS job and you get to do research as well'. In his role
as a researcher it seems likely that his affable personality lends
itself to collaborative research projects (e.g. as part of the Wellcome
Trust genome-wide association study group) and his enthusiasm for
patient involvement is not just as a politically correct add-on but key
to the success of ventures such as the BDRN, to which he is utterly
committed.

# People, not patients {#S1}

Jones\' attitude of respect and interest in his patients comes across
clearly. Having met him, it is easy to imagine how thoughtful he would
be in the clinical encounter. Not adopted self-consciously as a correct
attitude, but genuinely felt. This sits congruently with his attitude to
our clumsy, inaccurate (and proliferating) diagnostic categories. He is
not anti diagnosis, and points out how helpful diagnosis can be in
directing people to the treatment and support they need. But with
hundreds of diagnostic categories and subcategories in DSM-5, he thinks
most practising clinicians think they could do with 'about 15'.

# Science {#S2}

Jones has contributed to important scientific advance, particularly in
the area of the clinical and molecular genetics of bipolar disorder and
puerperal psychosis. His first big Wellcome-Trust-funded research study
was of bipolar twin pairs, where he heard from the patients directly
about their severe episodes of postpartum illness and noticed how often
this was the first episode of continuing bipolar disorder. He is still
excited by the many unanswered questions raised by the link between
childbirth and serious mental illness, and wonders whether this link may
be a clue to understanding the aetiology of mood disorders in general.

The research questions that preoccupy him currently are 'What is the
importance of biological/hormonal triggers and immunological factors?'
and 'How does sleep disruption or change in circadian rhythms play into
the aetiology of mental illness?'. In collaboration with Professor Lisa
Jones and the University of Worcester, he is part of a current,
prospective study of high-risk women with a history of bipolar disorder
or puerperal psychosis, asking them to wear 'actigraph' watches to
monitor their sleep. The plan is to determine what factors increase the
risk of a severe postpartum recurrence, such as the link between sleep
disturbance and prodromal symptoms: is sleep disturbance a trigger
or/and a symptom of illness?

He is also involved in a joint study with the University of Worcester
and Oxford University using True Colours
([oxfordhealth.truecolours.nhs.uk](oxfordhealth.truecolours.nhs.uk)), a
web-based system for monitoring mood. What he hopes will emerge from
this work is a more subtle conceptualisation of mood variation in lived
experience. People with bipolar disorder are 'not just euthymic with
episodes of mania or depression ... it\'s more complicated and variable
than that.'

The risks of postpartum psychosis in mood disorders is high: in a study
reported in 2013, with a sample of nearly 2000 women with bipolar
disorder or recurrent major depression, more than 66% had at least one
episode of perinatal mood disorder and around 20% of women with bipolar
disorder had experienced postpartum psychosis.^1^ In 2001, in the
*American Journal of Psychiatry*, Jones and others reported the heavy
genetic loading in puerperal psychosis, finding evidence that the
puerperal trigger in bipolar disorder was familial and suggested that
the majority of postpartum psychotic episodes can be viewed as bipolar
disorder with a puerperal trigger.^2^ While 26% of all deliveries in
women with bipolar disorder lead to puerperal psychosis, a huge 74% of
women with bipolar disorder and a family history of puerperal psychosis
in a first-degree relative will have a puerperal psychosis compared with
38% without a family history.^2^

With Professor Nick Craddock and Professor Lisa Jones at the University
of Worcester, he leads the Bipolar Disorder Research Network (BDRN,
[www.BDRN.org](www.BDRN.org)), which has recruited over 6000 people with
bipolar disorder into research across the UK. The BDRN sample is a large
contribution to the psychiatric genomics consortium bipolar work and he
is excited about the way genetics is improving our understanding of
mental illness. For example, the genetic overlap in the risk of bipolar
disorder, recurrent major depression and schizophrenia,^3^ which
obviously has major implications. 'The point is that the diagnostic
complexity doesn\'t reflect the underlying scientific understanding'. No
wonder so many of our patients with chronic illness run the gamut of
diagnoses over their psychiatric 'career'.

With bipolar disorder, Jones thinks it is both under- and
over-diagnosed. For some people, the diagnosis provides access to much
needed and overdue specialist help. For others, it may be a way of
avoiding the less palatable diagnoses, such as personality disorder.

# Post-partum illness {#S3}

Jones\' commitment to this complex field is unequivocal: "'The
postpartum period is so important ... it\'s a devastating time to be
unwell. Women with postpartum psychosis need high-quality in-patient
treatment with pharmacology initially and then talking treatments to
come to terms with what has happened to them, and the guilt and so on
... '." There is no mother and baby unit in Wales now and Jones deplores
the postcode lottery of service availability, which he, the Maternal
Mental Health Alliance and Action on Postpartum Psychosis are seeking to
change. Perhaps the new investment in mental health announced recently
will improve this area of psychiatric care?^4^

# Public education {#S4}

For Jones there is a seamless continuity between destigmatisation,
public education and the involvement of people with lived experience of
illness in research. He told me he was struck by a figure quoted that
'only a third of cancer patients are involved in research', with the
implication that in medicine the expectation of patient involvement in
research is vastly higher than it is in psychiatry.

In contrast to a 'paternalistic, protective' attitude (which he sees as
having been prevalent in psychiatric services hitherto), he wants people
to have an opportunity to participate, with the carrot of benefiting
others in the future. Recruitment into the BDRN has been much easier
than he anticipated: 'we said we\'d recruit 6000 but didn\'t think it
would be easy ... but we have ... and collaboration with Bipolar UK has
been key, one third of our recruits have come from them'. The NCMH has
also recruited over 6000 people.

> 'Interestingly, the third sector and people with lived experience are
> not difficult to win into cooperation: they see the need. It\'s the
> mental health services themselves who are harder to engage'.

Another patient research initiative he mentions is the True Colours
project he is involved in with Oxford University, where people can
monitor their mood over time: 'this is reconceptualising mood disorders
and we should be doing prospective studies'. He is frustrated by the
stigmatising views of some ethics committees who are reluctant to see
psychiatric patients as being capable of deciding for themselves to
participate in research. Demonstrating the only-too-familiar lack of
parity between mental and physical health, committees can believe that
'decisions have to made on behalf of psychiatric patients, who need
protection'. He quotes the outrageous differential against mental health
in research funding, amply demonstrated by the fact that, for each £1 of
government spending on cancer research, £2.98 is raised from the charity
sector, compared with only 0.01 pence per government pound on mental
health research.^5^

In the NCMH he wants to promote research integrated into the NHS, as
part of its role, of 'what we do'. His appetite for public education has
led him to some interesting places. As script advisor for the British TV
soap opera *EastEnders*, he helped with the storyline of Stacey
Branning, whose descent into puerperal psychosis was viewed by over 9
million people.^6^ He has been interviewed on BBC Radio 4\'s *Woman\'s
Hour*, and encouraged the YouTube video of a famous 64-year-old Welsh
Rugby referee, Clive Norling, impressively describing his severe
depressive episode. He has helped instigate the 'Bipolar Education
Programme Cymru', a direct mixture of group sessions and an online
interactive module in Wales, and chaired and is still a trustee of
Action on Postpartum Psychosis.

# 'Muscular psychiatry' {#S5}

In a controversial letter to the *British Journal of Psychiatry* in
2008,^7^ he and Nick Craddock called for reclaiming the medical core in
psychiatry and warning against a 'down-grading' of the medical aspect of
the role in favour of psychosocial care. It was a call to arms,
asserting that scientific rigour and patient involvement go hand in
hand, valuing an unsentimental, rigorous, 'muscular' psychiatry.

Jones describes the unhelpful diffidence of the specialty, its
reluctance to assert its own value: 'We are very nice, reasonable people
who don\'t put forward our agenda as strongly as we should ... we need
to stand up more for the role doctors play'. He affirms our unique
capacity to participate in the full range of what patients need: a
biological perspective and medication, talking treatments, and educating
patients and the public about mental health. He urges the profession
'not to play into therapeutic pessimism ... sure there are side-effects
of medication, and we need better, safer drugs, but drugs work in
psychiatry ... as well or better than in many physical health
conditions'.

Having worked in general medicine before becoming a psychiatrist, Jones
sees the psychiatrist as an effective prescriber, who should 'stand up
for medicine' while not losing the breadth of perspective that
encompasses the social and psychological as well as the pharmacological.

# Recruitment {#S6}

Jones sees recruitment as the most important challenge facing the Royal
College of Psychiatrists: 'We have to get the brightest and best
students to come into psychiatry'. He proposes an early intervention,
perhaps at the sixth-former stage: 'We could say to \[the
sixth-formers\]: "If you are considering psychology, sociology, if you
are interested in the mind/brain stuff, why not do psychiatry via
medicine?" '

This idea reminded me of a conversation relayed to me between a friend
and her three adult daughters in their late 20s, one lawyer, two
accountants. They are all fed up and wish they could be in the
psychiatry/psychology field. As my friend said: 'These jobs are about
what makes people tick ... in the end, it\'s the only thing that
matters, or is interesting'. Ian Jones\' own experience of psychiatry
teaching at St George\'s medical school was inspiring, 'the best
delivered teaching block', and he rightly emphasises the importance of
exposing students to the excitement and to hearing the lived experience
of patients, the 'how psychiatry saved my life'.

We know medical students are exposed to the disparaging, prejudiced
remarks of other doctors about psychiatry. 'You are too good to be a
psychiatrist', Jones was told. The attitude of medical students to
psychiatry as 'not proper medicine' has been directly captured in focus
groups at Durham (personal communication, S. Sinclair, 2014). Jones is
frustrated by therapeutic pessimism about psychiatry: "'The idea that
no-one ever gets better ... it\'s just not true ... we get far better
outcomes than in chest medicine where I worked before becoming a
psychiatrist ... We must be more positive about ourselves. What medics
bring to the table is often derided, as if using psychotropic drugs is
by default, or a sign of, failure. This needs to be robustly
challenged.''In a survey of women who reflected on their experience of
post-partum psychosis, they were very clear that it was admission and
drug treatment that they needed initially. They needed secondary
psychological treatment when they had recovered from the acute illness,
to deal with the guilt and so on, but they valued medical care ... '."
He makes a cogent plea for psychiatry as uniquely holistic: "'This is
how we help people, this is the case we need to make. In perinatal
psychiatry, particularly, we cannot ignore all aspects of treatment. You
cannot be a hardened psychopharmacologist or a pure psychotherapist'."
He becomes increasingly passionate about the integrated assessing,
prescribing, listening roles of the psychiatrist: 'Giving hope to people
is the most important thing we do, letting people tell their story is
validating, giving them hope that they can get better'. He is concerned
that as biological understanding improves, medicine may encroach on our
terrain (e.g. paediatricians taking over attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder) and the danger of handing over responsibility for conditions
is the danger of losing our unique and invaluable holistic approach.
Conversely, he does not see psychiatry as 'all about wishy-washy
feelings. There is lots of interesting science to be done at interface
of neuroscience and mind ... where the most exciting stuff of next 40
years will be unfolding,' he predicts.

As if he knows he is getting a bit carried away on a wave of positivity
which may not strike a chord with a hard-pressed CMHT consultant, he
admits it is hard to maintain positivity in underfunded services, and he
knows it is easier for an academic. But Ian Jones is not twiddling his
thumbs, and his energy and optimism seem like a refreshing tonic in the
jaded grey days of February.

[^1]: **Julia Bland**, Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist, South London
    and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, formerly Co. Director, MedNet
    service, London, UK, email: <julia.bland@hotmail.co.uk>
