---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** We aimed to estimate the proportion of UK
  emergency departments with a psychiatric assessment room and to
  determine whether such rooms met criteria for conducting high-risk
  assessments. Liaison psychiatry services were asked whether their
  hospital had such a room, whether it met the criteria and whether
  respondents judged it to be sufficiently safe and private.

  **Results** Of the 60 emergency departments included in the survey,
  23% had a psychiatric assessment room that met all the safety criteria
  and was judged to be safe and private. Barriers to the establishment
  of an appropriate facility included it being a low priority for
  hospital management, a room being used for other purposes, and
  balancing safety requirements with the creation of a calming
  environment.

  **Clinical implications** Mental illness is a common reason for
  presentation to emergency departments. Despite national
  recommendations, this survey indicates that many departments lack a
  sufficiently safe and private assessment room, which compromises the
  safety and privacy of patient care.
author:
- Jim Bolton
- Lucy Palmer
- Rohanna CawdronCorrespondence to Jim Bolton
  (<jim.bolton@swlstg-tr.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-4
institute:
- 1St Helier Hospital, Surrey, UK
- 2College Centre for Quality Improvement, London, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
title: Survey of psychiatric assessment rooms in UK emergency
  departments
---

Hospital emergency departments are involved with the resuscitation,
assessment and treatment of patients with acute illness and injury. This
includes patients with mental as well as physical illness. UK emergency
departments see about 50 000 new patients each year, with a range of
between 30 000 attendances for smaller departments and over 100 000 for
the largest.^1^ The incidence of patients presenting with mental illness
is about 5%.^1,2^ Common psychiatric presentations include self-harm,
suicidal ideation, psychosis, and alcohol and substance misuse.^1,2^

Liaison psychiatry is the subspecialty of general psychiatry that deals
with the management of mental illness in general medical settings.^3^ A
multidisciplinary liaison psychiatry service covering in-patient wards
and the emergency department is recommended as an essential requirement
for all acute hospitals.^1,4,5^ It is also recommended that an emergency
department should have an interview room for psychiatric
consultations.^2,6,7^ Such a room should not be isolated from the main
department and should be sufficiently safe and private. It should
provide a calming environment and be equipped for assessments of
patients whose mental illness increases their risk of harm towards
themselves or others.^8^

The Psychiatric Liaison Accreditation Network (PLAN) is an initiative of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists\' Centre for Quality Improvement
(CCQI) in partnership with the Royal College of Physicians, the Royal
College of Nursing, the College of Emergency Medicine and the mental
health charity Mind. Patient and carer representatives are integral to
the setting of quality standards and accreditation of services. PLAN
works with services to assure and improve the quality of psychiatric
care in hospital settings. Liaison psychiatry services are audited
against nearly 200 standards. These standards have been established
following a literature review and by a consensus of the organisations
involved in PLAN. The standards are revised regularly, in discussion
with the services engaged in the accreditation process, following the
emergence of new policy and in the light of their application.

To achieve accreditation a liaison psychiatry service that assesses
patients in an emergency department must have access to an interview
room that meets specific criteria for safely conducting 'high-risk
assessments' ([Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}).^9,10^ The
experience of PLAN has been that many liaison psychiatry services have
struggled to achieve accreditation because of the lack of an assessment
room, or because the room failed to meet one of the necessary criteria.

We aimed to survey liaison psychiatry services across the UK to estimate
the proportion of emergency departments with a psychiatric assessment
room and to determine whether such rooms met the PLAN requirements for
conducting high-risk assessments.

# Method {#S1}

The survey was conducted over 3 months between September and November
2013. A list of questions was circulated by email to UK liaison
psychiatry services and given out to delegates at a national meeting of
such services. We did not select services to take part in the survey.
However, we aimed to achieve a wide circulation and relatively high
response rate to ensure that we had information from emergency
department across the UK, in hospitals of varying sizes, and serving
rural, suburban and urban areas.

**Box 1** PLAN standards for a psychiatry interview room for conducting
high-risk assessments

The following include the standards used in this survey.^9^ Subsequent
revisions to the standards are given in bold.^10^

Facilities for high-risk assessments must ensure the safety of staff and
service users. They should: be located close to or within the main
emergency department or acute medical unit (revision: **be located
within the main emergency department**);have a door which opens both
ways and is not lockable from the inside (revision: **have at least one
door which opens outwards and is not lockable from the inside**);have an
observation panel or window;have a panic button or alarm system unless
staff carry alarms at all times;only include furniture, fittings and
equipment which are unlikely to be used to cause harm (revision: **for
example sinks, sharp-edged furniture, lightweight chairs, tables,
cables, televisions or anything else that could be used to cause harm or
as a missile are not permitted**);ideally the room should include two
doors (revision: **while not mandatory for accreditation, PLAN highly
recommends that assessment facilities should have two doors to provide
additional security; all new assessment rooms must be designed with two
doors**);**not have any ligature points**.

Respondents were asked to identify the hospital in which they worked to
ensure that no duplicate responses were included in the analysis. They
were told that specific emergency departments would not be named in the
publication of results.

Respondents were asked: whether their hospital had an emergency
department (only those answering positively were included in the
analysis);whether the emergency department had a psychiatric assessment
room;where there was a room, whether it met each of the criteria for
conducting high-risk assessments ([Box
1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"});whether the respondent judged the room
to be sufficiently safe and, if not, why not;whether the respondent
judged the room to be sufficiently private and, if not, why not;other
comments or suggestions regarding the use of, or PLAN criteria for, such
rooms.

The responses were analysed to determine the proportion of emergency
departments with a psychiatric assessment room and how many of these
rooms met the PLAN criteria for safety and privacy. Common themes were
identified in the free-text responses.

# Results {#S2}

Responses were received from liaison psychiatry services working in 60
of the 245 emergency departments in the UK (response rate: 24%).
Although we are not identifying individual services and hospitals in the
published findings, we can confirm that we received responses from
hospitals of a range of sizes and in various locations. Of these
hospitals, 51 (85%) had a psychiatric assessment room within or close to
the emergency department. Whether or not the psychiatric assessment
rooms met the PLAN criteria for facilities and equipment is indicated in
[Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}. Of the 51 rooms, 25 (49%) were judged
by respondents to meet all of these criteria: 33 (65%) were judged as
sufficiently safe and 46 (90%) as sufficiently private. Overall, 14
(23%) emergency departments had a room that met all the criteria and
that was also judged to be sufficiently safe and private by liaison
psychiatry staff. Common themes arising from the free-text responses are
incorporated into the discussion.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Number of rooms meeting safety criteria for facilities and equipment
(*n* = 51)
:::

| Criterion                                                | *n* (%) |
|:---------------------------------------------------------|:-------:|
| Door opens both ways and is not lockable from inside     | 32 (63) |
|                                                          |         |
| Observation panel or window                              | 46 (90) |
|                                                          |         |
| Panic button or alarm system                             | 38 (75) |
|                                                          |         |
| Furniture, fittings and equipment unlikely to cause harm | 33 (65) |
|                                                          |         |
| Two doors                                                | 38 (75) |
:::

# Discussion {#S3}

Despite long-standing national recommendations, in this survey of UK
liaison psychiatry services only 85% of emergency departments whose
staff responded to the survey were reported as having a psychiatric
assessment room. Of these rooms, 49% met all the safety criteria listed
by PLAN. Overall, only 23% of emergency departments included in the
survey had a psychiatric assessment room that met all the criteria for
conducting high-risk assessments and was sufficiently safe and private.

This is the first such survey of psychiatric assessment rooms in
emergency departments. Its findings concur with the perception of PLAN
that many liaison psychiatry services are working in departments with
inadequate facilities. The provision of an appropriate room is mandatory
for a liaison psychiatry service to be accredited by PLAN. As well as
meeting specific safety criteria for facilities and equipment, the room
should also be judged to be safe and private by the majority of patients
and peer reviewers involved in the accreditation assessment. Failure to
meet mandatory standards is judged by PLAN to constitute 'a significant
threat to patient safety, rights or dignity'.^10^

A common reason for a room being judged to be unsafe by respondents was
that it was not a dedicated facility for conducting psychiatric
assessments and that it was used by emergency department staff for other
purposes. One respondent noted that 'the room is often filled with
medical equipment (and) inappropriate furniture'. Another described how
the room was also used as an overflow waiting area for patients.
Although there is a need to use space efficiently in an emergency
department, this has to be balanced against the need for safe and
private facilities to manage the relatively high proportion of patients
with mental illness. We are aware of psychiatric interview rooms which
meet the PLAN criteria, but which are also used flexibly for the
assessment of other patients and meetings with relatives and carers.

Another common issue raised by respondents was a room being too small,
for example, 'to allow space for a patient to move around if restless'.
Although a minimum size for the room is not stipulated in the PLAN
standards, whether the room is large enough to conduct safe assessments
is judged by a visiting peer review team as part of the accreditation
process. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
recommends that the room should be large enough to accommodate six
people.^6^

Sufficient privacy to conduct psychiatric assessments is also assessed
by peer reviewers. In the survey several respondents judged that the
rooms in their emergency departments were not private. Most often this
was because conversations in the room could easily be overheard by staff
or patients outside, or because those in the room were too easily
visible from outside.

Several respondents described the difficulties they faced in trying to
secure a psychiatric assessment room in their local emergency department
or in ensuring that the room was adequately equipped. A frequently cited
problem was the perceived lack of influence with emergency department
management. The implication in a number of responses was that the
liaison psychiatry service was seen as being delivered separately from
the emergency department and therefore having a low priority when
considering the facilities provided. One respondent suggested that the
provision of a psychiatric assessment room should be mandatory when a
mental health service is commissioned.

Although liaison psychiatry services often work across the whole
hospital, we support them being seen as integral to the work of the
emergency department. PLAN encourages this by recommending that clinical
staff and management from both liaison psychiatry and the emergency
department meet regularly to discuss common issues. The survey
identified examples of good working relationships where the liaison
psychiatry services had successfully negotiated for the provision of an
assessment room. One respondent expressed their thanks to the PLAN peer
review team for their feedback on the inadequacy of the assessment room:
'I used it at every opportunity until we got the money to rebuild'.

Several respondents raised the difficulties they had experienced in
establishing a room that is equipped to meet safety requirements, but
also provides a calming environment for an agitated or anxious patient.
One room was described as being 'similar to a cell \[with\] white stark
walls' and another as 'poorly decorated, \[with\] no natural light and
\[as\] not welcoming or comfortable'. We recognise the challenge in
meeting safety standards and providing a calming environment in a busy
emergency department. However, measures can be taken to achieve the
latter, such as having a window which allows natural daylight,
decorating in calming colours, and use of pictures without glass that
are securely fixed to the walls.

The results of this survey, including the free-text comments and
suggestions by respondents, have informed a revision of the PLAN
standards for psychiatric assessment rooms.^10^ The changes have also
brought the standards into line with those for assessment facilities for
patients detained under Section 136 of the Mental Health Act 1983.^11^
The PLAN standards for a psychiatric assessment room have been included
in guidance published by the College of Emergency Medicine.^7^ We hope
that this will reinforce the importance of all emergency departments
having such a facility and will give additional support to liaison
psychiatry services and colleagues in an emergency department who are
negotiating for the provision or equipping of a psychiatric assessment
room.

# Limitations {#S4}

This is not a survey of all emergency departments in the UK. Instead, we
disseminated the survey to liaison psychiatry staff, who we thought
would be best placed to judge the adequacy of facilities in their
hospitals and to make judgements about the safety and privacy of
assessment rooms. Therefore, the survey does not include emergency
departments in hospitals where there is no liaison psychiatry service.
In our survey, the proportion of UK emergency departments with an
assessment room was 85%, but the figure for UK departments as a whole is
unknown. We think it is likely that a hospital without a liaison
psychiatry service is less likely to have a psychiatric assessment room;
hence the overall proportion of departments in the UK with the
recommended facilities is likely to be lower than that found in the
survey.

There may be bias in those services that completed the survey, including
a possibility that staff were more likely to respond if they were
frustrated about a lack of appropriate facilities in their hospital.

Another limitation is the lack of an independent opinion of the
appropriateness of facilities. An experience of PLAN is that external
reviewers occasionally disagree with liaison psychiatry staff that the
assessment room in their hospital meets the required standards. If this
was the case in this survey, it would tend to overestimate the
proportion of emergency departments with an adequate assessment room.

This survey audited rooms against the third edition of the PLAN
standards, which have now been revised, taking account of the survey\'s
findings.^9,10^ In view of the changes to some of the requirements the
proportion of rooms meeting the standards is likely to have changed.
However, we judge that any change would be relatively small and would
not alter the overall conclusions of the survey.

# Implications {#S5}

When psychiatric assessment rooms are being designed we strongly
advocate that the PLAN and College of Emergency Medicine guidelines are
followed to ensure provision of a sufficiently safe and private
environment ([Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}). Although we are not
aware of any specific planning guidance on the size of such a room, as
previously noted, NICE guidance indicates that it should be large enough
to hold six people. The design should also ensure that someone outside
the room should have clear lines of sight for all areas via the
observation panels or windows.

Despite recommendations that all emergency departments should have a
psychiatric assessment room that is sufficiently safe and private, this
survey indicates that such facilities are often lacking. Our findings
concur with the experience of PLAN in its reviews of services and
facilities. We believe that they are broadly representative of the
current provision and equipping of psychiatric assessment facilities in
UK emergency departments.

Mental illness is a common reason for presentation to emergency
departments, where the absence of appropriate assessment facilities
compromises the safety and privacy of patient care. Along with the
College of Emergency Medicine and the other partners in PLAN we endorse
the provision of psychiatric assessment rooms and urge inspectors of
health services to address this in their own reviews of the quality and
safety of patient care in emergency departments.

We thank all the liaison psychiatry staff who responded to our survey.

[^1]: **Jim Bolton** BSc(Hons) MBBS FRCPsych is a Consultant Liaison
    Psychiatrist at St Helier Hospital in Surrey and Honorary Senior
    Lecturer at St George\'s, University of London. **Lucy Palmer**
    BSc(Hons) is a Senior Programme Manager at the College Centre for
    Quality Improvement. **Rohanna Cawdron** is a Project Worker with
    the Psychiatric Liaison Accreditation Network at the College Centre
    for Quality Improvement.
