---
author:
- Debasis Bhattacharya
- Rahul Bhattacharya
date: 2016-4
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
subtitle: ": Formerly Director of Postgraduate Medical and Research
  Institute, Professor and Head of the Department of Neurology and
  Psychiatry, Calcutta, India"
title: Professor Ajita Chakraborty MB, DPM, FRCP (Ed.) FRCPsych
---

![](109f1){#F1}

Ajita Chakraborty, who has recently died aged 88, pioneered the
advancement of women in the field of psychiatry in India where she was
the first woman to practise in the specialty. She was highly active in
the Indian Psychiatric Society in which she served as general secretary
(1967-1968), treasurer (1971-1974), vice president (1975) and finally,
as a tribute to her indomitable leadership qualities and organisational
skills, as president in 1976. Ajita had a keen interest in transcultural
psychiatry. She first carried out pioneering epidemiological studies
(with an impressive sample size of 13 335) around Calcutta exploring
sociological and cultural perspectives. She noted that visual
hallucinations (visions of gods and goddess) were common, particularly
in women. This made making a differentiation between 'pseudo' and true
hallucinations a challenge.^1^ She also studied the outbreak of Koro in
eastern parts of India and proposed a hypothesis linking this disorder
with displacement as well as loss of agricultural land and threats to
cultural identity among the farming population.^2^ For several years she
worked on evolving an indigenous school of psychotherapy that was well
adapted for the people she treated most of her life. She was a member of
the World Psychiatric Association, Transcultural Psychiatry Section, for
25 years. On her retirement from the editorial board of the journal
*Transcultural Psychiatry*, the editor, Lawrence Kirmayer, thanked her
for 'unique and invaluable contributions' to the journal over the years.

She was acutely aware of the disadvantages facing women in the
professions in India, considering herself to be highly privileged at a
time when, as she herself recalled 'I was able to have advanced
education and a professional career at a time when 90% of girls (in
India) had no choice but marriage or family'. At the 5th World Congress
of Psychiatry in Mexico City in 1971 she voiced her concerns that there
were no sessions chaired by women and received widespread support. 'All
in all', she wrote late in life 'I think my life would have been easier
if the gender was "right" '. Although she did not wish to regard herself
as a feminist, she acted as a role model for professional women in India
at a time when feminism was still struggling to make its presence felt
in the Western world.

Professor Ajita Chakraborty was born in Calcutta in the state of Bengal
in 1926, at a time when the country was still a part of the British
Empire. The city was the epicentre of British rule in India and had
served as the capital of British India until 1911. Ajita\'s family had
received Western education for generations and had been well connected,
enterprising, urban middle-class with a streak of non-conformity that
ran through generations. Throughout her early years Ajita was exposed to
social inequalities, starting with the Bengal famine in 1943, followed
by political unrest and riots in the backdrop of the Second World War.
She lived through the granting of independence to India with the
associated partition of the state of Bengal accompanied by unprecedented
social displacement and uprooting that continued into the 1970s.

Ajita qualified from the Scottish Church College in Calcutta in 1944
(First Division) and enrolled for the Calcutta Medical College. Her
entry group had an exceptionally high proportion of young women, with 10
girls and 50 boys. After qualifying as a doctor in 1950, she travelled
to the UK for training in psychiatry, as the specialty was not yet
established in India. After obtaining postgraduate qualifications in
medicine and psychiatry, she returned to India in 1960 as the first
female psychiatrist in the country. Early political struggles with the
rising force of communism in Bengal and professional contact with
psychoanalysis left her, as Ashis Nandy wrote in the foreword to her
memoirs, 'both anti-Freud and anti-communist'.^3^

Many of Professor Chakraborty\'s students consider themselves
exceptionally fortunate to have had her as their teacher. She belonged
to a rare breed of psychiatrists who critically evaluate psychiatric
terminology and concepts, particularly exploring their cross-cultural
validity, researching and collaborating internationally. She stimulated
us through intellectual debate and introduced us to the idea of
appraising psychiatric theories. She was instrumental in facilitating a
rich interaction between psychiatrists, sociologists, psychotherapists
and intellectuals, promoting independent thinking in her students. She
continued to be a mentor to me (D.B.) throughout my career for over
three decades. Many eminent Indian psychiatrists now working both in
India and abroad, particularly in the UK, owe their professional
expertise to their early training with her.

Anjita Chakraborty died on 8 May 2015.
