---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** Documented prevalence of alcohol misuse among
  older adult patients at Birmingham Heartlands Hospital is
  significantly lower than the national prevalence. We aimed to evaluate
  our alcohol misuse screening protocol for older adults to identify
  possible shortcomings. Hospital protocol is to screen all adults for
  alcohol misuse in the accident and emergency (A&E) department using
  the Fast Alcohol Screening Test (FAST). One hundred consecutive
  consenting in-patients aged 65-94 admitted via A&E subsequently
  undertook an additional alcohol screening test (Michigan Alcoholism
  Screening Test-Geriatric version; MAST-G). Results of the two tests
  were compared.

  **Results** FAST screening was completed for 71 patients and none were
  FAST-positive for alcohol misuse, yet using MAST-G, 18 patients scored
  positively for alcohol misuse. FAST screening failed to identify 8
  patients with a documented history of alcohol misuse.

  **Clinical implications** Older adult alcohol misuse prevalence is
  significantly underreported using FAST. Screening older adults for
  alcohol problems requires a different approach to screening the
  general population.
author:
- Rachel Knightly
- George Tadros
- Juhi Sharma
- Peter Duffield
- Emma Carnall
- Jacqui Fisher
- Shaza SalmanCorrespondence to George Tadros (<george.tadros@nhs.net>)
  [^1]
date: 2016-4
institute:
- 1Heart of England NHS Foundation Trust, Heartlands Hospital,
  Birmingham
- 2Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health Foundation Trust, City
  Hospital, Birmingham
- 3Aquarius, Birmingham
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
title: "Alcohol screening for older adults in an acute general hospital:
  FAST *v.* MAST-G assessments"
---

In 2010, 20% of men and 9% of women aged 65 or over in the UK were
misusing alcohol (for men this means drinking \>21 units/week, for women
drinking \>14 units/week).^1^ Alcohol misuse prevalence in this
population is increasing.^2,3^ With the rising number of older adults
living in the UK,^4^ the prevalence of substance use problems among this
age group is predicted to more than double between 2001 and 2020.^5-7^
Despite the national figures being much higher, screening at Birmingham
Heartlands tertiary care hospital has historically identified only a 1%
prevalence of alcohol misuse among in-patients aged 65 or over.

Metabolic and physiological changes, and long-term polypharmacy, put
older people at high risk of adverse physical effects of alcohol misuse,
including peptic ulcer disease and falls.^8-12^ Alcohol misuse in the
elderly can often be misdiagnosed or undetected:^13^ reasons include
different presentations compared with younger adults, stigma and
difficulties screening older adults.^14,15^ Screening tests, including
the Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test -- Geriatric version (MAST-G)
have been developed to overcome these difficulties. Compared with the
Fast Alcohol Screening Test (FAST), a robust screening tool for the
general population,^16^ MAST-G has higher sensitivity for alcohol misuse
in older adults.^17^

We hypothesised that there is no difference in using FAST or MAST-G to
identify older people with increasing alcohol intake in an acute
hospital setting. We aimed to conduct further screening and medical
history review to better understand the pattern of alcohol misuse in the
older adult population in our hospital and compare the true prevalence
of alcohol misuse to that identified by our current screening protocol.

# Method {#S1}

## Participants {#S2}

Consecutive in-patients aged 65 or over admitted to the acute medical
unit via the accident and emergency (A&E) department were identified.
Patients were excluded from participation if they were medically unfit
for interview, if they were acutely confused, or if communication in
English was difficult. Eligible patients were invited to undertake the
MAST-G alcoholism screening test. The test consists of 24 questions
about alcohol use habits with yes/no responses. A score of five or more
questions answered positively indicates alcohol misuse (older adults
sensitivity 94.9% and specificity 77.8%).^17^ The first 100 eligible
patients who gave verbal consent and who completed MAST-G were included
in the service evaluation; 7 eligible patients did not give their
consent to participate.

## Procedure {#S3}

MAST-G was completed either by patients themselves or by a member of
staff reading questions aloud and recording patient responses.
Participating patients\' A&E notes were retrospectively examined and
their FAST score documented; the MAST-G scores and the A&E FAST scores
were compared. History of alcohol misuse was identified from patients\'
records from previous hospital admissions.

## Analysis {#S4}

Results were analysed using SPSS (version 19 for Windows). Frequency
data are reported as *n* (%). Non-parametric data were analysed using
related-samples Wilcoxon signed rank test, Fisher\'s exact test and
Spearman\'s rank correlation coefficient. Two-tailed *P*-values are
given: a threshold of *P*\<0.05 was used to determine statistical
significance.

# Results {#S5}

## Population {#S6}

One hundred older adults completed a MAST-G questionnaire, answering all
24 questions. Their median age was 79 years (interquartile range 73-86,
range 65-94, *n* = 100). The majority (61%) were female. The most
commonly documented reasons for patients\' admission to the acute
medical unit were fall (*n* = 14), shortness of breath (*n* = 10) and
chest pain (*n* = 9).

## FAST and MAST-G scores among different patient groups {#S7}

Of the 100 participants, 71 (71%) had a FAST score documented in A&E
([Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}). In none of these was the FAST score
positive. In contrast, 18 participants (18%) subsequently scored
positively for alcohol misuse using MAST-G. The difference in patients\'
scores between the two tests was statistically significant
(*P*\<0.0001). Among the 18 patients with positive MAST-G scores, 12 had
scored negatively for alcohol misuse on FAST, 4 patients had been unable
to answer FAST in A&E and 2 patients were not asked FAST screening
questions.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Fast Alcohol Screening Test (FAST) outcomes for participants who scored
positively and negatively on the Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test --
Geriatric version (MAST-G); (*P*\<0.0001)
:::

|           | MAST-G |     |     |
|:----------|-------:|----:|----:|
| Positive  |      0 |   0 |   0 |
|           |        |     |     |
| Negative  |     12 |  59 |  71 |
|           |        |     |     |
| No result |      6 |  23 |  29 |
:::

Hazardous or harmful alcohol misuse was documented in the medical
records of eight patients. Six of these patients had answered FAST
questions in A&E (one patient was unable to answer, one patient not
asked), but none scored positively on FAST. Seven out of the eight
patients (87.5%) subsequently scored positively on MAST-G ([Fig.
1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}). There was a significant association between
those older adults who had a history of alcohol misuse and those who
scored positively on MAST-G (*P*\<0.0001).

![A MAST-G histogram for the 100 participants. A score of ⩾5 indicates
alcohol misuse.](73f1){#F1}

Men were significantly more likely to score positively on MAST-G than
women (12/29 men and 6/61 women scored positively; *P* = 0.015). No
correlation was observed between MAST-G score and patient age
(Spearman\'s rank correlation coefficient −0.164; *P* = 0.1).

The question most frequently answered 'yes' by participants with a
history of alcohol misuse was 'Does having a drink help you sleep?' --
75% answered 'yes' compared with 22.8% of patients with no history of
alcohol misuse ([Table 2](#T2){ref-type="table"}).

::: {#T2 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

The six Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test -- Geriatric version (MAST-G)
questions to which older adults with a history of alcohol misuse most
frequently answered 'yes'
:::

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;">Question</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Patients with a history<br />
of alcohol misuse<br />
answering ‘yes’<br />
(<em>n</em> = 8), <em>n</em> (%)</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Patients with no history<br />
of alcohol misuse<br />
answering ‘yes’<br />
(<em>n</em> = 92), <em>n</em> (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">1 Does having a drink help you sleep?</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6 (75)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">21 (22.8)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">2 Does alcohol sometimes make it hard for
you to remember parts of the day<br />
    or night?</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4 (50)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2 (2.2)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">3 Do you have rules for yourself that you
won't drink before a certain time<br />
    of the day?</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4 (50)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">10 (10.9)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">4 Have you ever been concerned that
drinking might be harmful to your health?</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4 (50)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">12 (13.0)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">5 In general, would you prefer to have a
few drinks at home rather than go out<br />
    to social events?</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4 (50)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">17 (18.5)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">6 Has a doctor or nurse ever said they
were worried or concerned about your<br />
    drinking?</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4 (50)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2 (2.2)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
:::

# Discussion {#S8}

## Main findings {#S9}

The current hospital screening protocol (FAST) did not identify alcohol
misuse in any of the 100 participating older adults, including 8
patients with a documented history of alcohol misuse. On further
screening, 18% of the same older adults were identified as misusing
alcohol using MAST-G; this proportion is more consistent with previously
reported national figures.^1^ This service evaluation highlights a
difference between the number of older adult patients identified as
misusing alcohol using our standard practice (FAST in A&E) and those
identified after admission using an alternative screening test.

## Targets for alcohol screening in adults {#S10}

The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recommends that
National Health Service (NHS) professionals should 'routinely carry out
alcohol screening as an integral part of practice'.^18^ Locally, as part
of the Making Every Contact Count campaign, the Heart of England NHS
Foundation Trust mandated that 50% of A&E attendees be screened for
alcohol misuse and applied a financial penalty if this target was not
met. This target was met in our subpopulation (71% were screened) but
our results suggest that screening did not contribute to an increased
awareness of, or service provision for, older adults admitted with
alcohol misuse issues during this service evaluation.

## An aging population with increasing alcohol misuse {#S11}

Increasing alcohol misuse among older adults in the UK leads to health
and social problems, as well as increasing the risk of accidents
necessitating hospital admission and causing significant
mortality.^2,3,19,20^ Both acute and long-term complications of alcohol
withdrawal are more severe in older adults.^21,22^ The Royal College of
Psychiatrists\' recommendation to reduce the 'safe limit' for alcohol
intake from 21 units per week for men and 14 units per week for women to
11 units per week for older adults reflects the increased risks of
alcohol misuse in this population.^21^

This trust has recognised the increased prevalence and risks of alcohol
misuse among older adults, but our results compared with historical
annual prevalence figures (documented as 1% in this trust) highlight an
ongoing failure to recognise alcohol misuse in this population, despite
the achievement of local screening targets.

## Older adults: a difficult population to screen {#S12}

Other researchers have found older adults a difficult population to
screen for alcohol misuse, depression and delirium,^23-25^ possibly due
to stigma attributed to alcohol by adults in this population^26^ or
unwillingness to disclose information perceived to contribute little to
an acute medical or surgical assessment. However, results from our
evaluation show that most eligible older adults were willing to discuss
alcohol misuse when invited to take part in the evaluation: only seven
patients refused consent. Correlation with documented alcohol misuse
indicates that those participants who undertook MAST-G were, on the
whole, open about their drinking habits. It is therefore worth
considering what other factors could have contributed to our findings.

By investigating staff attitudes to older adult alcohol misuse, previous
studies have found hospital staff to have less suspicion and more
tolerance of alcohol misuse in older adults than the working-age
population,^27^ resulting in low levels of detection and low levels of
referral for recognised problems.^28^ In addition, it may in fact be
harder for staff to detect alcohol misuse in older adults than it is in
working-age adults^23^ -- notably, the pattern of alcohol misuse can be
different in older adults.^29^ MAST-G was developed to account for these
differences, as FAST questions about meeting work responsibilities and
concerns voiced by professionals or family members may be less relevant
to older adults. MAST-G lifestyle-specific questions about daytime
somnolence and social withdrawal aim to maximise sensitivity to typical
presentations of alcohol misuse in older adults.

Another reason for the difference between FAST results in A&E and MAST-G
results in the acute medical unit could have been the different physical
and temporal environments in which screening took place. FAST screening
contributes to a battery of questions and investigations in A&E, where
patients may feel stressed or time-pressured, and healthcare staff have
a large number of clinical decisions to prioritise. Previous studies
have suggested that the busy A&E environment could negatively affect
clinicians\' screening methods and documentation.^27^ Indeed, response
rates were lower for FAST in A&E compared with MAST-G in the acute
medical unit: 13/100 (13%) of the study population refused to answer
FAST (and 14 were unable to answer) compared with 7/107 (6.5%) eligible
patients who refused MAST-G. It is possible that the slower paced
questioning afforded by MAST-G in a more relaxed environment enabled
patients to consider their answers more carefully than those given
during FAST, and allowed clinicians more time to engage with
participants\' responses. If this is the case, and patients\'
environment affects their willingness to undergo screening, we should
consider even more carefully our policy of undertaking screening of
older adults in A&E.

## Practice implications highlighted by this service evaluation {#S13}

Throughout patient interactions as part of this service evaluation it
has become clear that many older adults do not recognise or report their
significant alcohol misuse as harmful. It falls to healthcare staff to
be opportunistic in their direct questioning about alcohol misuse and to
give advice appropriately. Lack of opportunistic diagnosis and
intervention from healthcare professionals not only inhibits optimal
care during hospital admission, but denies patients the chance to make
informed decisions about their long-term health and access to
out-patient services. A proactive approach appears key to our
discussions about alcohol use.

This evaluation suggests that our current process is grossly
underestimating true prevalence of older adult alcohol misuse. FAST has
a sensitivity of 93% for alcohol misuse in the general population, but
its sensitivity in older adults is less certain. The current evaluation
has not identified whether it is the screening tool itself, the
environment in which patients are screened, or the clinician-patient
interaction during screening which has lowered our sensitivity for
alcohol misuse so significantly. Importantly for our future practice,
although our results indicate that MAST-G may be a more sensitive
screening tool for our population, the time taken to complete its 24
questions makes it an unattractive screening test for A&E. In
identifying problems with our current screening system, this service
evaluation has not suggested a comparable alternative. Further
prospective work is needed to determine the best way for us to
accurately identify older adult alcohol misuse both efficiently and
sensitively.

Early opportunistic diagnosis of alcohol misuse has clear benefits for
both primary and secondary healthcare provision; undiagnosed alcohol
misuse has significant social and economic implications, as well as an
impact on physical health.^21^ Given the findings of this service
evaluation, research into the sensitivity of alcohol screening of older
adults in the community will complement our work.

# Limitations {#S14}

At this hospital every adult A&E attendee considered fit to answer
screening questions is offered 4-question FAST screening, whereas only
eligible medical in-patients willing to take part in this evaluation
undertook the longer 24-question MAST-G and formed part of our analysis.
The first limitation of this approach is that we have not evaluated
directly comparable tests, but nor did we aim to do so. Our aim was to
identify shortcomings in our current screening method in light of
putative inconsistencies with national data. We have not identified an
improved method of screening as a result of this study. Rather, we have
confirmed that our current procedure is failing to identify important
information which patients are, in fact, willing to disclose in an
alternative environment.

The second limitation resulting from our selection of in-patient
participants is that our sample population does not fully represent the
population of older adults attending A&E or, indeed, the wider
population in the community. It is possible that alcohol misuse could
have been a precipitating factor for medical admission among
interviewees, leading to a biased sample and skewed results. In
addition, we did not ask individuals\' reasons for withholding consent
to complete MAST-G (seven eligible patients refused consent). Selection
bias may have increased if participants unwilling to discuss ongoing
alcohol misuse withheld consent to avoid detection and intervention.

When considering the true prevalence of alcohol misuse in this
population, clinical history of alcohol misuse was taken from patients\'
recent medical notes. As such, any undocumented alcohol misuse was
counted as absence of alcohol misuse, leading to a potential
under-estimation of misuse prevalence. This limitation does not negate
our findings; rather, it adds weight to our need for an effective
screening protocol.

As a result of the screening protocol used in our typically busy general
hospital A&E department, alcohol misuse went unidentified in a
population with both known (documented) and freely volunteered (via
MAST-G) alcohol misuse. Studies comparing FAST with MAST-G in the same
temporal and physical setting will complement this initial evaluation,
allowing us to understand why we are failing to identify misuse.
Analysis of the reasons for discrepancies in the results from those two
screening tools will aid our understanding of how to sensitively and
efficiently screen for alcohol misuse in our older adult population.

[^1]: **Dr Rachel Knightly** is an FY1 doctor, Heartlands Hospital,
    Birmingham; **Professor George Tadros** is Professor of Old Age
    Liaison Psychiatry, University of Warwick, and Consultant in Old Age
    Liaison Psychiatry, RAID team, Heartlands Hospital, Birmingham; **Dr
    Juhi Sharma** is a consultant in general adult psychiatry, Derby;
    **Mr Peter Duffield** is an alcohol specialist nurse, RAID team;
    **Ms Emma Carnall** and **Ms Jacqui Fisher** are alcohol support
    workers at Aquarius, Birmingham and **Dr Shaza Salman** is an FY1
    doctor at Heartlands Hospital, Birmingham.
