---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** To develop a simple, pragmatic typology to
  characterise the nature of liaison interventions delivered by a
  liaison service in a National Health Service setting. We carried out a
  retrospective electronic case-note review of referrals to a ward-based
  liaison psychiatry service.

  **Results** Three hundred and forty-four patients were referred to the
  service over a 12-month period. Ten different types of liaison
  interventions were identified, with the most common interventions
  being diagnosis (112 patients, 32.6%), medication management (57
  patients, 16.6%), risk assessment and treatment (56 patients, 16.3%
  each). Mental Health Act work accounted for the greatest number of
  contacts per patient (median 7).

  **Clinical implications** There are inherent limitations in any
  single-site observational study, as site-specific results cannot be
  generalised to other liaison services. The intervention categories we
  developed, however, are easy to use and will provide a way of
  comparing and benchmarking the range of interventions delivered by
  different liaison psychiatry services.
author:
- Elspeth Guthrie
- Aaron McMeekin
- Rachel Thomasson
- Sylvia Khan
- Sally Makin
- Ben Shaw
- Damien LongsonCorrespondence to Elspeth Guthrie
  (<elspeth.a.guthrie@manchester.ac.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1University of Manchester
- 2Manchester Mental Health and Social Care NHS Trust
- 3Lancashire Care NHS Foundation Trust
- 4Pennine Acute Hospitals NHS Trust
- 5Greater Manchester West Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
title: "Opening the 'black box': liaison psychiatry services and what
  they actually do"
---

In a recent editorial, Sharpe^1^ has argued that liaison psychiatry
services need to develop greater clarity about what they are seeking to
achieve, with definable and measurable outcomes. Currently, liaison
services have rather a 'black box' quality in that they are present in
hospitals, they potentially save money, they see a lot of patients, but
there has been a struggle to capture the range and type of clinical
interventions that they provide.

The Centre for Mental Health published a report outlining the
difficulties in measuring outcomes and performance in liaison
psychiatry.^2^ The authors suggest that the complexity and heterogeneity
of service provision rule out a very simple, all-purpose approach to the
measurement of outcomes and performance in liaison settings. Instead,
they suggest a balanced score card approach to measuring outcome, in
which account is taken of inputs (referrals to a service), activities
and associated outputs (e.g. what is actually done), and outcome
(benefits in health that result from the service outputs).

The aim of this study was to develop a simple, pragmatic typology to
characterise the nature of liaison interventions delivered by a liaison
service in a National Health Service (NHS) setting. Such a typology
could then be used by other services to more fully describe the nature
of their work, and enable more meaningful comparisons and benchmarking
across liaison services in different settings.

# Method {#S1}

The study was carried out at a large teaching hospital in Manchester.
The hospital has 750 beds, with an emergency department (170 000
attendances per year) and several specialised units. An electronic
record system is used to record all contacts with patients seen by the
liaison psychiatry service. At the time of the study, the liaison
service at the hospital had three components: a ward-based liaison
service for adults of working age (16--64 years), a ward-based service
for adults 65 years and older, and a nurse-led 24/7 h liaison service in
the emergency department. All three components provided a seamless,
flexible service. This study focuses on the adults of working age
component which operates from 09:00 to 17:00, Monday to Friday, and has
a standard to see patients within one working day of referral. This part
of the liaison service is staffed by a consultant liaison psychiatrist
(7 sessions), two senior trainees (ST4--6) and one junior trainee (ST3).

## Developing the typology for liaison interventions {#S2}

All the electronic records for consecutive referrals to the liaison
service for a 2-month period between 1 April 2013 and 31 May 2013 were
examined. We considered the reason for referral to the service, the free
text in the electronic record describing the clinical assessment, and
additional entries (if present) describing subsequent contacts and
interventions, plus our own clinical knowledge of the patient in
question. We used a modified open-card sorting method to group referrals
according to different kinds of service interventions.^3^ We developed
seven distinct, definable categories, which captured the main clinical
intervention: (1) diagnosis/formulation; (2) assessment of risk; (3)
medication management; (4) management of disturbed behaviour; (5)
assessment of mental capacity; (6) treatment of non-psychosis; and (7)
treatment of psychosis.

These preliminary categories were then further refined after discussion
with senior consultant colleagues and presentation at a Psychiatric
Liaison Accreditation Network (PLAN) 1-day meeting, a Liaison Psychiatry
Young Consultants\' and Trainees\' meeting and the preliminary findings
from a working group set up by the Liaison Faculty of the Royal College
of Psychiatrists to develop an outcome framework for liaison psychiatry.
The two treatment categories (treatment of non-psychosis and treatment
of psychosis) were collapsed into one category of 'treatment' and four
other categories were added: assessment and treatment under the Mental
Health Act 1983;^4^ brief psychological interventions; providing
guidance/advice; and signposting/referring on. Thus, the final ten
categories are: assessment and diagnosis/formulation: joint working with
medical or surgical teams to establish a diagnosis following uncertainty
regarding symptom presentationproviding guidance/advice: verbal or
written guidance or advice provided by the liaison team about common
psychological problems, lifestyle changes or alcohol
consumptionsignposting/referring on: the individual is given information
about other relevant statutory or non-statutory agencies, or referred to
another service by a liaison team memberassessment and management of
risk: the assessment and judgement of an individual\'s immediate risk of
self-harm or harm to others; the assessment is usually followed by a
management plan tailored to the severity and nature of current risk --
risk changes with time, so it is not uncommon for multiple assessments
of risk to be carried outassessment of mental capacity: the assessment
of capacity to consent to a therapeutic procedure or post-discharge
placement, or ability to self-dischargeassessment and treatment under
the Mental Health Act: the use of the Mental Health Act^4^ in the
general hospital setting to detain an individual for assessment or
treatment of their mental health problemsmedication management: a
consultation about psychotropic medication which requires stopping,
restarting, switching or adjusting because of physical health problems;
such decisions usually entail expert knowledge regarding the use of
psychotropic drugs in physically unwell patientsmanagement of disturbed
behaviour: the active management of a patient with disturbed behaviour
as a consequence of some form of mental health problem while in the
general hospital settingbrief psychological interventions: the treatment
of an individual\'s psychological problems using a brief psychological
interventiontreatment: the starting or continuation of treatment for a
diagnosed mental health problem; the treatment is most often some form
of psychotropic medication coupled with advice about management.

## Case-note review {#S3}

We carried out a retrospective case review of the electronic records of
consecutive referrals to the ward-based service for 12 months from 18
June 2013 to 17 June 2014. We collected the following details: age;
gender; health district of origin; the number of face-to-face contacts
carried out by the team; the duration of time the team had ongoing
contact with the patient (days); the reason for referral; psychiatric
diagnosis using clinical judgement according to ICD-10 criteria;^5^
whether the Mental Health Act^4^ was employed; and disposal.

We assigned each patient seen by the service to one of the ten
intervention categories. The ten criteria are not mutually exclusive,
but for our main analysis we focused on the principal intervention by
the team for each individual referral (i.e. the type of intervention
which had taken up the greatest proportion of liaison input). Assignment
was carried out on a consensus basis within the team.

We used face-to-face contacts to estimate the workload of the service.
The minimum work involved in each face-to-face assessment includes the
following: going to the hospital ward; reviewing the patient\'s notes;
speaking to a member of nursing staff to obtain an update regarding the
patient\'s progress; finding a private room to interview the patient;
interviewing and assessing the patient; feeding back to nursing staff;
writing a summary of the contact with specific advice in the medical
notes; and entering a more detailed assessment on the mental health
trust\'s electronic record system. Most face-to-face contacts usually,
but not always, involve discussion with the medical or surgical team
involved in the patient\'s care.

There are many other aspects of liaison work that are not captured by
'face-to-face' contact activity, including attendance at
multidisciplinary meetings, telephone calls, liaising with other health
professionals, relatives, carers, pharmacy, writing letters, writing
reports, providing education and training, service evaluation,
development and management of services, etc. However, it is very
difficult to reliably record all this other activity, so we used
'face-to-face' contacts as a proxy measure for overall workload.

Where the data are normally distributed, summary scores are presented as
means and standard deviations. The service activity data were not
normally distributed, so summary scores are presented in the form of
medians and interquartile ranges (IQRs). Kruskal--Wallis tests were used
to compare the continuous activity data.

We determined that as the study was concerned with service evaluation,
it was not necessary to seek approval from a research ethics committee.
Only clinicians working for the liaison service, who had been involved
in direct clinical patient care, had access to patients\' electronic
records (in other words, the entries the clinicians had written
themselves). All clinical material included in this report has been
anonymised and all identifying features removed.

# Results {#S4}

The service received 344 referrals from 18 June 2013 to 17 June 2014.
The average age of people seen was 47.7 years (s.d. = 15.1), and 184
(53.5%) were female. At any one time, between 8 and 15 patients were
under review by the team.

Two hundred and twenty-seven (66.0%) referrals were from medical wards,
59 (17.2%) from surgical wards, 31 (9.0%) from the women\'s hospital and
23 (6.7%) from the critical care unit. One referral came from the eye
hospital and a further three were from the liaison for older adults
service of patients who were over 65 years old but who were best managed
by the adults of working-age team.

Approximately half of the referrals (*n* = 168, 48.8%) involved people
who lived in the locality of the hospital. The other half involved
people from 18 different health districts across the north of England,
and 17 patients were homeless.

Just under half of the people referred received a single assessment (*n*
= 157, 45.6%). A quarter of people were seen between two and four times
(*n* = 96, 27.9%), 20.1% (*n* = 69) were seen between five and ten times
and a small number of people required more than ten contacts (*n* = 22,
6.4%). The total number of face-to-face contacts was 1259 for the
12-month period, with the average number per patient at 3.7 (s.d. =
4.6). The small number of patients who required more than ten contacts
accounted for nearly a third of the total workload of the service (*n* =
373 face-to-face contacts, 29.6%). The mean length of duration under the
care of the liaison team was 10.8 days (s.d. = 20.5), with a range of
1--180 days.

One hundred and eighty-seven patients (54.4%) were seen on at least two
occasions by the team and of these, 167 (48.5%) were seen with at least
7 days between each assessment.

[Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"} shows the main mental health diagnoses
of people referred to the service according to the number of referrals
and the number of face-to-face contacts carried out by the team.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

The activity of the liaison team according to psychiatric diagnosis
:::

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;"></th>
<th style="text-align: right;">Referrals</th>
<th style="text-align: right;">Face-to-face contacts</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Face-to-face contacts</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Time in contact with<br />
service, days</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Depression</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">  135 (39.2)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">  506 (40.2)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2 (1–5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">7 (1–14)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Schizophrenia</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">  51 (14.8)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">  288 (22.9)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3 (1–7)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">7 (1–14)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Bipolar affective disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">25 (7.3)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">98 (7.8)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3 (1–4.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">4 (1–10)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Delirium</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">23 (6.7)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">84 (6.7)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2 (1–4)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">5 (1–14)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Substance misuse</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">16 (4.7)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">58 (4.6)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.5 (1–2)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2 (1–7)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Medically unexplained symptoms</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">9 (2.6)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">47 (3.7)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3 (1–7.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3 (1–34)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">No current mental health problem</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">25 (7.3)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">40 (3.2)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 (1–1.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 (1–4)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Personality disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">13 (3.8)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">36 (2.9)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 (1–3.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 (1–9.5)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Korsakoff syndrome</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">12 (3.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">27 (2.1)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.5 (1–2)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">4 (1–17)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Adjustment disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">10 (2.9)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">21 (1.7)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 (1–2)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 (1–4.75)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Anxiety disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">12 (3.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">19 (1.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 (1–1.75)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 (1–1.75)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Eating disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">5 (1.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">22 (1.7)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3 (1.5–8)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">7 (2–14.5)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Intellectual disability</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1 (0.3)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1 (0.1)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Asperger syndrome</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1 (0.3)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1 (0.1)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Dementia</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">6 (1.7)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">11 (0.9)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 (1–2.75)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 (1–6.25)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Total</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">344 (100)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1259 (100)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2 (1–5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">4 (1–13)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

IQR, interquartile range.
:::

Depression accounted for approximately 40% of referrals and 40% of the
face-to-face workload. Schizophrenia and bipolar affective disorder
accounted for 22% of referrals but 30% of the workload. There were
significant differences between diagnoses for both number of contacts
(*P* = 0.003) and duration of contact (*P* = 0.009) using the
Kruskal--Wallis test. The groups with the largest median number of
contacts were individuals with schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder
and somatoform disorders, with a median of 3 contacts.

[Table 2](#T2){ref-type="table"} shows the service activity for each
principal intervention category. Of the 344 patients referred to the
service over 12 months, 4 people declined any help from the service, so
were not allocated to an intervention. Of the remainder, the most
frequently employed intervention was diagnosis (*n* = 112 patients,
32.6%), followed by medication management (*n* = 57 patients, 16.6%),
then risk assessment and treatment (both 56 patients 16.3% each),
followed by management of behavioural disturbance (*n* = 28 patients,
8.2%). Although assessment or treatment using the Mental Health Act^4^
only accounted for 23 patients (6.7% of referrals), this work involved
the highest median number of contacts (7, IQR 3--12), and a total number
of 230 (18.3%) face-to-face contacts. There were no patients allocated
to 'brief psychological interventions', 'signposting/referring on' or
'providing advice/guidance'.

::: {#T2 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Referrals and service workload according to the principal intervention
categories
:::

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;"></th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Referrals<br />
<em>n</em> (%)</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Number<br />
of contacts<br />
Median (IQR)</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Total number<br />
of contacts<br />
<em>n</em> (%)</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Time in contact with<br />
the service, days<br />
Median (IQR)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Assessment and diagnosis/formulation</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">112 (32.6)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.5 (1–3)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  316 (25.1)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  3 (1.0–8.0)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Assessment and management of risk</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  56 (16.3)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.0 (1–2)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  139 (11)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  1 (1–6.5)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Assessment of mental capacity</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">    8 (2.3)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.0 (1–1.8)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">    10 (0.8)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  1 (1–6.3)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Mental Health Act 1983 assessment</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  23 (6.7)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">7.0 (3–12)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  230 (18.3)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">14 (6–30.0)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Medication management</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  57 (16.6)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3.0 (1–5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  208 (16.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  6 (1–14.0)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Management of disturbed behaviour</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  28 (8.1)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.0 (1–5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  105 (8.3)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  5 (1–8.8)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Treatment</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  56 (16.3)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.5 (1–6)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  245 (19.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  7 (1–21.0)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">No engagement</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">    4 (1.2)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.0 (1–2.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">      6 (0.5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  1 (1–10.8)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Total</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">344</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.0 (1–5)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1259</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">  4 (1–13)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

IQR, interquartile range.
:::

There were significant differences between principal intervention groups
for both number of contacts (*P*\<0.001) and duration of contact
(*P*\<0.001) using the Kruskal--Wallis tests ([Table
2](#T2){ref-type="table"}). The Mental Health Act group had the greatest
number of contacts (median 7), followed by medication management (median
3), treatment (median 2.5) and management of disturbed behaviour (median
2), with similar ordering of groups for workload.

Approximately half the patients seen by the service (*n* = 164, 47.7%)
received a therapeutic intervention as the principal intervention of the
team, which included treatment of a mental health problem, medication
management, management of disturbed behaviour, or detention to hospital
under the Mental Health Act^4^ for either assessment or treatment.

## Interventions {#S5}

[Table 3](#T3){ref-type="table"} provides examples of patients assigned
to each of the different liaison interventions, together with the reason
for referral, their psychiatric diagnosis and the degree of contact with
the service. Two examples are given for each intervention to illustrate
how the liaison typology was used in clinical practice.

::: {#T3 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Examples of patients allocated to the different liaison intervention
categories
:::

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;">Liaison<br />
intervention</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Age<br />
range and<br />
gender</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Reason<br />
for referral</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Medical<br />
condition</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Psychiatric<br />
diagnosis</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Outcome</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Assessment<br />
and diagnosis-<br />
formulation</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">16–20<br />
years,<br />
female<br />
60–69<br />
years,<br />
female</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Developed ‘fits’<br />
on post surgery<br />
ward round<br />
Psychogenic<br />
vomiting</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Admitted for<br />
tonsillectomy</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Non-epileptiform<br />
attack disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Explanation of nature of symptoms,
engagement<br />
of patient with biopsychosocial formulation<br />
Referral for out-patient psychological treatment<br />
Request for urgent scan which showed<br />
hydrocephalus and brain metastases<br />
Patient transferred to neuroscience centre</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">Vomiting query<br />
cause<br />
Known history<br />
of bipolar<br />
affective disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Intracranial<br />
pathology<br />
suspected as<br />
GCS low</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">Assessment and<br />
management<br />
of risk</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">60–70<br />
years,<br />
male</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Lacerated throat<br />
with Stanley<br />
knife</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Severe trauma to<br />
neck requiring<br />
tracheostomy<br />
and later PEG</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Depressive<br />
disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Ongoing risk assessment while<br />
in-patient with treatment<br />
Principal decision involved judgement concerning<br />
discharge to home treatment rather than<br />
in-patient psychiatric bed<br />
Ongoing risk assessment while in hospital with<br />
discharge to HTT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">40–50<br />
years,<br />
male</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Stabbed self<br />
in chest</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Surgery to repair<br />
multiple wounds<br />
to chest wall and<br />
explore damage<br />
to heart</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Adjustment<br />
disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Assessment<br />
of mental<br />
capacity</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">30–40<br />
years,<br />
female</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Refusing<br />
investigations<br />
and treatment<br />
Thought by staff<br />
to have paranoid<br />
ideas<br />
Refusing medical<br />
treatment<br />
Known diagnosis<br />
of schizophrenia</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">HIV multifocal<br />
leuco-<br />
encephalopathy</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Delirium</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Determine not to have capacity<br />
Best interests meeting arranged to determine<br />
further medical treatment plan</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">50–59<br />
years,<br />
female</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chest infection</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Delirium,<br />
schizophrenia</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Determine not to have capacity<br />
Best interests meeting arranged</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">Mental Health<br />
Act assessment</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">50–60<br />
years,<br />
female</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Paranoia</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Confusion<br />
caused by chest<br />
infection which<br />
was treated<br />
Admitted for<br />
investigation<br />
of confusion<br />
No medical<br />
cause found</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Schizophrenia</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Detained under the Mental Health Act
as<br />
refusing psychiatric treatment and considered to<br />
be at risk to self through serious neglect<br />
Transferred to in-patient psychiatric bed<br />
Detained under the Mental Health Act as trying<br />
to leave ward naked<br />
Treated on ward for 10 days while awaiting<br />
psychiatric bed<br />
Responded to treatment so Section 2 rescinded<br />
and discharged to local CRT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">40–50<br />
years,<br />
female</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Confusion<br />
Visual and tactile<br />
hallucinations</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Hypomania,<br />
although very<br />
organic<br />
presentation</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Medication<br />
management</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">40–50<br />
years,<br />
female<br />
50–60<br />
years,<br />
male</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Lithium stopped<br />
Query about<br />
treatment<br />
Clozapine<br />
stopped while in<br />
hospital for 10<br />
days</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Diabetes insipidus<br />
secondary to<br />
lithium<br />
Admitted to ITU<br />
with severe<br />
chest infection<br />
Noted to have<br />
ejection fraction<br />
of 30%</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Bipolar affective<br />
disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">High risk of relapse so started on
valproate<br />
Dose titrated up and discharged to CMHT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">Schizophrenia</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Physical condition improved and ejection
fraction<br />
improved<br />
Initial bedside measure was probably inaccurate<br />
Clozapine restarted and re-titrated after risks<br />
and benefits discussed with patient</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">Management<br />
of disturbed<br />
behaviour</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">40–49<br />
years,<br />
male<br />
40–49<br />
years,<br />
female</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Repeated self-<br />
harm on ward</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Epilepsy</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Personality<br />
disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Liaison team worked with staff to
de-escalate<br />
behaviour and plan safe discharge with<br />
appropriate follow-up<br />
Liaison team worked with staff to establish a<br />
clear management plan and defuse negative<br />
staff attitudes</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Leaving ward to<br />
drink alcohol and<br />
also drinking from<br />
alcohol gel dis-<br />
pensers on ward</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Alcoholic liver<br />
disease</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Personality<br />
disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Treatment</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">40–50<br />
years,<br />
male</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Confusion –<br />
query symptoms<br />
psychogenic, not<br />
eating or<br />
drinking<br />
Postnatal risk<br />
assessment</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Confusion and<br />
weakness of<br />
unknown cause</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Psychotic<br />
depression</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Treatment with antidepressants and<br />
antipsychotics started immediately<br />
Patient discharged to HTT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">30–40<br />
years,<br />
female</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Normal full-term<br />
delivery<br />
History of<br />
bipolar affective<br />
disorder</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Hypomania</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Treatment started immediately<br />
Condition settled within 5 days and patient<br />
discharged safely with baby, with support from<br />
local CRT</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

CMHT, community mental health team; CRT, crisis resolution team; GCS,
Glasgow Coma Scale; HTT, home treatment team; ITU, intensive therapy
unit; PEG, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy.
:::

# Discussion {#S6}

Previous published work on the evaluation of liaison psychiatry services
has predominantly focused on the following areas: activity and nature of
referrals,^6,7^ the complexity of patient problems,^8^ the professional
mix and staffing of services,^9--11^ training^12^ and quality
outcomes.^13^ There has been relatively little work which has addressed
directly either the 'outputs' or the outcome of liaison services. It is
the outputs of liaison work that this study attempted to address, as we
argue that until the outputs can be better characterised, it is
difficult to determine appropriate outcome measures.

In the late 1980s, Huyse and colleagues^14^ developed a schema to
operationalise the recommendations given by liaison specialists to
referring teams. This was an important development, but the measure was
intended for mainly one-off consultations, where advice only was
provided. Our intention was to develop a typology which was practical
and easy to apply in a clinical liaison setting, which could provide an
indication of the type of work undertaken by a liaison team. By using
the typology, we were able to determine that approximately half the
workload of our service involves the treatment on medical and surgical
wards of patients with mental health problems, the management of
behavioural disturbance and medication management. The treatment
provided includes the management and treatment of patients detained
under the Mental Health Act to the acute hospital, which accounts for a
fifth of the workload of the service. A third of the work involves risk
assessment and diagnosis.

Approximately half of all the patients referred to our service were seen
on at least two occasions, 7 days apart. This suggests that some form of
paired assessment of outcome would be feasible for 50% of all referrals
we receive. The different intervention categories allow us to specify in
Sharpe\'s terms^1^ what we are seeking to achieve for each kind of
intervention. For example, in the 'treatment' and 'management of
behavioural disturbance' categories, we would expect to see an
improvement in patients\' mental health, if rated by an appropriate
measure. However, if the intervention primarily involves 'medication
management', the intention for patients assigned to this category is to
prevent relapse by judicious switching or other appropriate action
regarding the patient\'s psychotropic medication. The aim in this case
for any kind of paired measurement would be to maintain stability,
rather than see positive improvement.

A major problem in the clinical evaluation of liaison services has been
their diversity, with different mixes of staff and different settings,
including emergency department work, acute hospital work and out-patient
treatment. As such, liaison services are likely to vary dramatically in
their intervention profiles. However, if we delineate and describe the
type of interventions which are delivered by a service, it enables us to
look inside the 'black box' and convey to our general hospital
colleagues, managers and commissioners what we actually provide, and
what we are hoping to achieve.

Three of the new categories, which were suggested by liaison colleagues
(brief psychological intervention, sign-posting/referring on, providing
guidance and advice) were not relevant for our own service, but may be
important interventions for other kinds of liaison services.

The number of referrals did not capture the workload of our service,
which was better provided by the number of face-to-face contacts for
each referral, as some patients required intensive input from the team,
particularly those detained under the Mental Health Act.^4^ The actual
number of face-to-face contacts by the adults of working-age service was
very similar to the number of contacts for the team covering older
adults at the same hospital. The older adult team received many more
referrals during the same period, but had fewer contacts per patient
than the adults of working age team.

Risk assessment and diagnosis are categories that could be assumed to
involve one-off assessments by a liaison service; however, referrals
involving these two kinds of intervention required a median of two to
three face-to-face contacts. Many of the risk assessments involved
patients who had been admitted following near-fatal self-harm, and
required ongoing assessment of risk as their physical condition
improved. Diagnosis also required more than one assessment in many
cases, especially if there were complex issues.

Using the data from the intervention categories, together with case
illustrations, helps to sketch out the work of the service. A picture
emerges of a service which provides assessment, treatment and management
of patients with complex and high-risk mental health problems in the
setting of an acute hospital. For at least half the patients, the
liaison service operates almost like a cross between a crisis resolution
service and an in-patient psychiatric unit (but in the setting of the
acute hospital). The anonymised case descriptions illustrate the
bi-directional interplay between psychological and physical problems,
which can be hard to convey using numerical or quantitative data.

The intervention categories have recently been incorporated into the
Framework for Routine Outcome Measurement in Liaison Psychiatry
(FROM-LP),^15^ and have been termed the IRAC scales (Identify and Rate
the Aim of the Contact). It is suggested they are used in conjunction
with a variety of recommended outcome measures, depending on whether the
patient is seen on one, or more than one, occasion.

There are inherent limitations in any single-site observational study,
and our results are not generalisable to other liaison services. The
study was conducted in a large inner-city teaching hospital, and the
patients referred to the service may not be typical of those seen by
other liaison services. Nevertheless, the methods we employed can be
reproduced by any liaison service and will provide a way of comparing
and benchmarking services. We believe this study provides preliminary
support for the new guidance from the Faculty of Liaison Psychiatry of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists regarding outcome measurement.

We thank Dr Peter Trigwell who commented on an earlier draft of this
paper and consultant liaison colleagues and senior liaison trainees who
provided informal feedback at the PLAN and Young Consultants and
Trainees\' meetings.

[^1]: **Elspeth Guthrie**, Honorary Professor in Psychological Medicine,
    University of Manchester, and consultant, Manchester Mental Health
    and Social Care NHS Trust; **Aaron McMeekin**, ST5 in Manchester
    Mental Health and Social Care NHS Trust; **Rachel Thomasson**, ST6
    in Manchester Mental Health and Social Care NHS Trust; **Sylvia
    Khan**, consultant in Lancashire Care NHS Foundation Trust; **Sally
    Makin**, ST4 in Pennine Acute Care Hospitals NHS Trust; **Ben
    Shaw**, consultant in Greater Manchester West Mental Health NHS
    Foundation Trust; **Damien Longson**, consultant in Manchester
    Mental Health and Social Care NHS Trust.
