---
abstract: |
  Governments around the world are uniting in trying to defeat terrorist
  movements. In this context, recent counter terrorism laws in the UK
  place public duties on all citizens to help prevent terrorism. Yet,
  the science of predicting rare events such as terrorist offending
  yields consistently poor results. There are ethical, clinical and
  scientific dilemmas facing the professions if we are to investigate
  social, religious and political belief systems in routine assessment
  in order to inform judgements about terrorist offending risk. A
  balanced and evidence-based approach is necessary.
author:
- Kamaldeep BhuiCorrespondence to Kamaldeep Bhui (<k.s.bhui@qmul.ac.uk>)
  [^1]
date: 2016-4
institute:
- 1Queen Mary University of London
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
title: "Flash, the emperor and policies without evidence:
  counter-terrorism measures destined for failure and societally
  divisive"
---

Radicalisation, the process by which ordinary individuals come to
sympathise with and support violent protests and terrorism, is thought
to include both social and psychological determinants and
vulnerabilities that shape otherwise healthy young people to engage with
and adopt terrorist ideology.^1^ Actual terrorist offending is rare and
has challenged a wide array of experts from a variety of different
disciplines including historians, scientists, forensic, health and
social care professionals, and stakeholders from the criminal justice
agencies. Preventing radicalisation and terrorism is even less well
understood, and has a smaller evidence base than homicide. There is
insufficient research evidence to propose any single model or mechanism
by which radicalisation leads to terrorism, and then even less that is
consistent about the role of mental illness, although more is emerging
about the role of emotional and psychological factors.^2^ Most knowledge
about terrorism comes from reconstructed biographies of convicted
terrorists where pathways are sought from ordinary citizen to a phase of
pre-radicalisation, followed by indoctrinated commitment to terrorist
causes.^2,3^ These retrospective accounts cannot be verified objectively
and are subject to recall bias but adopt the only approach known in
criminological investigations. Further arrest and conviction necessarily
lead the individual to re-envisioning their identity and sense of
belonging. Their own narrative of who they are and what has happened is
shaped by the need to justify their actions when asked to explain how
they came to commit offences labelled as terrorism.^2,3^

Little research has explored the early phase of radicalisation in the UK
and other high-income countries, when individuals turn on their
countries and give up friendships, family, freedom and opportunity
available to them. Even less research has explored how ordinary people
living in the community, ostensibly gaining from and giving to their
society, decide to attack their community and country.^4^

Terrorism seeks to secure political objectives through violence, fear
and intimidation of both populations and politicians. Consequently,
governments are obliged to respond by attempting to secure the safety of
their citizens as well as entering into international negotiations on
foreign policy, security and counter-terrorism strategies. Although
terrorism has a long history, the recent discourse foregrounds people of
Muslim heritage in high-income countries such as the UK, the USA, Canada
and Australia. More recently, France and Belgium have been drawn into
this concern.^5^ It is known that the vast majority of terrorist
offences take place in countries with a Muslim majority and low levels
of income, and indeed the victims are mostly of Muslim heritage,
although the evidence for terrorism being linked to Muslim countries is
not universal as many such countries enjoy peace and prosperity.^6^

The immediacy of terrorist threats, often unexpected and in spite of
significant counter-terrorism intelligence and investment, has provoked
a crisis in confidence and strategy, leading to calls for urgent
intervention locally and internationally. Within this counter-terrorism
discourse, the place of religious ideology is conflated with orthodox
religious beliefs, and the political basis of terrorist acts disguised
as religious rhetoric is overlooked. Attacking terrorism through a
religious idiom is not soundly based on evidence. Not all Muslims are at
risk of terrorism and many Muslim countries do not experience terrorism.
Extremist political interpretations are a minority but are reacted to as
if these are mainstream religious beliefs. If clinicians are asked to
make judgements about terrorism risk, radicalisation or even cultural
variations of religious practices and whether these fall within norms,
then community advocacy and partnership is required to help make those
judgements. Clinicians are also expected to ask about and problematise
the nature of religious beliefs and the boundaries with political
beliefs. This very topic has been contentious. On the one hand,
professional secular boundaries are necessary to protect the patient and
clinician in areas of ethical controversy,^7^ but a culturally sensitive
and competent enquiry is necessary to discern delusional beliefs, as
distinct from culturally acceptable beliefs and religious practices.

In part the strategy of terrorism is to provoke a Draconian, oppressive
counter-response in order to exonerate perpetrators and vilify
governments of Western democracies, which then risk an unwanted
by-product. If policies target Muslim or religious populations, it
demonstrates to people of Muslim heritage, or strong religious
affiliations, that they are not valued equally to other citizens;
indeed, their role in resolution and protection of their society is not
recognised or exploited to promote cohesion and safer societies.
Religiosity itself becomes a source of suspicion and concern.
Understanding the construction of religious experience and the
psychological costs of holding religious beliefs (perhaps with
contradictory and contested evidence, hence the need for faith and
belief) is the subject of much cultural, philosophical and
neuroscientific research.^8^ We need to know far more in order to
separate beliefs that are benignly religious from those that include
political motivations and incite violence but are disguised through
religious rhetoric; without this knowledge clinicians would face an
onerous and unscientific set of expectations. Regrettably, the current
UK government\'s counter-terrorism responses, specifically the Prevent
programme, have been criticised for begetting exactly this unintended
consequence.

The most recent counter-terrorism Bill seeks to invoke a public duty on
all citizens and public servants of identifying a potential terrorist
threat as early as possible. The implications for healthcare and
educational institutions and other employing organisations are that they
should have a responsibility to carry a high index of suspicion.
Further, they are obliged to intervene when they come across seemingly
suspicious individuals or groups who might be harbouring terrorist
intentions. Although well-intentioned, this proposal has been met with a
rather more concrete interpretation by some in public institutions. For
example, in education, even in primary schools, enthusiastic early
adopters misclassified individuals as being a potential terrorist threat
without fully appreciating the lack of any valid method of prediction.

In mental health services, there exists a special concern that people
with poor psychological health and psychiatric difficulties are
particularly vulnerable to exploitation and persuasion, especially if
they are additionally distressed and isolated and should come into
contact with nefarious, infectious terrorist ideology. Emerging
information suggests that those who commit terrorist offences rarely
have severe mental illnesses, specifically disorders with symptoms of
hallucinations and delusions. Nevertheless, it is sometimes difficult to
disentangle political ideology and commitment from delusional or
overvalued ideas, when these are held by a peer group from a similar
cultural background, even if a minority.^8,9^ In rare situations it has
been found that so-called 'lone wolves' acting in isolation from
persuasive terrorist organisations appear to be at high risk of having
mental health problems and acting erratically and perhaps impulsively,
to seek redress for perceived insult or assault on their cultural
religious beliefs, assuming the terrorist ideology to be true.^10^ In
addition, vulnerable individuals seek potent self-identity and influence
through joining gangs or shared interest groups, perhaps not realising
the gravity of potential offending in which they may be later involved.
Forensic psychiatrists and psychologists of course have to debate these
issues daily. But terrorism is a form of offending given special status
and investment as the new evil that must be combated. It is with this
zeal that some interpret their public duties.

In mental healthcare we are experienced in managing risks of suicide,
self-harm, violence and homicide. Accepting that the science of
prediction of rare events is limited, it is necessary to follow
established safeguarding processes and procedures in an effort to
minimise the potential for unwanted outcomes.

The UK government\'s counter-terrorism provisions could be understood in
this context: they are perhaps simply asking us to ensure we maintain a
high index of suspicion, optimal safeguarding, and most importantly, do
not consider concerns about potential terrorist offending to be outside
the remit of our public duties as citizens. The implementation of such
activities may be difficult to marry up with the responsibilities of a
healthcare professional or indeed any other public servant, as it
requires more resources and time, as well as discussion and
documentation. It also risks stigma and the alienation of people seeking
help from any official service or channel.

I have some sympathy with Derek Summerfield\'s position^11^ in that
medical ethics mandate confidentiality and the protection of an
individual\'s medical information and health, although clearly this has
to be balanced with considerations of risk to others. Yet the
implication that health professionals are somehow to routinely seek out
any index of potential terrorism overstates the scientific knowledge
about who is a terrorist offender, and about what radicalisation is as a
process and who might be vulnerable to it.

Further deficiencies in scientific knowledge fail to help us understand
how radical ideas can exist as extremist political ideology or
philosophy, and how political ideology seeks to exploit religious
rhetoric, as if appealing to all people of Muslim heritage. In our
studies of sympathies for violent protest and terrorism among South
Asian populations of Muslim heritage, ordinary citizens living in the
community, mostly employed and educated, we found the stereotypical
characteristics such as poverty disadvantage and discriminatory
experiences as unimpressive correlates of pre-radicalisation
sympathies.^12,13^ Migrants in fact were less likely to hold such views
as were those with poor health and living in areas of low social
capital. Similarly, work undertaken by specialist researchers working
for governments and independent researchers has not identified a range
of predictive variables, reinforcing that the only approach available is
one of safeguarding, careful risk assessment and management. It is known
that patient and public involvement improve the quality of public health
and societal research, especially in the realm of preventive science, so
more active involvement of communities is needed. Although research on
those at risk of offending or convicted terrorists is necessary,
considerable care needs to be exercised with regard to ethics and safety
of researchers and the public, as well as to not undermine the efforts
of criminal justice agencies.

In part the appeal of the terrorist threat is an infectious but noxious
idea with which to grapple, reflecting the human fascination with
transformation from hero to villain, as exemplified in popular film,
children\'s cartoons, and theatre. Woody and Buzz Lightyear in the film
*Toy Story*, Flash Gordon fighting an emperor, Luke Skywalker in Star
Wars, and Harry Potter all struggle with their identity as villain or
hero. All battle malevolent forces while being changed by them, and yet
surviving, overcoming and defeating the appeal of violence and evil
which is portrayed as pleasurable. We must ensure our counter-terrorism
response and public citizen duties do not engage with the realms of
fantasy. They must be subject to intense, intelligent, evidence-based
efforts to safeguard our patients wherever possible, while at the same
time promoting mental health and well-being even in treacherous times of
conflict and, for some, financial ruin and disconnection. All should
prioritise safeguarding, while doing away with policies without
evidence.

[^1]: **Kamaldeep Bhui** is Professor of Cultural Psychiatry and
    Epidemiology, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
    Queen Mary University of London, London, and Honorary Consultant
    Psychiatrist, East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
