---
author:
- Floriana Coccia[^1]
date: 2016-6
title: "Sad Dad: An Exploration of Postnatal Depression in Fathers"
---

This book sets out to make readers aware of the evidence and opinions
regarding postnatal depression in fathers. The first chapter gathers
together the published evidence available. This is followed by several
chapters of interviews with experts in the field, predominantly
psychotherapists. There are chapters on the role of fathers, single-sex
parents and some personal experiences of men who have had depression
related to the birth of their children.

There is not very much evidence yet available and very few of the
studies look at postnatal depression in isolation. Many of them include
depressive episodes that occur in men while their partners are pregnant
and some studies also include anxiety symptoms. Apart from research
arising from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, there
is little information given on the size of the studies, making it
difficult to assess the validity without looking for the individual
paper. One of the interesting references in this section was on the
anxiety experienced by men related to childbirth and how this can have
an impact on their postnatal well-being.

The subsequent chapters are the views of individual psychotherapists who
see men with depression. Here there is an attempt to describe how men
present differently in depressive episodes than do women and that
avoidance of the home by working long hours, alcohol use and risky
behaviours are more common. There is reference to 'several' or 'many'
patients that the psychotherapists have seen on which they base their
views and I question whether this is then generalisable in clinical
practice.

The final chapters are more a narrative by the author looking into other
elements related to fathers and the role of men in parenting. There is
some thought given to how men adapt to childbirth and how they are
sometimes excluded in the process that is largely focused on mother and
infant. I found that this was somehow belittling to men, suggesting that
they were unable to manage the demands put on them and making them seem
somehow fragile.

It is difficult to suggest who the book is aimed at. I think that
healthcare professionals would find the heavy slant towards opinion
unhelpful. Fathers may find some of the psychodynamic language a bit
hard to relate to. Olivia Spencer has made a start at getting people to
think a little bit more about including fathers in childbirth and the
surrounding months, but I remain unconvinced that she has made a case
for postnatal depression in fathers.

[^1]: **Floriana Coccia** is a consultant perinatal psychiatrist with
    Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health Foundation Trust, National
    Centre for Mental Health Birmingham, 25 Vincent Drive, Edgbaston,
    Birmingham B15 2FG, UK, email: <floriana.coccia@bsmhft.nhs.uk>
