---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** Electronic patient records were used to
  investigate the level of engagement and treatment that patients with
  very late-onset schizophrenia-like psychosis (VLOSLP) had with mental
  health services.

  **Results** Of 131 patients assessed and diagnosed, 63 (48%) were
  taking antipsychotic treatment at 3 months, 46 (35%) at 6 months and
  36 (27%) at 12 months. At discharge from mental health services, 54%
  of patients had failed to engage with services or became lost to
  follow-up, 18% had engaged with services but were not taking
  antipsychotic medication and only 28% were taking treatment.

  **Clinical implications** Results showed that less than half of the
  patients with VLOSLP were commenced on antipsychotic treatment and
  less than a third remained on treatment at 1 year or at point of
  discharge. This highlights the need for services to consider being
  more assertive in taking potentially effective treatment to this
  patient group.
author:
- Chun Chiang Sin Fai Lam
- Suzanne J. Reeves
- Robert Stewart
- Robert HowardCorrespondence to Chun Chiang Sin Fai Lam
  (<chunchiang.sinfailam@nhs.net>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
- 2King\'s College London
- 3University College London
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
title: Service and treatment engagement of people with very late-onset
  schizophrenia-like psychosis
---

A Cochrane review^1^ has concluded that there is no good randomised
clinical trial evidence on which to base treatment guidelines for
patients with very late-onset schizophrenia-like psychosis (VLOSLP),^2^
yet open treatment with atypical antipsychotics has been associated with
improvements in symptoms at least as good as those seen in younger
patients with schizophrenia or patients with early-onset schizophrenia
who have grown old,^3--5^ and antipsychotic treatment is the cornerstone
of care pathways. Little is known about how many patients seen within
specialist mental health services are engaged by those services and
given antipsychotic treatment. To address this, we conducted a
retrospective electronic patient record search.

# Method {#S1}

## Participants {#S2}

We used the Clinical Record Interactive Search (CRIS) system, developed
within the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Mental Health
Biomedical Research Centre, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust, to extract the records of all patients aged 60 years and above
with a diagnosis of schizophrenia, schizotypal and/or delusional
disorders (ICD-10 F20--F29)^6^ in contact with services between 1
January 2007 and 21 August 2014. All identified patients\' notes were
reviewed and those who scored 24 or less on the standardised mini-mental
state examination^7^ or had a concurrent diagnosis of an organic mental
disorder (ICD-10 F00--F09)^6^ were excluded. Other exclusion criteria
included any evidence that psychosis onset had been before the age of
60, insufficient recorded information to confirm diagnosis and less than
1 year of follow-up completed at time of CRIS search.

## Events {#S3}

The first face-to-face contact of mental health services with a patient
was regarded as the start point of each service episode. Records were
reviewed at 3 months to assess initial engagement with services. If a
patient was discharged before 3 months, the last documented episode was
used as an alternative. Two further engagement points, at 6 months and
12 months, were also examined. The length of each episode was also
extracted and the level of engagement at the point of discharge from
services was assessed.

Ethics approval for CRIS was given by the National Research Ethics
Service Oxford REC C.

# Results {#S4}

Search of the CRIS system initially identified 635 patients. Following
inspection of the individual records, patients were excluded because of
incorrect coding (*n* = 45), cognitive impairment (*n* = 216), onset of
psychosis before age 60 years (*n* = 150), insufficient information to
confirm diagnosis (*n* = 32) or in contact with services for less than
12 months preceding the search date (*n* = 61). Of the remaining 131
patients, 84 (64.1%) were female, 40 (30.5%) were White British, and 35
(26.7%) were living with a partner or family member. The extent of
engagement with services and antipsychotic treatment at 3, 6 and 12
months is shown in [Fig. 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}. At the point of
discharge from specialist services back to primary care, 65 patients
(54%) had been lost to follow-up or had not engaged with specialist
services, 22 (18%) had engaged with services but were not receiving
antipsychotic treatment, and 33 (28%) were taking antipsychotic
treatment. The rest were still receiving active specialist service
follow-up. Twenty-six (19.8%) patients were treated compulsorily under a
section of the Mental Health Act 1983, and neither male gender (odds
ratio (OR) 1.15: 95% CI 0.47--2.80) nor membership of a Black or
minority ethnic group (OR = 1.25: 95% CI 0.52--3.02) significantly
influenced Mental Health Act use.

![Service and antipsychotic treatment engagement over 12
months.](186f1){#F1}

# Discussion {#S5}

The diagnostic concept of VLOSLP emerged from an international consensus
meeting held to advance research on a patient group with first onset of
delusions and/or hallucinations after the age of 60 years, in the
absence of affective disorder or demonstrable brain disease such as
dementia.^2^ The illness is viewed as a functional psychosis with
symptoms that will respond to antipsychotic drugs.^2--5^ Our data show
that less than half of patients with VLOSLP were commenced on
antipsychotic treatment and less than a third remained on treatment at 1
year or at the point of discharge from services. This is a surprising,
even disappointing, result. An important barrier to acceptance of
antipsychotic treatment by patients with VLOSLP is the low level of
insight into presence of mental health difficulties or need for
treatment.^8^ Although treatment-related decision-making capacity has
not been specifically investigated in VLOSLP, studies of middle-aged and
older patients with schizophrenia have suggested that cognitive test
scores, rather than psychopathology ratings, associate most strongly
with the understanding and reasoning components of capacity.^9^ Patients
with VLOSLP do not, however, have demonstrably abnormal brain
imaging^10^ and do not inevitably progress to develop dementia,^11,12^
so cognitive impairment is unlikely to explain their inability to
evaluate their illness or the need for treatment. Reluctance by
clinicians to use mental health law to deliver compulsory treatment when
patients will not accept the case for antipsychotic treatment is
indicated by the small percentage of cases where this happened. Although
there are limited studies to compare this with, it is in keeping with
the lower rates of patients on longer-term detention within the above-65
population.^13^ This may reflect a view that elderly patients with
psychosis are somehow less 'risky' and that a failure to enforce
treatment is therefore justifiable. In fact, untreated symptoms of
VLOSLP are frightening and disabling, lead patients to place themselves
at significant risk and damage relationships with family and neighbours.
Comparably low levels of psychosis treatment in younger people would be
completely unacceptable and specialist mental health services for older
people should actively consider whether they should be more assertive in
taking potentially effective treatment to this vulnerable patient group.

[^1]: **Chun Chiang Sin Fai Lam** MRCPsych is a specialty trainee in old
    age psychiatry, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust.
    **SuzanneJ. Reeves** PhD MRCPsych is a clinical senior lecturer at
    the Department of Old Age Psychiatry, King\'s College London, and an
    honorary senior lecturer at the Division of Psychiatry, University
    College London. **Robert Stewart** MD FRCPsych is Professor of
    Psychiatric Epidemiology and Clinical Informatics, King\'s College
    London. **Robert Howard** MD MRCPsych is Professor in Division of
    Psychiatry, University College London, and at the Department of Old
    Age Psychiatry, King\'s College London.
