---
author:
- Peter Wilson
date: 2016-2
subtitle: ": Formerly Director, London Youth Advisory Centre (later the
  Brandon Centre)"
title: Faith Spicer OBE (MB, BS, JP)
---

![](50f1){#F1}

Dr Faith Spicer, who recently died at the age of 95, was a truly
resolute pioneer in the fields of family planning, sexual counselling
and the psychiatry of adolescence. She was acutely aware of the shame
and moral outrage that in her time was associated with pre-marital
sexual intercourse and its often appalling consequences, not least
dangerous, back-street abortions. At that time, women students who
became pregnant were seeking abortions for fear of their being sent
down. Illegitimate birth rates were accelerating at an alarming rate.

Something needed to be done to challenge the prevailing prejudices and
it was testimony to Faith\'s courage that she entered so powerfully into
the fray. In recognition of the predicament of young women who were
struggling with their sexuality in a changing society of the 1950s and
early 1960s, she became a vigorous campaigner on their behalf for
greater public awareness and improved psychosexual services. Her work
was controversial, occurring as it did in what were very unsettling
times for many people. Religious and moral pressures to uphold the
virtues of virginity before marriage were slowly having to face, and
adjust to the emergence of, a spirit of greater sexual freedom, which
was soon to be further facilitated by the impact of the new technology
of its time, the oral contraceptive pill. Faith was viewed with much
suspicion but also greeted, especially by the young, with relief and
gratitude.

She first practised contraceptive counselling in the Marie Stopes
Clinic, whose mission was to prevent unwanted pregnancies. In 1963 she
was appointed Medical Director of the Brook Advisory Centre. After 4
years she resigned from that post because she objected to those in
management who wanted to speed up the process of contraceptive advice
and increase the number of young people being seen. Faith took a more
measured view of the work that was required, arguing that consultations
should not be rushed. The issue for her was not so much that of the
contraceptive pill itself as of the emotional confusion and turmoil that
was often associated with sexual life and development. In 1969 she
founded the London Youth Advisory Centre (LYAC), later renamed the
Brandon Centre and eventually sited in Kentish Town, London. This
established a new model of service for adolescents from the age of 12 up
to 25, combining contraceptive advice and counselling/psychotherapy. Dr
Gill Hinshelwood, one of Faith\'s closest colleagues in the LYAC,
recalls the birth and growth of the centre at that time as inspiring and
indeed revelatory: 'All the most exciting and dangerous things happen on
borders and work at LYAC crossed the boundaries of many medical
disciplines, including psychiatry, gynaecology, social work, paediatrics
and psychotherapy. It was very challenging.'

As time went on Faith became increasingly successful in combating
ignorance and fear among the young. She understood the anxiety and
uncertainty that many experienced in making decisions in their sexual
lives -- so often risking their future either by embarking on
experiences they were not ready for or refusing experiences they should
have. She gave many talks and lectures on a wide range of subjects
concerning young people and wrote two important books, *Sex and the Love
Relationship* (1972, Priory Press) and *Adolescence and Stress* (1977,
Forbes Publications). These admirably convey her knowledge and
commitment to her cause as well as her compassionate understanding of
those who, as children, had been deeply affected by deprivation and
abuse. 'These young people', she wrote, 'have every right to dislike our
society and to try to find something better'.

Dr Spicer was born one of twins, the youngest of nine children of the
Rev. Montague Gifford James and his wife Violet. Her mother encouraged
her daughters to be independent and creative women and Faith did not
fail to live up to her expectations. She completed her medical training
in 1944 at University College London and became a psychiatrist
specialising in work with adolescents and psychosexual medicine. She
married a fellow doctor, Clive Spicer, when she was 22 and raised a
family of three children. Her marriage ended in divorce in 1986 and she
later married Tony Estill who died in 2002.

After her retirement at the age of 65, she became a consultant at the
Anna Freud Centre and to the Cotswold Community, a residential
therapeutic community for disturbed adolescents. She also served as
chair of a Juvenile Magistrates Court and as a member of the British
Board of Film Classification.

People who knew Faith enjoyed her warmth and generosity as well as her
sharp intelligence and lively personality. They knew too that at times
she could be quite forthright and unequivocal in fighting for what she
thought right. The LYAC could not have been born or grown without these
qualities in her leadership. There have been many who have been greatly
influenced and helped by her. It is particularly appropriate that, not
far from where Faith carried out so much of her work, one of her
granddaughters, Nell Nicholson, runs Gloucester House, the Tavistock
Children\'s Day Unit carrying out therapeutic care of vulnerable young
people.

Dr Faith Spicer died on 22 December 2014. She is survived by her three
children, Jane, Mary and David, five grandchildren and four
great-grandchildren.
