---
abstract: |
  Treatment provision for individuals with gambling problems in Britain
  is at best inadequate. Here we call for gambling treatment provision
  to be integrated into mainstream drug and alcohol services, and for
  its commissioning responsibilities to fall under local public health
  departments.
author:
- Sanju George
- Henrietta Bowden-JonesCorrespondence to Sanju George
  (<sanju.george@bsmhft.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-6
institute:
- 1Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust
- 2National Problem Gambling Clinic
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
title: "Treatment provision for gambling disorder in Britain: call for
  an integrated addictions treatment and commissioning model"
---

Gambling disorder sits alongside more traditional substance addictions
in DSM-5.^1^ This is the only behavioural addiction in this position,
the argument being that only gambling disorder had the research evidence
base supporting the transition.^2^

In Britain there is currently insufficient help for people with gambling
problems and those affected by someone else\'s gambling such as family
members.^3^ In this editorial we argue for an integration of gambling
treatment service provision into existing drug and alcohol treatment
services, and also for the commissioning of such services to be included
within the local public health departments\' remit, mirroring drug and
alcohol treatment services. We believe that such a model will positively
improve the status quo, wherein almost all of the gambling treatment
services in Britain are funded by voluntary contributions from the
gambling industry.

# Gambling as a public health problem: the scale {#S1}

In Britain, 73% of adults gambled in the past 12 months,^4^ with the
majority doing so without any harm to themselves or others. However,
0.9% (about 450 000 adults) gamble to a degree that damages or disrupts
their personal, family or recreational pursuits, and such people are
described as problem gamblers.^4^

The *British Gambling Prevalence Survey*^4^ found that 6.5% of the
population were 'at risk' of becoming problem gamblers in the future.
Especially vulnerable were Black and minority ethnic groups, young
people and people with mental health and substance misuse problems. For
those who gamble at risky levels, brief psychological interventions
offered early on in their 'gambling careers' have been found to be
effective in preventing the progression of their 'at risk' gambling to
more problematic behaviours.^5,6^

Akin to other addictions, gambling disorder, if untreated, can result in
a wide range of negative consequences to the individual and those around
them. People addicted to gambling may commit crime to fund their
addiction. As the addiction takes hold, employment and productivity may
suffer significantly. Problem gamblers suffer from high rates of
psychiatric comorbidity,^7^ and several stress-related and other medical
disorders, with resultant increased utilisation of medical services.^8^
It has also been estimated that for every person addicted to gambling,
up to eight others are also directly affected including family, friends
and colleagues.^9^ Domestic violence and abuse are common,^10^ and
children of gamblers have been found to have high rates of behavioural
problems, emotional difficulties and substance misuse.^11^

# The policy context {#S2}

Britain has liberal laws regulating gambling and this has resulted in
some significant new trends in this field.^12^ First is the clustering
of betting shops on the high streets. Second, the introduction of 33 000
fixed-odds betting terminals into betting shops across Britain.^13^
Third, a rapid expansion in remote gambling (i.e. internet and telephone
betting), which is currently a fifth of the 'offline' gambling (where
the gambler needs to by physically present) market.^14^ Fourth, a large
increase in exposure to gambling advertising on television (the number
of gambling advertising spots on television increased from 152 000 in
2006 to 1.39 million in 2012).^15^

# Current treatment and commissioning in Britain {#S3}

For the nearly half a million problem gamblers and the 6.5% at risk, as
well as those in their social networks who are affected, there is only
one National Health Service (NHS) clinic and a patchy string of
third-sector agencies that provide treatment. Some key limitations of
the way current treatment providers operate include lack of a clearly
defined model of care (such as a tiered care or a public health
multi-tiered prevention approach as exists in the field of substance
addictions), inadequate engagement with primary care or specialist
mental health services, absence of regional commissioning protocols and
lack of integrated care pathways.

None of the existing drug or alcohol treatment services offer fully
integrated treatment for gamblers and their families, although some work
in partnership with the charity GamCare
([www.gamcare.org.uk](www.gamcare.org.uk)) to provide some support for
problem gamblers.

It is also important to note here that all funding for gambling
treatment services (except Gamblers Anonymous and those in the private
sector) comes exclusively from the gambling industry. An industry that
generates billions of pounds in revenue every year, and growing year on
year, voluntarily donates approximately 0.1% of that to fund gambling
treatment, research and education in Britain. The Gambling Act 2005
enshrined the principle of 'polluter pays' regarding gambling treatment.
Also, a mandatory levy on the gambling industry has often been proposed
but has not been adopted as yet.

The commissioning of gambling treatment services is currently carried
out by the Responsible Gambling Trust
([www.responsiblegamblingtrust.org.uk](www.responsiblegamblingtrust.org.uk)),
a charity. The Trust in turn works closely with the Responsible Gambling
Strategy Board, an independent body that advises the Gambling Commission
(and in turn the Department for Culture, Media and Sport) on gambling
research, treatment and education-related issues. In terms of
commissioning, the Responsible Gambling Trust does most of its work
through GamCare, which in turn sub-contracts various treatment services
across the country. The major limitation of this commissioning model is
the lack of purchaser-provider split. In Britain, the government takes
no responsibility for the commissioning of gambling treatment services,
as strikingly made evident by the Department for Culture, Media and
Sport having responsibility for gambling rather than the Department of
Health.

# An integrated model of service provision {#S4}

We call for gambling treatment service provision to be integrated within
the existing network of drug and alcohol treatment services. These
services are provided through a network of local treatment agencies
(often partnerships of NHS and third-sector agencies) and are
commissioned through public health departments of local councils. We
feel this would be the most cost-efficient and sustainable way to
deliver services and to enhance existing service provision. Major
advantages of using existing drug and alcohol treatment services as a
vehicle to deliver gambling treatment are the infrastructure and
personnel cost efficiencies in terms of not generating separate set-up
and running costs. We envisage some additional investment requirements
primarily in terms of staff training and support to ensure their skill
set broadens enough to include gambling treatment interventions. There
might also be a need to increase personnel capacity, dependent on the
volume of additional activity this generates. All this can only
successfully happen if existing addiction treatment services are fully
signed up to this, both strategically and operationally. This is not to
say that specialist gambling treatment centres do not have a role to
play: they could serve as centres of research and academic excellence,
also leading on policy and strategy matters in a hub and spoke model, as
described in the *Gambling: The Hidden Addiction* document.^12^

## Integrated commissioning of substance and gambling addiction treatment services {#S5}

If gambling treatment provision were to be integrated into drug and
alcohol services, it logically follows that commissioning of these
services should also sit together. Since the recent shake-up in NHS
commissioning processes, current commissioning of drug and alcohol
services has become the responsibility of the local councils, through
their public health departments. This commissioning structure provides a
robust means to procure, monitor and manage the performance of treatment
providers, and including gambling addictions services into this
structure would be an improvement on the status quo. For this to happen,
more collaborative work would be required between the Responsible
Gambling Trust and local public health departments. It seems an
opportune time to consider local pilot models of service delivery to
test the feasibility and effectiveness of this proposal.

We acknowledge there is a lack of robust international evidence to
support this model. However, we believe that Britain is in a unique
position to be able to test it, as it allows for multiple sources of
funding both from the existing Responsible Gambling Trust and from the
NHS and Public Health England sources. This will help create a more
robust support structure of treatment services and commissioning
throughout the country, with a tiered approach, leaving the NHS services
to deal with the more severe presentations either in terms of chronicity
and severity of the illness or in terms of comorbid presentation.

Gambling disorder is now acknowledged as a valid psychiatric condition
and as such, similar to other substance addictions. To integrate its
treatment provision and commissioning into the existing infrastructure
for drug and alcohol treatment and commissioning, treatment services,
public health commissioners and other key stakeholders need to act in
unison and without further delay. Not only will this rightly help raise
the policy, research and practice profiles of gambling addiction, but it
will also provide better care for gamblers and their families without
significant cost increments.

[^1]: **Dr Sanju George** is a consultant in addiction psychiatry at
    Solihull Integrated Addiction Services (SIAS), Birmingham and
    Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, and **Dr
    Henrietta Bowden-Jones** is a consultant psychiatrist with Central
    and North West London Mental Health NHS Trust. She is the founder
    and director of the National Problem Gambling Clinic and vice
    president of the Medical Women\'s Federation.
