---
abstract: |
  End-of-life care has been given increasing importance within
  healthcare settings. In June 2014, the Leadership Alliance for the
  Care of Dying People published *One Chance to Get it Right*. This
  nationally accepted guidance replaces previous end-of-life care
  pathways such as the Liverpool Care Pathway and outlines how dying
  patients should be managed irrespective of setting. Increasingly,
  patients with mental health problems are entering their final days of
  life within psychiatric in-patient or acute hospital settings, and
  psychiatrists need to be aware of the new guidance and ready to
  implement it within psychiatric practice.
author:
- Nuwan Galappathie
- Sobia Tamim KhanCorrespondence to Nuwan Galappathie
  (<ngalappathie@standrew.co.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-2
institute:
- 1St Andrew\'s Healthcare, Birmingham
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
title: "End-of-life care in psychiatry: 'one chance to get it right'"
---

In recent years there has been a range of strategies, guidance documents
and evolving frameworks aimed at improving clinical practice within
end-of-life care. This includes the *End of Life Care Strategy* by the
Department of Health in 2008^1^ and the General Medical Council\'s
(GMC\'s) guidance document *Good Practice in Decision Making*.^2^ These
initiatives have led to the development of several end-of-life pathways
such as the Gold Standards Framework
([www.goldstandardsframework.org.uk](www.goldstandardsframework.org.uk))
and the Liverpool Care Pathway.^3^ While these pathways have enabled
improvements within areas such as diet, fluid and pain control, they
have been criticised as being derived from attempts to translate hospice
care to alternate settings and are therefore considered to be too
generic, lacking a patient- and family-centred approach.^3^ In June
2014, the Leadership Alliance for the Care of Dying People (LACDP), a
coalition of 21 national organisations including the Department of
Health, the GMC, the Royal College of Physicians and the Care Quality
Commission (CQC), published *One Chance to Get it Right*.^4^ This
guidance replaces previous end-of-life care pathways and outlines how
care for dying patients should be provided irrespective of setting. It
highlights five priorities for care: recognition of anticipated death,
sensitive communication, patient involvement, the needs of families and
individual care plans ([Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}). The new
guidance is applicable in England but adopts aspects of the Mental
Capacity Act 2005 that are applicable to both England and Wales.

Approximately 500000 people die in England each year, and their
end-of-life care pathways are changing, with 60% now dying in hospital
or care home settings rather than their own homes. Less than 6% are
transferred to specialist hospice care.^1^ Therefore, end-of-life care
is likely to increasingly affect psychiatrists working in psychiatric
in-patient settings and medical liaison posts. Further to previous
literature on end-of-life care within psychiatric settings,^5-10^ the
new guidance will require psychiatrists to update their knowledge and be
ready to implement the new guidelines. We have reviewed the new guidance
document and considered its implications for psychiatric practice.

**Box 1** Priorities for care of the dying person

'Priority 1: This possibility \[that a person may die within the next
few days or hours\] is recognised and communicated clearly, decisions
made and actions taken in accordance with the person\'s needs and
wishes, and these are regularly reviewed and decisions revised
accordingly.

Priority 2: Sensitive communication takes place between staff and the
dying person, and those identified as important to them.

Priority 3: The dying person, and those identified as important to them,
are involved in decisions about treatment and care to the extent that
the dying person wants.

Priority 4: The needs of families and others identified as important to
the dying person are actively explored, respected and met as far as
possible.

Priority 5: An individual plan of care, which includes food and drink,
symptom control and psychological, social and spiritual support, is
agreed, co-ordinated and delivered with compassion.'

Source: Leadership Alliance for the Care of Dying People.^4^

# Patient-centred care {#S1}

The new guidance builds on pre-existing good practice but moves away
from the process and rigidity of previous care pathways and instead
refocuses on providing individualised care for the dying person to meet
their needs and wishes. It essentially fosters a cultural change
enabling care that is both flexible and focused on the needs of the
person.

Patients who physically deteriorate, leading to concerns they might die,
should be assessed by a doctor able to judge whether the condition is
reversible or whether death is likely. We suggest that in psychiatric
settings a referral for a specialist medical opinion would be required
to decide this issue. For community patients this would be initiated by
the patient\'s general practitioner (GP), whereas in in-patient
psychiatric settings the primary care team or psychiatrist may need to
initiate this referral. Where curative treatment is not possible, the
situation must be sensitively explained to the patient in a manner
appropriate to their circumstances.

It is important to recognise that rather than a specific diagnosis of
'dying', end-of-life should be considered as a gradual spectrum.
Communication must be clear and specific. In particular, the patient
must be sensitively informed that they are likely to die soon, unless
they have indicated that they would not wish to know. Where appropriate,
the clinician should explain when and how death might be expected and
the basis for that judgement, while acknowledging and accepting any
uncertainty about prognosis with an opportunity to ask questions.

## Communicating with patient and their family or carers {#S2}

The patient and their family should be informed which doctor and nurse
is responsible for their overall care. We suggest that for vulnerable
psychiatric patients, efforts should be made to involve the family and
those who can support the patient, such as chaplaincy. The guidance
recommends that subsequent to being told the patient is likely to die,
there should be ongoing, proactive, sensitive communication that is
clear and addresses the patient\'s end-of-life needs. Communication
should be respectful in tone and pace and undertaken in private
settings. It should be two-way with staff listening to the needs of the
patient and their family and addressing concerns as they arise.
Understanding should be checked and documented. For psychiatric
in-patients, we suggest the least restrictive principle should be
followed and where appropriate, patients should be transferred to
nursing home or hospice settings. However, transfer to such settings may
not be possible, either because of risks related to the patient\'s
mental disorder or lack of availability of beds. In addition, some
long-term psychiatric in-patients may choose their ward as the place
where they would like to reside during their final days. In these cases,
the patient\'s wishes should be respected where possible and the
psychiatrist would then need to take the lead in coordinating their
end-of-life care. Within liaison psychiatry, there is a need to train
and educate medical and surgical teams in identifying and treating
common mental disorders, such as depression, that may arise during a
terminal illness.^5^

## Capacity {#S3}

In accordance with the Mental Capacity Act 2005, when a patient lacks
capacity to receive information about dying or to make decisions
regarding their end-of-life care, if there are no advance decisions
applicable to the patient\'s circumstances or lasting powers of attorney
in place, then the clinical team would need to make decisions on behalf
of the patient as per their best interests. It should be noted that the
time of writing it is not possible to make a valid advance decision
refusing treatment in Northern Ireland.

In terms of decisions regarding palliative treatment, the patient\'s
needs and wishes, as well as the wishes of their families and those
identified as important to them, should be taken into account. When
speaking with family or carers, staff should clearly explain whether
they are consulting, informing or involving them in decision-making.

# Care planning {#S4}

Individualised care plans must be developed and regularly updated to
meet the patient\'s rapidly evolving needs. The timing of
decision-making should also be carefully considered, for example
decisions related to life-prolonging treatments should not be made by
out-of-hours teams and should, where possible, be deferred until those
concerned (e.g. the senior clinician and the patient\'s family or
independent mental capacity advocate where appropriate) are available.

Patients must have individual care plans for food and fluids. Clinical
teams must understand that these are basic human needs and should be met
if the patient requests food or fluids, with assistance to feed being
provided if required. Although patients can refuse food or fluids when
offered, advance statements to refuse should not be considered to have
effect.

Care plans should also cover symptom control such as pain management and
include prompt referral to specialist palliative care teams. Such teams
should be available for routine daytime support and should also provide
out-of-hours telephone advice. We suggest that in in-patient settings
specialist palliative advice is obtained to consider the most
appropriate form of analgesia, for example intravenous syringe drivers
may need to be replaced by oral morphine or fentanyl patches if
appropriate. The *One Chance to Get it Right* guidance^4^ recommends
that patients should have care plans that cover psychological, social,
spiritual, cultural and religious needs. Sensitive empathic engagement
with the patient is required to take a meaningful spiritual history.^6^
Care plans should be reviewed as the patient\'s condition changes and
shared with those involved in the patient\'s care. There should be
judicious use of medications for symptom control and in particular
anticipatory medicines should target specific symptoms, have a clinical
rationale for their introduction, be regularly reviewed and adjusted as
needed for effect, and the reason for their use explained to the patient
and their families. Psychiatrists working in in-patient or liaison
settings should involve specialist palliative teams when prescribing
such medications. Psychiatrists should also involve the patient\'s GP
and palliative care team when considering do-not-resuscitate orders.

# Family and staff support {#S5}

The time leading up to the death of a family member can engender a range
of psychological, physical and emotional challenges. Psychiatrists
should listen and acknowledge these concerns, providing support where
possible. In psychiatric in-patient settings, efforts should be made to
allow the family as much access as possible to visit the patient,
including during their final hours. We suggest that in addition to
family support, when psychiatric in-patients enter end-of-life care, the
in-patient staff team will require a lot of emotional support which
could be facilitated by members of the team itself, chaplaincy, the team
psychologist, the visiting palliative care nurse or a trauma support
counsellor. Opportunities for debriefing sessions as well as a hospital
service with family support would also be helpful.

# Implementation {#S6}

The new guidance document appears to demonstrate a good example of
joined-up thinking. It is notably aligned with a range of other national
standards including the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) *Quality Standard for End of Life Care*,^11^ the GMC
guidance on decision-making,^2^ Nursing and Midwifery Council\'s
*Professional Code of Conduct*^12^ and General Pharmaceutical Council\'s
*Standards of Conduct*.^13^ NICE will also take the guidance into
account when developing its new clinical guidelines on the care of dying
adults. Clearly, implementation of the guidance will require appropriate
support and training and, within National Health Service (NHS) trusts,
assistance may be available from the trust\' development authority. In
addition, Health Education England has begun work to initiate e-learning
programmes to enhance the training and education of health and social
care staff involved in delivering end-of-life care
([www.e-lfh.org.uk/programmes.end-of-life-care](www.e-lfh.org.uk/programmes.end-of-life-care)).
To ensure standards are being met, the guidance will inform the
new-style CQC inspection of hospitals with end-of-life being a core
service area to be inspected. We suggest that, at an organisational
level, implementation of the new guidance should be made a clinical
priority. This could be enabled by NHS trusts and independent
organisations appointing clinical leads to oversee training and
education within this field.

# Conclusions {#S7}

Psychiatrists, especially those working in long-term in-patient settings
and medical liaison posts, will need to demonstrate that they have taken
on board and implemented the new end-of-life care guidance. There is a
need to develop training for psychiatrists in this area.

[^1]: **Nuwan Galappathie**, MBChB, MRCPsych, MMedSc, LLM, Consultant
    Forensic Psychiatrist, St Andrew\'s Healthcare, Birmingham, and
    Visiting Researcher, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
    Neuroscience, King\'s College, London. **Sobia Tamim Khan**, MBBS,
    MRCPsych, MMedEd, Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, St Andrew\'s
    Healthcare, Birmingham, and Honorary Senior Lecturer, University of
    Birmingham.
