---
abstract: |
  The predictable pharmacokinetic drug interaction between clozapine and
  rifampicin is listed in most standard reference texts but little
  detail is given or emphasis on its clinical significance. The
  interaction is based on theoretical knowledge of both drugs; to date
  just two case reports have been published. This article describes a
  third case demonstrating the significance of this interaction. This
  was potentially devastating for the patient who required an extended
  psychiatric admission. The enzyme induction was so potent that the
  dose of clozapine had to be increased approximately sixfold. Careful
  management of this significant interaction is essential for effective
  patient care.
author:
- Caroline ParkerCorrespondence to Caroline Parker
  (<caroline.parker@nhs.net>) [^1]
date: 2016-6
institute:
- 1Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
title: "Prescribing clozapine and rifampicin: clinical impact of their
  interaction"
---

Clozapine was the first second-generation antipsychotic. It has superior
efficacy to other antipsychotics,^1^ however, owing to its propensity to
cause blood dyscrasias its use is restricted; in the UK it is licensed
for use in treatment-resistant schizophrenia and psychosis during
Parkinson\'s disease.^2^ Clozapine is not a narrow-therapeutic-window
drug, but the measurement of serum levels has been established as
beneficial in optimising the dose, assessing adherence and minimising
dose-related adverse effects.^3--5^ The dose corresponding to
therapeutic serum levels varies considerably and is affected by gender,
cigarette smoking and age as well as concurrent interacting
medicines.^4^ People can vary dramatically in the rate at which they
metabolise clozapine (up to 50-fold slower/faster).^6^

Like most antipsychotics clozapine is extensively metabolised via the
hepatic cytochrome P450 system. The main metabolite via the CYP1A2
isoenzyme, norclozapine, is pharmacologically active, with other
isoenzymes involved (including 2C19, 2D6, 2C9 and 3A4) producing more
minor metabolites. Extensive reviews of clozapine\'s pharmacokinetics
and interactions are available.^7--9^

Rifampicin, introduced to the UK in 1967, is licensed for the treatment
of infections including tuberculosis.^10^ It is a potent inducer of
cytochrome P450 including the isoenzymes CYP1A2 and 3A4. It is widely
recognised as interacting with numerous medicines metabolised via these
routes,^10,11^ and its pharmacokinetics and interactions have also been
extensively reviewed.^12--15^

The interaction between clozapine and rifampicin is listed in most
standard texts,^6,11,16--18^ although not all.^5,10^ Even when
mentioned, there is little detail on its significance. The *British
National Formulary* (BNF)^11^ states 'rifampicin possibly reduces plasma
concentration of clozapine', but does not class it as significant or
give any guidance regarding the management of this interaction. This
article describes a case demonstrating this interaction.

# Clinical case report {#S1}

A 30-year-old female with paranoid schizophrenia had been taking
clozapine for the past 8 years with good efficacy and minimal
side-effects. She remained mentally stable in the community, adhered to
blood tests, and there were no haematological concerns. She was a
smoker, but had not misused illicit drugs or alcohol since she was in
her early 20s. Over the past 2 or 3 years she had developed skin
problems, including quite severe acne on her face. She held some
paranoid delusions about clozapine so at her request during the previous
year her maintenance dose had been gradually reduced over a number of
months, down to 100 mg daily, augmented with amisulpride (for residual
symptoms).

Approximately 3 months before her psychiatric admission she had seen a
dermatologist. They had avoided prescribing isotretinoin (Roaccutane)
(presumably due to the warnings that it can, albeit rarely, cause
psychiatric symptoms including depression, mood alterations, psychosis
and suicidal ideation)^19^ and started rifampicin 300 mg twice daily.
Subsequently she had an acute and severe psychotic relapse. Both her
clozapine and norclozapine were less than 0.05 mg/L, i.e. not
meaningfully detectable. Approximately a week after admission rifampicin
was stopped and replaced with clindamycin which does not interact with
clozapine.^2,20^ However, her presentation continued to deteriorate.
Over the following weeks the clozapine was increased to 350 mg/day, but
levels were subtherapeutic (clozapine 0.28 mg/L, norclozapine 0.15 mg/L)
and she only began to show some initial signs of improvement after a
month. The clozapine dose was further increased to 400 mg/day, yet
levels remained subtherapeutic (clozapine 0.20 mg/L, norclozapine 0.10
mg/L) and consequently the dose was further increased to 425 mg/day.
Over 2--3 months her presentation gradually improved, the dose continued
to be titrated up (levels were just therapeutic on 550 mg/day: clozapine
0.40 mg/L, norclozapine 0.14 mg/L) to 650 mg/day, without side-effects.

# Discussion {#S2}

Although this particular interaction is discussed in a number of
reviews,^8,9,12,15,21--24^ it is predominantly based on one case report
from 1998^25^ and a few refer to a second case published nearly a decade
later.^26^ In the first case,^25^ a 33-year-old male with schizophrenia
who had a very good response to clozapine developed tuberculosis and was
treated with rifampicin 600 mg daily, isoniazid and pyrazinamide. Within
2--3 weeks his clozapine serum levels decreased approximately sixfold
and were subtherapeutic, and at 3.5 weeks psychotic symptoms returned.
Prescribers increased his clozapine from 400 mg to 600 mg/day, but this
did not lead to any improvement. Rifampicin was then substituted with
ciprofloxacin, and the clozapine reduced back to 400 mg/day. Three days
later clozapine serum levels returned to therapeutic values and the
patient\'s psychotic symptoms improved. The second case^26^ was a man
with schizophrenia who was stable and well on clozapine 300 mg/day;
rifampicin 600 mg/day was started for tuberculosis. Two weeks later his
psychotic symptoms worsened and his previous clozapine dose-related
adverse effects ceased. His clozapine was increased to 550 mg/day with
only mild improvement. Six months later the rifampicin was stopped and
his psychotic symptoms improved significantly and the previous
dose-related adverse effects re-emerged. No clozapine levels were
reported. In both cases the patient\'s previous clozapine dose-related
adverse effects ceased when rifampicin was administered and their
psychotic symptoms returned. Increasing the clozapine dose was not
sufficient to manage the interaction.^18^

In another case^27^ where this combination was prescribed concurrently
for 9 months the pharmacokinetic interaction was not mentioned, and
although the patient did relapse, the main focus was the fact that they
developed late-onset neutropenia following the introduction of
rifampicin. Prior to that he had been mentally and haematologically
stable on clozapine for 9 years.

Given these limited reports of this pharmacokinetic interaction, the
description in standard texts is based on the theoretical knowledge of
both drugs. This article describes a third case demonstrating the
significance of this interaction, where clozapine was rendered
ineffective by the potent enzyme induction of rifampicin. The serious
psychotic relapse that ensued led to the patient\'s first psychiatric
admission in about 8 years.

Generally, enzyme induction interactions are slow to develop and slow to
resolve. Induction may take several days or 2--3 weeks to fully
develop;^13,17^ the extent of enzyme induction depends on both the drug
and its dose.^14^ The induction may persist for a similar period after
stopping the inducer, although this varies considerably between
drugs.^14,18^ Rifampicin\'s onset effect on clozapine is thought to be
2--3 weeks,^18,25^ and induction is near maximal at 300 mg/day.^13^

The case described here was in keeping with these facts. The impact of
the interaction on the patient\'s presentation was clinically
significant at about 3 months. Although rifampicin\'s effect on the
enzymes was likely to have lasted for at least 1--2 weeks after the drug
was discontinued,^12,18^ the effect on the patient\'s clinical
presentation took much longer to resolve. It could have been anticipated
that the patient\'s clozapine maintenance dose (100 mg daily) would not
lead to therapeutic serum levels but unfortunately none were recorded in
that or the preceding year. Following the introduction and cessation of
rifampicin, the patient\'s dose of clozapine was increased approximately
sixfold, suggesting that the enzyme induction was very potent. From an
interaction perspective, an alternative antipsychotic that is not
induced by rifampicin^18^ could have been considered, rather than
persisting with clozapine in the face of this interaction. However, this
option was not pursued as the patient\'s schizophrenia was treatment
resistant; several alternative antipsychotics had previously been tried
but the patient failed to respond to them. Therefore, the decision was
to optimise the clozapine dose carefully using therapeutic levels as a
guide, aware that on withdrawal of an enzyme inducer plasma
concentrations of the induced drug may increase and toxicity may
occur.^11^

In the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) for rifampicin the only
antipsychotics identified as interacting with it are haloperidol and
aripiprazole,^10^ although lurasidone and clozapine are also mentioned
in the BNF.^11^

The incidence of tuberculosis in England had increased steadily from the
late 1980s to 2005, and has remained at relatively high levels ever
since. England has one of the highest tuberculosis rates in Western
Europe. The incidence is more than four times higher than in the USA. If
current trends continue, England will have more tuberculosis cases than
the whole of the USA within 2 years.^28^ Therefore it is anticipated
that there will be more patients in whom both clozapine and rifampicin
are indicated, and this will need to be carefully managed.

# Conclusions and implications for clinical practice {#S3}

This is the third known case demonstrating the impact on a patient of a
pharmacokinetic drug interaction between clozapine and rifampicin.
Despite the predictability of this reaction from the theoretical
knowledge of these established medicines, there is little in the
literature to give prescribers advice in managing it. Although efforts
have been made to systematically assess the causality of adverse drug
reactions, these do not take into account direct pharmacokinetic
interactions. When rated using the Adverse Drug Reaction Probability
Scale,^29^ a reaction such as that observed in this case study (loss of
antipsychotic control) would be considered to be a 'probable' adverse
drug reaction.

There is a need for controlled studies to establish the importance and
extent of such reactions.^12^ Clinicians are reminded and encouraged to
report all drug interactions that lead to severe adverse effects to the
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency via the Yellow Card
Scheme.^30^ Prescribers are also encouraged to heed the significance of
this particular interaction, and to work across team interfaces so that
psychiatrists liaise with pharmacists and pulmonologists to carefully
review prescriptions to optimise patient care.

[^1]: **Ms Caroline Parker** is a Consultant Mental Health Pharmacist at
    St Charles Hospital in London, UK.
