---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** To identify training needs of the next generation
  of psychiatrists and barriers in prescribing first-generation
  antipsychotics (FGAs). We have surveyed psychiatry trainees in East
  Anglia with regard to their training experience, knowledge and
  attitudes to the use of oral FGAs as regular medication.

  **Results** Two-thirds of trainees were aware that first- and
  second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs) have similar efficacy, and a
  similar proportion perceived the older drugs to have more or
  'stronger' side-effects. Lack of training experience was noted as the
  second leading concern for prescribing FGAs. A quarter of trainees
  received no training exposure to the older drugs and two-thirds had
  never initiated these drugs themselves. Although nearly 90% of
  trainees felt confident about initiating an oral SGA as a regular
  medication, only about 40% felt confident with FGAs (*P*\<0.001).

  **Clinical implications** The survey highlights worrying gaps in
  training. FGAs can be used effectively, minimising side-effects, by
  careful dose titration, avoiding antipsychotic polypharmacy,
  high-dose, and high-potency drugs, thus ensuring they are not lost to
  future generations of psychiatrists.
author:
- Claire R. M. Dibben
- Golam M. Khandaker
- Benjamin R. Underwood
- Christopher O\'Loughlin
- Catherine Keep
- Louisa Mann
- Peter B. JonesCorrespondence to Claire Dibben
  (<Claire.Dibben@nsft.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-4
institute:
- 1Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 2University of Cambridge, UK
- 3Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
title: "First-generation antipsychotics: not gone but forgotten"
---

Since the introduction of chlorpromazine in the 1950s, antipsychotics
have been the mainstay of treatment for patients with schizophrenia and
related psychotic disorders. Current international psychiatric practice
appears dominated by the use of second-generation antipsychotic (SGA)
drugs.^1-3^ The use of first-generation antipsychotics (FGAs) is perhaps
often limited to rapid tranquillisation or depot injections. Healthcare
professionals also report overwhelming preference for SGAs as a
treatment of choice if needed for themselves.^4^ However, the rationale
for this trend is not clear, especially in the face of research
evidence.^5,6^ CATIE and CUtLASS 1, two large, non-commercial clinical
trials comparing FGAs and SGAs for people with chronic schizophrenia in
the USA and the UK respectively, have shown that the SGAs in general are
no more effective (except clozapine) or better tolerated than the older
drugs.^7-9^ The two classes have different side-effect profiles, yet the
occurrence of extrapyramidal side-effects (EPSEs) is similar between
FGAs and SGAs.^7,10^ In line with this evidence, the UK National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines do not
recommend one group of antipsychotics over the other for treatment of
psychosis, but suggest careful consideration of risks and benefits of
each drug, taking into account patient choice.^11^

Despite the paucity of research evidence favouring one class of
antipsychotics over another, the current trend in prescribing risks
losing an important tool from our limited therapeutic options. It is
likely that lack of training experience with FGAs will limit their use
even further in the future, which is an important issue. We have carried
out a survey that examines experience, knowledge and attitudes of
psychiatry trainees regarding the use of oral FGAs. The survey aims to
highlight training needs of the next generation of psychiatrists and
identify some of the barriers in prescribing FGA medications.

# Method {#S1}

We surveyed psychiatry trainees in the East Anglia region of England
using an electronic questionnaire which tested their knowledge and
attitudes regarding the use of oral FGAs. The following areas were
included: the administrative counties of Norfolk, Suffolk and
Cambridgeshire, and the unitary authority area of the city of
Peterborough. Specialist training in psychiatry is organised under two
National Health Service (NHS) mental health trusts: Norfolk and Suffolk
NHS Foundation Trust (NSFT) and Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
Foundation Trust (CPFT). The survey questionnaire was initially piloted
on a small group of psychiatry trainees and consultants. The survey was
set up electronically via the Survey Monkey website and emailed to all
trainees in NSFT and CPFT. The sample included mainly psychiatry
trainees but also foundation year (FY) doctors (medical intern) and
general practice (GP) trainees who were undertaking a placement in
psychiatry at the time of the survey. We sent three email reminders to
the trainees, and the survey was closed after 4 months. Data are
presented as proportions; chi-squared test has been used to examine
whether differences between groups are statistically significant.

The survey was approved by the research and development departments of
both trusts as an evaluation of training.

# Results {#S2}

## Response rate and sample characteristics {#S3}

The survey was completed by 101 out of 146 eligible participants (69%).
Response rates were similar in the two participating trusts. In total,
40% respondents were core psychiatry trainees, 40% were higher
psychiatry trainees and 20% were GP trainee or FY doctors; 49% were
female.

## Relative effectiveness of and concerns regarding FGAs {#S4}

Whereas two-thirds (67%) of respondents noted that in terms of
effectiveness FGAs were no different to SGAs (excluding clozapine),
about a fifth (18%) believed that SGAs were more effective. Sixty
percent of trainees had concerns about prescribing FGAs, nearly all of
whom cited side-effects as their main concern. Lack of experience in
using FGAs was the second most frequent concern noted by the trainees
(20%). FGAs were perceived to have more side-effects or 'stronger
side-effects' than SGAs. Trainees most commonly mentioned EPSEs,
including specifically tardive dyskinesia, neuroleptic malignant
syndrome, prolactin elevation, anticholinergic side-effects, QTc
prolongation, cardiac toxicity and sudden death. Interestingly,
criticism from colleagues was noted as a concern by one trainee.

## Training experience with FGAs {#S5}

About a quarter (24%) of trainees said they have never seen a patient
being started on an oral FGA as a regular medication excluding rapid
tranquillisation or 'as needed' (p.r.n.) use. Haloperidol was the most
commonly seen FGA, named by two-thirds of trainees. The observed use of
chlorpromazine, flupentixol, sulpiride and clopixol was similar (about a
third of trainees had seen each of these being used) ([Fig.
1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}).

![Training experience with first-generation antipsychotics
(FGAs).](94f1){#F1}

We asked trainees about their own prescribing practice. About 60% have
never started a patient on an oral FGA as a regular medication. Among
those who had, the pattern of prescribing was similar to what they had
observed, namely haloperidol was the most commonly prescribed.

## Confidence regarding use of FGAs {#S6}

To assess confidence in starting an oral antipsychotic as regular
medication, trainees were asked to give their views on the following
statements: 'I would feel confident about starting an oral FGA as a
regular medication''I would feel confident about starting an oral SGA as
a regular medication'. For each statement, they could answer strongly
agree, agree, neutral, disagree or strongly disagree. More than twice as
many trainees felt confident about starting an oral SGA than an FGA (87%
v. 39%; χ^2^ = 35.02; *P*\<0.001) ([Fig. 2](#F2){ref-type="fig"}).

![Trainee confidence regarding the use of oral first-generation
antipsychotics (FGAs) and second-generation antipsychotics
(SGAs).](95f2){#F2}

# Discussion {#S7}

We have surveyed 101 UK psychiatric trainees regarding their attitudes
to, and experience of, prescribing different sorts of oral antipsychotic
medication. Two-thirds of trainees were aware that FGAs and SGAs have
similar efficacy, whereas a similar proportion were concerned about
using FGAs owing to potential side-effects. Lack of training experience
was noted as the second leading concern for FGA use. A quarter of
trainees received no training exposure to the older drugs and two-thirds
never initiated these drugs themselves. Although nearly 90% of trainees
felt confident about initiating an oral SGA as a regular medication,
this number was only about 40% for FGAs. These results identify current
prescribing trends away from older antipsychotics and highlight worrying
gaps in training.

The outcomes mirror a larger study of European psychiatry trainees which
found that 93% of respondents would pick an atypical antipsychotic (SGA)
for themselves.^4^ This finding was not due to ignorance of the
published research, as trainees who were aware of the major studies
questioning the efficacy of SGAs were even more likely to prescribe
SGAs. This finding is also unlikely to be explained by length of time
spent working in psychiatry as the researchers found that attitudes did
not differ by length of training. Similarly, our results do not suggest
that experience is necessarily a decisive factor in influencing
prescribing, as the majority of trainees (76%) had experience of FGAs
being used as regular medication. Experience may play some role,
however, as where trainees had initiated an FGA it tended to be
haloperidol, the drug they had most frequently seen being prescribed by
others.

Our study goes further by examining the specific concerns which prevent
FGA prescribing. Whereas side-effects were an understandable concern,
particularly EPSEs, the side-effects of SGAs were felt to be less
worrying. Again, this is an attitude which is not entirely supported by
the evidence. In the UK CUtLASS 1 study there were no significant
differences in rates of objectively assessed EPSEs between groups of
patients receiving an FGA and an SGA, yet patients taking an FGA were
more likely to be prescribed an anticholinergic medication.^7,10^
Similarly, the US CATIE study showed that SGAs were no better for EPSEs,
negative symptoms or cognitive deficits.^9^ It is surprising that
despite concerns about EPSEs, haloperidol, a potent dopamine D~2~
receptor antagonist, emerged as the most commonly used FGA in our
survey. Haloperidol has a narrow therapeutic window between its
antipsychotic and EPSE-inducing doses, thus carrying a higher EPSEs
burden than some of the other FGAs. There is evidence that high levels
of D~2~ receptor occupancy in the striatum are associated with a higher
risk of EPSEs.^12^ Careful dose titration, lower total daily dosing than
has been commonplace, avoiding antipsychotic polypharmacy and
high-potency drugs can limit EPSEs and reduce overall side-effects in
FGAs.^8,13^

Our study suggests that trainee psychiatrists lack confidence in
prescribing FGAs. This is an important issue to address if the
availability of these drugs is not to be lost to patients. It is
possible that the results from this and other surveys reflect
prescribing practice which is not evidence-based. If ignorance of the
evidence is not the explanation, how might we explain this? The past
decade has seen dominance of treatment by SGAs before their efficacy and
side-effects were fully understood. This may have created a culture of
prescribing which has not been altered by the evidence. It is possible
that the relative immediacy of side-effects of potent FGAs (e.g.
dystonia) compared with the more insidious effects of SGAs (e.g.
metabolic syndrome) may discourage their use. Accepting the newer drugs
as better and effective in treating negative and cognitive symptoms
might also have thwarted drug discovery efforts for these
difficult-to-treat symptoms.

The UK NICE guidelines for treatment and management of psychosis and
schizophrenia in adults (published in February 2014) suggest the use of
an oral antipsychotic medication in conjunction with psychological
interventions for first-episode psychosis, acute exacerbation or
recurrence of psychosis or schizophrenia, but do not advocate the use of
SGAs as preferable over FGAs.^11^ The guidelines recommend that choice
of antipsychotic medication should be made by the patient and healthcare
professional together, taking into account the views of the carer if the
patient agrees.^11^ Prior to the initiation of antipsychotics a full
discussion of the options and relative risks and benefits of each should
occur covering side-effects such as the metabolic, cardiovascular and
extrapyramidal side-effects.^11^ Specifically for people with
treatment-refractory schizophrenia, the guidelines recommend that
clozapine should be offered to patients whose illness has not responded
adequately to treatment despite the sequential use of adequate doses of
at least two different antipsychotic drugs and at least one of the drugs
should be a non-clozapine SGA.^11^

If the dominance of SGAs does not seem to reflect the evidence or NICE
guidelines, what might be done to further explore this situation and
potentially change it? One voice which is less clear in this debate is
that of the patient. The results of patients surveys are mixed, some
suggesting that SGAs are preferred by patients^14^ while others indicate
no preference,^7^ although evidence is sparse. Therefore, it is
necessary to work collaboratively with patients and carers, taking into
account their views and potential risks and benefits of treatment
options. Production of evidence-based patient information aimed at
facilitating discussion and assisting an informed choice might be one
way forward. As for increasing training exposure, consultants of today
need to start considering the older antipsychotics as viable treatment
options.

We thank trainees for taking part in the survey and Dr Stephen Jones,
core programme director for NSFT, and Rosie Peck, postgraduate medical
training administrator, for their help with the survey.

[^1]: **Claire R. M. Dibben** is a consultant psychiatrist, Norfolk and
    Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust, Norwich, UK. **Golam M. Khandaker** is
    a clinical lecturer, Department of Psychiatry, University of
    Cambridge, and Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust.
    **Benjamin R. Underwood** is a consultant psychiatrist and
    **Christopher O\'Loughlin** is a consultant psychiatrist,
    Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust. **Catherine
    Keep** is a consultant psychiatrist, Norfolk and Suffolk NHS
    Foundation Trust, Norwich. **Louisa Mann** is a consultant
    psychiatrist, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust,
    and **Peter B. Jones** is Professor of Psychiatry, Department of
    Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Deputy Head of University of
    Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, and an honorary consultant
    psychiatrist, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust.
