---
author:
- Deborah Cooper[^1]
date: 2016-2
title: "Overcoming Distressing Voices: A Self-Help Guide Using Cognitive
  Behavioral Techniques"
---

This is a self-help book directed at those who experience voices. It is
written in a format seen in a number of other previous self-help books.
Its aims are simple -- to increase understanding of the experience of
hearing voices and reduce distress this causes.

The book is structured in five parts. The first part provides background
knowledge about distressing voices by exploring topics such as the
relationship between hearing voices and mental disorder, the common
types of voices experienced by people and the relationship between
voices and low self-esteem. The second and third parts provide
strategies to reduce distress occurring as a consequence of voices.
Examples include helping the reader to develop relaxation techniques and
encouraging socialisation. This section also covers core aspects of
cognitive-behavioural therapy such as identifying core beliefs and
helping the reader to start to challenge these. The penultimate part
encourages the reader to make plans for the future, and the last part
explores the impact of voices on those close to the reader, such as
friends and family.

The major strength of this book is its readable style. The introduction
highlights that a number of individuals are reluctant to seek help
regarding distressing voices. The narrative style and the effective use
of case histories throughout add a personal feel to the book and perhaps
help to reduce the sense of isolation that can occur as a consequence of
hearing voices. A number of practical homework tasks are set. These help
to support the reader to develop greater knowledge and awareness of
their voice-hearing and develop the ability to manage distress.

A minor criticism of this book might be its relatively small dimensions.
Although this makes it portable and approachable, the practical
exercises contained within are on the small side. As a consequence, one
would suspect that someone working through the book would need to keep
some of the exercises separate from the book. This might make review of
the knowledge and skills gained a little disjointed. The book is laid
out clearly and logically, with short paragraphs that encourage the
reader to work through short sections, as and when the opportunity
arises, rather than reading the book in one go. However, I wonder if
some readers might benefit from guidance in approaching the book, for
example working alongside a carer or mental health professional.

On the whole, this book achieves its objectives. It would be of value to
those suffering from distressing voices, as well as friends and family
members who may seek greater understanding of these experiences.

[^1]: **Deborah Cooper**, General Adult Psychiatrist, Department of
    Psychological Medicine, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK,
    email: <d.cooper4@nhs.net>
