---
abstract: |
  Recent years have seen a substantial increase in the use of crisis
  resolution home treatment (CRHT) teams as an alternative to
  psychiatric in-patient admission. We discuss the functions of these
  services and their effectiveness. Our research suggests high rates of
  suicide in patients under CRHT. Specific strategies need to be
  developed to improve patient safety in this setting.
author:
- Isabelle M. Hunt
- Louis Appleby
- Nav KapurCorrespondence to Isabelle M. Hunt
  (<isabelle.m.hunt@manchester.ac.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
title: Suicide under crisis resolution home treatment -- a key setting
  for patient safety
---

Crisis resolution home treatment (CRHT) teams were introduced by the
National Health Service (NHS) to provide intensive treatment at home for
individuals experiencing an acute mental health crisis and who would
otherwise be admitted to hospital care. The intended value was for CRHT
teams to act as gatekeepers to relieve the pressure on in-patient
services, not only through reducing admissions but also by supporting
the early discharge of patients from acute wards to home treatment.
Following the successful development of crisis intervention models in
North America and Australia in the early 1990s, the NHS Plan included a
policy mandating the establishment of these teams throughout England.^1^
Targets set within the plan included developing 335 crisis teams by 2004
and delivering home treatment to 100 000 people by 2005. These targets
helped bring about a relatively rapid implementation of these services
nationwide. They are now available in every trust in England and receive
significant NHS investment each year.^2^

Although flexibility exists, the guidelines from the *Mental Health
Policy Implementation Guide*^3^ recommended CRHT services for adults
aged 18--65 with severe mental illness who would ordinarily require
admission to hospital. Typically, CRHT is offered to individuals
diagnosed with schizophrenia and affective disorders and excludes those
with primary diagnoses of alcohol or drug misuse, personality disorder
or intellectual disability. Other key features of CRHT may include
24-hour availability during a crisis, intensive intervention in the
early stages of the crisis, and active involvement until the crisis
resolves. A core principle of these services is successful engagement
with the patient and involvement with the individual\'s family and
social network in the care management plans. Patients are also provided
with practical help with social issues, such as financial, housing and
childcare arrangements. This holistic approach has contributed to the
increase in patient satisfaction associated with receiving care under
CRHT,^4^ along with remaining in a familiar environment and the
reduction in stigma attached to psychiatric admission.^5,6^ In addition,
treatment under CRHT could reduce the need for out-of-area placements --
a growing issue within mental health services. Despite these benefits,
criticism has been made that CRHT teams are understaffed and patients
experience long waiting times before receiving care, often being seen by
several different team members.^7^ The gatekeeping role of CRHT services
means patients sometimes no longer have the option of choosing to be
admitted to hospital, despite some individuals preferring to be treated
away from home and the environment that may have triggered the crisis.

The effectiveness of CRHT services has often been examined through
assessing their role as gatekeepers and examining changes in admission
rates. For example, Jethwa and colleagues^8^ reported a 37.5% reduction
in monthly admissions after the introduction of CRHT, whereas Jacobs &
Barrenho^9^ found no impact of these services on admission rates. The
only UK randomised controlled trial found CRHT users were less likely to
be admitted to hospital in the 8 weeks post-crisis compared with the
control group receiving standard care from in-patient services and
community mental health teams.^10^ However, a national picture of the
efficacy of CRHT in terms of admission rates or gatekeeping is difficult
to establish with the great variation between healthcare providers in
CRHT service delivery.^11^ For example, around a third of CRHT teams do
not function as gatekeepers to acute in-patient beds,^11,12^ whereas a
report for the National Audit Office found around half of all discharges
were not facilitated by CRHT services.^13^

Published evidence on the outcomes of patients under CRHT is limited,
particularly with regard to patient safety and serious untoward
incidents, including suicide. Studies from the National Confidential
Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide by People with Mental Illness (NCISH)
have demonstrated that although there has been a significant fall in the
number and rate of in-patient suicide over the past decade, there has
been a corresponding increase in the number of patient suicide deaths
under CRHT.^14^ There are now three times as many suicides under CRHT
each year compared with in-patient suicides.^15^ This is not unexpected
given the expanding provision of home treatment services and the
reduction in hospital admissions. Reassuringly, however, the rate of
suicide under CRHT has not increased and has shown a decline between
2003 and 2011.^16^ This would suggest that perhaps some of the safety
concerns in CRHTs are being addressed. NCISH findings have also
demonstrated that NHS trusts which have introduced 24-hour crisis teams
have lower suicide rates compared with areas without these services.^17^

Despite the potential for CRHT to reduce suicide risk, one concern is
the possibility that suicide rates are higher in the CRHT setting than
the in-patient setting. In our recent study of suicides between 2003 and
2011, we found that the crude rate of suicide among CRHT patients over
this period was 14.6 per 10 000 CRHT episodes compared with 8.8 suicides
per 10 000 admissions for in-patients.^16^ These rates do not take into
account the varying CRHT service models or adjust for case mix or other
patient confounders, but reflect overall aggregate national effects. One
explanation could be time at risk -- if the length of care under CRHT is
longer than an in-patient stay this could explain the findings. When we
tried to take this into account (by including national estimates of the
duration of treatment), the risk under CRHT remained substantially
higher than the risk under in-patient care. However, we could not adjust
for length of time before and after admission as robust time-at-risk
data were not available. The higher rates under CRHT may be indicative
of the more intensive treatment and increased staff availability that an
admission brings, but could also reflect that the case-loads of CRHT
teams increasingly include some of the most acutely ill patients. NCISH
findings have shown a high prevalence of known suicide risk factors
among patients under CRHT who have subsequently died by suicide,
including adverse life events (49%), living alone (44%) or recent
discharge from in-patient care (34%).^16^ This raises the question on
the suitability of home treatment for vulnerable patients with limited
social support or who return to a home environment that has the
potential to exacerbate a mental health crisis. We have also recently
shown that between 2012 and 2013, 37% of patients who died by suicide
under CRHT had been under these services for less than 1 week which may
reflect the acuteness and severity of illness.^15^ Changes in service
provision may have increased levels of morbidity in admitted and
post-discharge populations and the use of CRHT following discharge might
mean that some admissions are shortened beyond what is safe. Our
previous controlled study on suicide within 2 weeks of discharge found a
link between post-discharge deaths and an admission lasting less than 7
days.^18^

What lies ahead for CRHT? Financial pressures could have contributed to
a recent trend for trusts to merge their specialist teams, such as CRHT
or early intervention with generic community mental health services.
However, given the potential benefits of the CRHT model, mental health
services should ensure these teams remain a unique treatment option but
with effective liaison with in-patient and community mental health
services. Variations between providers in CRHT service delivery is of
concern and may reflect uncertainties in the evidence base. Guidelines
for national standardisation of practice may help to improve the quality
of care, especially if these are rooted in sound research. Service
developments in crisis home treatment need to be monitored carefully
with respect to patient safety to ensure that the right care is being
delivered to the right patients.

[^1]: **Isabelle M. Hunt**, Research Fellow, **Louis Appleby**,
    Professor and Director, and **Nav Kapur**, Professor and Head of
    Suicide Research, National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and
    Homicide by People with Mental Illness, University of Manchester,
    UK.
