---
author:
- Zaza Lyons[^1]
date: 2016-2
title: "Understanding Curriculum: The Australian Context"
---

This book is about passion for teaching and learning. The word
'curriculum' is used as a metaphor for education at any academic level.
The book is composed of 12 chapters containing theoretical background
and discussion about specific approaches to the development and delivery
of a teaching curriculum, ranging from science and mathematics to fine
arts and philosophy. These theoretical discussions focus on both
traditional (or conservative) and progressive approaches to education
and are accompanied by useful 'reflective activities' that help the
reader deconstruct and apply underpinning pedagogical concepts and
theories to their local context and circumstances. Moreover, each of the
chapters contains a set of 'personal reflections' that give a human
touch to teaching and learning activities in 'a real life' setting.
Although the book has a focus on the Australian context and curriculum,
its messages are universal and applicable to all those who love
conveying knowledge or imparting skills to younger generations.

The book also contains an interesting chapter on Indigenous education
that focuses on the experiences of a young non-Indigenous teacher who
lived and taught in a remote Aboriginal community school in the Northern
Territory. Her personal reflections on this unique intercultural
encounter and challenging teaching environment make the book relevant to
any other multicultural corner of the world. This can be exemplified by
the following quote: 'Understanding multiple ways of knowing becomes
increasingly important, as we acknowledge that differing standpoints
inform how we human persons think and experience the world'.

Academics involved in medical education rarely have any formal training
in teaching. We learn how to teach on the job and in the field and make
up for pedagogical shortcomings by an abundance of energy and
enthusiasm. Universities around the world are moving towards 4-year
graduate medical courses, resulting in a significant reduction in
discipline-specific teaching time. With shorter rotations, we need to
use our time with students judiciously to ensure that they learn what is
needed to cover the core components of the curriculum. Importantly, for
an unpopular specialty such as psychiatry, we must also develop more
creative and innovative teaching strategies to attract medical students
to the 'endangered' discipline of psychiatry. The combination of
reflective activities and discussion of contemporary educational topics
allow this book to serve as a suitable guide for improving psychiatric
education that will assist in the survival of psychiatry as a respected
career choice and profession.

[^1]: **Zaza Lyons** is Assistant Professor at the School of Psychiatry
    and Clinical Neurosciences, Queen Elizabeth II Medical Centre,
    University of Western Australia, email: <zaza.lyons@uwa.edu.au>
