---
abstract: |
  Since the Liverpool Care Pathway has been withdrawn in the UK,
  clinicians supporting the palliative needs of patients have faced
  further challenges, particularly for patients with dementia who are
  unable to go to a hospice owing to challenging behaviours. It is
  becoming more important for different services to provide long-term
  palliative care for patients with dementia. Mental health trusts
  should construct end-of-life care policies and train staff members
  accordingly. Through collaborative working, dying patients may be kept
  where they are best suited. We present the case study of a patient who
  received end-of-life care at a psychiatric hospital in the UK. We aim
  to demonstrate how effective end-of-life care might be provided in a
  psychiatric hospital, in accordance with recent new palliative care
  guidelines, and highlight potential barriers.
author:
- Lauren Z. Waterman
- David Denton
- Ollie MintonCorrespondence to Lauren Waterman
  (<laurenzwaterman@doctors.net.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-6
institute:
- 1Sussex Partnership NHS Trust
- 2St George\'s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
title: End-of-life care in a psychiatric hospital
---

End-of-life care is defined as care that helps those with advanced,
progressive, incurable illness to live as well as possible until they
die, by focusing on their palliative care needs during their last phase
of life.^1^ The end of the Liverpool Care Pathway, whose use has been
withdrawn in the UK since July 2014,^2^ has brought challenges to
clinicians supporting patients who are in need of palliative and
end-of-life care, particularly for patients with dementia who are unable
to go to a hospice owing to their challenging behaviours. It is
essential that this problem be addressed. Dementia is now recognised as
one of the world\'s most pressing public health issues,^3^ with 35.6
million people living with dementia in 2010 (and the number predicted to
double by 2050),^4^ and increasing research into living with dementia is
showing long periods of troubling symptoms in these patients.^5--7^ The
Care Quality Commission is currently focusing on inequalities
experienced by people in end-of-life care, and has identified people
with dementia and other mental health needs as a particular priority
group.^2^

At a psychiatric hospital in England, we found that patients with
dementia with life-threatening, comorbid conditions and communication
problems have particular difficulties in expressing their wishes and
receiving optimal end-of-life care. There may also be barriers to
keeping them in their place of preference and/or the place where they
are at their most comfortable. We present a case study to illustrate
these particular difficulties and suggest potential solutions.

# Case study {#S1}

Mrs S was a 55-year-old patient on the dementia ward at a psychiatric
hospital. For the majority of her life, Mrs S was high in functioning
and had no history of mental illness. In 2012, she was diagnosed with
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (motor neurone disease), which
predominantly affected the muscles responsible for speech and swallow.
As her disease progressed she developed speech difficulties and her
swallow was affected, therefore she was fed via percutaneous endoscopic
gastrostomy (PEG) tube from 2013. She initially communicated in writing
and via a communication book; however, her cognition declined and she
developed expressive and receptive aphasias. She began to exhibit
erratic behaviour and was diagnosed with frontotemporal dementia by a
neurologist in June 2013. Her medication consisted of riluzole, dietary
supplements and antisecretory medications.

## Admission to a psychiatric hospital {#S2}

Mrs S\'s admission to the psychiatric hospital came as a result of
self-harm, self-neglect and vulnerability. She had begun pulling out her
PEG feeding tube, eating and drinking orally (which posed a serious
health risk), going out for walks late at night and refusing the
assistance of her carers.

She declined admission to hospital, but for her safety was admitted
under Section 2 of the Mental Health Act 1983. She had made an advance
decision in August 2013 stating that she wished to die at home and did
not want to go into residential care; that she would want to receive
antibiotics in hospital for chest infections, but that she did not wish
to be ventilated or resuscitated. However, when it came to making
decisions about placement and when to cease life-prolonging treatment,
her family felt that she did not have capacity at the time of making the
directive. It was made when she had already developed aphasia, and
although she was able to nod or shake her head to questions, there was
inconsistency regarding her responses; this was also mentioned in the
report of a speech and language therapist in September that year. The
advance decision was therefore deemed not to be valid by the
multidisciplinary team, in accordance with the Mental Capacity Act 2005.

## The patient\'s time on the dementia ward {#S3}

During her time on the ward, Mrs S displayed emotional lability,
exhibited possible suicidal intent, and was subsequently started on the
antidepressant citalopram. She was switched to Section 3 of the Mental
Health Act and then discharged from that section in November as she was
agreeable to staying in hospital and receiving treatment.

As time progressed, she became more distressed owing to excess
respiratory secretions. In September 2013 she had been admitted to the
general medical hospital for a month for a lower respiratory tract
infection; during this time, the local hospice and palliative care team
were involved and became familiar with her. Therefore, we sought
medication and management advice from the nurses and palliative medicine
consultant from the hospice, who came to review Mrs S on a couple of
occasions. In 2014 she was readmitted to the county hospital due to
bronchiectasis.

## End-of-life care planning {#S4}

After Mrs S\'s subsequent discharge from the county hospital, a review
meeting was organised involving her family and ward team. Her family had
found this last admission distressing, particularly since Mrs S\'s
secretions had been suctioned via nasogastric tube in the accident and
emergency resuscitation bay when she was biting on the suction tube
during oral attempts. Her family did not wish her to be admitted to
hospital again or to have further life-prolonging treatment, although
there was some confusion about the role that oral antibiotics might
play, given her advance directive stating her wish to receive them. Her
family wished her to die peacefully at the psychiatric hospital, with
which she had familiarised herself over the months. She could not be
accepted at a hospice while she was still mobile due to her high risks.

A further multidisciplinary meeting was organised, this time with the
palliative medicine consultant from the local hospice and nurses from
Hospice at Home present, as well as Mrs S\'s family and ward staff.
Since the patient\'s advance decision had been deemed invalid, a best
interests decision was made, incorporating the views of her family and
healthcare professionals, in accordance with the Mental Capacity Act
2005: this was to stop life-prolonging treatment. Specific plans were
defined clearly in a comprehensive care plan, which was finalised by the
ward nursing staff. Examples of these plans were: to suction secretions
and give oxygen only if the patient is accepting of these; not to sedate
for the purpose of suctioning, but if the patient were to be sedated for
other reasons then suction could be attempted; family visits to be
allowed whenever wanted; end-of-life palliative medications to be
pre-emptively prescribed and ordered; physical observations to stop; not
to be transferred to a medical hospital. Transfer to hospice would be
considered if the patient were to become bed-bound and if staff at the
psychiatric hospital were unable to care effectively for her needs. The
nurses from the Hospice at Home team agreed to support the nursing staff
with providing effective end-of-life care to Mrs S, and to come in to
assess her symptomatically and administer medications via a syringe
driver. We emphasised that since the ward staff were not sufficiently
trained or experienced in this type of care, the external nurses would
need to treat the situation in the same way as if Mrs S was dying at
home. They were happy to do this. Fortunately, we were also able to
bring in a registered general nurse to provide care during this time. We
invited a chaplain to the ward to provide spiritual support to the
patient and her family. During March 2014, Mrs S began to spend more
time in bed, although there were still periods where she was active and
would pace down the corridor. She passed away in March 2014.

The patient\'s family were grateful that we had allowed her to die in a
familiar environment, as this familiarity was crucial in supporting her
psychological well-being. Following her death, many staff members on the
ward were distressed by her passing, having spent many months working
closely with her and not being used to patients dying on the ward. A
debriefing session for staff was organised so that they could discuss
their emotions in an appropriate environment.

# Discussion {#S5}

This case highlights how effective end-of-life care might be provided in
a psychiatric hospital, to allow a patient to die being as comfortable
as possible in an environment they are familiar with and to achieve
continuity of care. In this setting, staff may not be familiar with how
to provide optimal end-of-life care, but it can be provided with
sufficient palliative care team input and good multidisciplinary
working. Continuity of care is one of the key recommendations for
achieving optimal palliative care in people with dementia that was made
by the European Association of Palliative Care,^8^ as the result of a
five-round Delphi study involving 23 countries. The European Commission
also declared in their summary report from the European Union summit on
chronic diseases (April 2014) that, for an ageing society, 'more
investment and innovation are needed to redesign and adapt care systems,
especially by fostering better integration of services and ensuring the
continuity of care' (p. 2).^9^

This case is presented in light of new national guidance for end-of-life
care provision. The Liverpool Care Pathway had been criticised for
facilitating poor communication and decision-making, with 'paternalistic
failure' seen as a key feature in its demise.^10^ Now, guidance
published by NHS England^11^ and yet more recent guidance from the
Leadership Alliance for the Care of Dying People^2^ remind clinicians
that good communication is key and that it should be ensured that
patients and relatives are more central to decision-making. The Alliance
also states that an individualised care plan for each patient must be
coordinated by the senior clinicians involved in their care -- for any
patients who are dying in a psychiatric hospital, this means the
consultant psychiatrists responsible for that patient.^2^

The Alliance has declared five priorities for providing good end-of-life
care, which we were able to address as follows.

-   Priority 1: 'This possibility \[that a person may die within the
    next few days or hours\] is recognised and communicated clearly,
    decisions made and actions taken in accordance with the person\'s
    needs and wishes, and these are regularly reviewed and decisions
    revised accordingly'. We benefited from the expertise of the
    community palliative care consultant and nurses in diagnosing when
    the patient was imminently dying, and we consequently communicated
    to her family that she was dying. We regularly reviewed the
    patient\'s care plan via multiple multidisciplinary meetings.

-   Priority 2: 'Sensitive communication takes place between staff and
    the dying person, and those identified as important to them'. Good
    communication with family members was key in Mrs S\'s case, and
    allowed us to produce a thorough care plan that was based on the
    patient\'s best interests. As we had already got to know the
    patient\'s family well during her time on the ward, this made these
    conversations easier, as her family felt able to be open with us
    about their concerns. Again, the local palliative care team helped
    us to achieve this goal by answering some of the more technical
    questions about dying that the family asked.

-   Priority 3: 'The dying person, and those identified as important to
    them, are involved in decisions about treatment and care to the
    extent that the dying person wants'. We faced difficulties in
    addressing this priority, as the patient had already lost the
    capacity to make decisions about her treatment and the advance
    decision was deemed invalid. All attempts were made by the medical
    team and speech and language specialist to enable the patient to
    communicate her wishes, but these were not successful. This issue
    was discussed with her close relatives. The relatives were included
    in multidisciplinary meetings and we ensured that they had ample
    opportunity to voice their opinions and concerns to all the
    professionals involved in the patient\'s care.

-   Priority 4: 'The needs of families and others identified as
    important to the dying person are actively explored, respected and
    met as far as possible'. The views of the patient\'s family were
    taken into account, such as that they were keen for her to remain on
    the dementia ward. They were very grateful to have their views
    listened to and considered. They were involved in best interests
    meetings about the patient and their opinions were actively sought
    out. We ensured their questions about the dying process could be
    answered comprehensively by inviting the palliative care consultant
    to a meeting with them, and they were offered the support of a
    chaplain.

-   Priority 5: 'An individual plan of care, which includes food and
    drink, symptom control and psychological, social and spiritual
    support, is agreed, co-ordinated and delivered with compassion'.
    Following multidisciplinary meetings, a comprehensive personalised
    care plan was constructed and reviewed at a later meeting. The
    Hospice at Home team provided assistance with symptom control, by
    helping the ward nursing staff to set up a syringe driver. The
    patient was able to communicate non-verbally when she was hungry,
    therefore food and drink was reserved for when she requested it.
    Intravenous fluids and excessive fluids via her PEG were avoided, as
    this would exacerbate her upper airway secretions. Psychosocial
    support was provided by keeping the patient in a place where she was
    familiar to and comfortable with the staff. She was permitted the
    freedom to pace the hallways freely as she wished, supervised by
    nursing staff. Spiritual support was offered via a chaplain.

The Hospice at Home team\'s input was essential to the care of Mrs S. It
is helpful for wards to bring in a registered general nurse temporarily
if they do not already have one. Additionally, debriefing for staff
after Mrs S\'s death was considered essential, since the staff, having
become close with her over many months, were affected by her death.

A major issue that we encountered was that Mrs S\'s advance decision was
not valid. This is because she had made the decision at a time where it
was deemed she lacked capacity to accept or refuse medical treatment.
Her case highlights the importance of early advance care planning: it
should be encouraged at the time of diagnosis of dementia or any other
terminal illness, rather than at a time where capacity to make important
decisions may have already been lost.^12^ This has been emphasised in
guidelines from the National Council of Palliative Care,^12^ and two
international Delphi studies have shown very high consensus between
specialists that planning of future care should begin as soon as
dementia has been diagnosed.^8,13^ Key principles of advanced care
planning have been published by the University of Nottingham,^14^ which
stress the importance of introducing discussions sensitively, assessing
the capacity of the individual to understand and discuss the options for
future treatment, thorough record-keeping and regular review of
decisions. Feeding by tube or drip is considered a form of medical
treatment,^15^ therefore decisions regarding the instigation or
continuation of clinically assisted nutrition should also be discussed
during advanced care planning, particularly in a case such as this where
the patient was likely to lose her ability to swallow. A barrier to
early advanced care planning is that individuals with dementia, their
families and healthcare professionals may not always recognise dementia
as a terminal illness. In fact, a recent Australian study published in
the *Journal of Palliative Care* showed that around 50% of nursing home
staff and 60% of family caregivers did not consider dementia to be a
terminal illness.^16^ Therefore, it is vital to provide education about
the illness trajectory of dementia as soon as possible after diagnosis,
to facilitate early advanced care planning.

Another issue highlighted by this case was that it is important for
mental health trusts that include in-patient wards to establish trust
end-of-life care policies. In creating these, it is advantageous to
learn from care homes and palliative care centres about end-of-life care
for patients with dementia: this is particularly pressing since research
into palliative care in dementia has been limited and mostly
consensus-based.^17^ The nursing staff at the psychiatric hospital may
have found it easier to provide care to Mrs S if they had more specific
and targeted end-of-life care guidelines to refer to, targeted at
providing care in a psychiatric hospital. There may also be a need to
train staff on dementia wards in caring for dying patients. As all
dementia services become more stretched with rates of dementia
increasing (and people living longer with dementia),^3^ it is likely to
become even more important for different services to provide long-term
palliative care for these patients. The financial costs of providing
end-of-life care in a psychiatric hospital are large, due to the need to
keep the patient on close observation, long-term hospital stay,
occupying the time of multiple staff members with multidisciplinary
meetings, and employment of a full-time registered general nurse if one
is not already employed. However, our case, along with the recent
guidelines,^2^ highlights the need to be flexible with where patients
die and discuss the options in the multidisciplinary setting with the
family. Hospices cannot always cater for patients with dementia due to
their behavioural difficulties and transfer out of a psychiatric
hospital may not always be in the patient\'s best interests. Therefore,
palliative care and dementia care teams need to have flexibility in
adapting to the changing needs of people with dementia, and to thus
explore and evaluate new approaches to providing end-of-life care. There
also needs to be further collaboration between palliative care and
dementia specialists, and between NHS England, third-sector
organisations, medical Royal Colleges and the Department of Health to
meet this challenge. Through collaborative working, it may be possible
to keep dying patients in the place where they are best suited.

[^1]: **Lauren Z. Waterman** MBBS BSc is a Foundation Year 2 doctor,
    working at the Royal Sussex County Hospital in Brighton, East
    Sussex, UK. **David Denton** MBBS MSc MRCPsych is a specialty
    registrar (ST5) in old age psychiatry, currently working with Sussex
    Partnership NHS Trust at the Clinical Trial Research Unit in
    Crowborough, East Sussex, UK. **Ollie Minton** PhD FRCP FHEA is a
    Macmillan consultant in palliative medicine and honorary senior
    lecturer at St George\'s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust.
