---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** Community treatment orders (CTOs) were introduced
  in Scotland in 2005, but are controversial owing to a lack of
  supportive randomised evidence. The non-randomised studies provide
  mixed results on their efficacy and utility. We aimed to examine
  hospital bed day usage across Scotland both before and after CTOs were
  initiated in a national cohort of patients, spanning 5 years.

  **Results** In total, 1558 individuals who were subject to a CTO
  between 2007 and 2012, of whom 63% were male, were included. After CTO
  initiation the number of hospital bed days fell, on average, from 66
  to 39 per annum per patient. Those with a longer psychiatric history
  appeared to benefit more from a CTO, in terms of reduced time in
  hospital.

  **Clinical implications** Our data offer cautious support for the use
  of CTOs in routine practice, in terms of reducing time spent in
  psychiatric hospital. This finding is balanced by the more rigorous
  randomised studies which do not find any benefit to CTOs.
author:
- Mark Taylor
- Melanie Macpherson
- Callum Macleod
- Donald LyonsCorrespondence to Mark Taylor (<marktaylor2@nhs.net>) [^1]
date: 2016-6
institute:
- 1Royal Edinburgh Hospital, UK
- 2University of Edinburgh, UK
- 3University of Queensland, Australia
- 4Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, Edinburgh, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
title: "Community treatment orders and reduced time in hospital: a
  nationwide study, 2007--2012"
---

Community treatment orders, known as CTOs in England and Wales and CCTOs
(community compulsory treatment orders) in Scotland, were specifically
legislated under the relevant mental health acts to reduce repeated
hospital admissions and promote patient autonomy and independent living.
However, the lack of supportive randomised scientific evidence related
to efficacy,^1^ and in particular a negative randomised controlled trial
(RCT) from Oxford,^2^ has led to considerable debate on their use.^3^ A
survey of psychiatrists in England and Wales found that the majority
felt CTOs would be therapeutically useful,^4^ although a recent
systematic review from the Oxford team noted contradictory results from
the non-randomised data.^5^ Nevertheless, the implementation of CTOs has
been rapid in the UK, for example they now represent 30% of all
long-term treatment orders in Scotland, where they have been in use
since 2005.^6^

Here we examine the effect of CTOs on hospital bed use in Scotland,
hypothesising that there would not be any relationship between use of a
CTO and number of hospital bed days.

# Method {#S1}

All individuals subject to a CTO in Scotland between 2007 and 2012 were
identified from the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland database. The
Commission is a statutory body overseeing the rights and welfare of
people with a mental disorder, and routinely collects information on all
individuals detained under the Mental Health (Care and Treatment)
(Scotland) Act 2003. Information on each person subject to a CTO was
anonymised prior to analysis, and included gender, age at which the
person was placed on a CTO, diagnosis and involuntary hospital
admissions before, during and, if applicable, after a CTO until 7 March
2013. Diagnostic data were limited to the simple categories of mental
illness, personality disorder or intellectual disability.

An analysis of time spent in hospital before and after CTO institution
was conducted, for both *de novo* CTOs (i.e. no prior Mental Health
(Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act detention) and for those people on
CTOs who had been on varied hospital-based orders immediately
beforehand. Time before and after CTO use varied for each individual,
and depended on date of first detention. To aid comparison the average
number of days spent in hospital per year, before and after the CTO was
instituted, was calculated.

Quantitative analysis was then performed using IBM SPSS Statistics (v11
for Windows), with a related-samples *t*-test being used to compare the
mean number of days in hospital per year before and after a CTO. An
independent-samples *t*-test was used to compare the amount of time
spent in hospital before and after the CTO between males and females.
Data were categorised into five age ranges ([Table
1](#T1){ref-type="table"}). The groups were compared to see whether one
category benefited more or less than the others, using Mann--Whitney
*U*-tests as normality of data was not present. Bonferroni correction
for multiple testing was applied and *P*\<0.05 was considered
significant.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Individuals in each of the five age categories
:::

| Age range, years |  *n* (%)   |
|:-----------------|:----------:|
| 0--19            |  50 (3.2)  |
|                  |            |
| 20--39           | 658 (42.2) |
|                  |            |
| 40--59           | 648 (41.6) |
|                  |            |
| 60--79           | 161 (10.3) |
|                  |            |
| 80--99           |  41 (2.6)  |
:::

# Results {#S2}

## Cohort and exclusions {#S3}

A total of 1610 individuals were subject to a CTO in Scotland between
2007 and 2012, and all were available for analysis. Thirty-two were on
orders under the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 before CTO
application, and it was decided that this legislation added another
level of complexity, so these individuals were excluded. Further, 20
individuals had obviously erroneous data relating to their compulsory
treatment and length of detention (including either a negative number of
days or more than 365 days per year spent in hospital) and were also
excluded. Therefore, 1558 individuals subject to a CTO remained for
analysis, with approximately 5% of CTOs being new direct from the
community.

There were 987 males in the cohort (63%), and the median age was 45
years for men and 39 years for women. Most individuals (*n* = 1358, 87%)
had mental illness as a single diagnosis; 11% (*n* = 170) had two or
more categories of mental disorder, for instance mental illness and
intellectual disability or personality disorder.

Comparing mean days in hospital per year before and after a CTO, their
number fell from 66.1 (s.e. = 2.0) to 39.3 (s.e. = 1.9) ([Fig.
1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}). A paired-samples *t*-test showed this to be
significant (*t*(1558) = 10.5, *P*\<0.01).

![Days in hospital before and after community treatment order (CTO) use.
Error bars denote 95% CI.](125f1){#F1}

Further analysis of CTO 'effect' on hospital bed days per annum for
those on *de novo* CTOs rather than CTOs varied from hospital detention
orders revealed that the average number of days in hospital per year
after the CTO was in place for *de novo* CTOs was 37, and for those with
previous Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act detention it
was 25 (*P* = 0.003 assuming an unpaired *t*-test of samples with equal
variance).

In terms of comparing the mean number of days in hospital per year
before and after a CTO by gender, for women (*n* = 571) it was 63.6 days
before and 38.4 days after the implementation of the CTO, whereas for
men it was 67.6 days before and 39.8 days after CTO implementation. A
paired-samples *t*-test was done on each sample for both men and women,
and indicated a significant reduction in hospital utilisation for
patients of both genders (*P*\<0.01). An independent-samples *t*-test
comparing benefit for males and females gave *P*\<0.01, implying men
were no more or less likely to benefit from a CTO than women.

[Figure 2](#F2){ref-type="fig"} shows the mean number of days benefit
(calculated from mean number of days in hospital per year before a CTO
minus mean number of days in hospital per year after a CTO).

![Comparison of mean number of days in hospital per year before and
after a community treatment order (CTO) by age.](125f2){#F2}

Mann--Whitney *U*-tests showed that the age range 0--19 was
statistically different from the other groups, except 80--99 (*P*\>0.05)
([Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}).

# Discussion {#S4}

On average, the 1558 individuals subject to a CTO between 2007 and 2012
spent less time in hospital after a CTO than before. Contrary to our
hypothesis, mean time in hospital fell from 66 days per year before to
39 days per year after CTO use. This was equally true for men and women.
The lower number of hospital bed days for those with previous detentions
compared with individuals with new or *de novo* CTOs may suggest that it
is individuals with a longer psychiatric history that benefit the most
from the imposition of CTOs. Consistent with this, our results also
suggest it is middle-aged individuals who have the largest reduction in
time spent in hospital after CTO imposition, and that the very young
(less than 19 years old) do not appear to be helped by a CTO in terms of
reduced hospital stay.

When Light^7^ reviewed CTO usage internationally, she noted the
epistemic challenges in assessing their utility and commented that CTOs
place responsibilities on both the patient and the healthcare system,
binding in service provision. Light also noted that a simple outcome,
such as readmission (as measured by the OCTET,^2^ see below) would not
necessarily capture important issues such as functionality and quality
of life. Kallapiran *et al*^8^ felt that measuring hospital utilisation,
as we have here, rather than simply counting the number of admissions
might be a better measure of CTO outcome.

## Strengths and limitations {#S5}

The descriptive results from this study regarding age and diagnosis are
remarkably consistent with previous related work by Brown *et al*^9^
using the same database. Strengths of this study include the size of the
cohort, being the entire Scottish population subject to a CTO over a
5-year period. Also, hospital admissions were counted over a long time
period limiting the bias created by fluctuations in mental illness
severity with time (i.e. regression to the mean). Similarly, we
corrected for multiple testing and did not go 'hypothesis fishing'.
Although this was not a period of major bed closures and community
mental health services were already well developed in Scotland, we
cannot exclude the confounding influence of time on our results.
Similarly, we cannot simply ascribe the reduction in hospital use to the
compulsory treatment mandated by the CTO, as the CTO might bind the
individual into a more assertive or effective form of holistic community
service. Last, although we examined the effects of age and gender, more
detailed analysis (e.g. by specific diagnosis) of who may or may not
benefit from CTO use was not possible using the routinely recorded
electronic database.

Our findings contradict the previous RCTs of CTO efficacy. The two
mature American RCTs^10,11^ are arguably of limited applicability to the
UK, given the major differences in healthcare delivery between the UK
and the USA. The non-masked OCTET RCT^2^ found no difference in
readmissions or overall time spent in hospital when they compared two
forms of community compulsion -- CTOs and 'leave of absence' -- even
though the length of compulsion between each arm varied (8 *v*. 183
days). OCTET did suffer from a high rate of protocol violations and 20%
of those approached to enrol refused, whereas those who were a 'clear
candidate' for CTO were excluded *a priori*, illustrating the ethical
and practical difficulties of conducting randomised studies of
potentially uncooperative individuals. The accompanying editorial by
Johnson^12^ called for 'large-scale collation and analysis of routine
data already recorded since their (CTO) introduction', just as we have
attempted here.

The paradox between the negative RCT data and the positive case--control
studies (as here) and qualitative data deserves discussion. Increased
personal autonomy, rates of employment or social stability, and improved
quality of life are all potential benefits of CTOs that are difficult to
quantify or capture in an RCT design, possibly limiting the
generalisability of the RCT findings. Further, despite the inherent
bureaucracy and ethical concerns, CTOs remain popular with clinicians
and patients\' families perhaps in part because they aid in 'persuading
the persuadable'.^13^ It may well be that most individuals are law
abiding, and accept the decision of an independent mental health
tribunal with regard to the need for compulsory treatment.

[^1]: **Mark Taylor** is a consultant psychiatrist at the Royal
    Edinburgh Hospital, and Associate Professor at the University of
    Queensland; **Melanie Macpherson** is an FY2 doctor in south-east
    Scotland; **Callum Macleod** is a data analyst at the Mental Welfare
    Commission for Scotland; and **Donald Lyons** is a retired
    psychiatrist and was CEO of the Mental Welfare Commission for
    Scotland.
