---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** To record the development of liaison psychiatry in
  the UK and to summarise the current levels of activity. We also
  highlight the challenges the specialty may face if it is to develop
  further. History since the 1970s is reviewed by early pioneers and
  those involved in the present day, with a focus on the key role played
  by members of the Royal College of Psychiatrists.

  **Results** We describe the development of training guidelines, the
  publication of joint documents with other Royal Colleges, establishing
  international collaborations and defining service specifications. We
  emphasise the importance of collaboration with other medical
  organisations, and describe successes and pitfalls.

  **Clinical implications** Much has been achieved but challenges
  remain. Liaison psychiatry has a potentially important role in
  improving patient care. It needs to adapt to the requirements of the
  current National Health Service, marshal evidence for
  cost-effectiveness and persuade healthcare commissioners to fund
  services that are appropriate for the psychological needs of general
  hospital patients.
author:
- Peter Aitken
- Geoffrey Lloyd
- Richard Mayou
- Christopher Bass
- Michael SharpeCorrespondence to Christopher Bass
  (<christopher.bass@oxfordhealth.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
- id: R37
title: A history of liaison psychiatry in the UK
---

The psychological and psychiatric care of people with physical
complaints has always been an essential part of good medical practice
and, in the early 20th century, became the focus of a small medical
subspecialty called psychological medicine. This article records the
evolution of the part of psychiatry that serves people with medical
illnesses and looks to its future, as medical services, training and
expectations of care evolve in the UK.

# Liaison psychiatry in the UK {#S1}

Until the 1970s dedicated liaison psychiatry services were virtually
unknown in the UK, although they had already become widely established
elsewhere, particularly in the USA.^1^ Indeed, liaison psychiatry, the
term allegedly introduced to describe the department at Colorado General
Hospital in Denver,^2^ was in its early years predominantly an American
movement,^3^ much influenced by now-discredited psychosomatic theories
of illness.^4^ It flourished in America in the 1970s in part as a result
of federal funding to support its role in medical student education.
Most American services provided in-patient consultation to patients but
there were also those who believed in the importance of liaison with
medical teams. The sometimes heated theoretical arguments about the
relative merits of these activities led to the adoption of the
cumbersome, combined term consultation-liaison (C-L) psychiatry.

Awareness of these American developments and the establishment of new
psychiatric units within general hospitals meant that more psychiatrists
became interested in liaison psychiatry in the UK and a small number of
designated posts were created. However, the crucial event enabling the
development of a recognised subspecialty of liaison psychiatry was the
foundation of the Royal College of Psychiatrists in 1971, bringing
together the asylum doctors ('alienists') and the teaching hospital
psychiatrists. Following the examples of the older Royal Colleges, the
Royal College of Psychiatrists formed specialist sections and took on
training and advisory planning roles. But the old teaching hospital
ethos of psychiatry as a part of medicine was progressively lost and the
new College did not initially cater for clinicians who wanted to
specialise in psychiatry of people with medical illnessses.

# The Royal College of Psychiatrists\' Liaison Psychiatry Special Interest Group {#S2}

However, all was to change. Informal discussions were begun among a
small group of interested clinicians, with Richard Mayou and Geoffrey
Lloyd as prominent members. These resulted in an agreement to explore
the possibility of establishing a group for those with interest in
medical illnesses within the College. The response to a preliminary
letter in the *Psychiatric Bulletin*^5^ revealed considerable enthusiasm
for a forum to facilitate discussion of clinical, research and teaching
interests. Sir Desmond Pond, College President from 1979 to 1982,
encouraged these aspirations. A preliminary planning meeting was held
during the College Quarterly Meeting in Oxford in 1983, followed by a
session at the Annual General Meeting in Edinburgh in 1984. An
application was made to the College to establish a special interest
group and this was approved, although not without opposition from some
senior fellows who did not regard liaison psychiatry as a special field
of activity separate from general psychiatry.^6^ Although the College
Council did not realise it, this initial and modest special interest
group was always seen by the protagonists as the first step towards
liaison psychiatry becoming a fully-fledged subspecialty.

The name of the new special interest group provoked some controversy.
Psychosomatic medicine was considered to have too strong a link with
past, unproven aetiological hypotheses whereas psychological medicine,
the preferred term, had recently been taken to name a new general
psychiatry journal. Although the name 'liaison psychiatry' was not
considered ideal, it had the advantage of familiarity and had already
gained acceptance in the USA. The self-appointed steering group became
the first Royal College of Psychiatrists\' Liaison Psychiatry Committee.
Richard Mayou, who had led much of the preliminary work, was elected
chairman, holding this post until 1989. Looking back, the central
importance of a succession of enthusiastic activists in establishing the
subspecialty is very clear. All these activists were relatively young,
ambitious for their subject and not overwhelmed by College bureaucracy.
We had two related aims: first, to create a psychiatric subspecialty
that required specialised expertise and training, and second, to promote
psychological understanding and care within all general hospital medical
practice. These aims were to be achieved in a variety of ways ([Box
1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}).

**Box 1** Setting up the subspecialty of liaison psychiatry --
preliminary tasks

-   Holding meetings and conferences to get people together

-   Conducting surveys to find out what was happening

-   Writing guidelines for training

-   Doing research to provide an evidence base

-   Teaching others

-   Making international links to share knowledge

-   Establishing collaborations with other medical organisations

-   Setting out service specifications

# Setting up the specialty: tasks of the liaison psychiatry special interest group {#S3}

## Meetings and conferences {#S4}

From the very beginning, the special interest group organised sessions
both at College meetings and its own conferences. Its first residential
conference, held in Oxford in 1987, was a great success; a second
successful Oxford conference in 1989 included European and American
colleagues. Subsequently, the liaison psychiatry conference has become
an established regular feature of the College calendar and attracts a
growing audience from members within the UK and abroad. Its success has
led to joint meetings with colleagues in The Netherlands, Denmark, Spain
and Portugal.

## Surveys {#S5}

Once the group had been recognised it proved surprisingly easy to
achieve a substantial membership. A survey of members found that there
was in fact more clinical and academic activity within liaison
psychiatry than had been realised, but also that there were few specific
posts. Respondents to these surveys frequently complained there was
insufficient time to carry out their work satisfactorily.^7^ They also
showed that services had developed unevenly and that few health
districts had given priority to developing liaison psychiatry.
Subsequent surveys documented slow progress, for example Guthrie,^8^
until a recent expansion of posts probably influenced by the
cost-effective analysis of the RAID service in Birmingham (discussed in
Successes).

## Training guidelines and training posts {#S6}

When the Royal College of Psychiatrists was founded in 1971 there was no
accredited higher training in psychiatry. The liaison psychiatry group
wanted to emulate the College sections that had set out recommendations
for accreditation, as this would confirm its separate expertise. After
much consultation, and some battling against significant opposition, the
group eventually persuaded the College Council to accept modest
proposals for training.

The establishment of training posts in liaison psychiatry was the next
priority. Requirements for training were agreed, published^9^ and later
consolidated in a College publication,^10^ which also advised on setting
up services and on teaching and research opportunities. The document
included contributions from child and old age liaison psychiatrists. It
was recommended that every psychiatry training scheme should have at
least one post in liaison psychiatry at senior house officer or
registrar level and that the trainee should have regular supervision and
also access to systematic teaching. Trainee posts at senior registrar
(specialist registrar) level were also to include experience of
research, audit and teaching junior hospital doctors and medical
students.

From 1992 Francis Creed and Elspeth Guthrie, both active early members
of the special interest group, have run an annual advanced residential
course held every June in Manchester. This attracts up to 36 trainees
from the UK and abroad and feedback suggests that it has had an
important role in career development.

## Research {#S7}

Liaison psychiatry has always had a strong link with academic
psychiatry, particularly in its early days. Indeed, many of the early
advocates of the activity were academics. There was active and
productive research activity in the universities of London, Manchester,
Oxford, Edinburgh and Leeds. Areas where British research achieved
international recognition included the study of suicide and self-harm,
chest pain, depression in relation to stroke and cancer, and in
communication skills training. Indeed, many of the earlier exponents of
liaison psychiatry held academic posts. The past 20 years have, however,
seen some diminution in the number of academics active in research
directly relevant to liaison psychiatry. This may in part be because of
the divergence between clinical provision and research in medicine in
general and in part because psychiatric research has an increasing focus
on biology and brain imaging. Nonetheless, the UK continues to have an
internationally recognised research output relevant to liaison
psychiatry and at least 10 professors of psychiatry who would see
liaison psychiatry as their clinical specialty.

## Teaching {#S8}

Historically, the teaching of medical students was a major part of the
work of a specialist in psychological medicine in the London teaching
hospitals. While liaison psychiatry offers huge potential to teach
medical students about psychiatry in the context of general medical
practice, rather than as a separate and arguably less generalisable
activity, it has been slow to develop a commensurate role. However, the
current crisis of recruitment into psychiatry and the relative
accessibility of liaison psychiatry to medical students is encouraging
an increase in the use of liaison psychiatry placements for medical
students and, indeed, postgraduate training. There is probably still
unfulfilled potential.

## International links {#S9}

From the late 1970s onwards many individuals had contact with our
colleagues in the USA. A number of UK academic liaison psychiatrists
(including Mayou, Creed and Sharpe) established close personal
relationships with and received warm acceptance from colleagues in the
American Academy of Psychosomatic Medicine. Although the American
healthcare system is in many ways substantially different from that in
the UK, the contrast between the National Health Service (NHS) and the
American system is potentially a creative one for thinking about how we
can best deliver psychiatry into general medical settings. The link with
the Academy remains strong and fertile and could be developed further.

There have also been productive links with Europe. In 1987 Frits Huyse,
a Dutch liaison psychiatrist, invited Mayou and Lloyd to represent the
College at the inaugural meeting of a European group for which he had
obtained funding. This meeting led to enduring professional
relationships, joint meetings and collaborations which enriched our
activities. The Dutch experience was particularly influential in
obtaining national funding to set out the specifications of an effective
liaison service in every hospital. These informal meetings also led to
seven UK liaison psychiatry services being included in the large
European Consultation-Liaison Workgroup (ECLW) Collaborative Study.^11^
This involvement meant that the UK was well represented in the
subsequent European Association for Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry and
Psychosomatics (EACLPP), which later merged with the European Conference
for Psychosomatic Research to form the European Association of
Psychosomatic Medicine (EAPM).

## Collaboration with other medical organisations {#S10}

From the beginning priority was given to working closely with other
medical organisations as well as with other areas of psychiatry; the top
priority was the Royal College of Physicians. Richard Mayou met with
their president Raymond Hoffenberg in 1980 and established
collaboration, resulting in joint conferences on medical symptoms not
explained by organic disease^12^ and on psychiatric aspects of physical
disease.^13^ The report of a joint working party on psychological care
in general medical practice, mainly written by Francis Creed,^14^ can
now be seen as a landmark in the development of the specialty. A
subsequent joint conference was held in 2003 and a report of a joint
working party chaired by Geoffrey Lloyd was published.^15^ The aims of
these joint reports were to identify those areas of medical practice
where psychiatry made a particular contribution to patient care, to
review the effectiveness of psychological and psychopharmacological
treatments in medical patients, and to encourage the establishment of
effective general hospital liaison services.

Other reports have involved collaborative working parties with other
organisations. These include the Royal College of Surgeons,^16^ chaired
by Christopher Bass, the British Association of Accident and Emergency
Medicine,^17^ chaired by Paul Gill, and the Royal College of General
Practitioners,^18^ chaired by Else Guthrie. Another collaborative
venture, in which the current College President Simon Wessely took a
lead role, led to the publication of a joint report on chronic fatigue
syndrome in 1996.^19^

Other initiatives include a collaboration of neuropsychiatrists,
neurologists and psychologists to develop methods of assessing and
treating patients with functional neurological symptoms -- the UK
Functional Neurological Symptoms (UK-FNS) group.^20^

## Service specifications {#S11}

These joint reports set out for the first time recommended staffing
requirements for a district hospital liaison psychiatry service. At the
time the reports were written very few hospitals met the minimum
recommended standards. Since the mid-1990s there has been an evolving
consensus among clinicians that a liaison psychiatry service should be
based within the hospital it serves and be managed and governed as part
of that hospital trust. It has become clear that the level of staffing
must depend on the size of hospital and the complexity of clinical
problems it presents but also that a minimum service should include a
whole-time consultant liaison psychiatrist, supported by two nurses who
are capable of working autonomously, and a clinical psychologist who can
provide supervision, training and delivery of brief psychological
treatments, irrespective of geographical catchment area issues.
Increasingly, expertise in old age psychiatry is essential, given that
the majority of general hospital in-patients are now over the state
pensionable age. Anderson & Ooman^21^ have cited evidence to show that,
in this age group, working closely and collaboratively provides greater
benefits than simple consultation on a case-by-case basis. At the other
end of the age spectrum it has become clear that a specialised child
psychiatry service is required in hospitals with paediatric
departments.^22^ Putting these initiatives together we move toward the
provision of liaison psychiatry 'across the lifespan'.

# Successes {#S12}

There have been many successes since the 1970s. These include the
recognition of the specialty by the Royal College of Psychiatrists when
it conferred section status in 1997 and faculty status in 2004 (faculty
membership has since grown to over 4000). The passing years have also
seen increasing attendance at faculty conferences and recently a rapid
growth in the number of consultant posts. The clinical need for liaison
psychiatry services has long been apparent and there is a growing body
of evidence to support the clinical effectiveness of pharmacological^23^
and psychological treatments, particularly cognitive-behavioural therapy
(CBT),^24^ in liaison psychiatry. Large-scale studies have demonstrated
the effectiveness of integrated care in treating depression in patients
with cancer^25^ and of CBT in improving symptoms of chronic fatigue.^26^
Schroder *et al*^27^ have shown the effectiveness of CBT in a range of
functional somatic symptoms. One notable study demonstrated the
cost-effectiveness of psychological treatment of functional bowel
disorders,^28^ and has featured prominently in the National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines.

However, the evidence for the cost-effectiveness of a liaison service
was unimpressive until Parsonage & Fossey^29^ conducted an economic
evaluation of the Rapid Assessment Interface and Discharge (RAID) team
established at the City Hospital, Birmingham by Tadros and colleagues.
The evaluation concluded that the savings to the hospital in terms of
reduced bed use (£3.55 million per year) were more than four times the
cost of establishing the service (£0.8 million per year). Although it
has methodological limitations, this study was important in supporting
the recent development of liaison psychiatry services.

## The rise, fall and rise again of the Oxford service {#S13}

Development since the 1970s has not always been linear, and the Oxford
service provides an example. In the early 1970s liaison psychiatry began
in Oxford as an innovative and pioneering service with a major focus on
the emergency department and self-harm. Over the following decades it
developed to provide a showcase, hospital-wide liaison psychiatry
service linked to the academic department and training many doctors and
nurses in the practice of psychiatry in the general medical environment.
However, in the early years of the 21st century difficult relations
between the mental health and acute trusts in Oxford led to the near
demise of the service. Despite the apparent demolition, the foundations
were sufficient to allow it to be reborn as a large, innovative, fully
integrated psychological medicine service established as an integral
part of the Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (the acute
trust), again with strong academic links. This roller-coaster tale of a
major teaching hospital has both reflected and influenced the morale of
UK liaison psychiatry. Although it has a happy ending, the story to date
is salutary in telling us that we cannot assume that the current
enthusiasm and development in the area will be sustained indefinitely,
particularly if we are unable to demonstrate its value through providing
robust research evidence and routine clinical outcomes.

# Remaining challenges {#S14}

Liaison psychiatry services in the UK remains patchy, with huge
variations in levels of staffing between hospitals. Encouragingly, it is
current government policy to establish a liaison psychiatry service in
every general hospital.

A major obstacle to the development of such services remains in the
almost entirely separate commissioning and delivery of mental health and
physical healthcare. This separation institutionalises the unhelpful
mind and body split.^30^ Indeed, developing services that offer parity
for patients\' mental and physical needs and deliver care in an
integrated and seamless fashion is virtually impossible when there is
such administrative separation.^31^ This reflects the problem that
liaison psychiatry was created to solve and leaves it uncomfortably
positioned between psychiatry and medicine, sometimes not fully accepted
by either. However, the developing awareness that liaison services work
most effectively when fully embedded in the acute hospital that they
serve provides some optimism for addressing this challenge.

The need to enhance acute hospital patients\' experience of medical care
is undeniable and has been underlined by numerous reports of substandard
care, most notably in the Mid Staffordshire NHS Trust.^32^ Liaison
psychiatry has a potentially important role in improving care, but if it
is to do so, several additional challenges will need to be
addressed.^33^ In particular, effective collaborations will need to be
established with other healthcare professionals, not only in nursing and
psychology but also with those working in palliative care and pain
services. Furthermore, given that acute hospital stays are now much
shorter than they used to be and that more patients are being treated as
day patients or out-patients, liaison psychiatry needs to adapt by
extending into out-patient settings as well as in the community,
alongside general practitioners.

The most recent College report on liaison psychiatry^34^ has recommended
minimum levels of staffing that are unlikely to be met by many acute
trusts in the near future. Consequently, liaison psychiatry\'s advocates
need to continue to marshal evidence for both the clinical and
cost-effectiveness of their work and to persuade healthcare
commissioners to fund services that are appropriate for the
psychological needs of general hospital patients.

Looking back, we can see that service development has always depended to
a large extent on local clinical leaders. This is likely to continue.
Morris^35^ and Butler & Temple^36^ have written helpful accounts of how
they successfully overcame the challenges we have outlined here. Liaison
psychiatry is poised to play a key role in addressing the need for more
integrated care^37^ and in doing so increasingly re-adopting the
original name of psychological medicine. We have come a long way from
the early days of psychological medicine. And there remains much to do.

[^1]: **Peter Aitken**, Director of Research and Development, Devon
    Partnership NHS Trust, Honorary Associate Professor, University of
    Exeter Medical School, and Chair, Faculty of Liaison Psychiatry,
    Royal College of Psychiatrists. **Geoffrey Lloyd**, Emeritus
    Consultant Liaison Psychiatrist, Royal Free Hospital, London.
    **Richard Mayou**, Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry, Oxford
    University, Nuffield College, Oxford. **Christopher Bass**,
    Consultant in Liaison Psychiatry, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford.
    **Michael Sharpe**, Professor of Psychological Medicine,
    Psychological Medicine Research, University of Oxford, Department of
    Psychiatry, Warneford Hospital, Oxford.
