---
author:
- Jane Morris[^1]
date: 2016-4
title: "The Time In Between: A Memoir of Hunger and Hope"
---

I was set to condemn yet another narcissistic autobiographical account
that would be pro-anorexia fodder -- but the author herself cleverly
forestalls that objection. She acknowledges that we can\'t stop
'wannarexics' from devouring this as a motivational manual. Thus from
the start, the book evokes that familiar sense of intellectual duelling
between patient and clinician, with anorexia always at least one step
ahead. This is one reason why I would recommend this book to any
colleague with the stomach to read it, and to anyone who dares
trivialise the challenge of working with people with eating disorders.

I found the spitefulness, the scorn, the superiority of anorexia quite
chilling. It dehumanised Nancy, and made it hard to feel for her,
although she suffered dreadfully. I laughed uncomfortably. I wondered
with horror which of the three caricatured clinicians is me --
Kind-face, Mean-face or Hangover face. Or, hopefully, 'Sharp
Psychiatrist', even 'The Right Therapist'. Patients have made me all of
these at times. I cringed at the thought of her parents reading about
their 'marital(ish) bed' -- a quip which outlasts the apologies and
appreciations at the end.

What did I learn? Well, that out-patient weights mean next to nothing.
Nancy isn\'t unique in 'faking' as much as 10 kg -- so why do we base
clinical decisions on BMI alone? I knew that anorexia is like possession
by devils but I saw it afresh. I learned from the black humour of
Tucker\'s 'questionnaires' that there are no right answers. Whatever
your responses to anorexia\'s dilemmas, you have got it wrong. That is
the dynamic.

It\'s a chilling read, and both gratifying and irritating in turns.
Tucker is a razor-sharp thinker and writer. The satirical dramatisations
and caricatures evoke a stage adaptation -- perhaps *Anorexia: The
Musical*. As Tucker\'s style matures, her archness may be used more
sparingly, she may edit out such distractions as colour titles and
metaphors, and attend to the overall balance of the narrative, rather
than merely acknowledge its imbalance. In fact, 300 pages give us the
gory details of her anorexic career, while only the final 50 are devoted
to the real meat of the story, the 'time in between' which the title
evokes.

But I would not change the title. The last pages are the real genius of
this book. The author poignantly describes her loss of anorexic power,
descent into bulimia and weight gain. She re-enters real life, makes
genuine relationships (including one with 'the Right Therapist') and
experiences self-compassion for the first time. The spiteful start is
transformed into lyrical, youthful, purple passages about her rites of
passage. I was won over.

[^1]: **Jane Morris** is a consultant psychiatrist and medical
    psychotherapist, The Eden Unit, Royal Cornhill Hospital, Aberdeen,
    UK, email: <janemorris1@nhs.net>
