---
abstract: |
  This editorial discusses the pros and cons of community treatment
  orders (CTOs) from the perspective of community general adult
  psychiatry. There is little scientific evidence supporting the
  application of CTOs. Preconditions of a CTO to work are likely to be
  met by few patients. The time for the application of a CTO may be
  better spent for patient-centred care until there is sufficient new
  and robust evidence that identifies the patients that might profit.
author:
- Reinhard Heun
- Subodh Dave
- Paul RowlandsCorrespondence to Reinhard Heun
  (<reinhard.heun@derbyshcft.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-6
institute:
- 1Derbyshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Derby, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
title: Little evidence for community treatment orders -- a battle fought
  with heavy weapons
---

The legislative framework for treatment of mental disorder has evolved
in the UK over more than a hundred years, with the successive acts of
1890, 1930, 1959 consolidating and refining the preceding common-law and
statutory acts into a framework that became the Mental Health Act 1983.
Community treatment orders (CTOs) were implemented in the 2007 Mental
Health Bill amending the Mental Health Act.

The discussion about CTOs seems to be ongoing and is fought on both
sides with heavy weapons -- science, personal experience and best
intentions. Sadly, there seems to be no resolution or agreement in sight
among patients, carers and professionals.^1,2^ Supporters argue that we
must help unwilling patients to take their medication and accept
treatment in their own best interest or in the interest of others around
them, even if it is with coercion under a CTO; uncontrolled real-life
trials, anecdotal personal evidence and CTO use in 70 jurisdictions^3^
have suggested that CTOs may work.^4^ In contrast, opponents aver that
all three randomised controlled CTO trials and their meta-analysis have
shown absolutely no evidence that CTOs have any significant effect on
the treatment outcome of patients.^5^

This editorial will provide an overview of the arguments on both sides.
We will also focus on the practical side of implementation within the
current legal framework: what are the preconditions for a CTO to do what
it is intended to do, that is reduce hospital admissions and improve
outcomes? These practical issues may not have been fully assessed in
previous discussions about the CTO. We will refer to the literature and
contextualise this to our clinical experience as general psychiatrists
with several years\' experience of working with CTOs within community
services. We will end with some specific recommendations.

# The arguments on the pro-side {#S1}

Supporters of CTOs put forward a number of arguments in their favour,
some of which are listed below.

-   Coercion with treatment for mental disorder in the patients\' best
    interest is justified on ethical grounds and is a feature of the
    legislative arrangements in many jurisdictions.^6^

-   There is no clear logical reason why this right or duty to
    appropriate treatment should be available in the restrictive
    hospital setting, but not in the community.

-   For this purpose, it can be necessary to force non-adherent patients
    to accept necessary treatment and medication.^4^

-   There is sufficient professional experience of patients improving
    under a CTO to justify this type of coercion.^4^

-   Many clinical studies of CTOs have shown relevant benefits for
    patients.^7--10^

-   Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) with negative results have not
    included the right group of patients that are likely to benefit from
    a CTO^4^ or have not applied the CTO appropriately.^11^

# The arguments on the con-side {#S2}

Counter-arguments are being proposed by those who believe CTOs are not
as beneficial to patient care as their supporters assert. We have
collected some of those arguments below.

-   Many patients relapse under a CTO.^12^

-   CTOs increased health service use.^13^

-   A number of non-randomised studies have provided negative and
    conflicting results and thus have not provided sufficient evidence
    to support CTOs.^3,14,15^

-   Three independent RCTs and a meta-analysis of their data have shown
    no benefit of the CTO on the number of hospital admissions and other
    relevant outcomes.^16--20^

-   Patients on a CTO have shown even less adherence to depot injections
    than those not on a CTO.^21^

-   Anecdotal reports do not provide significant evidence for the
    efficacy of a CTO. They may be the result of the regression to the
    mean (i.e. the CTO is implemented at a time when the patient is at
    their most ill) and improvements are therefore the likely results of
    natural variance of the disease course.^22^

-   Patients\' human rights might be violated by CTOs.^23^

-   Owing to flaws in the application of compulsory community care,
    patients are at risk of being subjected to new forms of social
    control of an unclear nature without proper legal protection.^24^

-   Without evidence there cannot be any ethical justification to use
    coercion and severe deprivation of freedom and liberty against
    psychiatric patients.^3^

# Necessary conditions for a CTO to work in principle {#S3}

Psychiatrists in the National Health Service (NHS) work within a
legislative framework that includes CTOs. Community psychiatrists with
typically sized case-loads will inevitably have experience of working
with patients who are subject to CTOs and will have experienced the
ethical dilemmas they present. Assuming that CTOs are effective in at
least some individual patients, there are necessary preconditions which
must be fulfilled for the order to work.

-   The patient has a treatable mental disorder (i.e. a disorder that
    has shown some response to treatment).

-   The patient does not want to continue to take the medication that is
    likely, from the perspective of the treating psychiatrist, to help
    maintain improvement and reduce risk of relapse. This may be for a
    range of reasons including side-effect burden, a disagreement that
    the medication is responsible for any improvement, a subjective
    perception that the medication has not helped, a belief that the
    medication is not necessary to maintain wellness or a disagreement
    that the problem being treated is a treatable mental disorder.

-   The subjective, implicit or explicit, benefit--disadvantage
    evaluation of the patient has thus led to a decision against the
    treatment continuing in the community.

-   Previous treatment in the hospital has not been sufficiently
    effective to lead to remission or improvement and has not increased
    the insight of the patient into their condition and their
    willingness to accept treatment.

-   The patient is fully informed about the CTO and understands the
    conditions of the CTO.^2^

-   They then accept and submit to the conditions of the CTO.^2^

-   The patient\'s experience of a hospital stay was negative and the
    possibility of a hospital readmission is seen as a sufficiently
    coercive or aversive threat.

-   This threat is sufficient enough to make the patient change their
    previous rejection and to accept treatment they otherwise would not
    accept.

-   This treatment then improves the patient\'s mental health and
    reduces the likelihood of admission to hospital.

The number of patients for whom all these conditions apply may be
limited.

# Some practical points to consider {#S4}

There are additional, very relevant issues, including some practical
points to consider which we draw from our previous experience with CTOs
in the UK since 2008.

-   The administration of a CTO is time consuming, bureaucratic and
    draws time away from appropriate patient-centred care. (In our
    experience, mental health tribunal reports, manager\'s report,
    capacity assessments and CTO renewal assessment can take up to 8--20
    h, depending on the patient.)

-   A doctor writing a report or completing the necessary forms does not
    provide any direct, if any, therapeutic benefit for or influence on
    the day-to-day care of a patient.

-   The increase in CTO use with the associated costly legal machinery
    of mental health tribunals has led to an increase in expenditure
    which diverts spending from direct patient care.

-   Threats and coercion may negatively affect the patient--psychiatrist
    relationship. The applications of a CTO may support paternalistic
    practice,^25^ and thus have an impact on the psychiatrist\'s role as
    a patient supporter, therefore limiting their influence on the
    patient.

-   Many patients do not know that they are under a CTO, are not fully
    informed or do not understand the regulations of a CTO.^26^

-   CTOs are favoured by relatives and carers,^27^ possibly to force
    patients to comply with their wishes; this may on some occasions be
    in their own, but not necessarily in the patient\'s, best interest.

-   The functional split between in-patient and out-patient consultants
    makes regulations and administration difficult. An in-patient
    consultant may utilise a CTO for one purpose, such as with a view to
    shorten an in-patient admission, without proper consultation with
    the psychiatrist and team who will have the task of implementing the
    order in the community over the longer term. In practice, it is our
    experience that collaborative planning of CTOs between in-patient
    and out-patient consultants is not a routine occurrence.^2^

-   The power to recall a patient to hospital by one doctor alone may
    reduce clinical governance in comparison with a full Mental Health
    Act assessment. It may have the advantage of being implemented more
    easily than a full Mental Health Act assessment but this is
    potentially at the expense of a less complete and balanced
    assessment.

-   The recall of a CTO does not allow treatment. Patients who are
    recalled may stay on a ward for up to 72 h just to wait for a Mental
    Health Act assessment to happen.

-   The CTO may be used to submit a patient to less than optimal depot
    medication, and may prevent the search for better suitable
    alternative treatments.^28^

-   It may be difficult to assume that the simple threat of a hospital
    admission actually reduces such admissions and our experience has
    been that this has not appeared to be sufficient. On the other hand,
    we also have anecdotal examples of patients who may have done well
    under the framework.

# Conclusions {#S5}

The scientific evidence that CTOs work is weak at best.^3,10^ The
likelihood that three independent controlled studies and their
meta-analysis have led to false negative results is low. Under these
circumstances, no clinical procedure would have any support from any
regulatory institution. The use of coercion without or even against
scientific evidence may be seen as unethical and might violate the
patients\' human rights. These circumstances may increase the stigma
against psychiatry.^29^ However, it is impossible to disprove that CTOs
may not work at an individual level in some patients. Those most likely
to benefit would appear to be those where the above-mentioned individual
conditions are all concurrently met. If any such cases had been included
in these controlled studies, their positive outcome must have been
mirrored by other patients with an equivalent negative outcome, namely
more admissions and worse outcome.

Some of the conditions for a CTO to work are unfavourable: the initial
subjective benefit of the treatment is low; the treatment in hospital
has not been fully efficient to lead to remission and to sufficient
insight; the hospital must be perceived as a sufficient threat to
trigger better adherence in the community. This may increase the stigma
against psychiatry.

# Recommendations {#S6}

It could be argued that the time, money and resources spent on
administration and report writing within the current CTO legislative
framework would be better spent working with patients on developing more
collaborative approaches to the ongoing management of their condition.

There may be nothing lost if the current CTO is replaced by the better
governed use of Section 2 or 3 of the Mental Health Act, utilising the
existing provisions of the Act, until the proponents of CTOs have, with
some scientific rigour, identified the subgroup of patients for whom it
may help and that it does what it is intended to do.

If there is a subset of patients who may benefit from this extension of
coercion into the community, it is important that there is a better
delineation of the group of patients who benefit through a proper
scientific evaluation that does not rely on anecdotal evidence. Such
studies are urgently needed to justify the continued application of CTOs
in the UK and also worldwide^1,30,31^ within mental health systems that
are continually under resource pressures.

It may also be helpful to look at how other countries, which have or do
not have a comparable legislation, deal with this subgroup of
non-adherent patients^23^ and indeed what other paths the UK could have
taken in 2007.

We believe also that there is an urgent need for greater transparency
over the resource costs associated with the system that has developed
over the past 7 years and a debate over how such sums of money are best
spent for the benefit of patients.

[^1]: **Reinhard Heun**, Professor of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy,
    Consultant Old Age & General Adult Psychiatrist, **Subodh Dave**,
    Consultant General Adult Psychiatrist, **Paul Rowlands**, Consultant
    General Adult Psychiatrist, at Derbyshire Healthcare NHS Foundation
    Trust, Derby, UK.
