---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** To gather information about psychiatric trainees\'
  use of different information sources and academic materials, a
  questionnaire was distributed at the London Deanery Annual Psychiatry
  Trainee Conference and the training programmes of two teaching trusts.

  **Results** Participants returned 202 out of a total of 300 completed
  questionnaires (67%). Websites were the most commonly accessed
  information source ahead of textbooks, abstracts and journals. Year of
  training correlated positively with journal use and negatively with
  textbook use. Year of training also correlated positively with
  frequency of reading three journals published by the Royal College of
  Psychiatrists and with specific reasons for consulting journals,
  namely to improve clinical practice and inform trainees\' own
  research.

  **Clinical implications** Respondents reported consulting websites
  more frequently than more traditional information sources but journals
  are still a widely used source of information for trainee clinicians.
  It is important that trainees continue to be equipped with skills to
  identify and access high-quality information at the point of clinical
  uncertainty.
author:
- Tom Walker-Tilley
- John Bainton
- Matthew Fernando
- Yimlun Wong
- Ba Ko
- James Warner
- Ramin NilforooshanCorrespondence to Ramin Nilforooshan
  (<ramin.nilforooshan@nhs.net>) [^1]
date: 2016-2
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
- 2Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust
- 3Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
title: "How psychiatric trainees keep up to date: survey of psychiatric
  trainees\\' use of journals and other information sources"
---

Publication of articles in peer-reviewed journals plays an important
part in disseminating research findings and advances in practice to
clinicians. The reading of such articles is one way in which doctors
maintain their General Medical Council (GMC)-mandated duty to keep their
knowledge and skills up to date.^1^ The importance of journals in
educating psychiatric trainees is recognised by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists. At core trainee level journal clubs form an assessed part
of the curriculum and critical appraisal of published research evidence
is assessed in the exams for College membership (MRCPsych).^2^ At higher
trainee level, self-directed learning from peer-reviewed journals as
well as library facilities that 'include a minimum of 10 psychiatric
journals as well as providing access to general medical journals' is
mandatory.^3^ However, academic journals are only one of many
information sources available to trainees, which include local and
national guidelines as well as a diverse range of material readily
available via internet resources such as Wikipedia. Modern medicine
emphasises evidence-based practice, therefore knowing what information
sources shape the knowledge of trainees and how they access this are
critical issues. Yet, while there has been some study of what consultant
psychiatrists read,^4^ there is a lack of similar work for training
grades. We undertook a questionnaire-based survey examining the use of
journals and other information sources by psychiatric trainees. We aimed
to obtain descriptive data and determine whether patterns of use are
related to stage of training.

# Method {#S1}

## Participants {#S2}

Questionnaires were distributed at the London Deanery Annual Psychiatry
Trainee Conference and the training programmes of a teaching trust in
inner London and another in an outer London county.

## Questionnaire {#S3}

The questionnaire was designed to be easily completed in less than 1
minute. This made it feasible to hand out and collect the questionnaire
immediately in person to maximise the response rate, rather than relying
on participants\' posting or emailing completed questionnaires. A panel
of educators and trainees drew up a list of psychiatric and general
medical journals from the UK and the USA, on the basis of impact factor
or trainee focus. The brevity of the questionnaire required that a small
number of representative journals be selected from the large number of
possibilities. The text of the questionnaire was written by T.R.W. and
then reviewed by R.N. and J.W. to assess clarity and ease of completion.

Questions 1 and 2 ask participants to rate the frequency with which they
consult different information sources, including academic journals and
online resources, to inform their clinical practice and research. Each
item requires the participant to tick a response ranging from 'never' to
'very frequently' with four intermediate options. Question 3 allows
participants a space to optionally list any other information sources
they use. The questionnaire also enquires about participants\' reasons
for consulting journals: question 4 asks to rate the frequency with
which trainees consulted journals for each of four specified reasons.
Question 5 asks for trainees\' aims when consulting academic journals.
It was included on the basis that reasons for consulting journals can
broadly be separated into two categories: sometimes a trainee may be
gathering evidence to answer a specific question but at other times to
improve their knowledge generally. The question offers five response
options ranging between two extreme options indicating only consulting
journals for one of these two reasons and three intermediate options.
Question 6 asks participants for their stage of training.

## Analysis {#S4}

Data from completed questionnaires were coded into a spreadsheet using a
scale of 1 ('never') to 6 ('very frequently') for questions 1, 2 and 4
and a scale of 1 ('always to answer specific clinical questions') to 5
('always to improve my knowledge generally') for question 5. Spearman
rank correlation coefficients between each of these ordinal responses
and year of training (from 1 to 6) were calculated to examine whether
advancement in training is associated with use of particular journals
and other information sources or particular reasons for consulting them.
Significance levels were corrected for multiple testing using the
Bonferroni method: raw *P*-values were multiplied by 15 to correct for
the 15 correlation coefficients calculated. Data were analysed using the
R version 3.02 for Linux (R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
Vienna, Austria; [www.R-project.org](www.R-project.org)). Free-text
responses to question 3 were also entered into the spreadsheet to enable
the counting of most common responses.

# Results {#S5}

Three hundred questionnaires were distributed and 202 (67%) completed
questionnaires returned. One hundred and thirty three of respondents
(66%) were core trainees (CT1--3) and the rest were higher trainees
(ST4--6). Figures [1](#F1){ref-type="fig"} and [2](#F2){ref-type="fig"}
summarise the frequency with which trainees report consulting different
journals and information sources. Spearman\'s rank correlation
coefficients of various outcomes compared with year of training are
shown in [Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}. We found relatively small but
significant correlations between year of training and sources of
information and reasons for retrieving that information.

![Trainees\' reported frequency of consulting different journals. Black
bars indicate modal responses.  
\*Now *BJPsych Bulletin*.  
\*\*Now *BJPsych Advances*.](46f1){#F1}

![Trainees\' reported frequency of using different information sources.
Black bars indicate modal responses.](47f2){#F2}

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Correlations between year of training and questionnaire responses
:::

|                                                                            | Spearman\'s ρ (d.f.=200) | *P* (Bonferroni^[a](#TFN1){ref-type="table-fn"}^) |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------:|
| Information sources^[b](#TFN2){ref-type="table-fn"}^                       |                          |                                                   |
|     Academic journals                                                      |                     0.21 |                       0.04                        |
|     Textbooks                                                              |                    −0.23 |                       0.02                        |
|     Online abstracts                                                       |                     0.20 |                       n.s.                        |
|     Websites                                                               |                    −0.09 |                       n.s.                        |
|                                                                            |                          |                                                   |
| Journals^[b](#TFN2){ref-type="table-fn"}^                                  |                          |                                                   |
|     *British Journal of Psychiatry*                                        |                     0.41 |                      \<0.001                      |
|     *BMJ*                                                                  |                     0.11 |                       n.s.                        |
|     *The Psychiatrist* [\*](#TFN5){ref-type="table-fn"}                    |                     0.34 |                      \<0.001                      |
|     *Advances in Psychiatric Treatment* [\*\*](#TFN6){ref-type="table-fn"} |                     0.31 |                      \<0.001                      |
|     *Lancet*                                                               |                     0.04 |                       n.s.                        |
|     *American Journal of Psychiatry*                                       |                     0.03 |                       n.s.                        |
|                                                                            |                          |                                                   |
| Reason for consulting journals^[b](#TFN2){ref-type="table-fn"}^            |                          |                                                   |
|     Help pass exams                                                        |                     0.05 |                       n.s.                        |
|     Improve clinical practice                                              |                     0.23 |                       0.01                        |
|     Inform my own research                                                 |                     0.26 |                       0.004                       |
|     Interest/enjoyment                                                     |                     0.04 |                       n.s.                        |
|                                                                            |                          |                                                   |
| Aim when consulting journals^[c](#TFN3){ref-type="table-fn"}^              |                          |                                                   |
|     specific clinical questions *v*. general knowledge                     |                    −0.11 |                       n.s.                        |

*P*-values have been multiplied by 15 to correct for the multiple
comparisons.

Correlations between year of training (1 to 6) and questionnaire
response coded from 1 'never' to 6 'very frequently'.

Correlations between year of training (1 to 6) and questionnaire
response coded from 1 'always to answer specific clinical questions' to
5 'always to improve my knowledge generally'.

n.s., not significant.

Now *BJPsych Bulletin*.

Now *BJPsych Advances*.
:::

One hundred and fifteen respondents entered a response to item 3. This
section allowed trainees to freely nominate other information sources
and demonstrated that senior colleagues (32%), followed by local
guidelines (26%), lectures (16%) and National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines (10%) were the most frequently used
information sources besides journals and websites.

# Discussion {#S6}

To our knowledge, this is the first study looking at attitudes of
psychiatric trainees towards sources of academic information and reading
journals. Our questionnaire gathered ratings for the frequency with
which trainees read six journals. The pattern of responses may reflect a
combination of how useful trainees find the different journals and their
availability. Subscription to the *BMJ* is included with membership of
the British Medical Association and likewise the *British Journal of
Psychiatry*, *BJPsych Bulletin* (formerly *The Psychiatrist*) and
*BJPsych Advances* (formerly *Advances in Psychiatric Treatment*) with
membership of the Royal College of Psychiatrists. The *American Journal
of Psychiatry* and *Lancet* (journals not included with professional
memberships commonly held by trainees) are least frequently read. In the
case of the *American Journal of Psychiatry* it may also be that
trainees seek information most relevant to practice in their own
country.

We found several significant correlations between year of training and
use of information sources. More advanced trainees consulted journals
more frequently and textbooks less frequently. This may be due to
advanced trainees requiring knowledge that is more specialised and
current than is found in textbooks. It could also reflect higher
trainees being more involved in research themselves or having more
confidence in reading journals due to the critical appraisal training
component of the MRCPsych examinations. More advanced trainees read the
*British Journal of Psychiatry*, *BJPsych Bulletin* and *BJPsych
Advances* more frequently. This could relate to both the increasing
relevance of these journals to staying informed about underpinning
science and current clinical practice as a trainee increases in
seniority, and their availability: a paper subscription to the *British
Journal of Psychiatry* and *BJPsych Bulletin* and online access to
*BJPsych Advances* are included with membership of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, a requirement for progression to higher training. There
was no significant correlation between training stage and frequency of
reading the *BMJ*, the *Lancet* or the *American Journal of Psychiatry*.
There was a significant correlation between years of training and how
often trainees consulted journals to improve clinical practice or inform
their own research. This may reflect more advanced trainees using
journals in a way more directed to a specific purpose. We acknowledge
that by presenting the data in that format we may miss a different
relationship between year of training and frequency of using journals.

Respondents reported consulting websites via internet search engines
with greater frequency (modal response 'very frequently') than more
traditional information sources such as textbooks and journals (modal
responses, respectively: 'frequently' and 'occasionally'). Reasons might
include the ubiquity of internet access and ease of searching for a
specific query. This finding is in line with a study which surveyed
specialist physicians, of whom 46% cited internet search engines as a
frequent source of information and a further 32% as an occasional
source.^5^ A majority of the physicians surveyed reported changing an
initial diagnosis on the basis of information from online report tools.
There is evidence that using Google to search for terms selected from a
patient\'s case record may assist physicians in making a correct
diagnosis and it is plausible that such searching could help develop
trainees\' skill at differential diagnosis.^6^

## Limitations {#S7}

Our study has some limitations. Examining in detail which online
resources psychiatric trainees are using and for what purpose was beyond
the scope of our survey. However, this clearly warrants further research
as the frequency with which trainees report using them suggests they may
have effects on trainees\' education and practice comparable with
textbooks and academic journals. Participants were trainees based in and
around London and it remains for larger-scale studies to be carried out
to see whether our findings generalise to trainees from other parts of
the UK.

Our survey shows that in the information age trainees make very frequent
use of websites as an information source. Journals are still widely
used, especially by more advanced trainees. It is important that
trainees continue to be equipped with skills to identify and access
high-quality information at the point of clinical uncertainty, and
appraise this research rather than rely just on guidelines. Future
training curricula and MRCPsych examinations should address and test
these skills.

[^1]: **Tom Walker-Tilley**, **John Bainton**, **Matthew Fernando**,
    **Yimlun Wong** and **Ba Ko** are specialty registrars in psychiatry
    in London, **James Warner** is a consultant/reader in older adults
    psychiatry and chair of the Faculty of the Psychiatry of Old Age at
    the Royal College of Psychiatrists, also in London and **Ramin
    Nilforooshan** is a consultant psychiatrist in older adult
    psychiatry with Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS Foundation Trust.
