---
author:
- Chris O\'Shea[^1]
date: 2016-2
title: "CBT for Mild to Moderate Depression and Anxiety: A Guide to
  Low-Intensity Interventions"
---

This highly accessible book is pitched at healthcare professionals in
primary and secondary care working with persons with anxiety and
depression, with the aim of introducing and promoting the theory and
practical applications of cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT). This
review coincided with my own supervised CBT case as part of my core
training, and I found the book a helpful guide for practically applying
cognitive and behavioural theoretical principles. Perhaps not
surprisingly for a book on CBT, each chapter has clearly structured
introductions, subheadings and summaries with recommended further
reading. The contents are logically laid out, with succinct sections
exploring initial assessment, problem identification, applying therapies
to specific conditions and maintaining recovery. The subsections
regarding session structure, goal-setting and maintenance models are
especially useful, along with a most helpful chapter on applying the
covered principles to difficulties with sleep. The book has a practical
flavour throughout, with appropriate use of case vignettes, online
materials to recommend to patients, and a wealth of resources within the
appendices.

Reassuringly, the book is very clear that its main goal is not to act as
a substitute for formal training or supervision, but rather to introduce
the reader to the ideas and means to be more psychologically minded in
one\'s practice. With this in mind, perhaps the main strength of the
book is its awareness of its own limitations; it clearly signposts to
further reading where appropriate, and emphasises the importance of
supervision, and indeed how to optimise it.

In pitching to such a wide range of practitioners there may be some
aspects of the book which some will find more relevant than others.
Nonetheless, I feel the authors have produced a valuable guide to
exploring the delivery of low-intensity CBT for depression/anxiety at a
time when awareness of the importance of these therapies is increasing
beyond psychiatric practice. Given this, I would recommend it as an
introductory reference text.

[^1]: **Chris O\'Shea** is a core psychiatry trainee in South East
    Scotland, UK, email: <chris.o'shea@nhs.net>
