---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** To establish an initial conceptualisation of how
  psychiatrists understand and use formulation within adult psychiatry
  practice. Twelve psychiatrists took part in semi-structured
  interviews. Transcripts were analysed using a constructivist grounded
  theory methodology.

  **Results** Formulation was conceptualised as an addition to
  diagnosis, triggered by risk, complexity and a need for an enhanced
  understanding. Participants valued collaborative formulation with
  psychologists. Multiple contextual factors were perceived to either
  facilitate or inhibit the process. Barriers to formulation led to a
  disjointed way of working.

  **Clinical implications** Findings contribute to an understanding of
  formulation within psychiatry training and practice.
author:
- Roxanna Mohtashemi
- John Stevens
- Paul G. Jackson
- Stephen WeatherheadCorrespondence to Roxanna Mohtashemi
  (<roxannamohtashemi@nhs.net>) [^1]
date: 2016-8
institute:
- 1Lancashire Care NHS Foundation Trust and Lancaster University
- 2Mersey Care NHS Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
title: "Psychiatrists\\' understanding and use of psychological
  formulation: a qualitative exploration^[†](#fn1){ref-type=\"fn\"}^"
---

Psychiatrists\' training criteria require them to demonstrate 'the
ability to construct formulations of patients' problems that include
appropriate differential diagnoses\'^1^ and a 'careful clinical history
and concise summary of the social, psychological and biological factors
that may have contributed to developing a given "mental disorder"'.^2^
Despite such guidance, a survey asking psychiatrists to list what should
be included in a diagnostic formulation revealed a lack of consensus
among participants.^3^ A similar finding was reported in a survey for
examiners of the Membership of the Royal College of Psychiatrists
(MRCPsych) clinical exams.^4^ However, these studies are now dated and
there have been no similar studies published since that may clarify
whether there is still a lack of consensus on what a formulation should
comprise and whether a psychological understanding is used at all. This
has become particularly relevant given recent debates on the relative
utility of psychiatric diagnosis versus psychological formulation,^5^
with the latter defined as 'a hypothesis about a person\'s difficulties,
which links theory with practice and guides the intervention'.^6^ The
formulation should be based on psychological principles and be tentative
and open to revision.^6^

Individual case formulations are traditionally incorporated in some form
into the majority of psychotherapeutic modalities^7--9^ and developed as
a 'recursive process of suggestion, discussion, reflection, feedback and
revision' during therapy.^10^ Research into the impact of formulation
during therapy suggests that it may increase levels of hope and
understanding in patients.^11,12^ Additional research into the use of
formulation is warranted, particularly given the relative lack of
participation representation from psychiatrists within empirical studies
focused on team-based formulation in mental health settings.^13--15^

# Rationale for the current study {#S1}

Existing research does not offer an understanding of how psychiatrists
specifically understand formulation and whether they value team
formulation and/or consultation with psychologists to develop a
psychological understanding of their patients\' difficulties. To enhance
clinical practice for both staff and patients it is necessary to have a
clear understanding of what is understood by the concept of formulation
and how it is used. This is in keeping with recommendations to continue
to share a dialogue with other disciplines within the field of mental
health practice.^6^

# Method {#S2}

A constructivist grounded theory approach^16^ was adopted to explore
three questions: How do psychiatrists understand formulation?How do
psychiatrists use formulation in their everyday practice?Do
psychiatrists value the process of formulation with psychologists and/or
in a team? Ethical approval was obtained from Lancaster University
Research Ethics Committee and National Health Service (NHS) research and
development approval was obtained from the relevant NHS trust prior to
conducting the research. Twelve participants working in different
services across four NHS trusts were recruited. All participants had
experience of formulation within adult services. They were aged between
33 and 67 years and ethnicity was diverse. All participants chose a
pseudonym to ensure anonymity. Data were collected via one-to-one
semi-structured interviews using an interview schedule developed with
the support of the psychiatrist supervising the project. All interviews
were audio recorded.

Analysis was informed by constructivist grounded theory, acknowledging
'truth' as socially constructed through language and social
interactions.^16^ Data were analysed inductively, beginning with
line-by-line coding, through to constant comparison of developing codes
and concluding with multi-level relational analysis of emergent
codes.^17^ Due to the pragmatic nature of carrying out inductive
research as part of a time-limited professional doctorate, 'theoretical
sufficiency' and related sampling strategies^18^ rather than
'saturation' were established as an initial conceptualisation of
participants\' experiences of the research topic. 'Sufficiency' was
considered when conceptual categories did not require revision in light
of fresh data. This is in contrast to 'data saturation', which is
achieved when interviews no longer offer new insights.^19^

## Reflexivity {#S3}

It was important to remain reflexive^19^ throughout the research process
in order to be aware of possible biases towards the data and emerging
theory. Regular supervision provided by an experienced academic
clinician facilitated reflection throughout, from conceptualisation to
completion. The researcher also discussed the emerging theory and
diagrammatic representation with an additional research tutor who was
well versed in grounded theory, which enabled the identification of gaps
and informed the interview schedule for the final three interviews, for
example finding out more about the dichotomy between using formulation
and not needing formulation.

# Results {#S4}

The analysis identified 111 focused codes which were grouped and
re-grouped into 4 conceptual categories of: (1) conceptualising
formulation; (2) singing off the same hymn sheet; (3) barriers to
formulation; and (4) making a Frankenstein\'s monster. These are
presented in narrative form below, together with supporting quotes taken
from the original data. A diagrammatic representation of the findings
can be seen in [Fig. 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}.

![Model representing psychiatrists\' understanding and use of
psychological formulation.](215f1){#F1}

## Conceptualising formulation {#S5}

Participants\' understanding of formulation was described as a
developmental process, contingent on psychiatry training and clinical
practice. Diagnosis was noted to be the foundation of their role,
prioritised alongside medication. A psychological understanding was not
always perceived as necessary; patients\' difficulties were sometimes
understood to be purely biological in nature: 'if someone is bipolar,
it\'s bipolar, you know they\'re manic, you don\'t need to \[formulate\]
... you do \[a\] diagnosis' (Stephanie). Dave explained how individual
differences contributed to whether or not psychiatrists used
formulation: "'I think it depends on the psychiatric background of the
person ... I have an analytical background, so it\'s much more easy for
me to do the formulation but if you ask me ... whether it\'s being done
regularly by all the consultants, or medics, I would say unlikely.'"
Overall, diagnosis and medication were the main foci of participants\'
perceived roles and a psychological understanding was not always
considered necessary.

Formulation was described as a heuristic device to enhance
understanding, which led to a number of different outcomes including the
offering of hope, informing reports, improving medication concordance,
signposting to treatment and management of care. A diagnosis was not
perceived to be sufficient in this respect, as Jack described: "'I might
see a patient who was obsessional in nature ... I can give them a DSM
diagnosis ... but actually I\'d quite like to know where has that
\[sic\] come from ... that helps me understand the behaviour, as it does
in my opinion the patient. Because giving the patient a label and a
diagnosis is all very well, but helping them understand where it\'s come
from is, I think, that\'s part of the hope bit.'"

Complexity, a high level of risk and patients who accessed services
frequently were perceived as reasons by participants to warrant either
referral to psychology or consultation with psychologists. For example,
patients within Stephanie\'s service who self-harmed, as well as those
who were 'in and out of hospital', were prioritised for psychological
support. This related to Jack\'s and Rob\'s observation of having more
psychology presence in forensic services, where there was a greater
emphasis on risk.

## Singing off the same hymn sheet {#S6}

Some participants described entering a process of creating a unified
understanding between psychologists and psychiatrists, resulting in the
successful integration of different epistemological positions. This
process was named by Jack as 'singing off the same hymn sheet' and
dependent on a number of contextual factors.

Facilitating contextual factors included availability of psychologists,
positive working relationships and an expressed individual interest in
psychology by participants. A positive relationship with psychologists
available not just within the service, but with those who were in close
physical proximity and available to consult with when needed was an
important requirement for being able to enter into a process of
integration: "' ... the conversations with her \[the psychologist\],
just kind of developed into thinking a bit more ... we had an
interesting meeting with him \[the patient\], me and the psychologist
and the nursing staff and then afterwards we were able to have a ten
minute conversation, the psychologist and I, about what we felt we got
out of that' (Jane)."

A joint understanding enabled the difficult dynamics between staff and
patient to be explored with the staff team. Formulation was also used as
a language to communicate with team members, professionals outside the
service and patients themselves: 'I had to get forensic commissioners on
board ... and speak to forensic colleagues ... being able to take it
back to a basic formulation really helped' (Jane).

Psychologists were described as playing a key role as part of the team
process: "'We use it with the psychology team ... we do a formulation at
the end to bring all that information together and say, well, where is
this person likely to be going on their psychological journey and how
can we prevent things from happening or understand why they\'re
happening. And that informs the multidisciplinary team' (Jack)."
Participants expressed a desire to see an increase in psychologists
training nursing staff in basic formulation skills. Rebecca emphasised
the need to 'maximise the effects of individual therapy' by equipping
care coordinators with psychological formulation and intervention
skills: 'I think for me whats more important is to actually build skills
within the team so that practitioners would be able to have some basic
skills around formulation' (Rebecca). All but one of the participants
felt it was a misuse of resources for psychologists to spend the
majority of their time delivering therapy to a relatively small number
of individuals, rather than consulting with the team.

## Barriers to formulation {#S7}

Participants\' understanding and use of formulation was perceived to be
dependent on the wider system. This was reflected in interviews where a
large amount of time was spent talking about different contexts, for
example the politics surrounding psychiatry and limitations within NHS
services. Participants perceived themselves to be faced with multiple
barriers that affected their ability to formulate and think
reflectively.

The allocation of 15 min for clinical appointments was described as
insufficient to be able to use formulation directly with the patient,
resulting in a 'robotic' and risk-focused approach (Dalglish). Perhaps
because of a lack of time, participants spoke more about formulation
being used to enhance their own understanding rather than directly
enhancing the patient\'s understanding. Participants described being
under immense pressure to make quick decisions within their roles, which
did not allow for formulating or reflective practice. Anita noted 'we
don\'t think; we just do\', while Dave commented: 'they say you have to
do reflective practice ... we don\'t have the time'.

In cases where a patient was admitted to a ward on a short-term basis,
participants thought the time taken to create a formulation was longer
than the patient admission length. Jane described the process in a
psychiatric intensive care unit (PICU): 'you\'re trying to gather
information from a variety of sources with someone you\'ve not met
before, who might not be with you for more than a few weeks so that
takes a lot of time'.

Some participants conceived a pressure to conform to the medical model,
needing to use diagnosis as a priority, to provide medication and
classification. This pressure came from multiple stakeholders, from the
patient to the general practitioner (GP): 'Some people really want to be
medicalised' (Rob) and 'The GP wants more a medical model. He just wants
a number' (Vivek).

Psychology was seen by some participants as a threat or attack to the
profession of psychiatry, with some psychologists being described as
being 'anti-psychiatry'. This was a barrier within the workplace as
psychologists perceived as anti-psychiatry were thought to behave in a
defensive way in their interactions with psychiatrists.

Participants described professional rivalry causing psychiatrists to
revert to a dominantly biological understanding of distress: "' ...
there\'s \[sic\] some people who are reacting against that \[challenging
diagnosis\] who are seeking to define what they do and in some ways
narrow their understanding of a reductionist model to a purely
biological, chemical based model' (Rob)." Overall, the majority of
participants perceived professional rivalry as unhelpful and wanted to
see a move towards a process of acceptance and integration of
psychologists and psychiatrists.

## Making a Frankenstein\'s monster {#S8}

The consequences of not being able to develop a psychological
understanding owing to one or more of the barriers described above led
to a perceived lack of reflection. This resulted in participants
resorting to a number of alternative approaches.

There was a perceived overreliance on a medical understanding of
distress, as a consequence of limited resources. For example, Dave
reflected that 'you might end up prescribing medication because you
might have to come across as doing something. But you know that it\'s
\[the illness is\] psychological'. This was described by Michael as a
'top-down' pressure to conform to using medication, whereas Dave
perceived the pressure also coming from patients themselves: 'some of
the time the patient comes in and says well I can\'t be bothered to sit
down and talk so could you give me a pill'.

Zadok described a process of treating 'complexity' with multiple types
of medication with a consequence of not knowing what had worked. He
described trying to understand a patient presenting with information
perceived as incoherent: 'he\'s got some sort of impulsivity, \[I have\]
given him some SSRI\'s \[selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors\] for
that, and on the other hand he doesn\'t get on very well with his mother
and it doesn\'t really fit together'. Overall, the combination of a lack
of integrated understanding of a patient, overreliance on medication and
general lack of resources was described as creating a 'Frankenstein\'s
monster' (Zadok), where the monster represented the process of
disjointed practice by psychiatrists.

The approach maintained barriers to understanding and using
psychological formulation, resulting in patients being treated without a
holistic understanding, which meant that patients kept returning to the
service: 'It\'s a false economy in my view ... because you haven\'t done
the formulation you don\'t understand what\'s going on ... you just make
more work for yourself' (Rebecca).

Three participants described dissatisfaction at working in a pressurised
environment, which eventually led them to 'seek alternatives' such as
entering academia, working privately or moving into other specialisms.
For example, Michael talked about moving from adult services into child
services, as he perceived there to be less pressure to prescribe
medication and more time to think psychologically.

# Discussion {#S9}

Findings from this study offer an initial conceptualisation of a sample
of psychiatrists\' understanding and use of formulation, highlighting
how utilisation was dependent on experiences within both psychiatry
training and clinical practice. Previous research into professionals\'
views of formulation comprises small-scale evaluations of staff
experiences of team formulation,^14^ psychologists\' perceived roles in
creating and sharing formulations within multidisciplinary teams,^20^
and numerous opinion pieces promoting the use of formulation either
alongside^21^ or as a replacement to diagnosis.^10^

Despite conflicting theoretical perspectives between psychologists and
psychiatrists, participants reported an integration of these
understandings while 'singing off the same hymn sheet'. This involved
clearly defined roles, working collaboratively and having space to
'think' together to develop a shared understanding.

The more psychiatrists are exposed to the benefits of team formulation
and working collaboratively with psychologists, the more they integrate
that into their everyday practice. This mirrors findings from a survey
over 30 years ago where consultant psychiatrists were more likely to
incorporate a psychological understanding into a diagnostic formulation
than junior psychiatrists.^3^ Not only does this emphasise the benefits
of professional practice gained from multidisciplinary team-working, it
suggests a gap in psychiatry training for team formulation.

The lack of time, emphasis on risk and format of psychotherapy training
seemed to lead to formulation being viewed as a discrete 'event'^6^ or
one-off activity which may have been perceived by some participants as
potentially lengthy and an 'inessential luxury'. However, psychological
formulation is arguably a more holistic and longitudinal process, which
could be considered an intervention in itself.

## Clinical implications {#S10}

There is a need for the Royal College of Psychiatrists to recognise the
role of psychologists in promoting psychological thinking across
teams.^21^ It may be beneficial to reconsider how formulation is
conceptualised to psychiatry trainees, perhaps incorporating
psychological ways of thinking that are outside of the traditional
one-to-one psychotherapy format. Teaching from psychologists alongside
psychiatrists during training for both disciplines may cultivate an
integrated way of working from the outset, facilitating
cross-disciplinary working in clinical practice.^22^

Psychiatrists should have access to supported and reflective practice
throughout their continued development.^1^ The process of team
formulation, facilitated by a psychologist, offers a 'thinking space'
for staff teams to reflect and formulate. This is in keeping with
guidelines promoting psychologists to integrate their work into teams
while maintaining their 'unique identity and contribution (e.g. offering
a constructive counter-balance to the 'medical model').^23(p.3)^ Given
the indicated barriers to collaborative formulation, it may be more
appropriate for psychologists to work informally, supporting the team
and 'chipping in' with psychological thinking.^20^ While acknowledging
no simple solution, examples of initiatives of positive practice are
outlined in the British Psychological Society document *Working
Psychologically in Teams*.^23^

## Limitations {#S11}

It is acknowledged that the researcher\'s background in clinical
psychology, where the context is paramount to understanding people\'s
difficulties, will have influenced the focus of the data on context and
on formulation with psychologists. In response, the researcher used a
number of different strategies to maintain neutrality, as discussed in
Method. There may also have been some bias in that participants who
responded to the invitation to participate in the study may have felt
more strongly about the research topic than the profession in general.
Indeed, many expressed a special interest in psychology, while others
seemed to have strong opinions on the debate around formulation and
diagnosis.

Findings cannot be wholly generalised to other settings, although the
developed model did suggest 'internal consistency'^24(p.91)^ owing to
interaction of codes between conceptual categories. This indicates
robustness of the model and potential to transfer the findings to
psychiatrists working in similar settings, which is worth exploring in
future research.

## Future research {#S12}

Additional research is necessary to identify whether the findings from
this study can be generalized to other settings such as primary care.
Research may seek to clarify whether team formulation is a
cost-effective endeavour, focusing on outcomes such as recovery or
reduced use of medication.^25^ Furthermore, research focusing on whether
formulation enhances the doctor-patient relationship may or may not
highlight the need to think psychologically within time-limited
appointments.

The use of formulation is triggered by risk or complexity and its goal
is to enhance understanding. Contextual factors may influence the
possibility for psychiatrists using formulation during their clinics and
as part of a multidisciplinary team.

It is hoped our findings will contribute to a clearer definition of
formulation within psychiatry training and practice. The need to
maintain an open dialogue across disciplines is paramount in creating a
holistic and integrated health service provision.

R.M. thanks Lucy Johnstone for sharing her ideas on the research topic
and for feedback on the final draft of this paper.

[^1]: **Roxanna Mohtashemi**, clinical psychologist, Lancashire Care NHS
    Foundation Trust and Lancaster University; **John Stevens**,
    consultant psychiatrist (early intervention in psychosis) and **Paul
    Geoffrey Jackson**, clinical psychologist, Mersey Care NHS Trust.
    **Stephen Weatherhead**, clinical tutor, Lancashire Care NHS
    Foundation Trust and Lancaster University.
