---
abstract: |
  This is a brief exploration of the ethical issues raised for
  psychiatrists, and for universities, schools and wider society, by the
  demand that they attend mandatory training as part of the UK
  government\'s Prevent counter-terrorism strategy. The silence on this
  matter to date on the part of the General Medical Council, medical
  Royal Colleges, and the British Medical Association is a failure of
  ethical leadership. There is also a civil liberties issue, reminiscent
  of the McCarthyism of 1950s USA. We should refuse to attend.
author:
- Derek SummerfieldCorrespondence to Derek Summerfield
  (<derek.summerfield@slam.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-4
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
title: Mandating doctors to attend counter-terrorism workshops is
  medically unethical
---

I want to raise a matter of immediate ethical import for doctors, one
which does not seem to have been debated in medical journals. My
National Health Service (NHS) trust told us recently that it is
mandatory for all staff to attend a Workshop to Raise Awareness of
Prevent, part of the government\'s so-called Prevent counter-terrorism
strategy. This is so across the whole NHS, and tens of thousands have
apparently attended already. The workshops intend to offer guidance on
how to identify people who may be vulnerable to 'radicalisation' and on
how to refer them on. This is a corrosion of the ethics of the
doctor-patient relationship, and is to prime us for an activity which is
a duplicitous deviation from the medical assessment, advice and
treatment that has brought the patient to us. It is basically a form of
spying and of scapegoating, and essentially about Muslim patients. An
example provided by a psychiatrist on the Critical Psychiatry Network
recently was of a young Muslim man with a mild depressive picture who
was referred by a general practitioner (GP) for a psychiatric assessment
to explore his views because he stated that he got angry watching events
in Syria on television.

It is remarkable that the British Medical Association (BMA), the medical
Royal Colleges and above all the General Medical Council (GMC) have to
my knowledge not said a word. When I contacted the GMC to confirm this,
I was told that the GMC had no formal position on Prevent. But they
forwarded to me the Department of Health guidance on the duty of
healthcare professionals *via-à-vis* Prevent, so presumably they are
endorsing it.^1^ For a statutory body whose raison d\'être is medical
ethics, this is a dereliction of its core duty.

Teachers, university lecturers and others in the public sector are also
being compelled to do the same thing. For civil liberties this is an
ominous development within UK society, of a piece with the era of
McCarthyism in the USA of the 1950s. It will end as badly as that era
ended. The advocacy organisation CAGE has described such policies as
consistent with a slide towards a 'cradle to grave police state'.^2^ In
July 2015 CAGE led and organised a joint statement opposing the Prevent
strategy, with a letter published in The Independent newspaper signed by
over 200 academics, activists, legal and medical professionals.^3^ The
guidance given in the UK Prevent programme sets out a duty to prevent
individuals from being drawn into terrorism, but clarifies that this
means not only violent extremism but also non-violent extremism (i.e.
thought and speech crimes). It is interesting that at least on paper the
US Department of Homeland Security does not go so far, describing their
programme as one which 'focusses not on radical thought or speech but
instead on preventing violent attacks'.^4^ Psychiatrists may be viewed
as having particular access to a person\'s intimate thoughts and
perceptions, so there is a particular challenge here for our specialty.

In my view, the Prevent workshops raise a significant medical ethical
issue for doctors and should be a matter for the GMC to address. I have
been canvassing psychiatric trainees and consultants in my trust. Many
have expressed unease and are responsive to the idea that they would say
no to these workshops.

Last, speaking as a citizen rather than just as a doctor, we need to
understand how this situation has arisen, and why the security of the UK
population might be better protected if the UK government reviewed their
policies and alliances in the Middle East. A poll commissioned by *The
Independent* found that 64% of people believed that Britain would be
safer from a terrorist attack if the country had not been involved in
conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan.^5^ This region has over decades had
to endure the unbridled application of Western power undeterred by the
human and social destruction and dislocation this has caused. The rights
and felt priorities of the civilian populations of the region, even in
their millions, have weighed little on the scales by which the USA, the
UK and Israel in particular have measured their interests. We know from
multiple sources that well over 1 million people would be alive today if
'we' had not illegally invaded Iraq in 2003.^6^ What do these deaths
weigh?

[^1]: **Derek Summerfield** is Consultant Psychiatrist, South London and
    Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, and Honorary Senior Lecturer,
    Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King\'s
    College London, UK.
