---
abstract: |
  Recently, the term 'locked rehabilitation' has spread from
  commissioning to now also clinical parlance. This is without any clear
  service description or category of patient which this service manages.
  Differences between this new term and an established definition of low
  secure services are examined and reasons for the introduction of this
  terminology are discussed. This is contextualised within service
  development, payment by results and measures of quality. It is argued
  that there is a need for ongoing measurements of types of patients
  admitted to, and treatments offered by, this 'new' ward, as well as
  those within psychiatric intensive and low secure care services.
author:
- Stephen Dye
- Lucy Smyth
- Stephen PereiraCorrespondence to Stephen Dye
  (<stephen.dye@nsft.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-2
institute:
- 1Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust, Ipswich
- 2University College London
- 3Keats House, London
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
title: "'Locked rehabilitation': a need for clarification"
---

Since Dominic Beer\'s thoughtful editorial in *BJPsych Bulletin*
outlining the state of psychiatric intensive care and low secure
services in the UK,^1^ a significant change has occurred. As described
by Dix^2^ and Chukwuma,^3^ over the past few years a new service type of
'locked rehabilitation' has emerged within the UK. However, services
that these units provide have not yet been defined. Whereas they are
'standalone units at the heart of communities',^2^ much of their
clinical focus overlaps with that of low secure units (LSUs).
Chukwuma^3^ suggests that although 'locked rehabilitation units' and
LSUs differ slightly in areas of physical security, locked
rehabilitation units tend to follow guidance set out by the Department
of Health in the national minimum standards (NMS) for low secure
services.^4^ Furthermore, it is suggested that 'locked rehabilitation
units' also share the treatment objectives and provide similar treatment
and care to LSUs, in that they aim to provide long-term,
multidisciplinary, recovery-oriented treatment and rehabilitation.

# 'Locked rehabilitation' and low secure units: do they differ? {#S1}

So what are the differences between the two services? Is locked
rehabilitation the new low secure care? Are LSUs really forensic locked
rehabilitation units? Do they both treat similar types of patient and
fulfil the same role in different guises? Essentially, these questions
emanate from a single question: on what basis was this 'new' service
named and developed?

## Service development {#S2}

In answering this question it may be useful to examine some of the
historical development of low secure care as well as psychiatric
intensive care units (PICUs) in the UK. The impetus for centrally funded
medium secure forensic services came from the Butler report.^5^ Although
this spurred development of regional secure units, it did not take into
account the provision of care for general psychiatric in-patients who
needed secure care for short periods of time before returning to an open
setting. This was addressed by the Reed report when the concept of what
we recognise as psychiatric intensive care was first acknowledged.^6^
The Reed report also stated that 'although more medium secure provision
is required, there also needs to be a range of facilities between this
and open local settings in order to meet the needs of the population'.
This gave rise to what came to be defined as low secure provision within
national standards.^4^

Despite definitions of PICUs and LSUs laid out in the Department of
Health guidance,^4^ ambiguity remained concerning the role of low secure
services. A report from the Centre for Mental Health in 2011 stated that
'low secure is more of a concept than a title for a discrete type of
provision'.^7^ It recommended reviewing the roles of low secure and
step-down care to inform commissioning decisions and systems. A big
difference between the development of regional medium secure services
and that of local PICUs and LSUs was that although the former were
centrally funded, it was up to each local area to respond to the Reed
report (and associated cost implications) how it saw fit. This led to a
variety of service types arising that were not appropriately defined
with adequate criteria. This assortment of services aimed to meet the
needs of patients and provide the full 'range of facilities' demanded by
the Butler report. Thus, each area defined low secure care differently
and attempted to provide a different service that was believed to meet
the needs of patients within their region. Perhaps, over time, these
services progressed to define the types of patients treated within them,
rather than meeting any changing needs of the local population.
Non-statutory providers also recognised an unmet service need and
responded with services that would meet this need. Thus, it is not
surprising that confusion arose: from different types of patients in
different but appropriate kinds of services, different types of patients
in inappropriate services, the same type of patient being managed in
different modes of service, or even the same form of service managing
different patient types! So a variety of estates exist within 'low
secure' that attempt to cover all bases with regard to differing needs,
but with little clarity, let alone specificity.

## Funding as the source of new labelling? {#S3}

Yet again, history seems to be repeating itself: a key difference
between LSUs and locked rehabilitation relates to how these services are
funded. Whereas LSUs are currently commissioned more centrally by NHS
England as part of the forensic pathway, locked rehabilitation units
appear to be locally commissioned as part of the acute care pathway.^3^
Judging by its title, *National Minimum Standards for General Adult
Services in Psychiatric Intensive Care Units (PICU) and Low Secure
Environments*,^4^ the clinical guidance published in 2002 was aimed at
locally commissioned general adult services. So, locked rehabilitation
may be what general adult psychiatrists have always known and recognised
as low secure care. It is possible that this service split has only
developed following funding centralisation and 'forensification' of some
established units which have taken on the mantle of more 'modern' low
secure care. It may be that commissioning arrangements will be reviewed
in the near future and funding streams become clearer. Perhaps it is
time for a clinical redefinition of low secure care as, by proactively
addressing sociopolitical challenges and changes within the UK health
service, it may actually be that some previously established LSUs have
developed unknowingly as the 'new kids on the block' (to quote Dix^2^)
and that locked rehabilitation is meeting some of the service and
patient needs following these changes.

# Endorsing change -- and learning from it {#S4}

If history is repeating itself, what can be learnt from it and do we
need to modify our approach to changing services? A major change in
funding of mental health services is the introduction of a payment by
results (PbR) system that is based on clusters of patients progressing
along pathways that are set by commissioners and providers. These
patient clusters are supposedly derived from patient need as opposed to
diagnosis and are created by a clustering tool based on the Health of
the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS).^8^ Difficulties have been outlined
with this approach and an alternative has been suggested within a PICU
environment -- identifying patient needs\' types and using lean
management techniques to refine pathways.^9^ This approach can also be
applied to patients within low security/locked rehabilitation. The
recently updated minimum standards for psychiatric intensive care has
proposed that there are three types of patient within low security:
those who are descending mental health security, those who are
transferred from the criminal justice service (for lower-level offences)
and those who present significant challenge to other in-patient settings
with a risk profile similar to the other two groups.^10^ The commonality
for all three groups is that the active risk assessment on admission is
no more than potential for actual bodily harm or similar offences.

Despite this commonality, the needs of these types of patient are
different and pathways they follow may be better described and defined
by patient need-typing as opposed to PbR-clustering. Provision of care
packages based on commonalities of clusters for individuals who have
varied pathways through services (dependent on need for different care)
is a convoluted and imprecise manner of meeting care needs. Although
there may be commonality in the active risk on admission, this may be
managed in differing ways for different types of patients dependent on
their varying needs. Identification and use of patient types and
development of care packages could well give a clue as to the
distinction between locked rehabilitation and low secure services and
how they could meet needs of particular patient types. Perhaps the
'modern' low secure care is associated with a different patient type
than the as yet undefined locked rehabilitation? This may also support
Dix\'s prediction that differences in cost between LSUs and locked
rehabilitation units may account for changes in LSU provision (an
average night\'s accommodation and treatment in an LSU costs £500,
compared with £300 for accommodation and treatment in a locked
rehabilitation unit).^2^

## Finally, evidence-based care {#S5}

Terminology is interesting but how does that help our patients? To
answer this we need evidence. Historically, there have been two major
national surveys of PICUs/LSUs. The first, by Beer *et al*,^11^
identified 110 PICUs in the UK. The results of this survey showed that
PICUs varied in many aspects of structure and function, including size,
level of security, admission of informal patients and length of patient
stay. Concerns regarding the lack of local and national guidance
relating to operational definitions of PICUs, low secure provision,
policies and guidelines were highlighted.^12^ The National Service
Framework also recognised the need for psychiatric intensive and low
secure care.^13^ Publication of national minimum standards that
separated PICUs and LSUs followed, giving some clinical operational
guidance which has recently been updated from a PICU perspective.^4,10^

Shortly after the publication of the initial standards, the most
comprehensive national survey of PICUs and LSUs in the UK was carried
out.^14,15^ This survey resulted in the development of a national
data-set for PICUs and LSUs, together with a more comprehensive
understanding of the different service provision and patient
characteristics within these units. A total of 307 units in the UK were
identified, 170 PICUs and 137 LSUs. The results of this survey indicated
that there were significant differences between PICUs and LSUs and
between patients treated in these units. It also identified ongoing
inconsistency in areas of operation and structure: PICUs offered a more
time-limited, medically oriented treatment, with a higher number of
qualified staff than LSUs. The average length of stay on a PICU was
found to be 27 days and over 90% of service provision was National
Health Service (NHS)-funded. The research was consistent with previous
studies of PICUs, which highlighted their role in offering time-limited
care for patients experiencing a severe and acute episode of mental
illness. LSUs were found to place more emphasis on long-term therapeutic
treatment and rehabilitation, and to provide a step down from higher
levels of security. This was illustrated by the longer length of stay
(on average 358 days), higher levels of psychology, social work and
occupational therapy input and fewer medical interventions. The survey
identified a link between LSUs and the independent sector as there was
more non-NHS service provision for LSUs than PICUs (28% *v.* 10%).

These surveys contributed to and highlighted separation of PICUs and
LSUs based on patient need. At present it appears that, perhaps driven
to an extent by funding arrangements, there is confusion in definitions
of low secure care. There has been development of a newly named service
without evidence that it meets a different patient need. Perhaps by
examining patient types, it may well be discovered that specific types
of patient need are treated or should be treated within specific
different services.

# A way forward {#S6}

The landscape of service provision within PICU and LSU has certainly
changed since the first publication of the NMS. Given the introduction
of a supposedly different service that has yet to be appropriately
defined, there is a need for further clarification of what is available
for different types of patient within this resource. Not only this, but
standards and form of service require assessment both for uniformity and
quality.

The Royal College of Psychiatrists\' accreditation scheme (AIMS) in
collaboration with the National Association of Psychiatric Intensive
Care and Low Secure Units (NAPICU) has developed AIMS-PICU.^16^ This is
a standards-based accreditation programme designed to improve the
quality of care in in-patient mental health wards. It has gone some way
to establishing measures of 'quality' within a PICU but not on a
national basis as data are owned by individual participating units. It
also uses service and environmental quality measures as opposed to
examining types of patient need and how this is met. The development of
these standards has been possible because of the robust definition of
psychiatric intensive care. This in itself was led by clarity of type of
service need for defined varieties of patient need which was discovered
through research. Without evidence and specificity of patient need,
services cannot be clearly defined or measured. Although an attempt has
been made to identify need using the PbR framework, this feels more like
the tail wagging the dog. Given the current lack of definition for a
'new' type of service, the time has surely come for research to be
re-visited.

Development of a framework of guidance and quality standards for secure
services and specific care packages with specified outcomes for care has
been recommended in the past.^7^ In our opinion, following the
publication of revised PICU standards, a specific rolling arrangement of
measurements of clinical provision for different types of patients
within PICU, LSU and locked rehabilitation is now desperately needed.
This will allow for benchmarking both locally and nationally. If this is
adopted, initially the definition of locked rehabilitation and the type
of patients served may become clearer. As a rolling venture that is
repeated at regular intervals (e.g. every 12--18 months), this would
also go some way to identifying and predicting unmet need and thus to
developing more appropriate services. In this way, as well as providing
some clarification, any further changes may be founded on clinical
evidence as opposed to being politically or financially motivated. Thus,
as well as clarity, explicit types of patient need will define
specificity of services and then quality can be developed and measured
appropriately.

[^1]: **Stephen Dye** is a consultant psychiatrist with Norfolk and
    Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust, Ipswich, UK, **Lucy Smyth** is a
    trainee clinical psychologist at University College London, and
    **Stephen Pereira** is a consultant psychiatrist in private practice
    in London.
