---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** To systematically review the prevalence and
  associated factors of burnout and stress-related psychiatric disorders
  among UK doctors. An extensive search was conducted of PubMed,
  EBSCOhost and British medical journals for studies published over a
  20-year span measuring the prevalence of psychiatric morbidity (using
  the General Health Questionnaire) and burnout (using the Maslach
  Burnout Inventory).

  **Results** Prevalence of psychiatric morbidity ranged from 17 to 52%.
  Burnout scores for emotional exhaustion ranged from 31 to 54.3%,
  depersonalisation 17.4 to 44.5% and low personal accomplishment 6 to
  39.6%. General practitioners and consultants had the highest scores.
  Factors significantly associated with increase in the prevalence of
  burnout and psychiatric morbidity include low job satisfaction,
  overload, increased hours worked and neuroticism.

  **Clinical implications** The results indicate a worryingly high rate
  of burnout and psychiatric morbidity among UK doctors, which could
  have a huge negative impact on healthcare provision in general.
  Factors at personal and organisational levels contribute to burnout
  and psychiatric morbidity, and so efforts made to counter these
  problems should target both levels.
author:
- Udemezue O. ImoCorrespondence to Udemezue O. Imo (<uimo@nhs.net>) [^1]
date: 2017-8
institute:
- 1Royal Oldham Hospital, Oldham, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
- id: R37
- id: R38
- id: R39
- id: R40
- id: R41
- id: R42
- id: R43
- id: R44
- id: R45
- id: R46
- id: R47
- id: R48
- id: R49
- id: R50
- id: R51
- id: R52
- id: R53
- id: R54
- id: R55
- id: R56
- id: R57
- id: R58
- id: R59
- id: R60
- id: R61
- id: R62
- id: R63
- id: R64
- id: R65
- id: R66
- id: R67
- id: R68
- id: R69
- id: R70
- id: R71
- id: R72
- id: R73
title: "Burnout and psychiatric morbidity among doctors in the UK: a
  systematic literature review of prevalence and associated factors"
---

-   [Method](#S1){#toc-S1}
    -   [Search strategies](#S2){#toc-S2}
    -   [Inclusion criteria](#S3){#toc-S3}
    -   [The questionnaires](#S4){#toc-S4}
    -   [Data extraction](#S5){#toc-S5}
-   [Results](#S6){#toc-S6}
    -   [Findings on prevalence](#S7){#toc-S7}
    -   [Findings on associated factors](#S8){#toc-S8}
    -   [Findings on the direct relationship between burnout and
        psychiatric morbidity](#S9){#toc-S9}
-   [Discussion](#S10){#toc-S10}
    -   [Limitations](#S11){#toc-S11}
    -   [Recommendations](#S12){#toc-S12}

Doctors have a legal duty broader than that of any other health
professional and therefore a responsibility to contribute to the
effective running of the organisation in which they work, and to its
future direction. ^[@R1]^ In an environment where their health and
well-being is not prioritised doctors sometimes become ill, manifesting
features of burnout and/or stress-related psychiatric disorders. Such
psychiatric morbidity, or 'caseness', is detected using self-reported
instruments such as the General Health Questionnaire (GHQ). ^[@R2]^
Doctors also experience 'burnout', which is defined as a syndrome of
exhaustion, cynicism and low professional efficacy. ^[@R3]^ Maslach *et
al* described burnout as a prolonged response to chronic emotional and
interpersonal stressors on the job, and stated: 'What started out as
important, meaningful, and challenging work becomes unpleasant,
unfulfilling, and meaningless. Energy turns into exhaustion, involvement
turns into cynicism, and efficacy turns into ineffectiveness'.

Increased prevalence of psychiatric morbidity and burnout has been
established in studies from different parts of the world. A study of
Italian physicians found an estimated prevalence of psychiatric
morbidity to be 25%, and prevalence of burnout on the emotional
exhaustion scale of the Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI) to be 38.7%.
^[@R5]^ Other studies have reviewed the factors associated with the
development and maintenance of psychiatric illness and burnout among
doctors. A survey of Australian doctors found that having medico-legal
issues, not taking a holiday in the previous year and working long hours
were all significantly associated with psychiatric morbidity. ^[@R6]^
Self-criticism as a medical student was significantly correlated with
psychological stress as a doctor in a cohort followed over 10 years by
Firth-Cozens. ^[@R7]^

Burnout among doctors can lead to self-reported suboptimal patient care,
^[@R8]^ and to major medical errors. ^[@R9]^ Psychiatric morbidity
increases the likelihood of retirement thoughts and retirement
preference. ^[@R10]^ Behavioural responses to burnout established in the
literature also include alcohol and drug misuse, physical withdrawal
from co-workers, increased absenteeism, arriving for work late and
leaving early, and employee turnover. ^[@R11]^ An extreme reaction to
stress can be suicide, even though the pathway to this is complex and
multifactorial. A UK survey of suicides between 1979 and 1983 ranked the
medical profession as 10th in the list of high-risk professions.
^[@R12]^

Mental ill health can be found within every workplace in every country.
In the UK the total cost to employers of mental health problems among
their staff is estimated at nearly £26 billion each year: £8.4 billion
from sickness absences and £15.1 billion from reduced productivity at
work. ^[@R13]^ The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE) found that promoting the mental well-being of employees can yield
economic benefits for the business or organisation, in terms of
increased commitment and job satisfaction, staff retention, improved
productivity and performance, and reduced staff absenteeism. ^[@R14]^
For the National Health Service (NHS) to reap the benefits described by
NICE, priority should be given to employee mental health. However, the
constant structural changes to the NHS in England have created
instability and lack of job security within the public health workforce.
^[@R15]^ The Health and Social Care Act of 2012 has placed doctors at
the centre of clinical commissioning groups in charge of shaping
services and made them responsible for £65 billion of the £95 billion
NHS commissioning budget. ^[@R16]^ This imposes on doctors, especially
general practitioners (GPs), a responsibility unlike any before,
^[@R17]^ one which their training has not prepared them for. The ability
to cope with the challenges of working in the NHS and the possibility of
stress and burnout were highlighted in the annual meeting of the British
Medical Association in 2013, ^[@R18]^ and are the focus of this review.

Numerous research papers document burnout and stress-related psychiatric
disorders in doctors worldwide, but none has presented the results in
the form of a systematic review showing the prevalence and associated
factors among UK doctors. The overall aim of this review was to redress
this by assessing the prevalence of burnout and psychiatric morbidity
among UK doctors working in different specialties, and to explore the
associated identified factors. The objectives were to review the
prevalence of the syndrome of burnout and psychiatric morbidity, to
explore the nature of the relationship between burnout and psychiatric
morbidity, and to identify other factors associated with the development
and/or perpetuation of those conditions.

# Method {#S1}

## Search strategies {#S2}

The words 'burnout' and 'doctors' were put into the search field of the
EBSCOhost website specifying the following databases: Academic Search
Complete, CINAHL Plus, PsycINFO and PsycARTICLES. Limiters activated
were: English language, human, apply related words, and a time limit of
January 1993 to December 2013. A total of 562 articles resulted from
this, reduced to 489 automatically after duplicates were removed; 28
articles were selected for further analysis, and out of these 9 remained
based on the study inclusion and exclusion criteria. Using the same
parameters but with the words 'psychiatric morbidity' AND 'doctors', a
total of 97 articles were generated, reduced to 77 after the removal of
duplicates, and from these only 1 was selected as new and appropriate.
Again using the same parameters but with the words 'stress' AND
'doctors' NOT 'nurses', 3560 articles came up, reduced to 2259 after
duplicates were removed; 23 new articles were reviewed in greater
detail, and from these 5 new and appropriate articles were selected.

An advanced search on PubMed with the words 'doctors' OR 'physicians'
AND 'stress', with a time limit of 1 January 1980 to 15 December 2013
and other limits (human, English language, clinical trial, journal
article, reviews, lectures) generated 5973 articles. After careful
analysis of the abstracts 28 new articles were identified for more
detailed review, and from these 10 were selected as new and appropriate.

Two searches within the group of British medical journals with the
phrases 'burnout and doctors' and 'doctors and stress' with the time
limit of January 1993 to December 2013 yielded two new and appropriate
papers.

A review of the reference lists of already-identified papers yielded
three relevant papers.

Altogether, this extensive search yielded 30 relevant papers which were
included in the units of analysis for this review ([Fig.
1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}).

![Flowchart of the study selection process.](198f1){#F1}

## Inclusion criteria {#S3}

Certain criteria had to be met before a study was included in the units
of analysis: it had to answer any of the research questions for the
measurement of the prevalence of psychiatric morbidity the study had to
have used any version of the GHQ, and for the prevalence of burnout
syndrome only the MBI was considered population group -- only medical
doctors in the UK irrespective of which organisation they work in
minimum sample size of 50 published between January 1993 and December
2013 published in the English language.

## The questionnaires {#S4}

The GHQ is a well-validated and widely used screening tool for the
detection of minor psychiatric disorders (psychiatric morbidity) in the
general population. ^[@R19]^ The GHQ-12 is self-administered and only
takes about 5min to complete. It enquires about the experience of
psychosocial and somatic symptoms in recent weeks. Each of the 12 items
is measured on a 4-point Likert scale. Studies validating the GHQ-12
against standardised psychiatric interviews indicate that a cut-off
score of 4 or above indicates a high probability that the individual
suffers from a clinically significant level of distress ('caseness' or
psychiatric morbidity).

The MBI is a 22-item self-report questionnaire, which is well recognised
and widely used to measure burnout in relation to occupational stress.
^[@R20]^ It has three subscales: personal accomplishment (measured by 8
items), depersonalisation (measured by 9 items) and emotional exhaustion
(measured by 5 items). Responses are rated for each item according to
frequency on a 7-point scale from 'never' to 'every day'. The total
score for each subscale is categorised 'low', 'average' or 'high'
according to predetermined cut-off scores, based on normative data from
a sample of American health professionals. A high degree of burnout is
indicated by high scores on the emotional exhaustion and
depersonalisation subscales and low scores on the personal
accomplishment subscale.

## Data extraction {#S5}

A simple paper data extraction tool was created in Microsoft Word, and
the tables from this have been used to portray the results in the
results section. Data were extracted by the author over the months of
November and December 2013.

# Results {#S6}

A total of 30 papers considered relevant and appropriate based on the
study inclusion and exclusion criteria were included in this review.
[Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"} summarises these papers.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

Units of analysis included in this review
:::

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Study                                Journal                   Running head                                                  Subspecialty/grade
  ------------------------------------ ------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------
  Sharma *et al* (2008) ^[@R21]^       *Psycho-Oncology*         Stress and burnout in colorectal and vascular surgical\       Surgery/consultants
                                                                 consultants                                                   

                                                                                                                               

  Ramirez *et al* (1996) ^[@R22]^      *Lancet*                  Mental health of hospital consultants: the effects of\        Surgery, gastro, oncology,\
                                                                 stress and                                                    radiology consultants

                                                                                                                               

  Wall *et al* (1997) ^[@R23]^         *British Journal*\        Minor psychiatric disorder in NHS trust staff:\               Non-specific
                                       *of Psychiatry*           occupational                                                  

                                                                                                                               

  Ramirez *et al* (1995) ^[@R24]^      *British Journal*\        Burnout and psychiatric disorder among cancer\                Oncology/consultants
                                       *of Cancer*               clinicians                                                    

                                                                                                                               

  Sharma *et al* (2007) ^[@R25]^       *Colorectal Disease*      Stress and burnout among colorectal surgeons and              Surgery/consultants

                                                                                                                               

  Kapur *et al* (1999) ^[@R26]^        *Family Practice*         Sources of job satisfaction and psychological\                GP, medical house officer
                                                                 distress in                                                   

                                                                                                                               

  Guthrie *et al* (1999) ^[@R27]^      *BJPsych Bulletin*        Sources of stress, psychological distress and burnout         Psychiatry/non-specific

                                                                                                                               

  Benbow & Jolley (2002) ^[@R28]^      *International*\          Burnout and stress amongst old age psychiatrists              Psychiatry/consultants
                                       *Journal of Geriatric*\                                                                 
                                       *Psychiatry*                                                                            

                                                                                                                               

  Orton *et al* (2012) ^[@R29]^        *BMJ Open*                Depersonalised doctors: a cross-sectional study of 564\       GP
                                                                 doctors                                                       

                                                                                                                               

  McManus *et al* (2002) ^[@R30]^      *Lancet*                  The causal links between stress and burnout in a\             Non-specific
                                                                 longitudinal study of UK                                      

                                                                                                                               

  Kirwan & Armstrong\                  *British Journal*\        Investigation of burnout in a sample of British general\      GP
  (1995) ^[@R31]^                      *of General Practice*     practitioners                                                 

                                                                                                                               

  Kapur *et al* (1998) ^[@R32]^        *BMJ*                     Psychological morbidity and job satisfaction in hospital\     Consultants/junior HO
                                                                 consultants                                                   

                                                                                                                               

  Coomber *et al* (2002) ^[@R33]^      *British Journal*\        Stress in UK intensive care unit doctors                      Intensive care/consultants
                                       *of Anaesthesia*                                                                        

                                                                                                                               

  Applet on *et al* (1998) ^[@R34]^    *British Journal*\        A survey of job satisfaction, sources of stress and\          GP
                                       *of General Practice*     psychological                                                 

                                                                                                                               

  Newbury-Birch & Kamali\              *Postgraduate Medical*\   Psychological stress, anxiety, depression, job satisfaction   Junior HO
  (2001) ^[@R35]^                      *Journal*                                                                               

                                                                                                                               

  Cartwright *et al* (2002) ^[@R36]^   *Journal of Clinical*\    Workload and stress in consultant medical microbiolo-\        Microbiology/virology\
                                       *Pathology*               gists                                                         consultants

                                                                                                                               

  Caplan (1994) ^[@R37]^               *BMJ*                     Stress, anxiety, and depression in hospital consultants,\     Consultants\
                                                                 general                                                       (non-specific), GP

                                                                                                                               

  Burbeck *et al* (2002) ^[@R38]^      *Emergency Medicine*\     Occupational stress in consultants in accident and\           Emergency medicine/\
                                       *Journal*                 emergency                                                     consultants

                                                                                                                               

  Soler *et al* (2008) ^[@R39]^        *Family Practice*         Burnout in European family doctors: the EGPRN study           GP

                                                                                                                               

  Bogg *et al* (2001) ^[@R40]^         *Medical Education*       Training, job demands and mental health of pre-\              Pre-registration HO
                                                                 registration                                                  

                                                                                                                               

  Upton *et al* (2012) ^[@R41]^        *Surgery*                 The experience of burnout across different surgical\          Surgery/consultants
                                                                 specialties                                                   

                                                                                                                               

  Sochos & Bowers (2012) ^[@R42]^      *The European Journal*\   Burnout, occupational stressors, and social support in\       Psychiatry, medicine/\
                                       *of Psychiatry*           psychiatric                                                   senior HO

                                                                                                                               

  McManus *et al* (2004) ^[@R43]^      *BMC Medicine*            Stress, burnout and doctors\' attitudes to work are\          Non-specific
                                                                 determined                                                    

                                                                                                                               

  Paice *et al* (2002) ^[@R44]^        *Medical Education*       Stressful incidents, stress and coping strategies in the\     Pre-registration HO
                                                                 pre-registration                                              

                                                                                                                               

  Tattersall *et al* (1999) ^[@R45]^   *Stress Medicine*         Stress and coping in hospital doctors                         Non-specific

                                                                                                                               

  McManus *et al* (2011) ^[@R46]^      *BMC Medicine*            Vocation and avocation: leisure activities correlate with\    Non-specific
                                                                 professional                                                  

                                                                                                                               

  Deary *et al* (1996) ^[@R47]^        *British Journal*\        Models of job-related stress and personal achievement\        Consultants
                                       *of Psychology*           among                                                         

                                                                                                                               

  Thompson *et al* (2009) ^[@R48]^     *The Clinical Teacher*    Contemporary experience of stress in UK foundation\           Foundation doctors
                                                                 doctors                                                       

                                                                                                                               

  Berman *et al* (2007) ^[@R49]^       *Clinical Medicine*       Occupational stress in palliative medicine, medical\          Oncology and palliative\
                                                                 oncology                                                      medicine registrars

                                                                                                                               

  Taylor *et al* (2005) ^[@R50]^       *Lancet*                  Changes in mental health of UK hospital consultants           Consultants
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GP, general practitioner; HO, house officer.
:::

## Findings on prevalence {#S7}

Seven studies ^[@R21],[@R22],[@R24],[@R25],[@R27],[@R30],[@R50]^ had
quantifiable data on the prevalence of both psychiatric morbidity and
burnout (an in-depth analysis of studies reviewed in this paper is
included in an online data supplement to this article). Altogether 22
studies reported on prevalence of psychiatric morbidity, and the range
was 17--52% (average 31%). GPs and consultants had the highest scores.
Fourteen studies had burnout scores, with nine reporting scores as
percentages and five as mean scores; one study ^[@R28]^ had both
percentage and mean burnout scores. For emotional exhaustion the scores
ranged from 31 to 54.3% and mean scores ranged from 2.90 to 31.26; for
depersonalisation the scores ranged from 17.4 to 44.5% (1.95--15.68) and
for low personal accomplishment the range was 6--39.6% (4.36--34.21).
GPs, consultants and pre-registration house officers had the highest
levels of burnout in the studies.

McManus *et al*, ^[@R46]^ in a UK-wide study carried out in 2009, had
the largest sample size at 2845 doctors and reported prevalence of
psychiatric morbidity at 19.2%. The other two UK-wide studies with
samples of over 1000 cutting across specialties and grades
^[@R23],[@R43]^ reported psychiatric morbidity prevalence rates of 27.8%
and 21.3%, respectively. Taylor *et al* ^[@R50]^ reviewed 1308
consultants from different specialties and found the prevalence of
psychiatric morbidity to be 32%.

One longitudinal study ^[@R30]^ found no significant increase in the
prevalence of psychiatric morbidity over 3 years in a non-specific group
of doctors. Another longitudinal study ^[@R50]^ found a significant
increase in psychiatric morbidity and emotional exhaustion among
consultants over 8 years.

The only European Union (EU) study looking at the prevalence of burnout
in GPs from 12 EU countries ^[@R39]^ found lower average scores on all
burnout scales compared with those of English GPs.

## Findings on associated factors {#S8}

Job satisfaction was found to be protective against the effect of stress
on emotional exhaustion. The number of hours worked, job stress and
overload were associated with increased psychiatric morbidity in eight
studies. Two studies ^[@R22],[@R38]^ found that women had significantly
higher psychiatric morbidity than men, but three studies
^[@R27],[@R34],[@R45]^ did not find any association with gender. The
personality trait of neuroticism was significantly associated with
increase in psychiatric morbidity in three studies,
^[@R35],[@R43],[@R47]^ while conscientiousness was a protective factor.
Psychiatric morbidity was also positively associated with taking work
home and with the effect of stress on family life.

Job satisfaction was negatively correlated with burnout in three
studies. ^[@R21],[@R22],[@R25]^ Age was an interesting factor; increased
depersonalisation was found in younger doctors in five studies,
^[@R21],[@R22],[@R27],[@R29],[@R31]^ whereas emotional exhaustion
increased with age in two studies. ^[@R22],[@R41]^ Being single was
associated with increased burnout scores, and neuroticism increased
burnout significantly in two studies. ^[@R43],[@R47]^ Increased job
stress and workload increased burnout in three studies, with
significantly lower emotional exhaustion scores in part-time GPs.

## Findings on the direct relationship between burnout and psychiatric morbidity {#S9}

Three studies ^[@R25],[@R30],[@R46]^ found significant positive
correlations between psychiatric morbidity as measured by the GHQ, and
burnout syndrome. Using the process of casual modelling, McManus *et al*
^[@R30]^ found that when scores were considered in 1997 and later in
2000, emotional exhaustion increased psychiatric morbidity, and *vice
versa*. Personal accomplishment increased emotional exhaustion directly,
and increased psychiatric morbidity directly but also indirectly through
increasing emotional exhaustion. When other mental health problems were
considered, anxiety and depression were found to increase psychiatric
morbidity in three studies, ^[@R35],[@R37],[@R38]^ and depression
increased depersonalisation. ^[@R41]^

# Discussion {#S10}

The findings indicate that the prevalence of psychiatric morbidity among
UK doctors is quite high, ranging from 17 to 52%. This compares
unfavourably with the results from a longitudinal survey of people
living in private households within the UK, which found an 18-month
period prevalence of common mental disorders to be 21%. ^[@R51]^ Only 4
of the 22 studies that reported on psychiatric morbidity found
prevalence of less than 21%, ^[@R26],[@R30],[@R32],[@R46]^ which is
slightly better than 27% found in a study of palliative care physicians
in Western Australia. ^[@R52]^ An earlier study of junior house officers
in the UK found psychiatric morbidity in 50% of doctors, ^[@R53]^ but
this was in a period when the working pattern of junior doctors was
relatively unregulated. More recent studies of junior doctors contained
in this review found the prevalence of psychiatric morbidity to be
around 19%. ^[@R26],[@R32]^ Concern over increasing prevalence of common
psychiatric illnesses was borne out by the results from the study which
found a 5% increase in morbidity among a cohort of consultants over an
8-year period. ^[@R50]^

This review also found a high prevalence of burnout among UK doctors
measured using the MBI. It lends further support to the growing body of
evidence which has found the syndrome of burnout to be prevalent all
over the world among health professionals. In a sample of Australian
doctors, 24% suffered burnout; ^[@R52]^ in a New Zealand sample of
medical consultants one in five did; ^[@R54]^ and in a cross-section of
Japanese doctors 19% were affected. ^[@R55]^ This review found even
higher rates of burnout, with the prevalence of emotional exhaustion
ranging from 31 to 54.3%, which would suggest UK doctors are
comparatively more prone to burnout. GPs generally had higher scores for
burnout, ^[@R29]^ particularly in the study of European family doctors,
^[@R39]^ which found that the only countries in which GPs had higher
burnout scores than England were Turkey, Italy, Bulgaria and Greece.
Emotional exhaustion among a cohort of consultants was shown to have
increased over an 8-year period, ^[@R50]^ with a prevalence of 41% in
2002.

This review has been able to pool together different studies which
report on factors associated with the development and perpetuation of
psychiatric morbidity and burnout. Neuroticism was positively and
significantly correlated with psychological distress and burnout in
three studies. ^[@R35],[@R43],[@R47]^ Neuroticism refers to a lack of
psychological adjustment and instability leading to a tendency to be
stress-prone, anxious, depressed and insecure, and it has been shown to
negatively predict extrinsic career success. ^[@R56]^ McManus *et al*,
^[@R43]^ in a 12-year longitudinal study on a cohort of students who
started studying medicine in 1990, found that doctors who are more
stressed and emotionally exhausted showed higher levels of neuroticism
all through their careers. Neuroticism was also positively associated
with perceived high workload. The researchers concluded that neuroticism
was not only a correlate but a cause of work-related stress and burnout.
Similar findings were noted by Clarke & Singh ^[@R57]^ in a study
looking at the pessimistic explanatory style of processing information,
which is a manifestation of neuroticism. In that study neuroticism was
shown to positively predict psychological distress in doctors, and the
authors recommended that susceptible doctors should be offered
cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) to alter their explanatory style.

In an editorial titled 'Why are doctors so unhappy?' Richard Smith
stated that the most obvious cause of doctors\' unhappiness was that
they feel overworked and under-supported. ^[@R58]^ Job stress, feeling
overloaded and the number of hours worked were positively linked to
psychiatric 'caseness' and burnout in many of the studies in the present
review, and this cut across specialties and grades. A General Medical
Council (GMQ survey ^[@R59]^ of doctors in training found that 22% felt
their working pattern leaves them short of sleep at work, and 59% said
they regularly worked beyond their rostered hours. Increasing job stress
without a commensurate increase in job satisfaction was associated with
the presence of psychiatric morbidity, and job satisfaction was also
positively correlated with illness in six of the reviewed studies
^[@R21],[@R22],[@R25],[@R34]--[@R36]^ Another significant finding was
the correlation between psychiatric disorders and burnout, with the two
feeding off each other, leading to worsening outcomes.

The public health importance of these findings cannot be overemphasised.
GPs are at the frontline of healthcare delivery in the UK, and around
90% of all NHS contacts take place in primary care, with nearly 300
million GP consultations a year. ^[@R60]^ The estimated total number of
GP consultations in England rose from 217.3 million in 1995 to 300.4
million in 2008, with a trebling of telephone consultations, and with
the highest consultation rates among the growing population of elderly
individuals. ^[@R61]^ Increased live births of over 110 000 over the
past 10 years, ^[@R62]^ and an ageing population ^[@R63]^ have
contributed to the pressure felt by services in general. However, in
spite of the increased demand on primary care services, the proportion
of the NHS budget that is spent on general practice has slumped to
record levels, and GPs report that this has compromised the quality of
care they can provide. ^[@R64]^ Under these circumstances, the added
expectation from the UK Department of Health that GP surgeries should
open for longer hours and should expand patient choice will undoubtedly
lead to even more psychological distress and burnout among GPs.

A government-driven emphasis in the NHS on performance management and
targets increases job demands and stress among managers, ^[@R65]^ and
increases psychiatric morbidity among doctors. The current climate of
austerity in the UK, and the expectation that doctors should continue to
provide high-quality care to patients within an NHS intending to make
£20 billion worth of savings, ^[@R66]^ further expose doctors to burnout
and stress. Psychiatrists are already having to deal with the expected
increase in demand for mental health services stemming from the economic
downturn, ^[@R67]^ and the increase in suicide rates ^[@R68]^ among the
working-age population. Psychiatrists are particularly vulnerable to
burnout, and patient suicide is a factor significantly associated with
stress and burnout in this group ^[@R69]^

Burnout among doctors can affect the entire public health workforce
because as a syndrome it is considered 'contagious'. ^[@R4]^ With the
push for doctors to take up leadership positions at every level within
the NHS a burnt-out doctor can negatively affect the entire healthcare
delivery system. Unhealthy coping strategies in response to burnout and
stress were identified in this review: these include retiring early,
taking work home, taking it out on family, mixing less with friends, and
avoidance, all of which work against the development of a healthy
work-life balance.

## Limitations {#S11}

Some key limitations are worth highlighting. First, all the studies were
cross-sectional surveys using questionnaires sent to the participants
online or by post. Response rates varied, with some as low as 17%, and
only in half of the studies was effort made to increase the response
rate by sending reminders or repeat questionnaires. Non-response bias
could have affected the results. Second, although the MBI was used in
all the studies examining burnout, different versions of the MBI were
utilised. With the GHQ some studies used the 28-item version but most
used the 12-item version. The cut-off for 'caseness' using the GHQ also
differed between studies and ranged between ⩾3 and ⩾5. However, these
differences may not have significantly affected the overall findings
given that a study to validate the two versions of the GHQ found no
difference between them, and also established that the different cut-off
for 'caseness' did not affect the questionnaire\'s validity. ^[@R2]^

The cross-sectional method used for the surveys makes it difficult to
draw a firm conclusion on the outcomes from a cause and effect
perspective. Also, the number of potential confounders for the presence
of burnout and common psychiatric disorders is vast and cannot be
controlled for in surveys alone.

The fact that this literature review ends in 2013 may be considered a
limitation, but the hope is that this paper will trigger more research
in this area, and the author\'s intention is to update the literature
review by 2023.

## Recommendations {#S12}

Doctors are ultimately responsible for the quality of care they provide
at any time, and they need to be aware of their own vulnerability to
burnout and psychiatric illness, and of their impact on patient care.
Traditionally, doctors take pride in working a lot of hours, ^[@R70]^
and are 3 to 4 times less likely to take days off sick compared with
other health professionals; ^[@R71]^ this combination is a recipe for
burnout. A whole list of support networks is available on the GMC
website, ^[@R72]^ and doctors should be encouraged to utilise these.
However, there is a 'culture of fear' among doctors regarding the GMC,
and 96 doctors, a lot of whom had mental health problems, have died by
suicide since 2004 while being investigated by the GMC. ^[@R73]^ A lot
more work is therefore needed to make the most vulnerable doctors feel
supported.

At an organisational level, approaches designed to reduce the workload
of doctors should be prioritised. Changes to doctors\' contract of
service should reflect an understanding of the impact of work-related
factors on the health and well-being of doctors, and any such contract
should contain the necessary protections to reduce the experience of
psychiatric illness and burnout. The benefits of a healthy workforce on
the quality of care provided in the NHS cannot be overstated.

[^1]: **Udemezue O. Imo** MRCPsych, MSc Public Health, consultant
    psychiatrist, Royal Oldham Hospital, Cherrywood Clinic, Oldham, UK.
