==================
Costas Stefanis MD
==================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: Formerly Professor of Psychiatry and Head, Department of Psychiatry, University of Athens Medical School; Director, Eginition University Psychiatric Hospital, Athens
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Nick Bouras

:date: 2017-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 302f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

Costas Stefanis, who died recently at the age of 88, was the leading
figure in psychiatry in Greece for 30 years, from the time of his
appointment as professor of psychiatry in 1970. In collaboration with
British-trained colleagues he transformed Greek psychiatry and mental
health services, steering away from a previously narrow traditional
psychoanalytic approach towards a much broader biopsychosocial
direction. He expanded the provision of generic and specialist mental
health services and was quick to adopt the new emerging trends of
community care by developing the first community mental health centre in
Greece. He developed a strong research programme, having himself – early
in his career, while in the USA and Canada – carried out pioneering work
on the functional role of pyramidal neurons in the sensorimotor cortex.
He had an international reputation as an expert on the mode of action of
neurotransmitters functioning on central nervous system synapses.

Several generations of Greek psychiatrists and allied professionals were
trained by him, including me. Many became his associates and were
inspired to go on to acquire international recognition and reputation.
In 1989, in Athens, he founded the University Mental Health Research
Institute – which undertook much neurobiological and psychosocial
research into mental disorders – and remained president and director
until his death.

He also played a major part in international psychiatry. As president of
the World Psychiatric Association (WPA) from 1983 to 1990, he was
responsible for an organisation in crisis. The political use of
psychiatry in the Soviet Union to incarcerate political dissidents on
the grounds of mental illness led to an explosive climate within the
WPA. In 1983, after major criticism from societies in other countries –
which made it likely that it was facing expulsion – the All-Union
Society of Psychiatrists and Neuropathologists of the USSR withdrew from
the WPA. Years later, at the WPA congress held in Athens in 1989, the
general secretary of that Society publicly acknowledged that political
abuse of psychiatry had indeed taken place and the organisation was
reinstated as a member. This by no means ended the unhappy situation in
the Soviet Union, which to some extent continues to this day, but a
greater degree of openness was achieved. Costas Stefanis was among those
responsible for reaching a conciliatory approach on issues with
significant ethical and political dimensions.

Costas Stefanis became active in the political life of his country.
Between 1996 and 2000 he served as honorary member of the Greek
Parliament in the reformist social-democratic government and was
Minister of Health and Welfare from 2002 to 2004. During his ministerial
tenure, he was president of the Council of Ministers of Health of the
European Union and succeeded in achieving approval for anti-stigma
legislation regarding mental illness. On behalf of the EU member states,
he signed the World Health Organization's International Treaty on
Tobacco Advertising. In Greece, he was responsible for four major bills
passed by Parliament – on public health; reform and decentralisation of
health services; the organisation of primary health care and provisions
for prevention and social reintegration. Unfortunately, most of them are
still awaiting implementation.

He received numerous distinctions and awards. In 1994 he was elected
life member of the Athens Academy of Sciences and Arts – the highest
level of scientific recognition in Greece – and served as its president
in 2006. He was awarded the Medal of the Cross of the President of the
Hellenic Republic in recognition of his distinguished service to the
country. In acknowledgement of his contribution to psychiatry, the World
Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry and International
Neuropsychiatric Association established an international prize: the
Costas Stefanis Award for Excellence in Psychiatry and the
Neurosciences. He was elected honorary member and fellow of several
scientific associations and he authored numerous peer-reviewed articles
as well as books and articles in the lay press.

Costas Stefanis was born in Greece in 1928 and graduated from the
Medical School of Athens University in 1953. He trained in neurology and
psychiatry in Athens and subsequently served as a fellow in basic
neurophysiology at McGill University, Montreal, and as a research
scientist at the National Institute of Mental Health and Saint Elizabeth
Mental Hospital (Bethesda, Maryland and Washington, DC).

He was a highly intelligent, conscientious professional who, during
difficult times, strove to improve psychiatric and mental health service
provision not only in Greece but worldwide, thus improving the lives of
thousands of people. He died on 29 October 2016 after a long illness
stoically borne, remaining active in offering advice and ideas to the
end. He was devoted to his family and is survived by his wife Adela, two
sons – Nicos, professor of psychiatry, and Leonidas, professor of
neurology – his daughter Evanthia, a film maker, and four grandchildren.

The death of Costas Stefanis will be felt as a great loss to psychiatry
by many clinical, academic and international colleagues who had the
privilege of knowing and working with him.
