---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** To describe and explain psychiatrists\' responses
  to metabolic abnormalities identified during screening. We carried out
  an audit of clinical records to assess rates of monitoring and
  follow-up practice. Semi-structured interviews with 36 psychiatrists
  followed by descriptive and thematic analyses were conducted.

  **Results** Metabolic abnormalities were identified in 76% of eligible
  patients screened. Follow-up, recorded for 59%, was variable but more
  likely with four or more abnormalities. Psychiatrists endorse
  guidelines but ambivalence about responsibility, professional norms,
  resource constraints and skills deficits as well as patient factors
  influences practice. Therapeutic optimism and desire to be a 'good
  doctor' supported comprehensive follow-up.

  **Clinical implications** Psychiatrists are willing to attend to
  physical healthcare, and obstacles to recommended practice are
  surmountable. Psychiatrists seek consensus among stakeholders about
  responsibilities and a systemic approach addressing the social
  determinants of health inequities. Understanding patients\'
  expectations is critical to promoting best practice.
author:
- Sue Patterson
- Kathleen Freshwater
- Nicole Goulter
- Julie Ewing
- Boyd Leamon
- Anand Choudhary
- Vikas Moudgil
- Brett EmmersonCorrespondence to Sue Patterson
  (<susan.patterson@health.qld.gov.au>) [^1]
date: 2016-10
institute:
- 1Metro North Mental Health, Queensland, Australia
- 2Griffith University, Queensland, Australia
- 3Queensland University of Technology, Queensland, Australia
- 4The University of Queensland, Australia
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
title: "Psychiatrists\\' follow-up of identified metabolic risk: a
  mixed-method analysis of outcomes and influences on practice"
---

The metabolic syndrome comprises a cluster of five metabolic
abnormalities directly linked to development of cardiovascular
disease,^1^ a leading cause of premature mortality among people
diagnosed with schizophrenia.^2^ Diagnosis of metabolic syndrome,
according to the International Diabetes Federation,^3^ is appropriate
when central obesity co-occurs with any two other specified
abnormalities: raised triglycerides, plasma glucose or blood pressure,
and reduced high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Not least because
treatment with antipsychotic medication contributes to metabolic
dysfunction, clinical guidelines have long recommended that
psychiatrists attend to the metabolic health of patients, screening and
intervening to reduce risk.^4^ Practice, however, is highly
variable;^5,6^ metabolic abnormalities go underdiagnosed and often fail
to elicit appropriate response.^7--9^ Hence, various interventions have
sought to improve practice. Some -- for example, formalising
protocols^10^ and scheduling screening at service, rather than
individual level^9^ -- have increased monitoring. However, improvement
in health outcomes requires intervention; when abnormalities are
detected, further investigations, patient education and/or
pharmacological or lifestyle interventions targeting weight reduction
and increased exercise are recommended as minimally adequate
responses.^4^ Because guideline implementation is complex, and shaped by
interacting guideline, system, professional and patient factors,
arguments are made that interventions to support implementation be
multifaceted and contextually relevant.^11,12^ A detailed understanding
of how psychiatrists currently respond to metabolic dysfunction in
people prescribed antipsychotics and what influences practice is
critical to intervention design, and will augment the 'sparse and
inconclusive' knowledge^12^ about embedding evidence-based practice in
mental healthcare.

Against this background we set out to describe the rate and nature of
follow-up of metabolic abnormalities identified during routine
screening, and influences on psychiatrists\' follow-up practice.

# Method {#S1}

A mixed-method observational study,^13^ combining audit of clinical
records with qualitative investigation of influences on practice, was
conducted.

## Setting {#S2}

Two of three sites of an Australian mental health service (AMHS) were
chosen for the study. The service encompasses inner city, suburban and
regional areas with a sociodemographically diverse population of about 1
million, and are community based. Multidisciplinary teams, linked to
in-patient units through team psychiatrists, provide assessment and
treatment across geographically defined areas. Care is coordinated by
designated (allied health or nursing) clinicians and patients prescribed
antipsychotic medication consult with psychiatrists or training
psychiatrists each month in out-patient clinics. At the time of the
study, service policy obliged psychiatrists to complete metabolic
screening for patients prescribed clozapine and olanzapine in designated
months and promote adherence to the clinical algorithm developed by
Jackie Curtis and colleagues.^14^ The algorithm, endorsed by the Royal
College of Psychiatrists as The Lester Protocol,^15^ is regularly
reviewed at clinical meetings and copies are posted in consulting rooms.

## Data collection and analysis {#S3}

Data were collected and analysed by authors, who are all employed by the
AMHS.

The audit sample was selected as shown in [Fig. 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}.
We reviewed monitoring data (routinely collated by the service) for
November 2013 at one site, identifying patients whose central obesity
(body mass index (BMI)⩾30 or girth circumference ⩾80 cm for females and
94 cm for males) indicated risk for metabolic syndrome.^3^ This
criterion was selected because it is fundamental to diagnosis of
metabolic syndrome and the algorithm recommends clinical response.
Extracted from charts for each patient were demographics, treating
doctor and notation regarding follow-up for metabolic abnormalities in
the month after screening. Follow-up actions were categorised based on
Wilson and colleagues^9^ as 'counselling' (i.e. notes stated
'counselled' or indicated conversation with the patient about screening
results, lifestyle change or interventions), 'advice to general
practitioner' (GP), 'investigations', 'prescription of hypoglycaemic or
hypolipidaemic agents', 'referral to GP, lifestyle programme or
dietician' and 'other'. 'Other' follow-up actions were then categorised.
Where multiple actions were recorded, each was counted separately. Data
were entered into a database for descriptive analysis. Comparisons were
made using χ^2^ and *t*-tests dependent on data type, with *P*\<0.05
regarded as statistically significant.

![Assessment of eligible patients and follow-up of those meeting
International Diabetes Federation body mass index (BMI)/girth criteria
for metabolic syndrome. GP, general practitioner; LTFU, lost to
follow-up.  
a. Multiple responses were permitted.](250f1){#F1}

Qualitative data were collected in semi-structured individual interviews
(*n* = 9) and focus groups (*n* = 3 with 12, 9 and 7 participants)
between February and June 2014. Psychiatrists invited to interview were
site clinical directors and psychiatrists known through audit to
routinely or seldom follow up abnormalities. Psychiatrists were
recruited to focus groups when attending routine educational meetings
given over to the study at each site. Informed consent was obtained
prior to data collection.

In interviews and focus groups, audit findings were first summarised
before participants were prompted to explore three questions: What
is/are your responsibility/ies in management of physical health of
patients?How do you action these responsibilities?What influences your
responses to identified abnormalities? Data were recorded and
transcribed immediately following interviews. To enable exploration of
expressed views, data collection and analysis using the framework
approach^16^ were concurrent. After each transcript was generated, data
were allocated to a cell in an initial frame, representing source and
research question with multiple allocations possible. Next, a process of
constant comparison was used to discern patterns and exceptions in data
within cells and between data sources. While maintaining links to
source, related data were grouped and descriptively labelled, and
subthemes were identified. Credibility of the analysis was promoted by:
checking of developing findings in ongoing interviews by members;
critical dialogue between authors with psychiatrist members of the team,
drawing on clinical experiences to check resonance; review of findings
by an academic psychiatrist acting as a critical friend; and a service
committee that oversees metabolic monitoring.

Certified Australian Human Research Ethics Committees approved the
qualitative study (HREC/13/QPCH/200), and granted exemption from review
for the audit (HRECEC00172).

# Results {#S4}

Metabolic monitoring was completed for 186 of 229 eligible patients
(75%) and three-quarters (*n* = 142; 76%), including 95 men, met central
obesity criteria. Patients were aged 23--73 years (mean 45). Men were
significantly younger than women (mean 42.6, s.d. = 0.2 years *v.* mean
49.3, s.d. = 10.9 years; *t*(140) = 3.8, *P*\<0.01). Central obesity was
the only metabolic syndrome criterion met for a small minority of
patients (*n* = 19; 13%). Fifty-three (36%) patients (half of whom were
men) met four or more criteria. Records indicated pre-screen diagnoses
of diabetes mellitus in 11 patients, and prescription of hyperglycaemic
and/or hypolipidaemic medication in 17 patients. No new diagnoses of
metabolic syndrome or diabetes mellitus were recorded.

Notation regarding follow-up of abnormalities was found in a majority
(*n* = 83; 59%) of the 141 patients in contact with the service
following screening. Although neither BMI nor gender were related to
follow-up, patients with four or more detected abnormalities were
significantly more likely than those who had fewer than four
abnormalities detected to have action recorded in charts (*n* = 37, 70%
*v. n* = 47, 53%; χ^2^(4,141) = 145.72, *P*\<0.01).

The 'quality'of records and type of follow-up actions were variable,
with individual doctors consistently using a similar approach/notation
for each patient. About a third routinely recorded follow-up involving
multiple actions (e.g. counselling, dietary advice, referral to
lifestyle programmes and/or GP). More commonly, a single action,
typically some form of counselling, was recorded. Follow-up coded as
'counselling' was diverse; a minority of doctors detailed the approach
(e.g. motivational interviewing) and recommendations; most entries
stated 'counselled' or 'psychoed' (indicating some form of
psychoeducation). 'Other' follow-up actions (*n* = 15) included letters
reporting results to health/Social Service providers, change of
antipsychotic medication (*n* = 1), and specified a patient activity
(e.g. food diary; *n* = 3). Infrequently, notes indicated that patients
refused referrals (*n* = 3) or were already engaged in programmes or
attempting to self-mange weight. Patients living in the service
community rehabilitation facility were referred to the in-house healthy
living programme (*n* = 7).

## Influences on follow-up actions {#S5}

Thirty-six psychiatrists (including 23 trainees; 85% of those working
across the services) and two registered medical officers participated in
interviews of around 15 min duration and focus groups lasting 30--55
min. Participants were heterogeneous with respect to age, experience,
clinical specialty and training locality, but several had completed
their medical degrees overseas. The sample included doctors known
through audit findings and by self-description to 'consistently',
'sometimes' or 'seldom' instigate follow-up of metabolic abnormalities.

Analysis identified diverse influences on practice in six themes. In
presenting the themes we describe the prevalence of an opinion/point of
view by attributing it to a non-specific number of participants using
the terms 'most/majority' (group consensus or multiple instances),
'some' (a view expressed by most of those interviewed but not widely
endorsed), and 'few/minority' (a divergent opinion or one expressed only
occasionally). Illustrative quotations are attributed to an interview
participant or a focus group (FG).

### 1. Knowledge and endorsement of guidelines regarding metabolic management {#S6}

All participants knew about, and most endorsed, guidelines acknowledging
responsibility for attending to side-effects of prescribed medication.
However, concern was expressed about increasing demands on psychiatrists
managing acutely unwell patients within an underresourced health system.
A strongly expressed minority opinion was that specialist psychiatry
roles were being diluted as requirements to undertake 'generalist' tasks
increased.

Psychiatrists were also aware that performance was being monitored by
the service: 'it is certainly in our consciousness', said one
consultant. Mixed views were expressed about the impact of this, with
administrative targets and 'authoritarian' surveillance of practice
described as devaluing clinical judgement, potentially leading to
superficial change -- 'doing it because we should' (FG2, consultant),
rather than meaningful engagement with patients and enduring practice
shifts.

### 2. Don\'t rock the boat! {#S7}

Informal normative pressure, a key influence on practice, played out in
various ways.

> 'Psychiatrists turn their backs toward physical illnesses because
> it\'s handed on generation to generation ... tradition to follow the
> seniors' (interview 2, registrar).

Psychiatrists in training commonly reported modelling practice on that
of whichever consultant was providing supervision or work unit norms.
Although a minority welcomed opportunities to challenge the perceived
status quo, most trainees considered it inappropriate to 'rock the
boat', particularly when involvement was time limited.

> 'Clients \[at rehabilitation unit\] all smoke and they\'re obese ...
> I\'m just here for three months so I shouldn\'t change anything'
> (interview 3, trainee).

Concerns related to being perceived unfavourably by colleagues as 'a new
broom' and disruption of continuity of care for patients.

### 3. Shared responsibility {#S8}

Describing health as complex (involving genetics, lifestyle and social
factors), psychiatrists were concerned about 'blaming individuals'
and/or antipsychotic medication for metabolic dysfunction. The consensus
was that a systemic response (encompassing social programmes and
multiple agencies) was required to improve outcomes of people with
severe mental illness (SMI). That psychiatry and mental health services
had a role to play was agreed, but opinions diverged around what that
role should be. Consistent with 'referral' being the most common
follow-up, psychiatrists typically considered (non-medical) mental
health clinicians and GPs as best placed to manage physical health. They
argued that their own potential as a 'bit player' with multiple
competing demands to influence outcomes should not be overstated.

> 'You can\'t be a one stop shop' (interview 4, trainee).

### 4. Patient characteristics and expectations {#S9}

> '\[Psychiatrists\] have to be realistic ... patients come from lower
> socioeconomic backgrounds and unfortunately, this is indicative of
> poor nutritional choices, poor exercise regimes' (FG2, trainee)

Noting that improvement in health was dependent on behavioural change,
psychiatrists described patient characteristics (i.e. age, culture,
social class and living circumstances) as key influences on practice.
They spoke of informally assessing readiness for change and likelihood
of follow-up recommendations being enacted.

> 'If you have someone who is fat and unmotivated, there\'s no point --
> you can advise all you like and nothing is going to change' (interview
> 7, consultant, high follow-up rate).

Patients were described as typically lacking interest in physical health
and 'pre-contemplative', with low motivation for lifestyle change
attributed variously to symptoms of mental illness (e.g. 'concerned with
what\'s going on in their heads'), viewing a large body positively (e.g.
'they think they are like body builders and they do not want to be
skinny'), and repeated unsuccessful attempts at changing
behaviour/losing weight.

> 'In the denial phase ... so once we convince them that it is
> unhealthy, then we might get them on a different diet' (interview 4,
> trainee).

Although typically hoping for positive outcomes, several questioned
whether behaviour change was possible and whether diet/exercise could
work with this (or any) population. Psychiatrists reported discontinuing
recommending interventions when this seemed futile, when referrals
and/or discussion of physical health were declined. Moreover, some
patients were described as considering physical health out of scope:
'not what \[patients\] come to us for'.

### 5. Resources and capacity {#S10}

Environmental resources (primarily their lack) and utilisation featured
in psychiatrists\' explanations of metabolic monitoring and follow-up.
References to 'time' were recurrent but divergent views were expressed.
Most psychiatrists identified time as the key barrier to follow-up,
noting that consultations were barely long enough to complete and
document essential psychiatric assessments. With metabolic dysfunction,
especially obesity, considered a chronic rather than acute problem,
psychiatrists\' identified legislative requirements and risk/safety as
their primary concern.

> 'You see a patient with alcohol problems, smoking, obese, you suggest
> "You should stop smoking, stop drinking alcohol ... but sorry, I
> don\'t have time today" (...) you have to concentrate on mental
> health' (FG3, trainee).

Others, although acknowledging time constraints, proposed that how
consultations were conducted mattered. Those who routinely undertook
follow-up identified two enabling practices: routine discussion of
well-being and physical health, and working after hours to complete
clinical notes and referral letters, because they derived professional
satisfaction from being 'good doctors'.

> 'You can\'t always be talking about the voices, these people are not
> acutely unwell and their recovery is about more than symptoms'
> (interview 6, consultant, high follow-up rate).

A minority of psychiatrists said that pressure to reduce service costs
influenced their decisions, particularly about ordering further tests,
as one said.

> 'Yes, but who pays? We get mixed messages in the current political
> climate ... promoted highly that we give the highest quality
> healthcare but the reality is that it\'s a minimalist budget; the cost
> is to the consumer' (FG1, trainee).

Awareness, endorsement and accessibility of interventions influenced
practice. Several psychiatrists reported not knowing what was available
or how to refer, and others questioned the evidence supporting
intervention with 'this population'.

### 6. Motivation and capability {#S11}

Self-perceived capability and views about 'appropriate' practice also
surfaced as influential. Motivation and willingness to engage patients
in discussion of lifestyle and particularly weight varied widely. A
minority of psychiatrists attributed their own reluctance to discuss
physical health (especially weight) to thinking this inappropriate or
not knowing the right words, or expressed concern that mentioning of
weight or lifestyle could cause offence and disrupt therapeutic alliance
with the patient. Most psychiatrists spoke of adapting their approach to
fit each patient\'s perceived openness to discussion and likelihood of
change but one advocated a frank approach: "'I, quite brutally might say
"If you do not change your lifestyle you are going to die 20 years
younger", I put it on the line ... some of them might accept that but
for some it\'s quite a shock and others just don\'t care' (FG2,
trainee)."

The use (or not) of medication for metabolic dysfunction/obesity was
robustly debated. With few reporting routinely prescribing
lipid-lowering agents, psychiatrists commonly regarded themselves as
'consciously incompetent' to do so (interview 8, consultant).
Psychiatrists spoke of uncertainty about dosing and drug interactions,
particularly if adherence was problematic, and inability to monitor
response if a patient\'s service contact was irregular. Many observed
that maintaining currency with psychiatric evidence constrained their
ability to engage with 'other' literature, and reported lacking
opportunities to develop expertise.

> 'As you become more senior in psychiatry, basic medical skills like
> interpreting test results are lost or diminish' (FG3, consultant).

The view that prescribing non-psychotropic medications was beyond scope
had been reinforced when physicians/endocrinologists from whom advice
had been sought in various circumstances were unable to articulate
precise recommendations. Additionally, and specifically in relation to
metformin, psychiatrists questioned the ethics of prescribing off-label.

> 'We could prescribe for insulin resistance but really we\'re
> prescribing for obesity. I\'m not sure that\'s ethical' (interview 7,
> consultant).

Whereas some participants considered clinical algorithms (such as that
proposed by Curtis *et al*^14^) helpful, others drew attention to
difficulty translating a general guideline (e.g. 'think about
metformin') into practice with an individual.

> 'If it\'s not core business, then a clear treatment algorithm is
> required -- at the moment there are no clear guidelines, which means
> I\'m not confident prescribing' (discussion 2, trainee).

## Suggestions for practice improvement {#S12}

Psychiatrists identified various solutions to perceived problems.
Describing unrelenting pressure to mitigate risk and engage patients who
saw no need for psychiatric treatment (never mind physical healthcare),
some proposed establishment of clinics to be run by junior doctors or
specialist metabolic monitoring roles. Others focused on process,
particularly coordination and communication with GPs. Simple referral
processes and efficient feedback mechanisms were considered essential if
patients were to avoid 'falling through systemic gaps'. More
fundamentally, psychiatrists called for consensus among stakeholders
within (psychiatrists, mental health clinicians and administrators) and
external to (GPs and non-government agencies) mental health services
about responsibilities -- knowing who does what and when. However,
psychiatrists noted that none of these strategies could improve outcomes
unless patients engaged.

# Discussion {#S13}

This study revealed, and explained from the psychiatrists\' perspective,
inconsistency in response to metabolic abnormalities which were
identified during routine screening of patients who were prescribed
antipsychotic medication. Most patients with central obesity were
followed up, and the consistently comprehensive response of some doctors
indicates that observed deficits and delays in guideline implementation
are remediable. However, such positive results were achieved in
challenging circumstances with multiple barriers to best practice
identified. The time constraints, focus on psychiatric symptoms,
concerns about role diffusion, and beliefs that patients are
unable/unwilling to modify lifestyles have all been described as
constraining attention to physical health.^7,17--22^ This study,
however, extends these findings by contextualising such proximal
influences on practice. In combination with the multiple demands on
their limited time, psychiatrists\' understanding of the health of
people with SMI as a product of dynamic interactions between personal
characteristics and social conditions beyond their control contributes
to ambivalence about their roles and observed clinical inertia.^23^
Hence, rather than seeing themselves as singularly responsible, they
construe themselves as contributing to what is necessarily a systemic
solution to the excess morbidity among people with SMI.

## Study limitations {#S14}

Implications should be considered in light of limitations, which
constrain generalisability. Findings were generated within particular,
sociopolitically and geographically situated services. The psychiatrists
who took part were not randomly selected and partly because the services
have been encouraging attention to physical health of patients for
nearly 3 years, their views and experiences may differ from peers
working elsewhere. Although the depth and breadth of discussion
indicates that psychiatrists felt able to share views openly, data were
necessarily shaped by the setting and process of collection and
researcher characteristics. In mitigation, we note that the sample was
substantial and diverse in relation to level and location of training
and duration of practice within AMHS, and member-checking demonstrated
credibility of findings.

## Implications for practice {#S15}

Limitations notwithstanding, findings hold pragmatic value; detailed
understanding of the 'problem' represented in inconsistent adherence to
guidelines and factors enabling comprehensive responding within busy
public mental health services can support practice improvement. Findings
indicate that although not sufficient, having and optimising use of
necessary resources is a key to adherence to guidelines. Psychiatrists
must be afforded time and be appropriately equipped. Careful
consideration should be given at the service level to how expensive
medical time can be used to best effect and psychiatrists should be
afforded opportunity to develop familiarity with guidelines for
prescribing antihypertensive/anti-lipidaemic agents and expertise needed
to safely prescribe. More fundamentally, however, psychiatrists\'
ambivalence about responsibility and capacity to effect change in an
apparently intractable problem must be addressed. Given the importance
of professional norms in shaping observed practice, it is incumbent on
diligent practitioners to actively encourage proactive attitudes in
peers and trainees, and on all involved to build the service culture
needed for change.

However, because mental health services and psychiatrists are but parts
of a system of care, establishment of the consensus around
responsibility of the diverse stakeholders and coordination of care
sought by participants in this study and others^24^ must be a strategic
priority. In this regard, consideration must be given to the broader
sociopolitical context and the multiple pressures on healthcare. The
efficiency imperative described by psychiatrists in this study as a key
influence on clinical practice is a challenge faced internationally. As
articulated by the president of the Royal College of Psychiatrists,
Professor Sir Simon Wessely: "'We are being asked to do more with less.
We are campaigning and saying that people need to be more open about
mental health problems and come forward earlier ... but when they do, we
find ourselves with less resources to treat them and they are getting
short-changed.'^25^"

Appropriate funding must accompany increasing expectations if healthcare
and outcomes are to be improved in any sustainable way.

We conclude that psychiatrists have an opportunity to contribute to a
reduction in cardiovascular disease that is prematurely killing people
with SMI, but, to be effective, this must be part of strategically
planned service- and system-wide responses. With collaboration central
to ensuring practice improvement, the challenge for psychiatrists and
mental health services is to overcome inertia and create the culture and
partnerships that will support holistic care, which is critical to
reducing the health inequities of people with SMI. As a first step,
stakeholders must be engaged collectively in establishing consensus
around roles, responsibilities and communication pathways. In relation
to institutionalisation of evidence-based practice more generally in
psychiatry, it seems that both cultural and structural change is needed
to enable doctors to deliver the care to which they aspire. As argued by
Grol & Grimshaw,^11^ 'even where doctors are aware of the evidence and
are willing to change, to alter well established patterns of care is
difficult, especially if the clinical environment is not conducive to
change.'

We are grateful to Anna Praskova for helpful comments on the manuscript,
Kellie Evans and Christine Russell for administrative support and David
Higson, chairperson of the service metabolic monitoring committee, for
enabling review of findings at business meetings. Thanks go also to the
36 psychiatrists who generously shared their time and views.

[^1]: **Sue Patterson** is Principal Research Fellow, Metro North Mental
    Health, Queensland, and an assistant professor of applied psychology
    at Griffith University, Queensland. **Kathleen Freshwater** is a
    clinical nurse at Metro North Mental Health, Queensland. **Nicole
    Goulter** is a clinical academic fellow, Metro North Mental Health,
    Queensland, and Queensland University of Technology. **Julie Ewing**
    is a clinical nurse, **Boyd Leamon** is a psychiatric registrar,
    **Anand Choudhary** is clinical director and **Vikas Moudgil** is
    clinical director at Metro North Mental Health, Queensland. **Brett
    Emmerson** is Executive Director, Metro North Mental Health,
    Queensland, and an assistant professor at the University of
    Queensland, Australia.
