---
author:
- Jane Morris
- Tim Agnew
- Heather Ireland
date: 2016-12
references:
- id: R1
subtitle: ": Formerly Consultant Psychiatrist and Psychotherapist, New
  Craigs Hospital, Inverness"
title: Dr Yvonne Edmonstone
---

![](350f1){#F1}

Dr Yvonne Edmonstone -- who died of breast cancer on 17 September 2015
at the age of 52 -- was the clinician responsible for the creation of
the National Health Service (NHS) Highland Eating Disorder Service and
one of the founder members of the North of Scotland Managed Clinical
Network for Eating Disorders. In 2009 she helped pave the way for the
opening of the Eden Unit, Scotland\'s first NHS in-patient unit for
adults with eating disorders. As well as her enormous contribution to
the field on a local and regional level, she was a key player on a
national scale, as part of the core group which set up Eating Disorders
Education and Training Scotland, and as a long-standing contributor to
the Scottish Eating Disorders Interest Group. On her retirement,
grateful patients produced a tribute video and -- in appreciation of her
contribution to the field -- she received an award from BEAT, the UK
charity supporting people with eating disorders.

Although the area of eating disorders was where she focused most of her
professional energy, Yvonne had a broad interest in the application of
psychotherapy to mental disorder. She was a valued supervisor for the
South of Scotland Cognitive Behavioural Therapy Course and an early
adopter of the interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) model, her case reports
being preserved as exemplars by IPT course accreditors. Yvonne was also
a keen advocate of dialectical behaviour therapy and a key member of the
Highland team working in that field. She was an expert psychotherapist
whose advice was sought by other clinicians because of her impressive
clinical acumen and compassionate, common-sense approach. As well as her
clinical commitments, she contributed to more academically focused
endeavours. She co-authored a chapter on psychotherapy in the
award-winning manual Research Methods in Psychiatry^1^ and was an author
of the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network guideline on the
non-pharmaceutical management of depression in adults.

Born on 20 March 1963, Yvonne, as a schoolgirl, was torn between her
artistic talents and passion for becoming a doctor. In adult life her
creativity expressed itself not only through her psychotherapeutic
practice but also in her talent for organising (and participating in!)
social events. She enthusiastically planned and enjoyed holidays,
lunches and trips to music festivals with family and friends until only
weeks before her death.

Yvonne undertook dual training in general adult psychiatry and
psychotherapy. She qualified in 1985 with an MBChB from the University
of Aberdeen. Her special interest in eating disorders involved both
clinical and research work in Edinburgh\'s Cullen Centre. On completion
of her training, she moved back to her beloved Highlands, where she
poured her heart and soul into building the Highland Eating Disorder
Service. She became a Fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists in
2014.

Humane and thoughtful, Yvonne was held in the highest regard and
affection by colleagues and patients alike. Her easy, yet infectiously
enthusiastic manner and sense of humour were valued not only by those
who knew her professionally, but also by everyone who came into contact
with her socially.

Yvonne demonstrated extraordinary generosity of spirit, both
professionally and personally. She was someone who really would go the
extra mile. She encouraged, mentored and otherwise inspired many
clinicians from different professional backgrounds to fulfil their
potential. She always had time for her colleagues despite her frenetic
schedule, while her engaging nature brightened many a dull day at work
and many a social occasion besides.

Yvonne\'s impact on local, regional and national psychotherapy and
eating disorders services cannot be underestimated. However, her
greatest legacy is her beloved family -- the four children she raised
with her husband Alistair and the close relationship she enjoyed with
her parents. Her ability to maintain such a truly productive work--life
balance is an example for us all. She is sadly missed.
