========================================================================
Training in quality improvement for the next generation of psychiatrists
========================================================================

Elizabeth Ewins
Rob Macpherson
Geoff van der Linden
Stephen ArnottCorrespondence to Elizabeth Ewins (elizabethewins@nhs.net)
 [1]_
:Date: 2017-2

:Abstract:
   Quality improvement (QI) projects have been shown to positively
   influence patient care. They provide opportunities for trainees to
   present and publish their work locally and nationally, and to gain
   valuable leadership and management experience. We describe a pilot
   project to engage in QI trainees across a National Health Service
   trust and a school of psychiatry. After the first year of this
   programme over half of psychiatry trainees in the school (58% of core
   trainees and 47% of advanced trainees) are participating in 28
   individual QI projects and QI project methodology is to become
   embedded in the core psychiatry training course. Specialty doctors,
   consultants, foundation doctors, general practitioner trainees,
   medical students and the wider multidisciplinary team have all become
   engaged alongside trainees, working with patients and their families
   to identify problems to tackle and ideas to test.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Foundation doctors and core medical trainees are being trained to
undertake quality improvement (QI) projects and are doing so competently
and effectively. :sup:`(n.d.a), (n.d.b)` QI projects have been embedded
in the Foundation Programme curriculum, :sup:`(n.d.c)` with an
expectation that trainees plan, implement, complete and present a QI
project as part of their training, using the results to improve patient
care. QI projects have been widely adopted across medicine and are in
many areas superseding traditional audit as a way to develop services.
However, the development of this methodology has been slower in the
mental health field and QI projects are new to most psychiatrists. Here
we outline and summarise in simple steps how to undertake a QI project.
We also describe our cross-deanery project led in Avon and Wiltshire
Mental Health Partnership NHS Trust and the Severn School of Psychiatry,
which aims to train and support psychiatrists of the future to become
actively engaged in QI projects.

.. _S1:

What is a QI project?
=====================

QI projects aim to improve patient safety, treatment effectiveness and
efficiency, and the patient experience. They are real-time, dynamic
processes involving focused, progressive, small-scale changes through a
simple structured framework, which enable visible and effective change
over a short period of time. QI projects are becoming increasingly
important because of the limited resources available in the National
Health Service (NHS). They can support service change and to achieve
this may engage all professional groups, including trainees.
Increasingly, evidence of QI is becoming a training requirement and is
taking the place of audit as a subject to discuss at trainee reviews and
job interviews.

Often the relationship between audit and QI projects is not clearly
understood. Audit is also generally about quality improvement, beginning
with identifying an audit subject, selecting audit standards and
measuring the level of performance, then making improvements and
re-auditing (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). The focus is therefore on data
collection. :sup:`(n.d.d)` This area of practice has been criticised, as
often the audit cycle has been left incomplete and the improvement part
of the cycle left neglected. :sup:`(n.d.e), (n.d.f)` QI projects are
advantageously placed as they can be seen as part of the improvement
element of the audit cycle, where the focus of the project is explicitly
on making a service improvement instead of collecting data.
:sup:`(n.d.g)` Although more complex than an audit, QI projects focus on
changing complex adaptive systems and can empower doctors to investigate
problems, identify solutions and work within a team to raise standards.

.. figure:: 46f1
   :alt: Representation of the traditional audit cycle (based on
   Benjamin :sup:`(n.d.h)` ).
   :name: F1

   Representation of the traditional audit cycle (based on Benjamin
   :sup:`(n.d.h)` ).

.. _S2:

Practical steps to carrying out a QI project
============================================

The first step in developing a QI project is identifying a specific
aspect of clinical practice that could be improved. This may be
something that has been highlighted by an audit or identified by the
wider team. It may be aligned to the local trust's quality and safety
agenda, something that has been identified as a clinical incident or
near-miss, or raised by patients or their families as a problem or idea
to test. Finally, it may simply be an area recognised by local
clinicians as something which is time consuming or frustrating and which
could be improved. The project has a small focus initially, so rather
than looking at 100 patient notes one might begin with just a single
patient, or instead of trying to improve a whole hospital the focus may
be on a single ward. Once an improvement has been proven to work on a
small scale, it can be then tested on another patient or another ward,
gradually being systematically scaled up and spread to become embedded
in an entire hospital or trust. Depending on complexity, the projects
can be undertaken within a 6-month training post.

The Institute for Healthcare Improvement recommend asking three
questions :sup:`(n.d.i)` based on the ‘model for improvement’ when
planning a project: What are you trying to accomplish? This helps to set
the aim of the project, which should be SMART (specific, measurable,
achievable, realistic and timely). How will you know that a change is an
improvement? This helps to think about what can be measured to
illustrate the impact of the change. What would be an easy measurement?
This needs to be done at baseline and then repeated at regular intervals
so that the change can lead to learning and to show that it works. What
changes can we make that will result in improvement? Possible ideas of
changes to implement to make an improvement can be brainstormed. The
current sequence of events already used can be examined and areas for
improvement identified, for example by eliminating unnecessary tasks or
steps, clarifying roles within the process, or by reducing delays and
duplication.

.. _S3:

Testing changes: the ‘plan, do, study, act’ (PDSA) cycle
--------------------------------------------------------

The ‘plan, do, study, act’ (PDSA) cycles can be used as a way to
develop, test and then implement a change on a small scale and in a real
work setting (`Fig. 2 <#F2>`__). :sup:`(n.d.i),(n.d.j)` Multiple PDSA
cycles will be required to fully implement a QI project.

.. figure:: 46f2
   :alt: The model for improvement is used as a framework to structure a
   quality improvement project (it includes going through several ‘plan,
   do, study, act’ (PDSA) cycles). :sup:`(n.d.i)` Based on Langley et
   al. :sup:`(n.d.k)`
   :name: F2

   The model for improvement is used as a framework to structure a
   quality improvement project (it includes going through several ‘plan,
   do, study, act’ (PDSA) cycles). :sup:`(n.d.i)` Based on Langley et
   al. :sup:`(n.d.k)`

.. _S4:

Stage 1: plan
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first stage is about planning a test of change. This involves taking
a single idea and making a prediction as to what might happen when the
change is implemented. A test and way of measuring whether what actually
happens meets that prediction needs to be designed so that the impact of
the change can be evaluated and learned from. This might be numerical
data, such as increasing numbers of reviews of patients, or reducing
numbers of critical incidents, and may also include patient and/or staff
satisfaction scores or comments. Once you have determined what you are
going to measure, make a baseline measurement. Determine what target you
are aiming for: is it realistic? Plan the time you have available: for
example, do you want to complete the project within the time frame of a
training post? The planning stage can take time, but good planning will
ensure a more successful project.

A useful tool for the early stages of planning a QI project is a driver
diagram (`Fig. 3 <#F3>`__), which can help to identify what steps could
be taken to make an improvement. This has three columns: outcome (the
aim of the project) and primary and secondary drivers. Primary drivers
are the overall improvement areas that need to be addressed to achieve
the desired outcome. Secondary drivers are the specific areas where
changes or interventions can be made, motivated by the primary drivers.

.. figure:: 47f3
   :alt: A driver diagram showing primary and secondary drivers for a
   quality improvement project trying to improve the time taken for
   referrals to be made to a psychiatry liaison service.
   From this, ideas for change can be generated, such as producing a
   short guide of how to complete the referral form, providing a short
   training session for staff, or ensuring referral forms are located
   with other referral forms in the hospital. As well as measuring the
   time taken for referral forms to be completed at regular intervals to
   assess the impact of the change, staff satisfaction scores and
   qualitative data could also be gathered.
   :name: F3

   A driver diagram showing primary and secondary drivers for a quality
   improvement project trying to improve the time taken for referrals to
   be made to a psychiatry liaison service.
   From this, ideas for change can be generated, such as producing a
   short guide of how to complete the referral form, providing a short
   training session for staff, or ensuring referral forms are located
   with other referral forms in the hospital. As well as measuring the
   time taken for referral forms to be completed at regular intervals to
   assess the impact of the change, staff satisfaction scores and
   qualitative data could also be gathered.

.. _S5:

Stage 2: do
~~~~~~~~~~~

Following careful planning, one small area of change can be identified.
The second stage of the PDSA cycle is where the change is actually
implemented. Measures of the impact of change should be taken from an
early point and frequently to monitor the effect of the change. Any
problems or unexpected results are noted while the change is carried
out.

.. _S6:

Stage 3: study
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The third stage involves analysing collected data and comparing that
with the predictions made. A graphical representation of the
measurements taken can be a useful way of plotting results to illustrate
the pattern observed as changes are made. :sup:`(n.d.l)` A goal line can
be shown so one can see at a glance where the work is in relation to
achieving the aim. Changes or improvements that are made (in repeated
PDSA cycles) can annotate the graph to clearly demonstrate the impact of
those changes (`Fig. 4 <#F4>`__).

.. figure:: 48f4
   :alt: Plotting results for the example quality improvement project in
   `Fig. 3 <#F3>`__.
   The time taken to complete referral forms was measured by timing
   eight junior doctors; each point on the graph shows the average of
   these measurements. A goal line (of 180 s) is shown and interventions
   made at each ‘plan, do, study, act’ (PDSA) cycle are labelled on the
   graph so the effect of each change can be clearly seen.
   :name: F4

   Plotting results for the example quality improvement project in `Fig.
   3 <#F3>`__.
   The time taken to complete referral forms was measured by timing
   eight junior doctors; each point on the graph shows the average of
   these measurements. A goal line (of 180 s) is shown and interventions
   made at each ‘plan, do, study, act’ (PDSA) cycle are labelled on the
   graph so the effect of each change can be clearly seen.

.. _S7:

Stage 4: act
~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the final stage of a PDSA cycle you can ask whether the change you
made achieved your aim. If not, what modifications to the change could
be made? Or what other ideas can be put in place? When you are ready to
make another change, the next PDSA cycle can be outlined.

.. _S8:

Implementing and spreading changes
----------------------------------

By going through several PDSA cycles a small change can be tested and
refined. Once a successful improvement has been proven on a small scale,
it can then be tested on a larger scale. This might be across several
wards or across several community teams. Once these pilot changes are
proven to be successful, they can be embedded in everyday practice and
incorporated into local trust policy.

.. _S9:

Training in QI for the next generation of psychiatrists – a pilot programme
===========================================================================

This is the first year of a pilot developed in the Severn Deanery to
support core and advanced trainees to become involved in QI. The
programme is being led by an advanced trainee (E.E.) as part of an
Educational Fellowship awarded by the Deanery.

Until 2015 it has been a deanery requirement of trainees to carry out an
audit project annually. This was amended so that all trainees are to be
involved in either an audit or a QI project each year, and if an audit
is undertaken trainees are encouraged to use QI methodology for the
implementation of change part of the cycle. The structure of training
and supporting trainees to undertake their own QI projects was adapted
from the local Foundation School :sup:`(n.d.a)` and the Royal College of
Physician's ‘Learning to make a difference’ programme. :sup:`(n.d.b)` A
half-day training session was developed to teach trainees about QI and
project methodology, including using PDSA cycles in practical examples,
so that they could undertake their own projects. This was delivered by
E.E. alongside the local trust audit and QI department lead. Trainees
were encouraged to come up with their own ideas for projects and to work
with other trainees to implement changes, under the supervision of a
higher trainee, specialty doctor or consultant. They were supported in
including the wider multidisciplinary team in developing and
implementing projects, as it was felt that this would be more likely to
lead to successful and sustainable changes being made.

Training was initially targeted at trainees, but a growing number of
specialist doctors and consultants requested to attend and they were
invited to a second training session. A resource handbook was developed
and a series of short follow-up sessions put in place to provide further
advice about QI methodology and to help support trainees' projects.
Trainees were asked to register their projects by completing a short
online form on the local trust audit and QI academy webpage so the trust
can monitor participation.

.. _S10:

Results so far
--------------

In the first year of this programme, QI projects (28 in total) are being
undertaken by 58% of core trainees (21 of 36) and 47% of advanced
trainees (16 of 34). A growing number of specialty doctors (6 of 54; 11%
of the Trust's total), consultants (24 of 111; 22%) and colleagues from
the wider multidisciplinary team, as well as foundation doctors and
medical students, are becoming involved in projects. Examples of current
projects being undertaken by trainees in the Deanery are shown in `Box
1 <#box1>`__. Some trainees have chosen to undertake educational QI
projects, which are being used to improve training and trainee
representation in their organisations and are felt to be a way of
engaging trainees in the trust.

Evaluation of the programme so far through post-course questionnaires
and semi-structured interviews held at the end of projects has shown
globally positive feedback from consultants and high engagement and
enjoyment from trainees. Trainees report high satisfaction owing to
being able to choose their own QI projects rather than being instructed
what to do. All trainees report that training sessions and follow-up
advice has been helpful, and feel that this should be provided to all
staff across the multidisciplinary team. One trainee fed back that ‘the
quality improvements often end up involving other team members so it
would be good to get them on side’, whereas another trainee highlighted
that ‘training is needed for senior staff members who we may need to get
on board.’ Additionally, trainees reflected that most projects needed
senior input to facilitate implementation and sustainability of
successful changes, and several projects have needed advice on
governance issues, which has been provided by the Trust's Quality
Academy, responsible for audit and QI projects.

We have found that owing to the nature of our work in mental health, QI
projects sometimes need to be structured in a different way than they
would be in an acute hospital setting. Careful consideration is needed
to find the most appropriate method of change measurement, as frequently
qualitative data may be available and innovative methods of quantitative
data have been required. We have also found that QI projects have often
had to run over a longer period than they perhaps would in an acute
hospital, perhaps owing to the longer in-patient stay in a psychiatric
hospital.

During the pilot we found that forming close links with the trust
Quality Academy provided invaluable assistance in setting up the scheme.
The Academy has a QI project lead, who provides advice and training for
trainees; they have been particularly helpful with guidance regarding
governance and what permissions might need to be sought. Support from
trust medical management leads, including the medical director and
director of medical education, has also been key.

As well as positively influencing patient care, trainees report that
projects are providing them with invaluable opportunities for leadership
and management experience. One advanced trainee leading a QI project
reported they had gained ‘experience of leading a team as well as
networking with other teams, management experience through attending
meetings and presenting ideas, plus the project has provided
opportunities to present at a departmental and regional level, as well
as an opportunity for publication. This is in addition to positively
influencing the future of mental health services’. Many trainees are
beginning to present and publish their work and we encourage trainees to
do so even if a project has not been fully successful, as much will have
been learned by the trainees, and can be learned by the Trust, from all
projects.

**Box 1** Quality improvement projects being undertaken by trainees
across the Severn Deanery

-  Improving handover between trainees

-  Ensuring physical health monitoring of patients prescribed
   antipsychotics

-  Improving the quality of letters written to general practitioners

-  Ensuring timely access to radiology results

-  Promoting awareness of mental health in an acute hospital

-  Providing support for new consultants

-  Advance care planning in later life

-  Improving the quality of ward rounds in forensic services

-  Training nursing staff about physical healthcare issues

-  Providing patients and their families with information regarding
   child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS)

-  Improving the local academic programme

-  Developing an out-of-hours handbook for trainees on call

-  Ensuring physical health assessments for patients in early
   intervention in psychosis

-  Improving access to mental health assessments for women during the
   antenatal period

-  Improving trainee representation across the mental health trust

**Box 2** Useful resources

-  The Institute for Healthcare Improvement website
   (`www.ihi.org <www.ihi.org>`__) provides many free resources to guide
   professionals through a quality improvement (QI) project (e.g. short
   videos which describe the steps involved).

-  BMJ Quality (http://quality.bmj.com) has an online guide to
   implementing a QI project and then writing it up, producing a
   publishable paper as a result. It can be useful to buy a licence to
   do this and follow the steps (licences last for 1 year so in the case
   of longer-term projects it may be prudent to sign up later rather
   than at the start of a project). Note that demonstration of clear
   ‘plan, do, study, act’ (PDSA) cycles is required for successful
   publication. There is a growing database of published QI projects
   which may prove inspirational for ideas that can be developed in
   psychiatry.

-  Local audit departments may be able to support projects directly and
   help identify potential QI project areas. Health Education England
   also publishes innovative ideas which can provide further inspiration
   (http://hee.nhs.uk/). Service user groups can be another source of
   ideas for QI projects.

.. _S11:

Future plans
------------

The training course is to be incorporated into the Deanery core
trainees' course and it is expected that all new core trainees who have
joined the Deanery in the 2015 summer intake will participate in a QI
project each year. Formal evaluation of the impact of training and QI
projects is to be undertaken for this cohort. Those trainees who have
successfully completed a QI project will be encouraged to become mentors
and local QI leads in their area for future projects, providing
sustainability for the projects as well as supervision, teaching and
leadership experience for trainees.

QI projects undertaken by trainees and their seniors are to be regularly
presented at the Trust's Medicines Advisory Group meetings, which will
not only spread innovative ideas but further encourage psychiatrists to
become involved in projects. Connections are being developed with
service user groups and local patient safety programmes to help trainees
define problems to tackle and ideas to test. Links have been made with
the West of England Academic Health Science Network and the Royal
College of Psychiatrists' South West Division E-volution programme
(`www.rcpsych.ac.uk/workinpsychiatry/divisions/southwest/innovationinthesouthwest.aspx <www.rcpsych.ac.uk/workinpsychiatry/divisions/southwest/innovationinthesouthwest.aspx>`__)
to promote the wider spread of quality improvement and innovation.

We have compiled a list of useful resources (`Box 2 <#box2>`__) and tips
for developing a QI project (`Box 3 <#box3>`__) drawing on our own
experience in the Trust.

**Box 3** Top tips for completing a quality improvement (QI) project

-  **Take time to plan your project**. You may be keen to start putting
   in place changes and improvements, but ensuring careful planning will
   mean that a project is more likely to be successful.

-  **Have a SMART aim**. Be clear and focused. Have a clear aim so that
   everyone knows what you are trying to achieve. Make your aim SMART
   (specific, measurable, achievable and agreed, relevant and
   time-bound).

-  **Keep it small**. This will help ensure an improvement works. Once
   it is proven to work on a small scale, it can be rolled out more
   widely.

-  **Think outside the box**. Get a group of interested trainees,
   consultants and the wider multidisciplinary team to think about the
   project with you and help brainstorm ideas for improvements. This
   will engage others and help the project to be a success. Get advice
   from your audit department.

-  **Work in a team**. This is more fun, you will come up with more
   ideas and will feel more motivated.

-  **Involve key stakeholders**. Who needs to know about the project for
   it to be a success? Do you need any approval to carry out changes?
   This might be a team consultant and team or ward manager, or it could
   include your clinical director, medical director or director of
   medical education or head of school. You could present your idea at a
   local academic meeting.

-  **Sustainability**. Think about how you can make your improvements
   continue, especially if you are in a training post and will be moving
   on in 6 months or a year. You will need to involve your
   multidisciplinary team and local team managers.

-  **Organise your time**. Think about how much time you have available
   to complete the project. Set yourself a time frame and stick to it.
   If you will be moving from a training post, think about whether you
   want to continue making changes after you leave or whether you need
   to do some succession planning.

-  **Make the most of the opportunity**. After all that hard work, make
   sure you get some rewards! Present your work locally, submit a poster
   to a conference, and write up your work and get it published. QI
   projects frequently provide leadership and management experience, and
   often teaching opportunities which you can mention at your annual
   review of competence progression (ARCP), annual appraisals and at job
   interviews.

We are grateful to Janet Brandling and Emma Adams (AWP Quality Academy),
Bridget Kelly (AWP Medical Education Project Manager) and Katherine
Finucane (Consultant and QIP Lead, North Bristol Trust) for guidance and
support in developing QI projects across the Severn Deanery.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

.. [1]
   **Elizabeth Ewins** is an ST6 dual trainee in general adult and older
   adult psychiatry and Trainee Lead for QI, Avon and Wiltshire Mental
   Health Partnership NHS Trust, **Rob Macpherson** is Head of Severn
   School of Psychiatry, Health Education South West, Bristol, **Geoff
   van der Linden** is a consultant psychiatrist and **Stephen Arnott**
   is Director of Medical Education, Avon and Wiltshire Mental Health
   Partnership NHS Trust.
