===================================================================================================
Implementation of a novel primary care pathway for patients with severe and enduring mental illness
===================================================================================================



Frank Röhricht
Gopal Krishan Waddon
Paul Binfield
Rhiannon England
Richard Fradgley
Lise Hertel
Paul James
Judith Littlejohns
David Maher
Matthew Oppong
:Correspondence: Frank Röhricht
(frank.rohricht@elft.nhs.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** New collaborative care models with an emphasis on
   primary care are required for long-term management of patients with
   severe and enduring mental illness (SMI). We conducted a descriptive
   evaluation of clinical outcomes of the first 3 years of a novel
   enhanced primary care (EPC) service. Data from 2818 patients and
   staff survey results were analysed.

   **Results** 2310 patients were discharged to EPC (508 not assessed as
   clinically suitable or patients/general practitioners declined the
   transfer); mean length of stay with secondary care service of the
   cohort was 9.8 years (range 0–24). 717 patients (31%) have been
   discharged to primary care only out of the EPC services and 233
   patients (10%) have been transferred back to secondary care. Patient
   and staff satisfaction with the new EPC model was high. No severe
   untoward incidents were recorded.

   **Clinical implications** The data suggest that EPC can be safely
   provided for a significant proportion of patients with SMI, who
   traditionally received long-term secondary care support. The novel
   EPC model can be utilised as a template for the provision of
   cost-effective, recovery-oriented and non-stigmatising care in the
   community.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Mental healthcare for the majority of patients with severe and enduring
mental illness (SMI) was historically provided predominantly by
specialist secondary care services in the UK. Hereby, most patients with
long-term chronic conditions received open-ended health and social care
support and relatively few were discharged back to primary care for
ongoing case management. More recently, patients with SMI are
increasingly considered for clinical management by less specialised,
generic primary healthcare services and in collaborative care models.
:sup:`1–3` Most of these schemes have not been robustly evaluated
through clinical and controlled trials. There is however good evidence
to suggest that collaborative chronic care models foster patient
self-management and can improve mental and physical outcomes for
patients with mental health problems. :sup:`3`

In England, the introduction of clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) in
2013 :sup:`4` and the significant public spending savings plan with
annual targets for all National Health Service (NHS) provider
organisations :sup:`5` resulted in a nationwide review of mental
healthcare provisions and piloting of novel care pathways. Secondary
mental healthcare providers have started to reduce the number of cases
held by specialist community mental health teams, including assertive
outreach and community rehabilitation teams. The NHS policy paper *No
Health Without Mental Health* :sup:`6` emphasised the need for
integration of care for physical and mental health needs; provider and
commissioner organisations therefore started to engage in various local
service redesign projects. In East London, enhanced primary care (EPC)
services for patients with SMI were developed and implemented in 2012,
following a whole system review which attempted to address the issue of
plateauing resources. The overall aim of the EPC service is to foster
recovery of patients with SMI, to safely discharge them to primary care
settings that attend to their mental healthcare needs. Three years after
its launch, clinical outcomes of the novel care pathway for patients
with SMI, patient/staff satisfaction were evaluated and are reported in
this paper.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Data collection and analysis
----------------------------

This evaluation is based on a retrospective data analysis of routinely
collected data on all the patients referred to and/or fully discharged
from secondary care to the EPC service since its inception (reporting
period from 1 August 2012 to 31 July 2015). Electronic clinical
data-sets included: total number of identified/discharged patients;
number of patients who refused to be transferred to the new service and
where either general practitioners (GPs) or consultant psychiatrists
assessed patients as not suitable; diagnoses and ICD-10 :sup:`7` codes,
gender, ethnicity, duration of service provided by secondary care,
number of admissions to hospital; number of patients re-referred to
secondary care or readmitted/relapsed analysis of main characteristics
of this subgroup of patients.

In addition we conducted an analysis of available information collected
regarding staff satisfaction (semi-structured interviews and
questionnaires) and summarised data from a patient satisfaction survey
(Client's Assessment of Treatment Scale :sup:`8` ) for the new service
from one of the three localities (Newham).

.. _S3:

Description of the new EPC service
----------------------------------

The model was developed in partnership between East London NHS
Foundation Trust and the three East London CCGs (Newham, City & Hackney,
Tower Hamlets) across primary/secondary care teams by interdisciplinary
working groups; those involved were people participation leads, GPs,
consultant psychiatrists, senior community psychiatry nurses,
psychologists and social work leads. The initial target was defined as
300 patients per year per locality. The EPC care pathway allows
providing mental healthcare flexibly according to patients' needs and to
step up (secondary mental health services) or step down (generic primary
care) in a seamless way without administrative hurdles.

.. _S4:

EPC care pathway elements
-------------------------

Elements of the EPC care pathway were as follows: Regular GP reviews (in
addition to quality and outcome requirements), the development of a
recovery care plan, practice nurse administration of depot medication,
and specific assessment of risk factors for physical illness,
signposting into healthy lifestyle services. Enhanced support to primary
care from consultant psychiatrists with regular practice-based mental
health multidisciplinary review meetings. Training and education to GPs
on managing SMI in primary care, and for practice nurses on
psychopharmacology and therapeutic depot administration. EPC mental
health teams consisting of registered mental nurses, employed by East
London NHS Foundation Trust but working within general practice, to
support discharge into the EPC and provide recovery-oriented support to
patients on an ongoing basis.

The philosophy of the service operationally distinguishes clearly
between: specialist acute and rehabilitation treatment for patients with
severe or complex needs and/or those identified as presenting with
significant risks to self or others associated with their illness
(continued to be provided by secondary care services); and long-term
condition management aiming to provide monitoring and maintenance
support for patients with stable chronic SMI (provided by the new EPC
teams). Inclusion criteria for the EPC transfer were defined as follows:
Aged 18 years or older, resident in one of the three East London
boroughs and currently under the care of secondary care services.
Established diagnosis of an SMI that would warrant their inclusion on
the practice severe and enduring mental illness (SEMI) register.
Identified care needs above those that would ordinarily be provided for
under normal primary care, either medical or social needs, that require
additional support. Patient agrees to the support offered via the EPC
clinic. Sustained clinical progress with less frequent support from
secondary care and no identified need for specialist interventions and
treatments. Last acute psychiatric hospital admission more than 12
months ago, no current risks to self or others identified; patient is
well-established on a medication regime and requires minimal assistance
with concordance, but does require regular monitoring and review.
Patient has settled accommodation, is able to meet their own basic
living needs. Patients requiring lithium prescribing or depot injections
in primary care are included.

.. _S5:

Teaching, training and supervision
----------------------------------

Primary care liaison nurses (PCLNs) of the EPC teams were recruited from
secondary care services and all had experience in providing mental
healthcare to patients with SMI. A list of essential competencies,
skills and experiences were identified as significant requirements for
the recruitment of the EPC workforce and included the following areas:
history taking/mental state examination, engagement skills and basic
knowledge of principles pertaining to a positive therapeutic
relationship, risk assessment and management, recovery care and social
psychiatry, and psychiatric emergencies. Additional training was offered
to PCLNs.

The provision of the EPC service is supported through weekly team
meetings, monthly supervision sessions, and six monthly
appraisal/reviews, aiming to maintain and update knowledge and skills.

The three localities agreed on mandatory training requirements for
primary care staff as part of the EPC contract with their primary care
practices and the EPC team provided training for staff in GP practices
including mental health awareness training for practice reception staff
and depot training for nurses.

Subsequently, in 2015 a website with a wide range of teaching and
self-learning materials for all primary care staff was developed with
funding from Health Education England North Central and East London,
launched into public domain in 2016
(http://primary-mentalhealth-care.elft.nhs.uk).

.. _S6:

Service aims and expected outcomes
----------------------------------

-  To support patients to achieve their recovery goals through a process
   of joint planning that places patients at the centre.

-  To empower people to self-manage their own recovery journey and reach
   a position where they can reduce their contact with mental health
   services.

-  To mark the recovery journey by recognising achievements while being
   transferred to receive care in EPC and at the point of discharge from
   EPC.

-  To improve the patient experience and outcomes through enhanced
   multidisciplinary team working that addresses mental health, physical
   health and social need as part of an integrated approach.

-  To improve patient experience and outcomes through the provision of
   care in a normalised setting, close to home and to assist the
   navigation of patients towards resources that supports their
   recovery.

-  To enable the development of capacity, confidence and competence in
   relation to mental health treatment and care in the primary care
   workforce.

The service elements were developed accordingly, centred on a ‘My
Recovery Plan’ and associated ‘My Safety Plan’ documents for
time-limited EPC interventions according to recovery goals set by the
patient (with a recommended duration of up to a year after which the
patient is supposed to be discharged into generic primary care
services). The time-limited nature of the service was to be made clear
to the patients at the outset and the service provides a fast-track
option back to secondary care services if needs change.

.. _S7:

Team composition
----------------

The service is predominantly delivered by psychiatric PCLNs. The three
localities agreed on different staffing compositions according to local
variations of service needs and/or perceived requirements in respect of
multidisciplinary inputs from health professionals.

In Newham, psychiatrist input is provided by one consultant with
protected time in the job plan and by catchment area consultants as
required based on a sectorised/practice-aligned service model; in Tower
Hamlets consultants with a primary base in general practice deliver
psychiatric expertise; and in City & Hackney a model with a dedicated
EPC service consultant was established.

Following a 12-month review the team of healthcare professionals was
complemented by a group of peer support workers, who provide patients
with emotional and practical support as they approach discharge from
secondary care services. All the peer supporters have personal
experience of in-patient and community mental healthcare and support
patients flexibly based on their own experiences of recovery. A summary
of the current team structures and allocated posts is provided in `Table
1 <#T1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Staffing composition in enhanced primary care (EPC) teams in each
      locality `a <#TFN2>`__

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | D     | Total | Admin | Oc    | Cli   | Nurse | Nurse | Consu | Peer/ | Se    | Team  |
   | irect | WTE   | Band  | cupat | nical | Band  | Band  | ltant | su    | rvice | case  |
   | orate | per   | 4     | ional | ps    | 6     | 7     |       | pport | ma    | -load |
   |       | team  |       | ther  | ychol |       |       |       | w     | nager | cap   |
   |       |       |       | apist | ogist |       |       |       | orker | Band  | acity |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | Band  | 8a    |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | 3/4   |       |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
   | CH    | 10.6  |       |       |       |       | 8.0   | 1.6   |       | 1.0   | 300   |
   | ori   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ginal |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | CH    | 16.3  | 1.0   | 0.2   | 0.2   |       | 6.0   | 1.0   | 7.0   | 1.0   | 720   |
   | cu    |       |       |       |       |       |       | `b    |       |       |       |
   | rrent |       |       |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | 3>`__ |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | NH    | 9.1   |       |       |       | 4.0   |       | 0.1   | 4.0   | 1.0   | 300   |
   | ori   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ginal |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | NH    | 14.0  |       |       |       | 4.0   |       | 0.5   | 8.0   | 1.0   | 600   |
   | cu    |       |       |       |       |       |       | `c    |       |       |       |
   | rrent |       |       |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | 4>`__ |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | TH    | 6.4   |       |       |       | 6.0   |       | 0.4   |       |       | 250   |
   | ori   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ginal |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | TH    | 18.0  | 1.0   |       |       | 6.0   | 4.0   | 1.5   | 4.0   | 1.0   | 700   |
   | cu    |       |       |       |       |       |       | `d    |       |       |       |
   | rrent |       |       |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | 5>`__ |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Trust | 48.3  | 2.0   | 0.2   | 0.2   | 10    | 10    | 3.0   | 19.0  | 3.0   | 2020  |
   | total |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | cu    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | rrent |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

   CH, City & Hackney; NH, Newham; TH, Tower Hamlets; WTE, whole time
   equivalent.

   Original and current from 2016. Phased increase in size of service
   with new investment following a service review in 2014–2015.

   Consisting of each of the four current primary care consultants
   devoting 2.5 sessions a week to the EPC service and primary care
   liaison.

   Consisting of time dedicated to EPC and primary care liaison by the
   four assessment and brief treatment consultants providing support to
   practices and one consultant with 0.1 WTE leading on EPC.

   Consisting of a dedicated consultant providing two sessions a week to
   provide clinical support to the EPC team and the Compass Primary Care
   Psychology service, and each of the community mental health team
   consultants providing one session a fortnight to supporting the
   primary care practices to which they are aligned.

EPC provides an open general advice service to GPs to assist in the
treatment of patients that have been discharged from EPC and secondary
care. The arrangements vary between the three East London boroughs but
all include case-based discussions between GPs and consultant
psychiatrists during regular multidisciplinary clinical meetings at
primary care level.

.. _S8:

Results
=======

.. _S9:

Service activity summary
------------------------

As per 31 July 2015, the three East London EPC teams provided care for
1370 patients. Since August 2012 the services considered in total 2810
patients, of which 480 were not proceeded with because the patients
declined transfer (*n* = 149), the GP declined the transfer (*n* = 90)
or the secondary care eventually decided the transfer was not clinically
appropriate (*n* = 241). Therefore, 2330 patients have received an
active service from EPC services since their inception. In total, 717
patients were transferred to primary care only from EPC with variations
across teams. The total number of patients discharged from EPC to
primary care alone has significantly increased beyond the reporting
period of this service evaluation due to changes in operational policy
and as a result of the teaching and training efforts to upskill GPs,
resulting in increased throughput.

All referral and case-load data with developments to 30 October 2016 are
summarised in `Table 2 <#T2>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Total referral and case-load activity for enhanced primary care
      (EPC)

   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                | At 31 July     | At 29 February | At 30 October  |
   |                | 2015           | 2016           | 2016           |
   +================+================+================+================+
   | Active         |                |                |                |
   | case-load, *n* |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     City &     | 510            | 547            | 633            |
   | Hackney        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Newham     | 485            | 557            | 610            |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Tower      | 375            | 473            | 618            |
   | Hamlets        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Total *n*  | 1370           | 1577           | 1861           |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Referrals      |                |                |                |
   | considered,    |                |                |                |
   | total *n*      |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     EPC –      | 2810           | 4082           | 5286           |
   | Trust wide     |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Refused/not    |                |                |                |
   | suitable, *n*  |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     EPC –      | 480            | 576            | 633            |
   | Trust wide     |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Received EPC   |                |                |                |
   | service, *n*   |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     City &     | 955            | 1317           | 1635           |
   | Hackney        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Newham     | 787            | 1186           | 1448           |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Tower      | 588            | 1003           | 1570           |
   | Hamlets        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Total *n*  | 2330           | 3506           | 4653           |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | EPC transfer   |                |                |                |
   | to primary     |                |                |                |
   | care, *n*      |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     City &     | 384            | 675            | 939            |
   | Hackney        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Newham     | 184            | 465            | 705            |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Tower      | 149            | 385            | 594            |
   | Hamlets        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Total *n*  | 717            | 1525           | 2238           |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Transfer back  |                |                |                |
   | to secondary   |                |                |                |
   | care, *n*      |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     City &     | 65             | 95             | 177            |
   | Hackney        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Newham     | 124            | 164            | 227            |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Tower      | 48             | 94             | 160            |
   | Hamlets        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Total *n*  | 233            | 353            | 564            |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

.. _S10:

Patient characteristics
-----------------------

The majority of patients referred to EPC had a significant history of
SMI with an average (mean) duration of care provided under care
programme approach (CPA) standards by secondary care services (community
mental health teams) of 9.7 years (range 0–24). The mean age of patients
was 45.7 years (range 18–65; 12.1% 18–30 years and 77.3% 30–60 years);
54% of patients were female and 46% were male. Overall, 47.4% were
single/living alone, 26.3% were married/civil partner and 11.6% were
separated/divorced/widowed/surviving civil partner. Given the high
percentage of Black and ethnic minorities living in East London, the
distribution of ethnicity across the sample reflects the diversity:
Asian or Asian British 24%, Black or Black British/African–Caribbean
19.8%, White British or other White 38.5%, other ethnic groups 17.8%.

The main diagnoses of patients were: schizophreniform or other psychotic
disorders (ICD-10 codes F20–29) 37.2%, mood (affective) disorders
(F30–39) 32.1%, anxiety/stress-related/somatoform and other
non-psychotic mental disorders (F40–48) 11% and disorders of adult
personality and behaviour (F60–69) 4.1%.

According to Department of Health guidance :sup:`9` the main cluster
codes on transfer to EPC were: cluster 10–13: 48.9% (11: 19.4%; 12:
21.5%; 13: 7.1%); cluster 4–7: 26.1%. The number of patients referred
back to secondary care due to clinical issues (relapse concerns) was 237
(City & Hackney *n* = 65, Newham *n* = 124, Tower Hamlets *n* = 48).

.. _S11:

Feedback from patients
----------------------

Both EPC staff reports and results from questionnaire surveys suggest
that the vast majority of patients regarded the new service arrangements
as both helpful and adequate according to their needs. We conducted a
more detailed survey in one of the three localities (Newham), using the
structured Client's Assessment of Treatment Scale. Results from 126
patients who completed the survey (mean age 49.2 years, range 26–71; 66
female, 60 male) are indicative of comparatively high levels of patient
satisfaction (most scores across the group rated with a mean of 8–9 out
of 10) (`Table 3 <#T3>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Results from 126 patients who completed the Client's Assessment of
      Treatment Scale

   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   |                                             | Mean | Range | s.d. |
   +=============================================+======+=======+======+
   | Do you believe you are receiving the right  | 8.8  | 4–10  | 1.6  |
   | treatment/care for you here?                |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   |                                             |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   | Does your general practitioner understand   | 8.4  | 1–10  | 1.9  |
   | you and is she/he engaged in your           |      |       |      |
   | treatment/care?                             |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   |                                             |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   | Does your named nurse understand you and is | 9.0  | 2–10  | 1.5  |
   | she/he engaged in your treatment/care?      |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   |                                             |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   | Are relations with other staff members here | 8.5  | 0–10  | 2.0  |
   | pleasant or unpleasant for you?             |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   |                                             |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   | Do you believe you are receiving the right  | 8.9  | 0–10  | 1.7  |
   | medication for you?                         |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   |                                             |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   | Do you believe the other elements of        | 9.4  | 4–10  | 1.3  |
   | treatment/care here are right for you?      |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   |                                             |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   | Do you feel respected and regarded well     | 9.0  | 4–10  | 1.5  |
   | here?                                       |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   |                                             |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+
   | Has treatment/care here been helpful for    | 9.0  | 4–10  | 1.4  |
   | you?                                        |      |       |      |
   +---------------------------------------------+------+-------+------+

.. _S12:

Feedback from GPs
-----------------

GPs across all three localities engaged very well with the three EPC
teams and expressed high levels of satisfaction; they acknowledged that
the EPC service improved care for their patients. A brief survey
questionnaire distributed to 61 GP surgeries in Newham was returned by
52 GPs. All but two GPs stated that the EPC helped to change their
perception of/and relationship with mental health services.

Another GP survey was conducted in Tower Hamlets and revealed the
following feedback (first figure 6 months after service implementation
based on 61 responses (from 36 surgeries), second figure 1 year later
based on 23 responses); this survey indicates that the EPC model
contributed to developing GP's skills and knowledge of psychotropic
prescribing (Very confident 3.3/13%, Confident 44.3/47.8%, Neutral
33.4/34.8%, Not confident 18.0/4.4%). In addition, satisfaction rates
with practice-based multi-disciplinary meetings as well as the
network-linked PCLNs was largely positive and increased over time.

We conducted a subgroup analysis of patients from Newham EPC who were
re-referred to secondary care from EPC due to a relapse (significant
increase in symptoms) of their mental disorder or other reasons; *n* =
124 out of 787, 15.8%.

Relapse due to a range of stressors (iatrogenic, non-adherence, etc.)
was *n* = 69; relapse with acute admission to hospital, *n* = 8; and
non-engagement and requests to be discharged from GP, *n* = 9. Requests
for medication review by secondary services/GP referred back: *n* = 26;
social circumstances: *n* = 4; and patient demanding to be referred back
to consultant: *n* = 3.

Only for 3 out of 124 re-referred patients with a change in prescribed
dose of medication were identified, all others had been on stable
medication as per discharge plan from secondary care. The number of EPC
face-to-face contacts for this group varied from 0 to 8, most patients
had been seen on 1–3 occasions by their PCLN. The diagnostic codes, PCLN
clinics and GP surgeries were equally distributed across this group.

.. _S13:

Discussion
==========

The data-set considered for this service evaluation comprised of a large
sample of over 2000 patients with predominantly chronic severe mental
illness (schizophreniform, psychotic or severe affective disorder, care
clusters 10–13 and 4–7) and the observation period of 3 years seems
adequate to allow for a critical appraisal of performance data. The
overall results from this service evaluation suggest that a significant
proportion of patients with SMI, who were traditionally seen long term
with open-ended care plans in secondary care, can be successfully
discharged to enhanced primary mental healthcare services. This is even
more so significant given the fact that prior to transfer of care,
patients had been receiving specialist mental health services for on
average of nearly 10 years. The number of relapses and re-referrals to
secondary care services has been low, even though the overall referral
rate to EPC has risen. A significant number of patients who received EPC
services are now supported by primary care alone.

The success of this novel care pathway is based on very close
collaboration between primary and secondary care health professionals
and service characteristics that provide seamless care across
boundaries: all PCLNs were employed through secondary mental health
services and mostly recruited from existing mental health teams, which
enabled them to provide clinical expertise into the new service – quick
access to secondary care for crisis management was built into the
service structure.

Only about 14% of patients were not taken into EPC clinic care following
the initial referral and this is indicative of a carefully conducted and
initially conservative selection process, also taking patient
preferences into account. Patient feedback was very positive and no
severe untoward incidents occurred during the observational period.

Although mental healthcare services for patients with SMI have
traditionally been regarded as too specialised for primary care, most
patients regard primary care provisions as a significant milestone in
their recovery journey. :sup:`10` The care pathway development was
conducted based on a much clearer distinction between elements focusing
on supporting people to maintain stability and monitor symptoms versus
elements providing active recovery-oriented treatment. This allowed
refocusing of specialist services and deconstructing the ‘shifted
out-patient clinic’ model, :sup:`11` essentially a replacement model,
which does not provide opportunities for enhanced linkage and
face-to-face consultations between the primary care physician and the
psychiatrist. :sup:`12` By contrast, the consultation-liaison
collaboration model provides regular face-to-face contact between the
psychiatrist or mental health worker and the GP. :sup:`13`

The survey results suggest that the support primary care doctors receive
from consultant psychiatrists is a vital part of the scheme. The precise
arrangements vary across the three boroughs but each primary care
practice has an aligned consultant who visits the surgery regularly, is
available for advice especially on potential referrals to secondary care
and who assists the surgeries to become more mental health sensitive and
informed.

The main difficulties with the new care pathway identified in the
context of this service evaluation are related to the wider context of
recovery-focused care with an emphasis on integration with mainstream
community services, such as employment, training and leisure activities.
Depending on pre-existing skill and knowledge base within each of the
participating GP surgeries, the quality of mental state monitoring and
therapeutic engagement is likely to vary significantly. More emphasis
must therefore be given towards developing robust and ongoing teaching
and training curricula for primary care practitioners. Another
significant challenge is the variation in access to psychological
therapy services and social care from locality to locality depending on
the level and specification of integrated care pathways. This is a
crucially important issue for the success of EPC services, safeguarding
against compromising the quality of care.

A further significant increase of the number of people who experience a
mental health problem in England has been predicted (i.e. 14.2%, from
8.65 million in 2007 to 9.88 million in 2026) as a result of population
growth. :sup:`14` More research of innovative and collaborative schemes
for high-quality cost-effective mental healthcare is required, assessing
the impact of working across primary and secondary care. :sup:`15`

The promotion of psychological resources and capabilities at a family
and community level to support people experiencing mental ill health
appears to be a promising complementary strategy for both primary and
secondary prevention. Last but not least there seems to be a real case
to extend the role of district nurses, to strengthen the role of GP
champions in mental healthcare :sup:`16` and to involve patients as
teachers in interprofessional learning as already pointed out by Lester
*et al* :sup:`17` in their discussion paper on integrated primary mental
healthcare more than 10 years ago.

.. _S14:

Limitations and outlook
-----------------------

This is a retrospective analysis of routinely collected data for service
evaluation, not a formal research study. Patients were identified by
their secondary care clinicians as potentially suitable for transfer to
the EPC clinic and there was no control condition. The Client's
Assessment of Treatment Scale satisfaction scores and relapse indicator
analysis was only available for one of the three localities and only a
subgroup of about 25% of patients open to the EPC service completed the
survey.

Empirical research is needed to establish detailed patient
characteristics as predictors for successful transfer of care.
Longer-term and controlled follow-up studies are required to establish
care quality and effectiveness issues across various components of the
health and social care pathway (e.g. social inclusion, subjective
quality of life, psychopathological symptom levels) following discharge
from secondary care services, compared with continuing specialist
treatment. It will be important to assess differences between inner-city
and more rural areas to establish as to whether the claim, that the
delivery of mental healthcare in primary settings is ‘more accessible,
affordable and acceptable for the population’ :sup:`18` can be
substantiated.

.. [1]
   **Frank Röhricht**, Consultant Psychiatrist and Associate Medical
   Director, East London NHS Foundation Trust and University of Essex.
   **Gopal Krishan Waddon**, Quality and Performance Manager, East
   London NHS Foundation Trust and Research Student, University of
   Bolton. **Paul Binfield**, Head of People Participation, East London
   NHS Foundation Trust. **Rhiannon England**, general practitioner and
   CCG Mental Health Lead, NHS City & Hackney Clinical Commissioning
   Group. **Richard Fradgley**, Director of Integrated Care, East London
   NHS Foundation Trust. **Lise Hertel**, general practitioner and
   Strategic Clinical Network Representative, South East Mental Health
   Commissioning Network. **Paul James**, Director of Operations, East
   London NHS Foundation Trust. **Judith Littlejohns**, general
   practitioner and CCG Mental Health Lead, NHS Tower Hamlets Clinical
   Commissioning Group. **David Maher**, Deputy Chief Officer and
   Programme Director, NHS City & Hackney Clinical Commissioning Group.
   **Matthew Oppong**, Head Primary Care Liaison, East London NHS
   Foundation Trust.
