=============================================
Mental health law across the UK\ `† <#fn1>`__
=============================================

Tony ZigmondCorrespondence to Tony Zigmond (aszigmond@me.com)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   The criteria governing medical treatment without consent in the three
   legal jurisdictions of the UK – England and Wales, Scotland and
   Northern Ireland – is discussed.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

   ‘A doctor is not that sinister figure which in former times he was
   represented to be, anxious simply to confine a man in a dungeon for
   life. He is treating mental disorder in exactly the same way as he
   treats any other disease.’

   Lord Russell 1928\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`

Nearly 20 years ago I wrote an editorial in this journal that there
should be a medical incapacity act to ‘provide for the medical
treatment, both mental and physical, of those who lack capacity from
whatever cause. It would establish a statutory framework offering the
same protections to all patients who are unable to consent to medical
intervention, from both physical and psychiatric conditions, and permit
investigation and treatment of both the physical and mental illnesses of
such patients’.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Szmuckler & Holloway have not just
argued for a single piece of legislation for all nonconsensual care and
treatment saying that a mental health act is harmful,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`
they have written a draft act under the heading of ‘Fusion
Law’.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` We may soon know whether we were right.

There are three distinct legal jurisdictions within the UK: England and
Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. Until recently all had a mental
health act to regulate the care and treatment of people with a mental
illness while relying on common law to do the same for the physically
ill. The powers given to doctors and other healthcare professionals by
the two regimes was very different.

Within a year or two either side of the turn of this century, all the
jurisdictions started to review their relevant legislation, not only
their mental health law but also the necessity for replacing common law
with statutory provision for the non-consensual treatment of physical
illness, not least to ensure compliance with the European Convention on
Human Rights as required by the Human Rights Act 1998. Scotland passed
its Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, England and Wales its
Mental Capacity Act 2005, Northern Ireland its Mental Capacity Act
(Northern Ireland) 2016. For their mental health acts, each started with
a review: Richardson for England and Wales published in
1999,\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` Millan for Scotland in 2001\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` and
Bamford for Northern Ireland in 2007.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Each considered
whether or not their mental health act should include a ‘capacity’
criterion for medical treatment without consent.

The courts have been consistent about the role of capacity when adults
make a decision about medical treatment. Lord Reid in 1972 said: “‘There
is no doubt that a person of full age and capacity cannot be ordered to
undergo a blood test against his will. … the real reason is that English
law goes to great lengths to protect a person of full age and capacity
from interference with his personal liberty. We have too often seen
freedom disappear in other countries not only by coups d'etat but by
gradual erosion: and often it is the first step that counts. So it would
be unwise to make even minor concessions’.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`” Lord
Donaldson, then Master of the Rolls, in 1992 said: “‘Prima facie every
adult has the right and capacity to decide whether or not he will accept
medical treatment, even if a refusal may risk permanent injury to his
health or even lead to premature death’.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`” Ten years
later Dame Butler-Sloss said the same: “‘A competent patient has an
absolute right to refuse to consent to medical treatment for any reason,
rational or irrational, or for no reason at all, even when that decision
may lead to his or her death’.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)`” They all emphasised the
importance of autonomy. Although common law has now been replaced by
statute law, the provisions of capacity legislation fully reflect these
sentiments. I note that all the Judges were, of course, incorrect. A
competent person with a mental illness may have no right to refuse
treatment.

To return to the reviews. The first principle of Recommendation 3.3 in
the Millan report is ‘Non discrimination – People with mental disorder
should whenever possible retain the same rights and entitlements as
those with other health needs’ (p. 23).\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` So, should
capacity be a criterion as it is for those with other health needs? The
report sets outs the arguments against the capacity criterion including
that there were difficulties assessing capacity, particularly in
patients with mood disorders, obsessive–compulsive disorders and eating
disorders; ‘Such patients might retain legal capacity but be at such
risk as to justify intervention’ (p.55).\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` The committee
was also told by some psychiatrists that “‘incapacity was a concept
which they would find difficult to measure and apply. The British
Medical Association (BMA) suggested that a capacity test would make it
harder for GPs and doctors in, for example, Accident and Emergency
Departments to come to a decision, and might lead to a reluctance to use
the Act. The United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and
Health Visiting (UKCC), while in favour of making the justification for
non-consensual interventions more explicit, suggested that professionals
were not equipped to apply sophisticated tests of capacity fairly’
(p.55).\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`” These comments about difficulties assessing
capacity are noteworthy because no individual or organisation said they
could not operate or abide by the provisions of that country's
incapacity act which, of course, requires assessment of capacity.

The Millan committee advised “‘that it should not be possible for a
compulsory intervention to be made under mental health law unless there
is evidence that the person's judgement is significantly impaired, as a
result of mental disorder, so as to justify the intervention. This
expresses a broadly similar concept to incapacity, but is felt to be a
less legalistic formulation, and one which may be easier to apply in
practice’ (p. 57).\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`” Significantly impaired
decision-making as a result of the mental disorder (SIDMA) is a
criterion for compulsion in the Mental Health (Care and Treatment)
(Scotland) Act 2005. Millan had asked the question as to whether a
mental health act was necessary and decided it was. Richardson also
considered the question of capacity. Similar to Millan, ‘The principles
governing mental health care should be the same as those which govern
physical health’ (p. 21)\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` wherever possible. Although
deciding that incapacity should not be a criterion because ‘Mental
disorder unlike most physical health problems may occasionally have
wider consequences for the individual's family and carer, and very
occasionally for unconnected members of the public’ (p.
19),\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` the report suggested a form of words which would
require the assessment of, and taking into account, the patient's
capacity. Patients with capacity could only be detained if they
presented a higher degree of risk compared with patients who lacked
capacity. The government rejected this proposal. That a distinct mental
health act was required was not questioned. There is no ‘capacity’ or
‘SIDMA’ criterion, nor a distinction between patients who retain
capacity and those who do not, in the Mental Health Act 1983 (amended in
2007). To have such a criterion would have meant, according to Lord Hunt
during the debate on the 2007 Bill, ‘abandoning one of the most
fundamental objectives of the Act, namely that compulsory intervention
should be based on need and risk’.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` To spell it out, in
England and Wales a person can be forced to accept treatment for their
mental illness if there is a health risk to themselves or others despite
retaining full decision-making capacity. The equivalent law for physical
illness, the Mental Capacity Act 2005, only applies if the person cannot
consent because they lack capacity to do so. Patients with capacity who
refuse consent cannot be forced to accept treatment no matter what the
risks.

Northern Ireland has taken rather longer to determine their way forward.
The outcome of the Bamford review and the provisions of their new act
are detailed by Lynch *et al.*\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`\ There is to be no mental
health act. The Mental Capacity Act (Northern Ireland) 2016 gives
exactly the same legal framework for the non-consensual medical
treatment of all citizens no matter what their illness.

Parity of esteem, a flagship policy of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, is best described, according to the College, as: ‘Valuing
mental health equally with physical health’ (p. 3).\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` The
College has described a range of equalities which need to be achieved
although, perhaps surprisingly, there is no mention of equality under
the law. Northern Ireland now has equality under the law. The day after
the judgment in the case of Ms B,\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` *The Independent*
newspaper wrote ‘Never again may a clinician administer treatment
against the will of a mentally competent patient’.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` In
Northern Ireland that will soon be true.

Earl Howe, in his closing statement during the passage of the Mental
Health Bill 2007 (England and Wales), quoted the Millan committee, ‘It
should not be the function of mental health law to impose treatment on
those who are clearly able to make decisions for themselves’ and then
continued, ‘As it is we are, in a real sense, back in the world of Enoch
Powell and 1959. Patient empowerment and respect for the wishes of the
patient are acknowledged features of good clinical practice in all other
areas of healthcare – but not, it seems, in mental
health’.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` The Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Act 2016
gives psychiatrists the same legal powers as all other doctors, and
psychiatric patients the same autonomy and respect as all other
patients. Where Northern Ireland has led surely other UK jurisdictions,
and countries across the world, will follow.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

.. [1]
   **Tony Zigmond**, retired consultant psychiatrist, UK.
