---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** Capacity legislation in the UK allows substitute
  decision-making for adults lacking capacity. Research has explored the
  experiences of such adults and their carers in relation to the Adults
  with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, and the Mental Capacity Act 2005
  in England and Wales. A systematic review of the relevant research was
  performed using a framework method.

  **Results** The legislation provided mechanisms for substitute
  decision-making which were seen as useful, but there were negative
  experiences. Decision-making did not always seem to follow the
  legislative principles. Awareness of the legislation was limited. Most
  research was qualitative and some was of low methodological quality.
  Data were too heterogeneous to allow comparisons between English and
  Scottish law.

  **Clinical implications** Capacity legislation was generally viewed
  positively. However, some experiences were perceived negatively, and
  the potential benefits of the legislation were not always utilised.
author:
- Sam WilsonCorrespondence to Sam Wilson (<samuel.wilson1@nhs.net>) [^1]
date: 2017-10
institute:
- 1Royal Cornhill Hospital, Aberdeen
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
title: "Mental capacity legislation in the UK: systematic review of the
  experiences of adults lacking capacity and their carers"
---

-   [Method](#S1){#toc-S1}
-   [Results](#S2){#toc-S2}
    -   [Positive experiences](#S3){#toc-S3}
    -   [Negative experiences](#S4){#toc-S4}
    -   [Decision-making](#S5){#toc-S5}
    -   [Other findings](#S6){#toc-S6}
        -   [Practical support](#S7){#toc-S7}
        -   [Lack of knowledge of the legislation](#S8){#toc-S8}
        -   [Assertiveness of carers](#S9){#toc-S9}
        -   [Application for financial/welfare powers](#S10){#toc-S10}
        -   [Absent or limited data](#S11){#toc-S11}
-   [Discussion](#S12){#toc-S12}
    -   [Methods and limitations](#S13){#toc-S13}
    -   [Findings](#S14){#toc-S14}

In law, mental capacity is the ability to make decisions, and it relies
on a number of attributes such as comprehension and reasoning.^[@R1]^
Capacity legislation exists to allow legally valid decisions to be made
about finances, welfare or medical treatment where the individual lacks
mental capacity In Scotland this legislation exists as the Adults with
Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 (AWIA) and in England and Wales as the
Mental Capacity Act 2005 (MCA). Northern Ireland has recently adopted
the Mental Capacity Act (Northern Ireland) 2016.

Prior to the introduction of legislation, English capacity law was
criticised by the Law Commission as being unsystematic and out of step
with disability rights.^[@R2]^ The Scottish Law Commission described
Scottish capacity law as fragmented and archaic.^[@R3]^ The AWIA and the
MCA were introduced to reform capacity law, and are similar in many
respects. They set out principles which aim to promote the rights of
adults who lack capacity, and create mechanisms to allow substitute
decision-making, a process whereby another individual has the legal
power to make decisions on the disabled adult\'s behalf. The MCA has a
specific 'best interests' process, which allows some decisions to be
made without court proceedings, whereas there is no equivalent process
in the AWIA. The Northern Irish legislation mirrors the MCA in many
regards. The terminology varies between jurisdictions, for example,
guardianship in the AWIA is similar to deputyship in the MCA.

A number of studies have explored the experiences of adults lacking
capacity and their carers in relation to the legislation, and this
systematic review draws together findings from this area of research.

# Method {#S1}

This review systematically appraised the research evidence exploring how
adults lacking capacity and their carers experienced capacity
legislation. It followed the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination
guideline.^[@R4]^ The process is summarised in [Fig.
1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}. All experiences related to the AWIA and the MCA
were considered of interest, from everyday decision-making to
perceptions of court proceedings and their outcomes. There was no
research relating to the Northern Irish legislation, because the review
was undertaken prior to its adoption. In this review, 'carers' included
family and professional carers who made substitute decisions in a
day-to-day caring role.

![Flow chart of study selection process.](261f1){#F1}

The primary research question was 'What are the experiences and
perceptions of adults lacking capacity, their carers and the general
public in relation to capacity legislation in the UK?' The secondary
research question was whether such experiences varied between
jurisdictions.

The published literature consisted of both quantitative and qualitative
research. Studies were included if they were published after the year
2000 (the year of introduction of the AWIA) and consisted of
quantitative or qualitative research about the experiences or
perceptions of adults lacking capacity, their carers or members of the
general public in relation to the MCA or AWIA There was no restriction
placed on diagnosis. Exclusion criteria included studies where the
individuals were minors, studies of capacity to participate in research,
and studies carried out prior to the implementation of whichever Act was
relevant. Papers such as accounts of service development activities,
assessments of educational interventions and legal commentaries were
also excluded. Research publications from sources other than
peer-reviewed journals were included, because it seemed likely that
there would be a paucity of evidence in the peer-reviewed literature.
Although this strategy increased the likelihood of low-quality evidence
entering the review, this was addressed by consideration of quality in
the synthesis of the results.

A literature search was performed during June 2015. The databases were
Medline, PsycINFO, EMBASE, Web of Science, ESRC, Social Care Online,
BAILII, HeinOnline and LexisLibrary. The search terms were the keywords
'Mental Capacity Act', 'Adults with Incapacity Act', and 'Adults with
Incapacity Scotland Act'. Each abstract was screened. Duplicate papers
and papers originating outside the UK were not included. Additional
papers were sought from reference lists, conference proceedings and
contact with authors. The abstracts of the papers were compared with the
exclusion criteria. The complete paper was read if it was unclear from
the abstract whether the paper should be included. The remaining papers
were read once to exclude irrelevant papers from the final sample.

Quality assessment was carried out using the Multi-Methods Appraisal
Tool (MMAT),^[@R5]^ which was selected because it offered the ability to
assess the quality of all the various types of studies in the sample. It
consisted of screening questions followed by questions for quantitative,
qualitative and mixed-methods studies. No studies were excluded from the
final sample because of low quality.

This review followed guidance that items should be regarded as data for
secondary research only if they were described as results or findings in
the primary research.^[@R6]^ A data extraction form was developed during
a reading of the final sample papers. The data extraction form consisted
of headings taken from the results sections of the final sample papers.
Results from each study were then extracted if they were relevant to any
heading on the data extraction form. Analysis used a framework
method^[@R7]^ with a matrix consisting of each study along the x-axis
and each heading from the data extraction form along the y-axis.

# Results {#S2}

There were 11 papers in the final sample, containing 12 distinct
studies. The type and quality of studies are summarised in [Table
1](#T1){ref-type="table"}. Most of the studies used qualitative or mixed
methods. There was variation in the quality of studies; only 4 of the 12
studies were rated as having the highest methodological quality and had
been published in peer-reviewed journals. The other eight studies
presented their results clearly but failed to report important
information.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

Type and quality of studies in the final sample
:::

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Study                                       Act                                 Type                                 Peer-reviewed\   MMAT\
                                                                                                                          journal?      score
  ------------------------------------------ ------ ----------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------- -------
  Badger (2009)^[@R8]^                        MCA                     Multiple qualitative methods                           No          3/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Badger & Parnell (2009)^[@R9]^              MCA                     Multiple qualitative methods                           No          2/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Jevon (2014)^[@R10]^                        AWIA                         Quantitative survey                               No          2/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Jingree (2015)^[@R11]^                      MCA                        Qualitative interviews                             Yes          4/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Killeen & Myers (2004) Ch. 4^[@R12]^        AWIA   Mixed-methods -- quantitative survey and qualitative interviews         No          2/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Killeen & Myers (2004) Ch. 5^[@R13]^        AWIA                       Qualitative interviews                              No          2/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Manthorpe *et al* (2012)^[@R14]^            MCA                        Qualitative interviews                             Yes          4/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Mental Welfare Commission (2011)^[@R15]^    AWIA                       Qualitative interviews                              No          2/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Myron *et al* (2008)^[@R16]^                MCA      Mixed-methods -- questionnaires and qualitative interviews            No          1/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Samsi & Manthorpe (2011)^[@R17]^            MCA                        Qualitative interviews                             Yes          4/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Samsi & Manthorpe (2013)^[@R18]^            MCA                        Qualitative interviews                             Yes          4/4

                                                                                                                                       

  Williams *et al* (2012)^[@R19]^             MCA    Mixed-methods -- quantitative survey and qualitative interviews         No          2/4
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

AWIA, Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000; MCA, Mental Capacity
Act 2005; MMAT, Multi-Methods Appraisal Tool.
:::

Research aims and participants are summarised in [Table
2](#T2){ref-type="table"}. Although there were data related to
experiences in courts in Scotland, there were no data related to the
Court of Protection in England and Wales. The data about the AWIA
related mainly to guardianship, and the data about the MCA related
mainly to decision-making practices. Therefore, no direct comparison
between specific elements of the AWIA and MCA could be made.

::: {#T2 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

Aims and participants in studies in the final sample
:::

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Study                        Act           Research aim            Population context                           Participants
  --------------------------- ------ ---------------------------- ------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
  Badger (2009)^[@R8]^         MCA     Explore decision-making     Intellectual disability   27 participants: 2 staff and 1 family member for each\
                                                                                                of 9 disabled adults in 3 settings (none of the\
                                                                                                      9 disabled adults directly involved)

                                                                                            

  Badger & Parnell\            MCA     Explore decision-making          Not described           24 participants: 6 disabled adults with 2 staff\
  (2009)^[@R9]^                                                                                           and 1 family member for each

                                                                                            

  Jevon (2014)^[@R10]^         AWIA      Assess experiences\            Not described               193 welfare guardians (27% response rate)
                                             of guardians                                   

                                                                                            

  Jingree (2015)^[@R11]^       MCA     Explore decision-making     Intellectual disability          15 support workers from a single service

                                                                                            

  Killeen & Myers\             AWIA       Explore power of\            General public            3 individuals who had made a power of attorney\
  (2004) Ch. 4^[@R12]^                      attorney and\                                      and 5 individuals who had applied for intromission\
                                       intromission with funds                                            with funds (8% response rate)

                                                                                            

  Killeen & Myers\             AWIA        Understand the\                  Mixed             58 professionals, carers, and adults with incapacity\
  (2004) Ch. 5^[@R13]^                      operation of\                                    involved in 13 guardianship cases -- exact composition\
                                             guardianship                                                         not reported

                                                                                            

  Manthorpe *et al*\           MCA      Assess links between\             Dementia                             123 professionals\
  (2012)^[@R14]^                      personal and professional\                                      (70 of whom had experience as carers)
                                       experiences of dementia                              

                                                                                            

  Mental Welfare\              AWIA      Assess experiences\            Not described                58 welfare guardians (family or carer)
  Commission (2011)^[@R15]^               of guardians and\                                 
                                             supervisors                                    

                                                                                            

  Myron\                       MCA    Assess staff, family and\             Mixed                  73 staff, 20 disabled adults, and 6 carers
  *et al* (2008)^[@R16]^                  patient knowledge\                                
                                             of capacity                                    

                                                                                            

  Samsi &\                     MCA      Understand how older\          General public          37 self-identified 'well' people aged over 50 years
  Manthorpe (2011)^[@R17]^            people planned for their\                             
                                                future                                      

                                                                                            

  Samsi &\                     MCA     Explore decision-making            Dementia                             12 dementia dyads\
  Manthorpe (2013)^[@R18]^                                                                           (person with dementia plus their carer)

                                                                                            

  Williams *et al*\            MCA     Explore decision-making              Mixed                  385 participants, mostly professionals --\
  (2012)^[@R19]^                                                                                   5 interviews from the perspective of carers
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

AWIA, Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000; MCA, Mental Capacity
Act 2005.
:::

None of the four studies from Scotland had been published in
peer-reviewed journals and none received the highest rating of
methodological quality. Two of these studies were separate pieces of
research in a single publication.^[@R12],[@R13]^

The findings are summarised in [Table 3](#T3){ref-type="table"}. For
reasons of parsimony, the 15 items from the data extraction form were
collapsed into four headings in the results, but all data were retained.

::: {#T3 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

Summary of findings
:::

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Theme                  Finding
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Positive experiences   Having a legal basis for decision-making was recognised as useful\
                         Benefits such as increased safety and quality of life were sometimes described\
                         The ability to use the mechanisms of the Acts to plan for the future was seen as beneficial, although only a\
                         minority did this\
                         The legislation was sometimes perceived as empowering

                         

  Negative experiences   Court and other legal processes were seen as challenging and cumbersome, and costs may be off-putting\
                         Some participants had extremely negative experiences\
                         The legislation was sometimes perceived as disempowering

                         

  Decision-making        Decisions were sometimes but not always made with the disabled adult\'s participation\
                         Carers sometimes struggled to make decisions in the best interests of the adult lacking capacity\
                         There could be conflicts of interest between the adult lacking capacity and the decision maker

                         

  Other issues           There were variable findings related to support and supervision\
                         There was a lack of understanding of the legislation on the part of the general public and carers\
                         A need for carers to be assertive was described\
                         The most common reason for applying for powers was because of a wish for a formal role in decision-making\
                         There were no findings about carers\' abilities to assess capacity\
                         There were no findings about deprivation of liberty\
                         Data were mainly derived from carers
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

## Positive experiences {#S3}

One study from Scotland reported that family carers saw guardianship as
positive because it offered them the ability to manage their relative\'s
welfare and finances. Improved safety and quality of life were described
in several cases. Half of the six adults with incapacity interviewed in
this study described improvements in their quality of life.^[@R13]^ In a
telephone survey, most guardians stated that guardianship was useful,
but a minority reported that it made little difference, or found it a
negative experience.^[@R15]^ In a postal survey of guardians, most of
the participants described welfare guardianship as being useful, but the
response rate (26.7%) in this study was low and the result may not
represent the experience of carers.^[@R10]^ Those who had made a power
of attorney or who had made a successful application for intromission
with funds saw the process as a positive experience. However, there were
only a total of eight participants in this mixed-methods study.^[@R12]^

Some older members of the general public in England saw potential
benefits from making a power of attorney, but most described a
disinclination to plan for the future. Any plans that were made were
usually of a financial nature. Individuals living alone with no family
described difficulty in appointing someone to look after their
affairs.^[@R17]^ The finding of participants failing to make powers of
attorney or advance decisions, despite believing in their utility, was
repeated in a group of professionals who had personal experience as
carers.^[@R14]^ Only a minority of elderly people made a power of
attorney in another study by the same researchers.^[@R18]^

## Negative experiences {#S4}

One study involved 58 professionals, carers and adults with incapacity
who had been involved in court proceedings for 13 guardianship cases in
Scotland. The process was described as perplexing and inhibiting for
carers, and confusing and stressful for adults who lacked capacity. The
process made some carers feel 'isolated and under pressure' and was
described in negative terms such as 'a nightmare' and 'an enormous waste
of time'.^[@R13]^ By contrast, the instruments of the AWIA which did not
require court proceedings were viewed generally positively.^[@R12]^

However, negative experiences were not just restricted to experiences in
court. A minority of participants in the telephone survey of guardians
found being a guardian to be a negative experience in general.^[@R15]^
One study of the MCA included five cases of best interests
decision-making from the point of view of family carers, and the
experience in each case was described as disempowering and distressing
for the carers. No further details were given because the carers were
not directly interviewed, but this finding contrasted markedly with the
largely positive views of the MCA expressed by professional respondents
in the same study.^[@R19]^

As well as the cases of carers appearing disempowered, some adults who
lacked capacity were observed to resent the powers that others held over
them.^[@R13]^ However, some carers in Scotland who had gone through
processes to be formally appointed with decision-making powers saw
themselves as empowered.^[@R12],[@R13]^ In this review, the legislation
was perceived as empowering' for some and disempowering for others.

## Decision-making {#S5}

A qualitative study of support workers found decision-making to be
inconsistent with the MCA; there was no assumption of capacity, and
decisions were rarely oriented towards best interests.^[@R11]^ Other
support workers described struggling to balance their duties under the
MCA with duty of care and safeguarding obligations, and stated that
limited resources restricted their ability to support decision-making in
practice.^[@R9]^ Another group felt that organisational policies, the
influences of others such as family and professionals, and their duty of
care restricted their ability to engage the adults in best interests
decision-making.^[@R8]^

Some decision-making was clearly compliant with the general principles
of the legislation. All 12 carers for individuals with dementia
described the importance of best interests decision-making. They stated
that they attempted to maintain the autonomy of the adult who lacked
capacity and took a decision-specific approach to each question. They
described the use of strategies to enhance the disabled adult\'s
participation in decision-making, and used their knowledge of the
person\'s previous wishes. However, even these carers described
conflicts of interest between their needs and those of the adult with
incapacity, and admitted struggling to decide what constituted best
interests.^[@R18]^ The situation was similar in Scotland, with carers
reporting difficulties assessing the most beneficial course of action
and understanding the views of the adult with incapacity.^[@R13]^

Overall, it appeared to be the case that immediate carers (whether
family carers or support workers) sometimes found difficulty in making
decisions which adhered to the principles of the legislation, and that
there could be conflicts between the wishes of the adult lacking
capacity and the priorities of the decision maker. Although the degree
of engagement with the principles varied between studies, this finding
was consistent in all the studies which examined this theme, including
in two of the four highest-quality studies.^[@R11],[@R18]^

## Other findings {#S6}

### Practical support {#S7}

Older members of the public in England were generally unaware of
potential resources to support making powers of attorney or advance
decisions, and some suggested that this might be helpful.^[@R17]^ Carers
described a lack of practical support for decision-making for the adult
lacking capacity, and some would have liked more.^[@R18]^ In one study,
carers could identify potential sources of support, but these were
generic supports such as friends, relatives, general practitioners and
social services.^[@R16]^ In Scotland, around 75% of guardians were
satisfied with the level of supervision and support they had from their
local authorities.^[@R15]^ Guardians in another study perceived that
they received insufficient support but were subject to excessive
scrutiny.^[@R13]^ The perception of excessive scrutiny was shared by
holders of intromission with funds.^[@R12]^

### Lack of knowledge of the legislation {#S8}

There was a lack of awareness on the part of the general public about
the legislation. None of the respondents in a study of older members of
the public in England were aware of the MCA, or that it could
potentially support their choices for the future, but a few understood
the nature of a power of attorney.^[@R17]^ Only 3 of 12 'dementia dyads'
(consisting of a person with dementia and their carer) had heard of a
power of attorney, and only a single pair had utilised one.^[@R18]^ This
lack of understanding of the legislation was apparent even where carers
had been trained or where they held specific powers. Support workers
thought that they needed more training in using the MCA^[@R8],[@R16]^
and were observed to be unclear about some of their duties under the
MCA.^[@R9]^ Guardians in Scotland were ignorant of their
responsibilities to document the use of powers, and were unaware that
they could delegate them.^[@R15]^ Some respondents felt that improved
sources of information were necessary.^[@R13]^ Organisations caring for
disabled adults had policies about risk which needed to be revised to
comply with the principles of the legislation, and education about the
MCA was suggested not just for professionals, but for adults lacking
capacity and family carers as well.^[@R8]^

### Assertiveness of carers {#S9}

Those professionals with personal experience of being family carers
described a necessity for carers to be 'assertive' in using the MCA to
compel health and social services to act in the best interests of the
adult who lacked capacity.^[@R14]^ The need for guardians to be
'assertive and articulate' was also described in Scotland.^[@R13]^

### Application for financial/welfare powers {#S10}

Data about the reasons for making applications for formal financial or
welfare powers were only found in studies from Scotland. In a survey of
guardians, the most common reason described for applying for
guardianship was a wish for a formal role in the care of the adult with
incapacity.^[@R15]^ Carers applied for intromission with funds because
they believed that they had no other means of managing the person\'s
finances.^[@R12]^

### Absent or limited data {#S11}

There were no findings in relation to carers\' abilities to assess
capacity. No data in the sample related to experiences of formal legal
proceedings under English law in the Court of Protection. There was no
information about experiences of Deprivation of Liberty Safeguards.
Although many adults lacking capacity participated in the studies in
this review ([Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}), the experiences of
carers dominated the findings ([Table 2](#T2){ref-type="table"}).

# Discussion {#S12}

## Methods and limitations {#S13}

This review offers a systematic appraisal of the empirical research
literature exploring how adults lacking capacity and their carers
experience capacity legislation in the UK. Both quantitative and
qualitative data were sought in the process of this review, but most of
the studies in the final sample used qualitative or mixed methods. The
lack of quantitative studies presented difficulty in data synthesis,
because methods for the systematic review of qualitative research are
not well established.^[@R4],[@R6]^ However, there were benefits from
utilising qualitative data to answer this review\'s research questions.
Qualitative methods were appropriate to answer the primary researchers\'
questions because they are concerned with experiences and
perceptions,^[@R4]^ are not reliant on random sampling^[@R20]^ and can
draw conclusions from small sample sizes.^[@R21]^ However, this
systematic review cannot make claims of generalisability because it is
based mainly on qualitative data, and the prevalence of the experiences
described in this review cannot be determined.

There are other limitations which mean that the findings of this review
must be treated with caution. This review relied on a single researcher
and therefore sampling of papers and quality assessment were carried out
without independent checks to ensure consistency. Two-thirds of the
studies had not been published in peer-reviewed journals and some were
of low quality. Most of the data from England and Wales related to
decision-making, and none related to aspects of English capacity law
such as experiences in court. Some of the data from Scotland were more
than 10 years old, and may not reflect current practices. Data were
heterogeneous and the secondary research question could not be answered
because direct comparisons between specific components of English and
Scottish law were not possible. However, the data were not so
heterogeneous as to prevent the use of framework analysis.

## Findings {#S14}

What does this systematic review say about the AWIA and the MCA from the
perspectives of the people who are subject to these laws? This review
found that the legislation provided family carers with the ability to
manage decisions for adults lacking capacity on a legally valid basis,
and the mechanisms to allow this were generally seen as satisfactory.
There were reports of improved safety and quality of life in some cases,
including from some adults who lacked capacity. The ability to make
plans for future incapacity was seen as useful. These positive
consequences of the AWIA and MCA suggest that the legislation has
achieved its goals, at least judging by the standards set by the law
reformers of the 1990s.^[@R2],[@R3]^ However, although a detailed
discussion of human rights is beyond the scope of this paper, it must be
acknowledged that the paradigm of disability rights has changed since
the drafting of these laws; for example, there is pressure from the
United Nations\' Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities to
replace existing capacity laws with alternative approaches which do not
utilise substitute decision-making and which would allow legal capacity
regardless of the level of mental impairment.^[@R22]^ These proposals
are based on an interpretation of Article 12 of the UN Convention on the
Rights of Person with Disabilities^[@R23]^ which has excited
controversy^[@R24]^ and been criticised as undermining rather than
promoting the rights of people with mental illnesses.^[@R25]^ However,
if that interpretation of Article 12 is accepted as authoritative, then
key areas of UK capacity legislation are incompatible with international
law.^[@R26]^

In this review, some positive consequences of the AWIA and the MCA were
mitigated by other findings. Perhaps not unexpectedly, adults lacking
capacity sometimes resented the powers held over them. There were
experiences of both empowerment and disempowerment. Potential benefits
such as advance planning were not always realised; for example, planning
for the future was seen as potentially beneficial, but despite this few
people made powers of attorney or advance decisions. This is an area of
concern given the relative simplicity of such instruments compared with
the cost and complexity of the legal proceedings which can become
necessary when someone loses capacity Awareness of the legislation seems
to be lacking, and public education might increase the utilisation of
advance planning. However, not everyone will have the desire or ability
to nominate a suitable power of attorney.

Education about the legislation may also be beneficial. As well as a
lack of knowledge about the legislation on the part of the general
public, support workers and family carers who held specific powers were
sometimes unaware of their responsibilities. Decision-making was not
always fully compliant with the legislative principles. Although some of
the studies with these findings were conducted shortly after the
introduction of the legislation when knowledge might be expected to be
limited,^[@R8],[@R9],[@R16]^ other studies continued to demonstrate this
finding several years later.^[@R11],[@R15]^

Legislation could be experienced as either empowering or disempowering
by carers. Although some adults lacking capacity described positive
outcomes, others described concepts similar to disempowerment. The AWIA
and the MCA have been lauded as progressive and empowering
instruments.^[@R27],[@R28]^ It is true that both are grounded in
principles such as enablement, least restriction, and the participation
of the adult who lacks capacity in decision-making. Nevertheless, these
principles are only empowering in the sense that they return disabled
people to the legal status of any other citizen, and do not give them
any additional rights to allow them to overcome their impairments.
Series^[@R29]^ has observed that most of the mechanisms of the MCA have
the effect of transferring power away from disabled adults, and for this
reason disputes the claim that the MCA is empowering. The AWIA may be
viewed as disempowering for the same reason.

In this review, negative experiences of the legislation related mainly
to court proceedings, although data were lacking about the Court of
Protection in England and Wales. The transfer of significant
decision-making powers between individuals is always likely to require
formal proceedings, which will often be perceived as challenging and
costly by the applicants. What other options are there? Moving to a
tribunal system could potentially decrease costs and reduce distress
because the proceedings take place outside the courts. However,
tribunals might prove more expensive because of the addition of an extra
judicial tier,^[@R27]^ and may not necessarily be experienced more
positively than court proceedings.

The initial legislation did not deal with the provision of due legal
process for adults without capacity who require restrictive care regimes
but lack the ability to challenge their *de facto* detention (so-called
'Bournewood patients').^[@R30]^ This gap in the law still exists in
Scotland.^[@R31]^ In England and Wales, provisions to deal with this
issue were made in the form of the Deprivation of Liberty Safeguards,
but these were criticised by the House of Lords, which recommended the
process be replaced.^[@R27]^ Both the AWIA and the MCA are undergoing
reform to deal with this issue. This review found no data about
deprivation of liberty, and it is unfortunate that there are no
perspectives from patients or their carers to inform the changes to this
area of law.

Finally, the participation of disabled adults in research about capacity
legislation needs be improved. Most of the findings in this review were
drawn from carers, despite many adults who lacked capacity having been
recruited into the studies. It is disappointing if researchers have made
efforts to include such participants, only for those voices to be lost,
and future research should take care to avoid this.

This study formed part of an MSc in Mental Health and Law from Queen
Mary University of London. Dr Erminia Colucci, Dr Ruth Fletcher and Dr
Yasmin Khatib commented on the design of this study and drafts of the
manuscript. Dr Lucy Series suggested additional papers for this review.

[^1]: **Sam Wilson** MRCPsych, Locum Consultant Psychiatrist, Royal
    Cornhill Hospital, Aberdeen, UK
