---
abstract: |
  Online health information is increasingly popular and may bring both
  benefits and potential harm to users with mental health problems. The
  encouragement of harmful behaviour among this population is a
  particular concern. The website [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org)
  provides the benefits of shared experience by publishing excerpts from
  rigorous research interviews with patients, contextualised with
  medical information. This article sets out evidence for the positive
  and negative effects of online mental health information and describes
  the methodology behind [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org), with an
  overview of the mental health information it provides and how it can
  benefit patients and health professionals.
author:
- Jo Kidd
- Sue ZieblandCorrespondence to Jo Kidd (<jo@healthtalk.org>) [^1]
date: 2016-10
institute:
- 1[healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org), Oxford, UK
- 2University of Oxford, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
title: Narratives of experience of mental health and illness on
  healthtalk.org
---

The internet has revolutionised how people deal with symptoms and
illness. Almost half of UK adults now search for health information
online, an increase from 18% in 2007.^1^ Mental health resources have
proliferated on the web since the mid-1990s. Patients, their friends and
families can find detailed information on a range of common, and less
common, mental health conditions from myriad reliable (and less
reliable) sources.^2^ As well as this more 'traditional' health
information, patients can now access online cognitive-behavioural
therapy (CBT) interventions, connect with other patients in online
support groups and fora, and read or view personal accounts and blogs.
The web can also provide a tool for people with mental health conditions
to become activists, raising awareness and challenging stigma around
mental illness.^2^

Although using the internet for health information and support is now
routine, normal practice, concerns remain about the potential for harm,
especially for people who are considered vulnerable. Pro-anorexia (or
'pro-ana') websites may cause harm by providing 'tips' and
'thinspirational' imagery which encourage harmful behaviour and
exacerbate symptoms.^3^ Evidence is equivocal about the influence of
chat rooms for people who are self-harming or considering suicide: on
the one hand, these fora may support people who are socially isolated
and help them cope, but some researchers have concluded that such chat
rooms may do harm by 'normalising' self-harming behaviour or suicidal
intent.^4^ In 2012, micro-blogging platform and social network Tumblr
was implicated in the suicide of British teenager Tallulah Wilson.
Tallulah had been blogging about her self-harm and interacting with
others who self-harmed. Following the case, Tumblr changed their
procedures to encourage users to report content that encouraged
self-harm and sharing of self-harm images. The internet clearly presents
both risks and opportunities for prevention of harm in young adults.^5^

The reliability of mental health information found online has also
raised concerns. A study of mental health websites popular in the USA
concluded that more than two-thirds of information provided on common
mental health conditions could be considered as 'good' or 'better
quality' and that this has improved over time.^6^

One of the most transformative effects of the internet revolution is
that people can now access, at any time of day or night, accounts of how
others have dealt with the same condition. They can do this in private,
without anyone knowing that they are doing so. They can learn through
the experiences of others how to manage their own condition, decide when
and whom to consult and how to deal with health and care services, as
well as sharing and gaining peer support.^7^ This may be especially
pertinent to those with a mental health condition, for whom stigma can
be a barrier to seeking help.^8^ Peer support as an intervention has
been shown to help reduce symptoms of depression^9^ and peer support
delivered online was associated with improved experience and emotions in
the case of people with mental health conditions and long-term health
conditions.^10^ However, more research is needed to understand the
efficacy of online peer support for mental health conditions.^11^

# About [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) {#S1}

Based on a belief in the value of peer support, as well as the
recognition of the value of a broad sample of experiences and a
'curated' delivery, [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) publishes analyses
and extracts from interview studies using narrative methods. Most of the
interviews are video recorded, if the participant\'s consent has been
given. The website has some of the features of online forums (a broad
range of experiences, peer support, the issues that matter to patients)
but as it is based on carefully conducted research with broad samples of
participants, it provides a balanced, evidence-based reflection of what
is important to patients, presented through video and audio interview
clips as well as written material.^12^

The website [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) is the product of a unique
collaboration between DIPEx, a registered UK charity, and the Health
Experiences Research Group (HERG) at the University of Oxford\'s
Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences. The two have worked
together for 15 years to offer support and information on a range of
different health issues from the perspective of those who experience
them first-hand.^13^

The website was the brainchild of Oxford general practitioner Dr Ann
McPherson CBE and Dr Andrew Herxheimer, clinical pharmacologist,
founding editor of the *Drugs and Therapeutics Bulletin* and emeritus
fellow of the Cochrane Collaboration. They were inspired to collect a
database of patient stories by their own health experiences in the late
1990s. Dr McPherson had been diagnosed with breast cancer and Dr
Herxheimer was scheduled for knee replacement surgery. Both were aware
of the value of hearing the real stories of other patients, as well as
learning from the results of randomised controlled trials.

Originally intended to be a collection of individual written accounts,
it was soon realised that the project would be much more useful if it
represented a wide range of experiences of each condition covered and
would be more inclusive and accessible if based on digitally recorded
interviews rather than written accounts. Information on each health
condition included in the project is based on a national, diverse sample
of interviews collected and analysed by skilled and trained qualitative
researchers. The researchers travel all over the country and interview
people in their own homes, using open-ended 'narrative' methods that
encourage the participant to talk about what matters to them (rather
than what matters to researchers and clinicians).

A website team that sits within the charity DIPEx works with the
researchers to publish video and audio extracts and analysis from the
interview collections intended for patients, public, family members and
professionals. The first sections, on experiences of prostate cancer and
experiences of high blood pressure, were published on the former DIPEx
website in 2001. Fifteen years later the site is called
[healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org), includes nearly 100 different
conditions (including several mental health collections) ([Box
1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}) and has sister projects in 12
countries ([dipexinternational.org](dipexinternational.org)).

## Mental health topics on [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) {#S2}

The website covers a number of mental health issues: depression,
depression and low mood in young people, eating disorders in young
people, psychosis, antidepressants, mental health experiences of ethnic
minorities and ethnic minority carers, parents\' experiences of
self-harm and, the most recent addition, patients\' experiences of
electro-convulsive therapy (ECT) (links are included in [Box
1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}). For each of these issues, there are
video, audio and written excerpts from interviews with around 40 people
who have experienced the issue personally or through a family member.
The research team analyse the interviews and write thematic summaries on
topics such as diagnosis, work, support, making decisions about
treatment, and impact on friends and family. Each of these themes is
illustrated with different experiences and perspectives from the
interviews so that people who use the site can find experiences that
resonate with their own (albeit perhaps not voiced by someone whose
experiences they might have assumed would be like their own).

This broad range of experience was particularly important in the case of
the antidepressants section, where interviewees talked about how people
react differently to depression medicines. Stuart (52 years old) had
tried a number of different antidepressants over the years: "'From my
experiences they work very differently for different people and you
can\'t tell until you\'ve started taking the drugs what they\'re going
to do for you, what the therapeutic effect is going to be, you can\'t
say what side effects you\'re going to get, if any'."

John, 84, was diagnosed with depression in his 30s, and prescribed
diazepam. A few years before being interviewed, he was prescribed
fluoxetine for the first time: 'The black clouds lifted' he said. In
contrast, Peter (aged 34) said that taking venlafaxine after being on
fluoxetine without success was 'like waving a magic wand'. Lucy (aged
21) came off fluoxetine after 6 months because she felt dizzy and
'distant' from her emotions. She told the interviewer that she realised
only later that different drugs were available and advised that patients
should talk to their doctors if they are not getting on with their
prescription or if they would like to explore other treatment options.

**Box 1** Mental health collections on [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org)

-   Antidepressants
    ([www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/experiences-antidepressants/topics](www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/experiences-antidepressants/topics))

-   Depression
    ([www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/depression/topics](www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/depression/topics))

-   Depression (in Australia)
    ([www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/experiences-depression-and-recovery-australia/topics](www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/experiences-depression-and-recovery-australia/topics))

-   Eating disorders in young people
    ([www.healthtalk.org/young-peoples-experiences/eating-disorders/topics](www.healthtalk.org/young-peoples-experiences/eating-disorders/topics))

-   Electroconvulsive treatment
    ([www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/electroconvulsive-treatment/topics](www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/electroconvulsive-treatment/topics))

-   Low mood and depression in young people
    ([www.healthtalk.org/young-peoples-experiences/depression-and-low-mood/topics](www.healthtalk.org/young-peoples-experiences/depression-and-low-mood/topics))

-   Mental health: ethnic minority experiences
    ([www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/mental-health-ethnic-minority-experiences/topics](www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/mental-health-ethnic-minority-experiences/topics))

-   Mental health: ethnic minority carers\' experiences
    ([www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/mental-health-ethnic-minority-carers-experiences/topics](www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/mental-health-ethnic-minority-carers-experiences/topics))

-   Experiences of psychosis
    ([www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/experiences-psychosis/topics](www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/experiences-psychosis/topics))

-   Self-harm: parents\' experiences
    ([www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/self-harm-parents-experiences/topics](www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/mental-health/self-harm-parents-experiences/topics))

# How [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) is used {#S3}

> 'I\'m 20 years old and have been struggling with depression since I
> can remember, and have struggled even more with trying to get those
> around me to understand how I feel. I would try to explain it to them
> and they still wouldn\'t get it, making me feel more alone. I sent my
> parents the link to this page and had them watch the videos, and now
> they (and I) know that I am not alone with my illness and the way it
> makes me feel. Now instead of shaming me for the way my depression
> makes me live, they understand that it can be crippling and have
> decided to help me. Thank you so much, this information saved my
> life.'

This message was received by the [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) team
in 2015. It came from Alice, a young woman who had been looking at a
page entitled 'What does depression feel like: social & physical
experiences'. Her comment demonstrates the value of being able to access
online personal stories of other ordinary young people who, like Alice,
are experiencing depression.

Approximately 5 million people visited [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org)
in 2015, of whom half a million were seeking mental health information.
A visitor survey suggests that the patient stories have a real impact
too: 8 in 10 people agreed or strongly agreed that they felt better
informed after viewing the information and 7 out of 10 agreed or
strongly agreed that they felt better prepared for, and less alone in,
what they were facing. Furthermore, 85% of people reported that they
agreed or strongly agreed that the information on
[healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) is better than they have seen elsewhere
and 8 out of 10 agreed or strongly agreed that
[healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) provides information on issues that
they had not found covered elsewhere. Examples include emotional
lability after stroke, eating disorders in young men and the parents\'
perspective on self-harm in young people. Arguably, the use of
qualitative, narrative research methods also enables the team to tackle
issues with a depth that might not be available elsewhere. Finding out
from patients what was important to them allows the research team to tap
into the issues that might help other patients.

# How [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) can help health professionals {#S4}

Although the vast majority of people who visit the website are seeking
information for themselves or a loved one, about 5% of the audience use
the website for work. Mental health professionals can find out what
patients in general think of the care they have received, what works and
what does not. The following quotes are from the website\'s section on
depression in Australia and illustrate different perspectives on the
care that patients received. We do not reveal the names of health
professionals or hospitals on the website and are careful to remove such
identifiers from the interview extracts before they are published on the
website.

> 'We have a mutual respect of each other. \[My psychiatrist\] is quite
> a remarkable person. The first dog I had, my psychiatrist got me to
> have because I was so unwell I shouldn\'t live alone. He was so scared
> I was going to kill myself and he thought that if I had a dog with me,
> I might think again before killing myself and having the dog locked in
> the house with a dead person ... I just couldn\'t bring myself ever to
> do it when the dog was there. So, so it was very smart thinking from
> my doctor and it worked a real treat, yeah.' (Suzie).
>
> 'When I cried in \[the psychiatrist\'s\] office she just sort of
> looked at me as if I was a freak. When she said, "You\'ve got
> postnatal depression" and I absolutely burst into these tears ... I
> think she actually said ... "Well, what did you think I was going to
> say?" And I thought that wasn\'t particularly supportive' (Emma).

The website is used across the globe in the teaching and training of
health professionals and professionals in other disciplines including
the police and social care. We are aware that it is used in teaching in
almost all of the medical schools in the UK. Recently a function called
'Scrapbooks' was added to the website that allows teachers and learners
to create their own collections of video clips and articles from across
[healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org). Videos added to scrapbooks will appear
in a playlist. The feature has proved popular -- some teachers have set
the students the task of creating their own scrapbooks.^14^

Not only are the [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) resources used in
training professionals but there is evidence to show that these national
collections of patients\' experiences can be used as part of studies to
improve how health services are delivered. A recent study used an
'accelerated' version of a co-design approach called 'experience-based
co-design'. They found that using 'trigger films' based on the
pre-existing interviews collected by HERG in national collections was as
effective for stimulating local service improvement initiatives as
previous studies that had included a lengthy process of local data
collection with patients and staff. They found that using the HERG
collections for the trigger films did not adversely affect engagement
with National Health Service (NHS) staff and could make the process less
threatening; the films also worked well as trigger for discussion and
led to similar improvement activities to those implemented in earlier
studies after using local narratives.^15^ The team behind this paper
have created a trigger film based on experiences of psychosis and
another one based on young people\'s experiences of depression is
planned.

The interviews collected for the study of experiences of psychosis were
also used to inform the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) clinical guidelines on service user experience for
people using adult NHS mental health services, published in 2012.^16^

# Conclusion {#S5}

[healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) sits alongside other respected UK
providers of online mental health information such as Mind
([www.mind.org.uk](www.mind.org.uk)), the Royal College of Psychiatrists
([www.rcpsych.ac.uk](www.rcpsych.ac.uk)), Rethink
([www.rethink.org](www.rethink.org)), CALM
([www.thecalmzone.net](www.thecalmzone.net)) and the Mental Health
Foundation ([www.mentalhealth.org.uk](www.mentalhealth.org.uk)) in
serving a population of people who live with mental health conditions
and the general public, who increasingly turn to the internet for
information about health.^1^ The work of these organisations helps
individuals to seek support and practical information on mental health
issues, in private and at a time convenient to them.^8^

In summary, [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) complements existing
resources to offer in-depth information on people\'s experiences of
mental illness, through the rigorous qualitative research methods of the
University of Oxford\'s Health Experiences Research Group at the
Nuffield Department for Primary Care Health Sciences.

Future areas for research that will be made available through
[healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org) include a project on the depression
experiences of young adult Americans, which is in progress by colleagues
at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. They, and other members of the
DIPEx International collaboration, are keen to conduct studies on many
other health conditions, including mental illness, and are currently
seeking funding for projects on bipolar affective disorders,
obsessive-compulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder.

[^1]: **Jo Kidd** is communications manager at
    [healthtalk.org](healthtalk.org), Oxford, and **Sue Ziebland** is
    professor of medical sociology and director, Health Experiences
    Research Group, Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences,
    University of Oxford.
