=========================================================================================================================
Trainee experiences of intellectual disability psychiatry and an innovative leaderless support group: a qualitative study
=========================================================================================================================



Ross Spackman
Hannah Toogood
Jayne Kerridge
Jon Nash
Elizabeth Anderson
Dheeraj RaiCorrespondence to Ross Spackman (ross.spackman@nhs.net)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-8

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** There is very little research into the challenges
   of training in intellectual disability psychiatry or into
   interventions which may address these challenges. Using focus groups,
   we explored the experiences of intellectual disability psychiatry
   trainees, and evaluated a leaderless trainee support group developed
   in Bristol.

   **Results** Five distinct themes were identified via framework
   analysis: that trainees felt unprepared for the difference from
   previous posts; the need for support; the value of the group; that
   trainees were concerned about judgement in supervision; that the
   group structure was valued.

   **Clinical implications** Our findings highlight the support needs
   specific to intellectual disability psychiatry trainees. Leaderless
   peer support groups may be a valued resource to address such issues,
   and may be a useful model to be considered by other training schemes.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Intellectual disability psychiatry (also known as learning disability
psychiatry particularly in UK healthcare services) is a specialty in the
UK involving the assessment and management of mental health problems in
individuals with intellectual disability and other developmental
disabilities. Trainees in intellectual disability psychiatry face
specific challenges, including the need to acquire enhanced
communication skills, understand a range of genetic, neuropsychiatric
and neurodevelopmental conditions, and utilise knowledge of complex
psychopharmacology.\ :sup:`1` They may also have to confront substantial
existential and societal issues associated with caring for vulnerable
individuals who face exclusion and disadvantage in many aspects of their
lives.\ :sup:`2`

Although there is little published literature, one study exploring the
experiences of intellectual disability psychiatry trainees described
strong feelings of isolation, alienation, lack of skills and impotence,
not unlike the feelings experienced by the patient groups the trainees
worked with.\ :sup:`2` Prompted by these findings, trainees on the
Bristol intellectual disability psychiatry training scheme developed an
innovative, leaderless trainee support group (`Box 1 <#box1>`__) after
taking advice from a consultant psychotherapist. The group aimed to
provide a forum for reflective peer support for core and advanced
intellectual disability psychiatry trainees (doctors specialising in
psychiatry, previously termed senior house officers and specialist
registrars). It has continued since 2005, with individual membership
varying from 6 months (core trainees) to 3 years (advanced trainees).

Here we report the findings of a qualitative study exploring the
experiences of trainees in intellectual disability psychiatry who
participated in this support group. The aims were to explore doctors'
experiences of training in intellectual disability psychiatry, in
particular the positive and negative aspects of working in this
specialty, and the role of support and supervision; and to evaluate the
model of a leaderless peer support group from the perspective of its
participants.

**Box 1** Trainee support group

-  Who: All core and advanced trainees in intellectual disability
   psychiatry placements are invited. Typical attendance is 3–6
   participants, dependent on need, leave or competing priorities. The
   group does not have a facilitator or leader, and was set up with an
   egalitarian structure.

-  When: Fortnightly before the academic programme.

-  Where: On the site of the academic meeting, central in the area
   between the different placements.

-  How long: 90 min.

-  Structure: 10 min of chat as people arrive, 70 min of focused support
   group. No fixed agenda, time used between trainees depending on needs
   that day.

-  Boundaries: start and end time, confidentiality, respect.

.. _S1:

Method
======

We approached this project using a qualitative design, as we were
interested in exploring a variety of individuals' interpretations of
their experiences.\ :sup:`3` Although one-on-one interviews were an
alternative, focus groups provided a time-efficient way to gather data,
allowed discussion of the issues raised, and enabled researchers to gain
a sense of whether the individuals identified with each other's
experiences.\ :sup:`4`

.. _S2:

Procedure
---------

Two focus groups were held, one for each cohort, each lasting 90 min.
Focus groups were facilitated by two of the researchers (J.N. and J.K.
for the first cohort, and J.K. and D.R. for the second), who used a
topic guide and encouraged free-floating discussion. The facilitators
sought clarification when needed, and prompted the participants to move
on to new areas when they started to repeat previously discussed issues,
or after periods of prolonged silence. They also encouraged participants
to share examples from their own work wherever possible. Recordings were
transcribed, including spoken words, speech fillers and dysfluencies, by
a medical secretary.\ :sup:`5`

The topic guide comprised four sections: experiences of working with
people with intellectual disabilitythe role of support and supervision
in training in intellectual disability psychiatryreflections on the
value and usefulness of the trainee support groupspecific consideration
of the leaderless, egalitarian model of the trainee support group. The
list was generated from data gathered via a previous semi-quantitative
survey investigating perceptions of the trainee support group held by
trainees and trainers in 2007.

.. _S3:

Participants
------------

All doctors who had been members of the trainee support group during the
preceding year were invited to participate in each of the study's two
focus groups. This process was performed twice, 4 years apart, sampling
two non-overlapping cohorts. This was to allow exploration of whether
experiences were cohort specific. Each focus group comprised five
participants. The first included three core and two advanced trainees
and the second two core and three advanced trainees. Each group was
mixed gender and had trainees from different community learning
disability teams (CLDTs) in the scheme. The ages of the participants
were between 25 and 40 years.

Participation was voluntary, without incentive and occurred during work
time. All participants consented to their comments being recorded and
transcribed for analysis, with individual identities removed.

.. _S4:

Ethical considerations
----------------------

The regional training programme director reviewed the proposal,
considered relevant ethical issues and gave approval for the study.

.. _S5:

Analysis
--------

Framework analysis was the most appropriate analytic method, given its
relative simplicity and ease of use, and served the intended aims of
seeking themes rather than generating explanations or new theories or
concepts. A process similar to the framework analysis described in
detail in Rabiee was followed.\ :sup:`5`

.. _S6:

Stage 1
~~~~~~~

Two authors (J.K. and D.R. in the first and R.S. and H.T. in the second
focus group) independently immersed themselves in the focus group
transcript as a whole. The transcript was manually coded on paper, thus
developing a ‘thematic framework’.

.. _S7:

Stage 2
~~~~~~~

Following this, quotes were highlighted, pasted into a separate document
and arranged by broad themes.

.. _S8:

Stage 3
~~~~~~~

The interpretation stage of the analysis was done jointly between each
pair of authors and involved refining and condensing the themed
quotations using suggested criteria of: attention to frequency;
emotion/intensity; specificity (attention to actual personal experience
over hypotheticals); and extensiveness. Internal consistency (reduced
attention to views subsequently contradicted or changed) could not be
reviewed as suggested by Rabiee,\ :sup:`5` as individuals could not be
consistently tracked throughout the transcript.

.. _S9:

Stage 4
~~~~~~~

The final stage involved a review of the analysed and interpreted data
to see whether they had resulted in significantly overlapping themes
suggestive of an overarching or superordinate theme. Themes were named
by a process of abstraction as described by Fade.\ :sup:`6` A
requirement for reflexivity was acknowledged from the outset. Thus,
researchers' influence was viewed as a necessity for making sense of the
richness of the data generated by group participants rather than as bias
to be eliminated.\ :sup:`7`

.. _S10:

Results
=======

.. _S11:

Results of thematic analysis
----------------------------

Five distinct themes evident in both focus groups were identified. Owing
to the anonymisation of participants during transcription, it was not
possible to attribute quotes to specific participants. However, the
quoted contributions incorporated a broad range of views arising in
themes evident in both focus groups. Furthermore, it was evident in the
transcript that they did not represent any one dominant voice.

.. _S12:

Theme 1: unprepared for difference
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Both groups perceived placements in intellectual disability psychiatry
as being quite different to other psychiatry posts. This was viewed as
having both positive and negative facets. Positive aspects included
having more time allocated to conduct detailed assessments, and the
potential to work jointly with colleagues from other professional
groups. These were seen as enabling the doctor to assess the patient in
a holistic manner and the overall experience was described as
‘rewarding’ by several trainees: “You don't just see the person in one
dimension; you are seeing a holistic view.Working with people with
disabilities … can be very rewarding.” A variety of negative issues were
discussed, including problems associated with reliance on suboptimal
collateral histories and doctors questioning their own abilities to
provide adequate care to this patient group, particularly with respect
to specialist skills such as epilepsy management: ‘Suddenly you are
asked to treat something you've probably not had a great deal of
training for [epilepsy]… suddenly you are expected to already know about
it.’ Some trainees appeared to be aware of such differences prior to
starting posts, which was sometimes a source of apprehension. However,
for others it was more of a surprise: ‘I think it is very different to
what one gets in general psychiatry and I think that is not clear at the
outset and sometimes can come as a surprise.’

A sense of isolation while working in these posts was part of the
discourse in both groups. The change from being in large mental health
teams to smaller CLDTs, where the other professionals have limited
psychiatry training, was noted. The low number of medical colleagues in
the CLDTs also generated feelings of isolation, as did the geographical
spread of posts: “The posts can be quite isolating … there might be you
and another doctor within the team.We are quite isolated, we are far and
few.There is that huge geographical spread which means that you don't
tend to see people informally.”

.. _S13:

Theme 2: need for support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The trainees described the need for help and support in coping with
aspects of their work. For example, there were accounts of doctors
struggling with the emotions evoked by working with a patient group with
disabilities: “I think it is quite difficult to work with people with
[intellectual disabilities]; especially people who are severely …
physically and mentally disabled, it can make [you] feel quite low if
you see those people who are completely dependent on carers.If you work
with someone who has so much pain and trouble, if you work with them and
you don't get any support, I think I would personally get depressed,
just thinking about it.If you don't actually discuss your feelings with
someone else who understands where you are coming from, I think that can
pile on and on and can actually start affecting you in your personal
life too.” Some trainees also described being overwhelmed by the
additive effect of numerous emotionally challenging encounters: ‘In a
week you collect things in your head. If there were deaths you would
have a formal debrief, but these things are not deaths. They are things
that keep on happening, small things.’

Many of the participants also expressed feelings of impotence to ‘fix’
the underlying conditions of their patients with intellectual
disability: ‘I've always been taught to diagnose a disorder and treat
it… I felt powerless.’

The trainees described the trainee support group and consultant
supervision as addressing different support needs: “I think they are
quite separate things… they do quite different things.I think…
supervision is about supporting your work and this [trainee support
group] is a place that supports you.”

The trainee support group was also highlighted by several trainees as a
useful place to talk about difficulties related to training and
difficulties experienced within CLDTs.

   Being a doctor who is newly working in learning disability and the
   emotions that generates and the challenges of training, I think you
   get more out of discussing that with a group of people who are going
   through the same thing.

.. _S14:

Theme 3: value of the group
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The trainees described finding the group a source of: “Genuine support
and encouragement and reassurance.We talk, and when you talk it comes
out, and you are able to share, and it is not so … painful anymore.”
Some participants also recalled specific clinical and nonclinical issues
where the group had been helpful to them: ‘I was struggling … the
support was phenomenal.’ Trainees also stated that the group had a
positive impact on their clinical work: ‘I think it does help us to
become better clinicians in terms of how to deal with our emotions … we
do learn from each other a lot.’

Positive aspects to the structure of the group included: permission to
discuss anything, the group being confidential, and the opportunity to
be with peers who are experiencing similar challenges: “The openness and
the fact that you feel a bit equal… you can pretty much bring anything
there.I can speak and no one will judge me.” Sessions that had been of
most value were reported to be those that were best attended, and
setting ground rules was considered helpful to the group. If the group
discussion was solely focused on an informal chat or issues such as rota
swaps, it then lost its supportive benefits: ‘Incredibly valuable
[sessions] have been the ones where people, lots of people, have come
and come on time, and other times they definitely have felt like a
missed opportunity.’

.. _S15:

Theme 4: judgement in supervision
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Participants described finding it easier to talk about their feelings
with peers in the group than in consultant supervision. In particular,
worries were expressed regarding looking incompetent during supervision,
as the consultant would need to sign off the trainee at the end of the
placement.

   I don't want to say something [in consultant supervision] that will
   make me look bad, that will go on my file.

   I would probably be worried in supervision that I don't want to say
   that I felt unsure about myself.

   I find the trainee support group is more about me and about how I am
   coping, whereas clinical supervision is everything about the client
   and getting my assessments and appraisal.

   Part of the issue might be your unhappiness with your interaction
   with other members of the team or with your consultant, which … you
   would find difficult to discuss in supervision.

However, consultant supervision sessions were deemed more appropriate
for some other issues, which trainees said they would not discuss in a
group setting: ‘Certain personal and professional issues that you may
want to discuss in a supervision environment I wouldn't do in a Balint
group or here.’

.. _S16:

Theme 5: group structure
------------------------

The egalitarian model was described as enabling core and advanced
trainees to express their opinions knowing trainees were viewed as of
equal value to the group: ‘My views were valued and … I could also give
advice to my senior colleagues, which is not always respected
everywhere, so this was a major strength.’

It also allowed all members to talk about what they felt was important
to them rather than to a facilitator. However, some noted a downside
that a less confident member might not highlight their desire to bring a
new topic to a session, and the group could be dominated by particular
individuals: “There is a freedom in the group that comes from the fact
that it's unstructured and doesn't particularly have an agenda.I think a
chairman would be useful [… ] in asking if particular quiet members
would [… ] like to say anything because there are some people who have
attended and I haven't heard speak in 6 months.” The lack of a leader
was thought to promote a more lax view on attendance and punctuality,
and some trainees and consultants were reported as giving the group a
lower priority than other aspects of the trainees' work. Group members
arriving late or leaving early was disruptive and disturbing: ‘We value
the group, we see it as valuable or we wouldn't come at all, but we
don't value it as highly as other things in our timetable so it tends to
be the first thing that gets bumped.’

.. _S17:

Discussion
==========

This study adds substantially to the very limited literature detailing
the peculiarities and challenges of training in intellectual disability
psychiatry.\ :sup:`1,2` One strong theme that emerged from our results
was how trainees considered training in intellectual disability to be
different from other psychiatric posts and the degree to which they were
prepared for this. The reasons cited were related to both the specifics
of the work and the structure of teams. It is well known that
psychiatric disorders in intellectual disability may be more complex to
diagnose, particularly owing to difficulties in effective communication.
A further contrast with many other areas of psychiatry is the degree to
which healing or restoration to full function or participation is
possible. In intellectual disability psychiatry, the primary disability
is often the intellectual impairment or associated developmental
disorder, thus treatment of any mental illness may restore the patient's
previous level of functioning and quality of life, but no further.
Despite epilepsy management being a common role for the intellectual
disability psychiatrist,\ :sup:`8` our findings suggest that many
trainees felt apprehensive about their skills and confidence in this
area.

Feelings of isolation were also highlighted. CLDTs in the area of the
study are geographically spread out and based away from their mainstream
psychiatric colleagues. Separation from peers has been noted as
off-putting to foundation doctors,\ :sup:`9` but few studies explore
feelings of isolation among psychiatry trainees\ :sup:`2` It has been
noted previously that individuals who work with people with disabilities
can feel stigmatised and isolated.\ :sup:`10–12` Stigma by association
is the process by which relatives, support staff, friends and associates
feel stigmatised owing to their contact with a stigmatised
group.\ :sup:`13,14` This may also affect trainees working in this area
and contribute to their feelings of isolation. We think that one reason
the group was valued could be its ability both to reduce the feeling of
isolation by bringing trainees together, and to mitigate some of the
stigma felt by enabling the trainees to share difficult experiences. One
could speculate that the group may have not just attenuated some
potential negatives of the subspecialty training, but also contributed
to the enjoyment and reward of it. If this were to be true, it would be
interesting to study whether training schemes in areas with
specialty-specific support or educational groups do better in relation
to trainee retention or satisfaction than those without such structures.

It should be noted that despite the challenges, there was also a strong
and pervasive feeling of positivity about training and working in
intellectual disability psychiatry. Such experiences were startlingly
absent in previous work,\ :sup:`2` but are important to note to reassure
future recruits in the specialty. In particular, the trainees mentioned
the term ‘rewarding’, a varied and complex concept.\ :sup:`15` The view
that community-based intellectual disability psychiatry would be
rewarding was predicted some 30 years ago,\ :sup:`16` although this is
the first study as far as we are aware that affirms this view.
Intellectual disability requires a particularly holistic approach, often
not dissimilar to the approach of general practitioners (GPs). While
there is an absence of published surveys or qualitative studies on what
psychiatrists find rewarding, interpersonal relationships between doctor
and patient have been found to be particularly satisfying for
GPs.\ :sup:`17` However, we are unaware of similar studies among
psychiatrists.\ :sup:`18`

Both focus groups discussed how consultant supervision and the support
group were different, but mutually supportive and compatible. When
surveyed, UK trainees report they are mostly happy with supervision and
find it useful.\ :sup:`19` The Royal College of Psychiatrists recommends
that supervision should enable ‘the development and assessment of
clinical and personal skills under direct one-to-one supervision by an
expert’ and should be ‘focused on discussion of individual training
matters’.\ :sup:`20` The hierarchical nature of consultant supervision
is both valued by trainees\ :sup:`21` and necessary for valid competency
assessments, but this can be a potential barrier to seeking support in
some areas, particularly revealing vulnerabilities to a supervisor who
is also an assessor. Personal upset and secondary grief relating to
patients is considered by some supervisors and supervisees to be a
boundary breach in supervision.\ :sup:`22` The trainee support group is
set up without hierarchy and this may have contributed to reducing
boundaries around discussing vulnerabilities. Honest discussion about
how trainees were ‘coping’ was easier in the trainee support group than
supervision, despite the College suggesting consultant supervision
should include this.\ :sup:`20` This study adds to previous work
suggesting some mismatch between intent and what trainees feel
comfortable discussing\ :sup:`23` This space for honesty is a value of
the group but it would be a concern if the availability of the trainee
support group and its support acted as a colluder or barrier to honesty
in consultant supervision.

Group peer support may be more beneficial than alternatives such as
paired peer support. Several of the benefits described in both focus
groups suggested similarities to Yalom's therapeutic factors:
universality, altruism, guidance, imparting of information, cohesion,
and existential factors.\ :sup:`24` That senior trainees stayed in the
group for up to 3 years may reinforce some of these factors, and their
relative maturity and existing trust following a longer involvement in
the group may provide additional support.\ :sup:`25` It also provides
senior opinions, which have been found to be supportive when shared in
other contexts.\ :sup:`26` A common concern when leaderless groups are
used for supervision is a loss of focus on the task and drifting into
support and advice-giving.\ :sup:`27,28` As the model presented here is
primarily for support, and advice is part of that, the lack of leader is
not a concern in this context, although the results did suggest that
some participants would have liked a facilitator role in encouraging
quieter members to contribute.

As this is an analysis of a single group and the findings have not been
replicated elsewhere, it is difficult to generalise the utility of such
groups to other areas. However, we think similar models of egalitarian
peer support that require limited resources for setting up may have the
potential to benefit trainees in other, smaller or more challenging,
specialties.

.. _S18:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

The qualitative design and use of focus groups is appropriate to
investigate attitudes and experiences of trainees. The training rotation
is relatively small, with 7–9 core and advanced trainees available to
attend the trainee support group in each 6-month period. ‘Group think
and the articulation of group norms may have introduced a positive bias.
However, the anonymity of participants in the transcript is likely to
have mitigated self-censorship and there was evidence of a diversity of
opinion, particularly illustrated by both praise and criticism of the
trainee support group and highlighting a range of experiences in
training. The anonymisation happened at transcription rather than at
analysis stage. This precluded the ability of the authors analysing the
data from tracking individuals’ comments or reviewing whether they were
linked to particular posts or trainers. Generalisability is a concern in
qualitative studies, and was also a concern in this particular training
scheme. First, at the time of the focus groups, the Bristol scheme was
performing above average on trainee satisfaction in GMC
surveys.\ :sup:`29` Second, many of the CLDTs may be unusually isolating
for trainees compared with elsewhere in the country by virtue of their
geographic spread and relatively rural setting. Finally, in several
CLDTs within the scheme, most team members, except psychiatrists, are
employed by a different organisation and may have few psychiatric
skills.

In conclusion, we have highlighted some of the challenges and rewards of
training in intellectual disability psychiatry. Our evaluation of an
egalitarian, trainee-led peer support group suggests that the model
could be useful for other intellectual disability psychiatry training
schemes. Whether this could be a support structure suitable for other
specialties remains to be studied.

We thank Dr Andrew Clark, consultant psychotherapist, for help with
setting up the group; Dr Kristina Bennert for recording equipment; Gill
Wetherall for transcription of the tapes; Dr Helen Sharrard, training
programme director, and all consultant trainers for supporting the
groups; and importantly, all trainees who enthusiastically participated
in them over the years.

.. [1]
   **Ross Spackman**, MBChB BSc PGCE MRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist
   in Learning Disabilities, Dorset Healthcare University NHS Foundation
   Trust; **Hannah Toogood**, MBBS BSc MRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist
   in Learning Disabilities, Avon and Wiltshire Mental Health
   Partnership NHS Trust; **Jayne Kerridge**, MBChB MRCPsych, Consultant
   Psychiatrist, Avon and Wiltshire Mental Health Partnership NHS Trust;
   **Jon Nash**, MBChB MRCP(UK) MRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist,
   Cambian Adult Services; **Elizabeth Anderson**, RGN MSc EdD, Teaching
   Fellow in Clinical Education, King's College London; **Dheeraj Rai**,
   MBBS MRCPsych PhD, Consultant Senior Lecturer, University of Bristol,
   UK.
