=====================================================================================================================================
The mini-PAT as a multi-source feedback tool for trainees in child and adolescent psychiatry: assessing whether it is fit for purpose
=====================================================================================================================================



Gill Salmon
Lesley PugsleyCorrespondence to Gill Salmon (Gill.Salmon@wales.nhs.uk)
 [1]_
:Date: 2017-4

:Abstract:
   This paper discusses the research supporting the use of multi-source
   feedback (MSF) for doctors and describes the mini-Peer Assessment
   Tool (mini-PAT), the MSF instrument currently used to assess trainees
   in child and adolescent psychiatry. The relevance of issues raised in
   the literature about MSF tools in general is examined in relation to
   trainees in child and adolescent psychiatry as well as the
   appropriateness of the mini-PAT for this group. Suggestions for
   change including modifications to existing MSF tools or the
   development of a specialty-specific MSF instrument are offered.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Multi-source feedback (MSF) can motivate doctors to improve and change
their practice. :sup:`1, 2` It gives doctors an overview of how others
see them and compares this with their own view as well as the results of
their peer group. :sup:`3` MSF evolved in Canada and the USA out of a
public demand for accountability to patients as well as an acceptance
that assessments examining clinical decision-making and medical
expertise do not address other essential competencies, such as
interpersonal skills, professionalism and communication. :sup:`3` MSF
tools were originally designed to be formative, that is, to lead to
awareness of and improvements in performance through feedback. More
recently, however, they are being used for summative purposes, namely to
provide information for revalidation and the annual review of competence
progression (ARCP) which determines whether a trainee is considered fit
to proceed with their training. As such, MSF tools need to be
sufficiently reliable and valid. Reliability refers to the
reproducibility of assessment measures or scores over repeated tests
under identical conditions, and validity refers to the degree of
confidence that an assessment measures what it is intended to measure.
An associated term, feasibility, is a measure of whether an assessment
instrument is practical, realistic and sensible given the circumstances
and context. :sup:`4`

.. _S1:

Research on the use of MSF for doctors
======================================

Ramsey *et al* :sup:`5` published a landmark study showing that it was
feasible for internal medicine physicians to obtain peer assessments
about their humanistic qualities, clinical practice and communication
skills. They also came to important conclusions about the reliability of
MSF – for example, that 11 peer ratings were needed to ensure a
reliability coefficient of 0.7 (the minimum acceptable for
workplace-based assessments (WPBAs)) and that the results were not
substantially affected by the relationship between the rater and the
person being rated nor by the method used to select the raters. The
findings of this study also suggested that a doctor's medical knowledge
(determined by examination marks) was not predictive of how peers
subsequently rated their interpersonal relationships or communication
skills.

The finding that reliable and valid MSF questionnaires can be developed
and be feasible to use for assessing doctors has been replicated across
settings and specialties. :sup:`2,6–9` A number of systematic reviews
have also been published, all of which conclude that MSF as a method of
assessing communication skills, collegiality, humanism and
professionalism in doctors has high reliability, validity and
feasibility. :sup:`10–15`

.. _S2:

The mini-PAT as an MSF tool
===========================

The mini-PAT is used by the Royal College of Psychiatrists as an MSF
instrument for trainees. It is well known because of its widespread use
in the Foundation Programme. :sup:`16,17` The mini-PAT was derived from
the Sheffield Peer Review Assessment Tool (SPRAT) following a mapping
exercise against the foundation curriculum, :sup:`6` thus ensuring its
content validity. The SPRAT contains 24 questions assessing a doctor's
competencies and professional attributes, and it maps directly on to
General Medical Council (GMC) standards of good medical practice,
:sup:`18` again establishing its content validity. These standards
include good clinical care, maintaining good medical practice, teaching
and training, appraising and assessing, relationships with patients and
working with colleagues. The SPRAT was the first MSF tool validated in
the UK for use by paediatric consultants as part of their appraisal.
:sup:`19` It has also been shown to be reliable, needing as few as four
raters to determine whether a doctor is in difficulty or not (more in
borderline situations), and feasible, taking only 5–6 minutes to use
with good return rates (more than 70%). :sup:`20` It can also
discriminate between the more and less experienced trainee. :sup:`21`

In developing the mini-PAT, nine questions which did not map on to the
curriculum for the Foundation Programme were removed from the SPRAT.
These included questions relating to the management of complex patients
and leadership. One question about probity and health was added while
the free-text element and six-point scale (where 1 indicates ‘very poor’
and 6 indicates ‘very good’) remained unchanged. :sup:`6` The resulting
mini-PAT was thought to reflect the importance for foundation doctors of
developing communication skills, team work and other humanistic
qualities in relation to patient care in addition to their medical
knowledge. :sup:`3`

In his critical analysis of the mini-PAT, while accepting its content
validity and feasibility, Abdulla stated that it ‘lacks sufficient field
evaluation and has not gone through any stringent criteria that are
required for the validation of an assessment tool’. :sup:`3` Data on the
reliability and validity of 693 mini-PAT assessments on 553 foundation
year 1 and 2 (F1/F2) doctors have subsequently been published. :sup:`6`
The mean scores of the two groups were found to be significantly
different when using the same criterion standard (i.e. expectation for
F2 completion), with 19.6% of F1s and 5.6% of F2s being assessed as
borderline or below the expectations for F2 completion. This was used as
evidence of internal standardisation and construct validity, as was the
finding that the trainees scored higher in the domains of working with
colleagues and relationships with patients compared with the clinical
skills domains. Overall, 53% of F1 doctors and 74% of F2 doctors could
have been assessed by no more than 8 assessors based on their mean
scores. Factor analysis revealed that the two main factors were
humanistic qualities and clinical performance. The authors concluded
that the mini-PAT was a valid and reliable MSF tool for assessing
foundation doctors.

.. _S3:

Use of the mini-PAT in child and adolescent psychiatry training
===============================================================

In child and adolescent psychiatry, the process when using the mini-PAT
is as follows: twice a year, the trainee provides contact details of
between 8 and 12 co-workers who see them on a frequent basis in a range
of situations. These people and the trainee then complete the mini-PAT
online. Presumably based on the findings of Archer *et al*, :sup:`6` it
is suggested that at least 8 forms must be completed to ensure the
assessment is reliable. There is, however, no research specifically
related to the mini-PAT on the minimum number of assessors required to
give a valid result. :sup:`3` The form uses a 6-point Likert-type rating
scale. Trainees are rated according to the standard expected at each
stage of training. A score of 4 corresponds to the expected standard,
with higher or lower scores suggesting the trainee's performance is
better or worse. :sup:`22` The responses are analysed centrally and a
report is then sent to the trainee's educational supervisor who delivers
the feedback in person. :sup:`23`

.. _S4:

Potential issues with using MSF tools
=====================================

Several issues that have been identified in relation to the use of MSF
tools for medical practitioners in general are also relevant to their
use in child and adolescent psychiatry. One is the trainee's choice of
rater. Although several authors have found that MSF assessment is not
necessarily biased by allowing the doctor to select their own raters,
:sup:`5,24,25` others have found that factors such as the seniority,
gender and profession of raters can significantly influence the
assessment. For example, Archer *et al* :sup:`21` found that consultant
raters using the SPRAT gave significantly lower mean scores to
paediatric trainees than more junior doctors did; similarly, Bullock *et
al* :sup:`26` found that consultants and senior nurses were more likely
to give ‘concern’ ratings when assessing junior doctors than were peers
or administrators. Thus, there is a trend for assessors to be more
critical with increasing seniority. When considering the mini-PAT,
Archer *et al* :sup:`6` found that assessors' scores were affected by
their occupation, the length of time the trainee had been working with
them, and the working environment. They suggested standardising the
number of consultants used as raters by each trainee. These findings
support the need for more detailed guidance in rater selection from the
Royal College of Psychiatrists. Trainees are currently only advised that
raters be chosen from a broad range of co-workers. :sup:`4` In addition,
Abdulla :sup:`3` suggests that selection bias can be reduced if the list
of raters is discussed and agreed on beforehand with the trainee's
supervisor.

Measurement errors, such as the central tendency and halo effect, can
also occur and are particularly likely when behaviours which cannot be
easily observed are being assessed. :sup:`27` A particular issue for
non-doctor raters is knowing what standards they should expect for a
doctor at that stage in their training. In an attempt to reduce
measurement errors, Abdulla :sup:`3` suggests better education for
mini-PAT raters. This could be provided by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists as part of their online mini-PAT package.

It has been shown that doctors' self-assessments do not correlate well
with peer or patient ratings. :sup:`7,28` Violato & Lockyer :sup:`29`
studied psychiatrists, internal medicine physicians and paediatricians,
and found that all were inaccurate in assessing their own performance.
Those psychiatrists who were rated by peers to be in the bottom quartile
saw themselves as ‘average’, whereas the psychiatrists in the top
quartile significantly underrated themselves. This indicates that poorly
performing doctors often lack insight, not always accepting negative
feedback from others and querying its validity. :sup:`30` Overeem *et
al* :sup:`31` advise that trained facilitators should encourage trainees
to reflect on MSF results and help them set concrete goals for
improvement. Offering coaching to help trainees identify their strengths
and weaknesses may help facilitate changes in performance. :sup:`32`
Making the feedback highly structured can help trainees acknowledge
feedback from all sources rather than just the medical scores which they
tend to value more. :sup:`5,33–35` Although taking the mean of the
scores may be the most reliable approach, :sup:`36` attention should
also be given to the free-text comments which might highlight specific
performance issues and which may also make the feedback more acceptable.
:sup:`35` These findings highlight the importance of the MSF feedback
process, which should include the development of a relevant action plan
in collaboration with the doctor.

It has been proposed that a single, generic MSF tool be used in the UK.
:sup:`37` Research supporting this includes Violato & Lockyer's
:sup:`29,38` study of the use of one MSF tool for internal medicine
physicians, paediatricians and psychiatrists. Although they found no
specialty differences in response rates or reliability, it is of note
that of the items clustered into the same four factors across the
specialties, for psychiatry the most discriminating factor was
communication whereas for the other two specialties the most important
was patient management. By contrast, Mackillop *et al* :sup:`39`
evaluated the use of a generic MSF tool across specialties and concluded
that, although the generic content was appropriate for most specialties,
some would benefit from specialty-specific content.

.. _S5:

Does the mini-PAT suit the needs of trainees in child and adolescent psychiatry?
================================================================================

In child and adolescent psychiatry, the mini-PAT is currently used to
assess trainees. Although the mini-PAT has content validity for
foundation doctors, having been mapped against their curriculum, this
does not necessarily mean it is also a valid tool for other grades or
for use across specialties. In the making of the mini-PAT, some
questions were removed from the SPRAT, namely those relating to
management of complex patients and leadership. :sup:`6` However, these
items are highly relevant to trainees in child and adolescent
psychiatry. Davies *et al* :sup:`40` modified the SPRAT for trainees in
histopathology following a blueprinting exercise against the
histopathology curriculum to establish content validity. They concluded
that specialty-specific MSF is feasible and achieves satisfactory
reliability. A similar approach blueprinting the SPRAT against the child
and adolescent psychiatry competency-based curriculum :sup:`41` could
therefore be considered. The SPRAT also requires fewer raters than the
mini-PAT in order for the results to be sufficiently reliable, :sup:`6`
thus adding to its potential suitability for child psychiatry trainees
who often work in small teams.

Alternatively, a specialty-specific MSF instrument for child and
adolescent psychiatry trainees could be developed, to reflect the
differences in their practice compared with other specialties and the
greater importance placed on communication, interpersonal skills,
emotional intelligence and relationship building. :sup:`4` Tools taking
these attributes into account have been developed for use with
consultant psychiatrists and have been found to be feasible to use as
well as being reliable and valid. :sup:`42,43` The child and adolescent
psychiatry competency-based curriculum :sup:`41` gives details of
intended learning outcomes (ILOs), which are either mandatory or
selective, some of which tap into these areas. The ILOs range from those
that are predominantly clinical (e.g. managing emergencies (mandatory),
paediatric psychopharmacology (mandatory) and paediatric liaison
(selective)) to those that focus on more humanistic skills (e.g.
professionalism (mandatory) and establishing and maintaining therapeutic
relationships with children, adolescents and families (mandatory)). The
ILO on professionalism includes: ‘practicing Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry in a professional and ethical manner; child and family
centred practice; understanding the impact of stigma and other barriers
to accessing mental health services and inter-professional and
multi-agency working’. :sup:`41` Some of the necessary associated skills
which trainees are expected to attain include: supervising junior
psychiatric staff, working with colleagues within the team and with
other agencies to put the child's needs as central, and acting as an
advocate for the child. There is scope to develop this area of the
curriculum even further; the American Board of Pediatrics (ABP)
published guidelines for the teaching and evaluation of professionalism
in paediatric residency programmes :sup:`44` as well as standards of
professional behaviour against which paediatricians, including those in
training, can be evaluated. :sup:`45` Both are of relevance to child and
adolescent psychiatrists.

If developed, a child and adolescent psychiatry specialty-specific MSF
instrument would need to map on to the relevant ILOs. It could also
include feedback from patients and families (which is not currently
routinely collected as part of the WPBAs) to reflect the need to balance
the views of the child (who is the patient) with those of their carers.

.. _S6:

Conclusions
===========

MSF tools such as the mini-PAT can provide reliable and valid
information on areas of a trainee's performance such as communication
skills and other humanistic qualities affecting patient care for which
other forms of assessment, such as written examinations, are unhelpful.
MSF tools have their predominant strength when used for formative
assessment and were generally designed for this purpose. They are most
appropriately used within a portfolio of other WPBAs and can help in
making decisions about a doctor's fitness to practice or to continue
training. :sup:`46` Rater bias and measurement error could be reduced by
offering more detailed guidance to trainees in their choice of rater as
well as to raters in the use of the tool. Measurement error could also
be reduced by encouraging trainees to obtain a larger number of returns
than the minimum of eight recommended by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists. :sup:`3` The quality of the feedback to the trainee is
also important and educational supervisors would benefit from training
in this area.

Although the mini-PAT is used widely across specialties, it has only
been properly evaluated for use with foundation doctors. Interested
researchers, clinicians or educationalists might now want to consider
developing a modified version of the SPRAT or a specialty-specific MSF
tool that is more appropriate for the needs of trainees in child and
adolescent psychiatry. This would reflect the differences in their
day-to-day practice compared with that of other trainees but would
obviously need to be mapped to the curriculum and evaluated in practice
to ensure content validity and reliability.

.. [1]
   **Gill Salmon** is a consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist at
   the Fairfield Child and Family Clinic, Swansea. **Lesley Pugsley** is
   a senior lecturer in medical education in the School of Postgraduate
   Medical and Dental Education, Cardiff University.
