===============================================================
Personality disorder: still the patients psychiatrists dislike?
===============================================================



Dimitrios Chartonas
Michalis Kyratsous
Sarah Dracass
Tennyson Lee
Kamaldeep Bhui
:Correspondence: Tennyson Lee (Tennyson.Lee@elft.nhs.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2017-2

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** In 1988, Lewis and Appleby demonstrated that
   psychiatrists hold negative attitudes towards patients with
   personality disorder. We assessed the attitudes of psychiatry
   trainees towards patients with borderline personality disorder and
   depression, expecting an improvement. 166 trainees were block
   randomised to receive one of four case vignettes that varied by
   diagnosis and ethnic group. We used Lewis and Appleby's original
   questionnaire and the Attitudes to Personality Disorder Questionnaire
   (APDQ).

   **Results** We received 76 responses. Lewis and Appleby's
   questionnaire showed more negative attitudes towards personality
   disorder than depression, with no significant patient ethnic group
   effects, and the APDQ also showed a (weak) trend towards more
   negative attitudes to personality disorder. In subgroup analysis,
   only in the White British patient group were there significantly more
   negative attitudes to personality disorder. Factor analysis showed
   significantly less sense of purpose when working with personality
   disorder.

   **Clinical implications** The perceived greater lack of purpose in
   working with personality disorder should be the target of clinical
   training and intervention. Targeted interventions that include
   training in managing personality disorder, supervision and practice
   in non-specialist, general psychiatry settings are important.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Personality disorder is characterised by an enduring dysfunctional and
distressing pattern of inner experiences, behaviours and interpersonal
interactions. :sup:`1` Almost a quarter (24%) of people seen in primary
care :sup:`2` and 50% of people in secondary mental health services meet
the criteria for a diagnosis of personality disorder. :sup:`3` Patients
with personality disorder have high rates of comorbidity :sup:`4` and
service utilisation. :sup:`5` A meta-analysis, which identified 391
relevant publications and finally included 14, showed significant
differences in prevalence between Black and White groups (although no
differences between Asian or Hispanic groups compared with White
groups), raising the question of whether there is a neglect of diagnosis
in some ethnic groups. :sup:`6`

Although there is good evidence that borderline personality disorder
(BPD) is a helpful diagnostic construct, :sup:`7` some studies contest
the validity (but not the clinical utility) of the diagnosis. :sup:`8`
Potter :sup:`1` stresses that the psychological and interpersonal
dynamics that patients with BPD bring to the clinical setting cause
frustration and consternation among clinicians, such that BPD is now a
diagnosis that can carry pejorative connotations and compound the stigma
that such patients already face. Many patients with BPD feel rejected
and disbelieved by clinicians. :sup:`9` Improving clinicians' attitudes
toward patients with BPD could bring them clinical benefit. :sup:`10`

Against this background, there have been systematic efforts to study
clinicians' attitudes to personality disorder. A systematic review of
the literature shows that healthcare professionals in general have
negative attitudes towards such patients. :sup:`11,12` A large study
:sup:`7` demonstrated that the clinician's occupational subgroup was
significantly related to the attitude they adopted towards patients with
BPD: staff nurses had the poorest self-ratings on overall caring
attitudes, whereas social workers had the most caring attitudes. Social
workers and psychiatrists self-rated highly on treatment optimism,
whereas staff nurses rated poorly on empathy and treatment optimism.
Overall, the authors suggested that education about the nature and
treatment of BPD can lead to more positive attitudes, but also that
clinicians with greater levels of experience in terms of both number of
BPD patients and years of practice were more likely to express positive
attitudes towards such patients. Bodner *et al* :sup:`13` demonstrated
that psychologists were less likely than psychiatrists and nurses to
express antagonistic judgements towards patients with BPD and suicidal
tendencies, whereas nurses were less likely to show empathy than
psychiatrists and psychologists. They identified a number of factors
influencing attitudes, including motivation to improve diagnostic
skills, seniority, training and supervision, gender and familiarity with
treatment modalities.

In 1997, Bowers *et al* :sup:`14` developed a new instrument called the
Attitude to Personality Disorder Questionnaire (APDQ). The APDQ is a
reliable and valid measure of attitude to personality disorder, and is
useful for outcome studies. It was tested among nurses and prison
officers. :sup:`15–17` One of these studies :sup:`16` revealed that
psychiatric nurses' attitudes were more negative than those of prison
officers. Prison officers more often liked and showed an interest in
prisoners with personality disorder, and they showed less fear and
helplessness, less anger, more optimism about treatment and less
frustration. The other studies found that nurses considered people with
personality disorder difficult to treat; they were pessimistic about the
efficacy and outcome of treatment and felt they were poorly trained to
care for such patients.

Over 20 years ago Lewis & Appleby :sup:`18` demonstrated that
psychiatrists hold negative attitudes towards patients with a diagnosis
of personality disorder, and that the diagnostic label was more
influential on their attitudes than the patient's gender or class.
Patients given a previous diagnosis of personality disorder were seen as
more difficult and less deserving of care than controls. The authors
concluded that a diagnosis of personality disorder carries enduring
negative sentiments and is not used to guide effective treatment. For
example, people with this diagnosis may experience difficulties when
seeking help for psychiatric symptoms such as depression. The authors
proposed that the concept of personality disorder be abandoned.

In 2002 the National Personality Disorder Development Programme was
introduced in the UK, accompanied by the publication of *No Longer a
Diagnosis of Exclusion* :sup:`19` and *Breaking the Cycle of Rejection*,
:sup:`20` policy attempts that aimed to improve the evidence base of
effective interventions for patients with personality disorder in
specialist personality disorder services and, it was hoped, would also
mitigate stigma.

Given the above, it seemed timely to see whether the attitudes of
psychiatrists towards BPD showed any change. We selected psychiatric
trainees, despite the difference in seniority/experience compared with
Lewis & Appleby's original study (mean 16.5 years of psychiatric
practice), as they are on the front line of service provision and are
the next generation of consultant psychiatrists. Considering the
findings of McGilloway *et al* :sup:`6` and the multi-ethnic patient
population in east and north-east London our sample was drawn from, we
also examined the impact of ethnicity on attitudes.

.. _S1:

Objectives
==========

The objectives of the study were: to assess the attitudes of psychiatry
trainees towards patients with BPD compared with depression to assess
the impact of patient ethnicity on the attitudes of trainees to BPD.

.. _S2:

Method
======

The study population consisted of the cohort of doctors training in
psychiatry on the north-east London rotations (East London NHS
Foundation Trust and North East London NHS Foundation Trust) between
February and July 2013: core trainees 1–3, specialist trainees 4–6,
general practice vocational trainees and foundation year 2 doctors.
Overall, 166 doctors in training were block randomised in blocks of 8 to
receive one of four different case vignettes (`Box 1 <#box1>`__) that
varied by previous diagnosis (BPD or depression) and ethnic group (White
British or Bangladeshi). The case vignettes were modified versions of
those used by Lewis & Appleby. :sup:`18`

**Box 1** Case vignettes used in the study

**Case 1**

A 25-year-old White British woman is seen in out-patients. She complains
of feeling depressed and crying all the time. She is worried she may be
having a ‘breakdown’ and is requesting admission. She says she has
thought of killing herself by taking an overdose of tablets at home. She
has a history of an overdose 2 years ago after a relationship break-up,
following which she saw a psychiatrist who diagnosed her with depressive
episode. She recently lost her job and is worried about how she will pay
the bills. She is finding it difficult to sleep and her GP prescribed
nitrazepam, which she says has been helpful and which she would like to
continue.

**Case 2**

Same as case 1, but the patient is Bangladeshi.

**Case 3**

Same as case 1, but the previous diagnosis is borderline personality
disorder.

**Case 4**

Same as case 3, but the patient is Bangladeshi.

We used the following tools to measure attitudes:

Lewis & Appleby's 22 semantic differentials on a 6-point scale. Using
the original scoring conventions, the semantic differentials were scored
so that a higher score represented responses that were more rejecting or
that indicated lack of active treatment.

APDQ: a questionnaire that consists of 37 affective statements about
patients with personality disorder (e.g. ‘I like personality disorder
people’, ‘I feel drained by personality disorder people’, ‘I feel
patient when caring for personality disorder people’). Respondents rate
the frequency of their experiences of these feelings on a 6-point Likert
scale: never, seldom, occasionally, often, very often and always. The
responses can be summed to give a total score; the higher the score, the
more positive the attitude towards patients with a personality disorder.
Five subfactors can be scored: factor 1, enjoyment: warmth, liking for
and interest in contact with patients with personality disorder factor
2, security: the lack of fears, anxieties and helplessness in relation
to patients with personality disorder factor 3, acceptance: the absence
of anger towards patients with personality disorder and a sense of being
different from them factor 4, purpose: feelings of meaning and purpose
in working with patients with personality disorder factor 5, enthusiasm:
energy and absence of tiredness.

For the purposes of this study we modified the affective statements to
‘I like these patients’, ‘I feel drained by these patients’ etc. to
correspond to the case vignette of either personality disorder or
depression.

.. _S3:

Analysis
--------

As regards Lewis & Appleby's 22-item semantic differentials, we compared
mean and s.d. scores on items. We assessed the structure of the items by
running a principal components analysis. We summed scores of the most
dominant factors that explained most of the variance and compared them
by diagnosis and by ethnic group.

The APDQ scores (mean, s.d.) were compared for trainees across the four
case vignettes. These were compared as groups that differed by diagnosis
or by ethnic group in logistic regression analyses, to assess the role
of diagnosis and ethnic group. We used the original APDQ factors as an
additional variable to assess differences by patient ethnic group and
diagnosis.

The study was granted ethical approval by the South West London REC 3
(ref. 10/H0803/159). We obtained the names and positions of all trainees
in the rotation from the core training scheme manager for the north-east
London rotations. We contacted all trainees via email asking them to
complete questionnaires online (on the SurveyMonkey platform,
`www.surveymonkey.co.uk <www.surveymonkey.co.uk>`__). All respondents
gave informed consent and all responses were anonymous.

.. _S4:

Results
=======

We received 76 responses (response rate 46%). However, a small number of
respondents failed to answer a number of questions. We thus analysed
data from 73 responses to Lewis & Appleby's questionnaire (*n* = 19 for
case 1, case 3 and case 4, and *n* = 16 for case 2) and 68 responses to
the APDQ (17 for case 1, 15 for case 2, 20 for case 3, and 16 for case
4). Respondent characteristics are given in `Table 1 <#T1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Respondent characteristics

   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |               | Depression | Borderline    |    |    |    |    |
   |               |            | personality   |    |    |    |    |
   |               |            | disorder      |    |    |    |    |
   +===============+============+===============+====+====+====+====+
   | Gender        |            |               |    |    |    |    |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |     Female    | 12         | 10            | 22 | 13 | 8  | 21 |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |     Male      | 5          | 5             | 10 | 7  | 9  | 16 |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |     Unknown   | 3          | 1             | 4  | 0  | 3  | 3  |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |               |            |               |    |    |    |    |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   | Ethnicity     |            |               |    |    |    |    |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |     White     | 8          | 6             | 14 | 11 | 9  | 20 |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |               | 6          | 7             | 13 | 6  | 4  | 10 |
   |    Black/Asia |            |               |    |    |    |    |
   | n/mixed/other |            |               |    |    |    |    |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |     Unknown   | 6          | 3             | 9  | 3  | 7  | 10 |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |               |            |               |    |    |    |    |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   | Qualification | 10         | 8             | 18 | 11 | 8  | 19 |
   | in UK         |            |               |    |    |    |    |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |     Unknown   | 3          | 1             | 4  | 1  | 3  | 4  |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |               |            |               |    |    |    |    |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   | Current level |            |               |    |    |    |    |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |     GP/FY     | 2          | 5             | 7  | 4  | 0  | 4  |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |     CT1–3     | 10         | 5             | 15 | 11 | 12 | 23 |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |     ST4–6     | 5          | 3             | 8  | 5  | 5  | 10 |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+
   |     Unknown   | 3          | 3             | 6  | 0  | 3  | 3  |
   +---------------+------------+---------------+----+----+----+----+

   GP, general practice vocational trainee; FY, foundation year; CT,
   core trainee; ST, specialist trainee.

.. _S5:

Lewis & Appleby's 22-item semantic differentials
------------------------------------------------

The scale was subject to principal components factor analysis followed
by an orthogonal rotation to identify 16 of the 22 items loaded (loading
of greater than 0.5) on the first factor (eigenvalue 10.42, explaining
71% of the variance), with two further candidate factors (eigenvalue
1.68, explaining 11.5% and eigenvalue 1.00, explaining 6.1%,
respectively) (`Table 2 <#T2>`__). Only items from the first factor were
summed to compare attitudes, as the second and third factors were
accounted for by 3 items each and did not show a clear conceptual
distinction between each other. The mean and s.d. score of factor 1 was
compared by diagnosis and by ethnic group (case 1: mean 42.42, s.d. =
8.54; case 2: mean 48, s.d. = 8.71; case 3: mean 53.68, s.d. = 11.99;
case 4: mean 51.53, s.d. = 10.51). The scores did not vary by ethnic
groups. The rank sums showed significant differences by diagnosis, with
higher scores (more stigma) towards personality disorder than depression
(overall Kruskal–Wallis χ\ :sup:`2` = 11.38, d.f. = 3, *P* = 0.01)
(`Table 3 <#T3>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Principal components analysis

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | Mean  | Lo    |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       | `a    | ading |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       | 3>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       | (     |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       | s.d.) |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
   | F     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | actor |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 1     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | eigen |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | value |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 1     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 0.42) |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 3.25  | 4.20  | 0     | 0     |   0   | 0     | 0     |
   | Poses | (     | (     | .5955 | .0826 | .0343 | .1059 | .6261 |
   | diff  | 1.18) | 1.30) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | icult |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | manag |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ement |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | pr    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | oblem |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.17  | 3.64  | 0     | 0     | −0    | −0    | 0     |
   |   Unl | (     | (     | .6828 | .2932 | .0333 | .4351 | .2574 |
   | ikely | 0.94) | 1.48) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | im    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | prove |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 3.67  | 3.28  | 0     | 0     |   0   | 0     | 0     |
   | Cause | (     | (     | .6678 | .2539 | .1938 | .2264 | .4007 |
   | of    | 1.22) | 1.31) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | debts |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | under |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | pati  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ent's |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | co    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ntrol |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.53  | 3.00  | 0     | 0     | −     | −0    | 0     |
   |    No | (     | (     | .7153 | .2039 | 0.041 | .3236 | .3403 |
   | m     | 1.38) | 1.57) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ental |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | il    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | lness |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.64  | 2.97  | 0     | −0    |   0   | 0     | 0     |
   |  Case | (     | (     | .6820 | .2883 | .0797 | .1921 | .4085 |
   | does  | 1.15) | 1.06) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | not   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | merit |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | NHS   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | time  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.67  | 3.95  | 0     | 0     | −0    | −0    | 0     |
   |   Unl | (     | (     | .7376 | .1704 | .1875 | .3877 | .2414 |
   | ikely | 1.15) | 1.23) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | com   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | plete |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | trea  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | tment |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.89  | 3.56  | 0     | 0     | −0    | −0    | 0     |
   |   Unl | (     | (     | .8410 | .1506 | .0388 | .2516 | .2052 |
   | ikely | 0.95) | 1.27) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | c     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | omply |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | with  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | dvice |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |   and |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | trea  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | tment |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.91  | 2.64  | 0     | 0     | −0    | −0    | 0     |
   |   Sui | (     | (     | .8697 | .0496 | .1665 | .0827 | .2066 |
   | cidal | 1.00) | 1.40) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | urges |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | under |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | pati  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ent's |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | co    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ntrol |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     L | 4.08  | 4.72  | 0     | −0    |   0   | 0     | 0     |
   | ikely | (     | (     | .7435 | .3069 | .2593 | .0553 | .2827 |
   | to    | 1.11) | 0.79) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | b     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ecome |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | depe  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ndent |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | on    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | one   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 3.25  | 3.54  | 0     | −0    | −0    | 0     | 0     |
   |  Cond | (     | (     | .8259 | .3129 | .1401 | .1625 | .1740 |
   | ition | 0.94) | 0.91) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | not   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | s     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | evere |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 3.25  | 3.55  | 0     | 0     | −0    | −0    | 0     |
   |  Admi | (     | (     | .9096 | .0398 | .1405 | .0416 | .1496 |
   | ssion | 1.50) | 1.40) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | not   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | indi  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | cated |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.56  | 3.00  | 0     | −0    | −0    | 0     | 0     |
   |   Not | (     | (     | .8246 | .0480 | .1447 | .2903 | .2126 |
   | a     | 0.99) | 0.99) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | su    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | icide |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | risk  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.42  | 3.08  | 0     | −0    |   0   | 0     | 0     |
   |  Does | (     | (     | .8481 | .2232 | .0573 | .1831 | .1942 |
   | not   | 1.59) | 1.51) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | re    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | quire |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | sic   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | kness |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | c     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ertif |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | icate |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 3.29  | 3.08  | 0     | −0    | −0    | 0     | 0     |
   |  Depe | (     | (     | .8432 | .2268 | .0802 | .0578 | .2279 |
   | ndent | 1.18) | 1.23) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | on    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | BZs   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 1.91  | 1.95  | 0     | −0    | −0    | 0     | 0     |
   |   Psy | (     | (     | .9452 | .0484 | .0436 | .0273 | .1017 |
   | choth | 1.16) | 1.11) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | erapy |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ref   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | erral |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | not   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | indi  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | cated |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 1.83  | 3.47  | 0     | −0    | −0    | 0     | 0     |
   | Antid | (     | (     | .8676 | .2914 | .0017 | .1573 | .1377 |
   | epres | 1.16) | 1.59) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | sants |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | not   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | indi  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | cated |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | F     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | actor |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 2     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | eigen |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | value |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 1.68) |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.91  | 2.68  | −0    | 0     |       | 0     | 0     |
   |    Ma | (     | (     | .0609 | .6055 | 0.208 | .2771 | .5095 |
   | nipul | 0.95) | 1.32) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ating |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | admi  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ssion |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.46  | 3.08  | 0     | 0     | −0    | 0     | 0     |
   |   Unl | (     | (     | .1055 | .6853 | .1458 | .3179 | .3969 |
   | ikely | 1.09) | 1.36) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | rouse |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | sym   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | pathy |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.86  | 3.36  | 0     | 0     |   0   | 0     | 0     |
   | Would | (     | (     | .3862 | .4406 | .1868 | .0396 | .6203 |
   | not   | 1.40) | 1.55) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | like  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | have  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | in    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | one's |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | c     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | linic |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | F     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | actor |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 3     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | eigen |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | value |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 1.00) |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     T | 2.97  | 3.64  | 0     | 0     | −0    | 0     | 0     |
   | aking | (     | (     | .2184 | .4940 | .6602 | .1606 | .2466 |
   | an    | 1.03) | 1.35) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ove   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | rdose |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | would |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | be    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | atte  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ntion |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |    se |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | eking |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     S | 1.61  | 1.82  | 0     | 0     |   0   | 0     | 0     |
   | hould | (     | (     | .3843 | .3520 | .6137 | .0264 | .3511 |
   | be    | 1.10) | 0.93) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | disch |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | arged |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | from  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | o     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ut-pa |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | tient |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |  foll |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ow-up |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     L | 3.11  | 3.64  | 0     | 0     |   0   | −0    | 0     |
   | ikely | (     | (     | .4816 | .1173 | .5391 | .1399 | .4441 |
   | to    | 1.28) | 1.48) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | annoy |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

   BPD, borderline personality disorder; BZ, benzodiazepine; NHS,
   National Health Service.

   Means: higher values indicate greater agreement with statement; there
   was a 6-point scale between the two statements of the semantic
   differential.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Attitudes to BPD based on the four test vignettes (factor 1:
      Kruskal–Wallis equality-of-populations rank test)

   ============= ================ ========
   Case vignette Respondents, *n* Rank sum
   ============= ================ ========
   1             19               460.50
   \                              
   2             16               564.50
   \                              
   3             19               860.50
   \                              
   4             19               815.50
   ============= ================ ========

   χ\ :sup:`2` = 11.38, d.f. = 3, *P* = 0.01

.. _S6:

APDQ
----

Multiple regression analysis of overall scores showed a weak trend
towards lower scores in assessment of attitudes towards patients with a
previous diagnosis of BPD compared with patients with a previous
diagnosis of depression (lower scores indicate more negative attitudes
in the APDQ and this is consistent with findings from the Appleby
measure); however, this difference fell just short of statistical
significance (*z* = 1.75, *P* = 0.08). There was no significant ethnic
difference in attitudes towards patients. In subgroup analysis, only
among White British patients with a previous diagnosis of BPD was there
a lower overall score compared with White British patients with a
previous diagnosis of depression (*z* = 1.98, *P* = 0.047).

This outcome had already been subjected to factor analysis by the
original inventors of the measure. When we assessed scores on the basis
of the five factors (using Kruskal–Wallis equality-of-populations rank)
there was no statistically significant difference in scores for factors
1 (enjoyment), 2 (security), 3 (acceptance) and 5 (enthusiasm). However,
there was a statistically significant (*P* = 0.03) difference found for
factor 4 (purpose), with higher scores in attitudes (more positive)
towards patients with depression (mean 4.60) compared with patients with
a previous diagnosis of BPD (mean 4.15).

.. _S7:

Discussion
==========

Since the original study of Lewis and Appleby nearly 30 years ago, a
number of studies spanning from 1993 to 2012, as summarised in the
introduction, have consistently shown that clinicians hold negative
attitudes towards personality disorder. Our finding of more negative
attitudes towards personality disorder compared with depression among
psychiatric trainees, using the same instrument as Lewis and Appleby, is
in line with previous research. However, it is difficult to show and
theorise a sense of longitudinal change. This is mainly because
different studies have looked at different professional groups,
including nurses, prison officers, social workers, psychologists and
psychiatrists, with varying training and levels of experience, and in
different countries and/or care settings. In addition, our study
examined the attitudes of a less experienced sample of psychiatrists
than the Lewis and Appleby study, and this has to be taken into
consideration when comparing current attitudes with previous ones.
However, the ongoing finding of more stigma towards patients with
personality disorder, almost 14 years after the introduction of the
National Personality Disorder Development Programme, is disheartening.

More encouraging is the lack of evidence of differences in attitudes to
patients with personality disorder of different ethnicity. The greater
negative attitudes to personality disorder than depression in White
British but not in Bangladeshi patients raises questions of differences
in how clinicians may view the disorder in different ethnic groups,
especially given that culture influences significantly what is
considered to be a person and personality. Culture influences a number
of factors relevant to the construct of personality disorder, such as
learning inside and outside the family, the threshold when personality
vulnerability cannot be compensated for by the person, and the social
threshold when such decompensations are labelled pathological.
:sup:`21–23` If one accepts personality pathology as universal,
:sup:`24` perhaps this finding can also raise further questions
regarding under-diagnosis of personality problems in certain ethnic
groups, although supporting such a link is beyond the scope of this
paper and further research is needed looking into both the universality
of personality disorder and issues of under-diagnosis or misdiagnosis.

The question of why psychiatrists stigmatise personality disorder is
complex and not simple to answer. In addition to the issues discussed
above in relation to caring for these often emotionally draining
patients, it is of relevance that specific features of BPD can cause
negative attitudes. It is known that a wide range of impulsive and
potentially self-damaging behaviours are observed, especially early in
the course of the disorder. :sup:`25,26` These include gambling,
irresponsible money handling, reckless driving and unsafe sexual
practices, :sup:`27` as well as problematic substance use, self-harm,
suicidal behaviour and disordered eating. :sup:`28–31` Most of these
behaviours carry strong moral connotations, sometimes challenging social
norms, and can thus provoke negative reactions, triggering clinicians'
implicit beliefs and possibly prejudices towards such behaviours.

While mounting anti-stigma campaigns may be required, the finding of a
greater lack of purpose in clinicians in working with personality
disorder allows for more modest and targeted intervention. Lack of
purpose and therapeutic pessimism raise the importance of designing
targeted interventions which may include training in personality
disorder. As personality disorder is prevalent in all psychiatric
settings, this is an important part of training for all psychiatrists.

.. _S8:

Limitations
-----------

Limitations of the present study include the small sample numbers,
which, despite a reasonable response rate for a questionnaire study,
makes it difficult to rely on comparisons between the groups, and thus
compromises the power of the study. Our study population is taken from
only two mental health trusts in the UK. However, the trusts cover both
inner and outer London areas, and the training programmes are similar to
those of others in the UK, as there is a specific framework for
postgraduate training in psychiatry.

.. _S9:

Recommendations
---------------

Increased training in evidence-based practice for generalist mental
health professionals in borderline personality disorder may address the
issue of clinicians' lack of sense of purpose. The emphasis is thus on
increasing the skills of clinicians in managing personality disorder in
general psychiatric settings, which usually lack the structure, training
and resources to deal with these complex patients. The difficulties
faced by general psychiatry clinicians have been acknowledged in the
literature, and in that respect ‘structured clinical management’ has
been discussed as an effective way of working with BPD patients in
non-specialist settings, as long as certain principles are followed and
interventions implemented. :sup:`32`

It has been shown that people with personality disorder present specific
challenges to the therapeutic alliance. :sup:`33–35` Training and
supervision :sup:`36–39` as well as participation in a Balint group
:sup:`40` can improve negative attitudes.

Patients with personality disorder can provoke strong
countertransference reactions, there is thus an ongoing need for
clinicians to monitor their countertransference when working with such
patients. This highlights the ongoing need for psychotherapy training.
Evidence-based psychotherapy treatments have a documented applicability
as a useful model for general psychiatrists. :sup:`41` Supervision and
further training is also necessary for consultants, as they often
supervise trainee doctors and inevitably influence them through their
own attitudes to these patients.

Recent research on stigma reduction has identified certain key
ingredients that anti-stigma initiatives should take into consideration:
a recovery emphasis and having multiple forms of social contact are
especially important for maximising outcomes. :sup:`42` These key
ingredients can be taken up to introduce specific initiatives to reduce
stigma against personality disorder. For example, Knaak *et al*
:sup:`43` found that a 3-hour workshop on BPD and dialectical
behavioural therapy (DBT) was successful at improving attitudes and
behavioural intentions towards persons with BPD. This is in line with
those studies that show that training and education programmes tend to
improve attitudes.

.. [1]
   **Dimitrios Chartonas**, ST4–6 in general adult psychiatry, Camden
   and Islington NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; **Michalis
   Kyratsous**, ST4–6 in general adult psychiatry, South London and
   Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; **Sarah Dracass**,
   Consultant Psychiatrist, and **Tennyson Lee**, Consultant
   Psychiatrist in Psychotherapy, both at East London NHS Foundation
   Trust, London, UK; **Kamaldeep Bhui**, Professor of Cultural
   Psychiatry and Epidemiology, Queen Mary University of London, and
   Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist, East London NHS Foundation Trust,
   London, UK.
