=================================================================================
Drug information update. Lithium and chronic kidney disease: debates and dilemmas
=================================================================================



Sumeet Gupta
Udayan Khastgir
:Correspondence: Sumeet Gupta (sumeet.gupta@nhs.net)
 [1]_

:date: 2017-8

:Abstract:
   Lithium is an established treatment for bipolar disorder and an
   augmenting agent for treatment-resistant depression. Despite
   awareness of renal adverse effects, including chronic kidney disease,
   for the past five decades, there has been a lack of research
   evidence. This has led to debates around the existence and magnitude
   of the risk. This article discusses the current evidence base
   regarding the link between lithium and chronic kidney disease,
   monitoring of renal functions and its clinical implications.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Lithium is one of the oldest psychotropic medications. It remains the
gold standard treatment for bipolar disorder and an augmenting agent for
treating depression. Over the past few decades, additional benefits of
lithium have also come to light, most importantly its role in preventing
suicide and Alzheimer's disease.\ :sup:`1,2` As it is often used as a
maintenance treatment for lifelong disorders, concerns have been raised
about its potential long-term organ toxicity, mainly the effect on
glomerular function leading to chronic kidney disease (CKD).\ :sup:`3–5`

.. _S1:

Debate 1: does lithium cause CKD?
=================================

The association between CKD and lithium has been known for a long time,
and monitoring renal function in patients receiving lithium therapy has
been the norm for many decades. Despite this, there has been little
research into the renal adverse effects of lithium so far. A link
between lithium therapy and CKD has received increasing recognition, and
there are several explanations for this. First, glomerular function
decreases gradually as a normal part of the ageing process; increased
life expectancy has led to increasing numbers of lithium patients being
diagnosed with CKD. Second, there has been a resurgence of interest in
lithium and its safe use, owing to its proven effectiveness in bipolar
disorder in comparison with other mood stabiliser drugs and its
anti-suicide effect. Last, more effective monitoring of renal function
and the use of more sensitive measures to diagnose CKD, such as the
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) rather than serum urea and
creatinine levels, have led to the early identification of affected
patients.

Despite significant progress over the past two decades, doubts still
remain about the existence and magnitude of the risk.\ :sup:`3–5` Unlike
its tubular adverse effects, which more commonly present with polyuria
and polydipsia, the glomerular adverse effects of lithium therapy appear
after long-term use and might not normalise or improve after its
discontinuation. It has therefore been difficult to attribute causality
for this adverse effect.

The debate about lithium nephrotoxicity started in 1977, with reported
abnormalities in renal biopsies from a small group of patients treated
with lithium.\ :sup:`6` Initial cross-sectional, case-control and small
cohort studies with short-term follow-ups reported contradictory
findings on the toxicity risk.\ :sup:`7–10` In 1994, Bendz *et al*
published a study of 142 patients who had been taking lithium for more
than 15 years. The authors measured the glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
by chromium-51-labelled ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid
([:sup:`51`\ Cr]EDTA) clearance and found that in 21% of patients the
GFR was lower than in the demographic-matched population control
group.\ :sup:`11` Two meta-analyses of these diverse studies failed to
produce conclusive evidence for or against lithium nephrotoxicity.
Although they showed that patients on lithium therapy had worse renal
function than controls (as measured by serum creatinine levels or the
eGFR), they reported that the clinical significance was questionable.
Both meta-analyses highlighted poor quality data and significant
heterogeneity among studies.\ :sup:`12,13`

Recent epidemiological studies utilising large databases have
consistently shown that CKD (defined as an eGFR of < 60 ml/min/1.73
m\ :sup:`2`) is common among lithium patients but that lithium therapy
increases the risk of CKD. In addition, renal failure in patients with
end-stage renal disease (ESRD) is not as rare as previously
thought.\ :sup:`14–17` In a retrospective cohort study using the General
Practice Research Database, Close *et al* reported that patients taking
lithium for bipolar disorder had a twofold increased risk of developing
renal failure and a two-and-a-half-fold increased risk of developing CKD
of any stage compared with lithium-naive patients.\ :sup:`14`

The relationship between lithium therapy and renal failure or ESRD has
been investigated in many other studies that mainly use data from
databases of patients undergoing renal replacement therapy (dialysis or
renal transplant). A Swedish study found that 0.81% of renal replacement
therapy patients had kidney disease attributable to lithium-induced
nephropathy. Moreover, the risk of ESRD in lithium-treated patients was
nearly sixfold greater than in the general population.\ :sup:`17`
Another recent retrospective cohort study, of renal replacement therapy
patients in Australia, reported that the incidence rate of ESRD due to
lithium therapy had increased significantly from 0.14 cases per million
population per year (95% CI 0.06–0.22) in 1992–1996 to 0.78 cases per
million population per year (95% CI 0.67–0.90) in 2007–2011. This report
emphasised that lithium-induced nephropathy is not a rare cause of ESRD,
and is becoming more common.\ :sup:`18` However, the debate is far from
over and contradictory findings continue to be published. For example,
in a review of patients with ESRD in Sweden, Aiff *et al* found 32 cases
of ESRD in patients who had started taking lithium before 1980 but none
in those who had started taking lithium after 1980. Hence, the authors
suggested that the opposite was true: renal failure might not be a
problem with the current practice of maintaining lower serum lithium
levels along with better monitoring of renal function.\ :sup:`19` In a
recent population-based retrospective cohort study in Denmark, Kessing
*et al* also failed to identify any patients with lithium-induced ESRD.
However, their findings indicated that bipolar disorder is independently
associated with CKD.\ :sup:`20` Therefore, uncertainties about the
magnitude of the CKD risk are yet to be resolved.

It is clear that not all patients taking lithium experience glomerular
adverse effects. Most likely, only a select group of patients develop
CKD and only a small proportion of these progress to ESRD.\ :sup:`21`
Moreover, the association between lithium therapy and CKD is unlikely to
be entirely explained by coincidence or confounding variables (such as
age, other psychotropic drugs or comorbid medical/psychiatric
illnesses). Discrepancies among studies were largely due to
methodological differences such as varied parameters to assess renal
function and definitions of renal impairment, short-term follow-up, a
lack of patients on long-term lithium therapy, combining high-risk and
low-risk groups, choice of control group (healthy *v*. psychiatric
patients), and an inability to control the confounding variables.
Definitive data on the magnitude of the risk are still lacking.
Moreover, in the absence of any pathognomonic histological or
biochemical changes, lithium-associated CKD remains a diagnosis of
exclusion.

.. _S2:

Debate 2: is there any relationship between the tubular and glomerular adverse effects of lithium?
==================================================================================================

It was previously assumed that CKD is preceded by tubular adverse
effects of lithium. However, differences in the prevalence of tubular
and glomerular adverse effects and a lack of correlation between reduced
glomerular function and tubular abnormalities on renal biopsy (in the
form of tubular dilation and microcysts) argue against this
assumption.\ :sup:`22,23` Despite this, the presence of tubular adverse
effects is suggested to increase the risk of CKD, hence the suggestion
that treating or preventing tubular adverse effects might help to
prevent deterioration of glomerular function.\ :sup:`21`

.. _S3:

Debate 3: is it possible to identify patients at high risk of developing CKD/ESRD and to predict the prognosis of these adverse effects?
========================================================================================================================================

As only a small proportion of patients on lithium therapy experience
CKD, early identification of these high-risk patients might help to
prevent and manage this adverse effect. Over the years, researchers have
tried to identify both susceptibility and treatment-related factors such
as associations with ageing, comorbid physical/psychiatric health
problems, cumulative lithium dose or treatment duration, dosing
frequency, and number of toxicity episodes.

Acute lithium toxicity is known to cause acute renal failure, and many
patients suffer renal impairment even after recovering from an acute
episode. There is consistent evidence that acute nephrotoxicity episodes
can lead to CKD.\ :sup:`6,9,24` Recently, Clos *et al* suggested that
lithium-associated CKD is primarily mediated by acute lithium toxicity,
and that avoiding lithium toxicity can prevent renal
impairment\ :sup:`25` Studies suggest a relationship between impaired
renal function and either persistent high serum lithium levels
(>0.6mmol/L *v*. <0.6mmol/L) or a single serum lithium measure of > 1.0
mmol/L. As these were not prospective studies, it is difficult to
establish a causal relationship, especially as reduced renal function
can also increase serum lithium levels.\ :sup:`26,27` On the other hand,
a recent randomised placebo controlled trial of low-dose lithium therapy
(serum lithium levels of 0.25–0.50 mmol/L) in elderly patients with mild
cognitive impairment did not show a significant difference in eGFR over
a 4-year follow-up period.\ :sup:`28` The study suggests that lower
therapeutic levels of lithium might not impair renal
function.\ :sup:`28` In contrast, other studies have failed to show a
relationship between CKD risk and lithium dose or serum lithium
levels.\ :sup:`17,24` It is well established that higher serum lithium
levels provide better protection against another affective episode
(especially a manic episode). Therefore, the debate about what serum
lithium level represents a balance between safety and effectiveness is
likely to continue until more definitive data become available.

Once-daily dose is thought to be associated with less renal impairment
than multiple daily doses.\ :sup:`21` Although a few studies do not
support this, none have so far reported disadvantages for once-daily
dosing.\ :sup:`29` Therefore, although a definitive answer is lacking,
it makes sense to adopt a once-daily dosing strategy. Comorbid physical
health conditions such as diabetes or hypertension can independently
cause CKD, but CKD is also commonly seen in lithium-treated patients,
even in the absence of a comorbid physical illness. Therefore,
comorbidity is unlikely to entirely explain the association between
lithium and CKD.

So far, evidence about CKD risk factors is limited and somewhat
contradictory. However, it indicates that lower therapeutic lithium
doses might have a reduced detrimental effect on renal function and that
acute lithium toxicity should be avoided to prevent renal dysfunction.
Furthermore, once-daily dosing might be safer than multiple daily doses.

.. _S4:

Debate 4: how can we effectively monitor glomerular adverse effects?
====================================================================

Monitoring renal function in patients on lithium therapy has been the
norm for many years, but there are significant discrepancies among the
different guidelines on the parameters that should be used and the
frequency of monitoring.\ :sup:`30–32` The UK National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends 6-monthly monitoring; the
British Association for Psychopharmacology recommends annual monitoring;
and the American Psychiatric Association recommends monitoring every 2–3
months for the first 6 months, followed by 6-monthly to annual
measurements :sup:`30–32` However, they do not give specific guidance
about the parameters for measuring renal function and continue to
recommend measuring serum urea and creatinine levels, although recent
guidelines have started to recommend measuring the eGFR. In other
medical areas, measuring serum urea and creatinine levels is no longer a
preferred option for monitoring renal function: standard practice is to
monitor the eGFR. Many equations can be used to calculate the eGFR from
serum creatinine concentration, with differing accuracies. Recent NICE
guidelines on managing CKD suggest using the CKD Epidemiology
Collaboration (CKD-EPI) equation. They also suggest using the CKD-EPI
equation based on cystatin C levels if accurate GFR estimates are
necessary.\ :sup:`33` Psychiatry guidelines do not recommend any
particular method for calculating the eGFR.

The importance of measuring proteinuria to monitor renal function in CKD
patients is now firmly established. Proteinuria is an independent
predictor of CKD progression, cardiovascular disorders and all-cause
mortality.\ :sup:`33` However, a role for estimating and monitoring
proteinuria in lithium-related renal impairment is yet to be
established. The evidence so far is sparse and contradictory: some
reports suggest that proteinuria is linked to lithium-associated CKD and
indicates a poor prognosis, while others suggest that lithium-associated
CKD is not associated with proteinuria and that in the presence of
proteinuria one should rule out other causes.\ :sup:`5,10,21` However,
recent publications have highlighted the importance of monitoring
proteinuria in patients with lithium-associated CKD.\ :sup:`21,34`

Unfortunately, psychiatric guidelines have not kept up with advances in
nephrology, and we need guidelines for evidence-based monitoring of
renal function. Recent publications suggest that renal function should
be monitored regularly via the eGFR and that the degree of proteinuria
should be measured in patients with a declining eGFR or an eGFR of <60
ml/min/1.73 m.\ :sup:`221,34` However, these recommendations are
developed for CKD associated with other aetiological factors, and more
specific evidence-based monitoring guidelines need to be developed to
screen and monitor lithium-associated CKD.

.. _S5:

Dilemma 1: should lithium be stopped if a patient develops CKD?
===============================================================

The most common dilemma clinicians face is what to do if a patient on
lithium therapy develops CKD. In this scenario, the clinician must
decide whether to continue or discontinue lithium. Advice in the
literature is contradictory, ranging from discontinuing lithium as soon
as renal function starts to deteriorate (as evidenced by two consecutive
tests) to continuing lithium even in the presence of CKD.\ :sup:`18,35`
The decision to discontinue lithium is based on the assumption that
lithium is a causative factor for CKD and that its discontinuation would
improve renal function or at least slow down deterioration. However,
neither of these assumptions is completely supported by current
evidence.\ :sup:`4,5,36` Moreover, we still do not know whether
lithium-associated CKD is reversible or irreversible. It has been
suggested that this adverse effect might be reversible at the initial
stages, only becoming irreversible after a certain threshold is
reached.\ :sup:`4,21` Presne *et al* suggested that the threshold might
be somewhere between a GFR of 25 and 40 ml/min/1.73
m\ :sup:`2`.\ :sup:`22` Thus, the advantages of discontinuing lithium
are uncertain :sup:`4,5,35,36` On the other hand, there is enough
evidence to suggest that lithium discontinuation is associated with high
risk of relapse for patients with mood disorders, especially those with
bipolar disorder. Moreover, the illness might become treatment
refractory.\ :sup:`21` One of the advantages of lithium is its
anti-suicide effect: the risk of suicide is known to increase after
lithium discontinuation\ :sup:`37` The decision to continue or
discontinue lithium treatment should thus only be taken after careful
assessment of the benefits and risks, and because of uncertainties
surrounding these, it is essential that the decision-making process
should include patients and all of the professionals involved, including
nephrologists. Our experience agrees with a documented report that many
psychiatric patients prefer to maintain their mental stability against
the unknown risk of further deterioration in renal function.\ :sup:`38`
In clinical practice, it is not unusual to request that a nephrologist
makes this treatment decision. However, it is important that
psychiatrists should not abdicate responsibility, because nephrologists
might not be fully aware of the risks associated with the psychiatric
illness.\ :sup:`5,21,34,35` Another option would be to continue lithium
treatment while closely monitoring renal function. Many authors have
suggested trying to keep the lithium level at the lower end of the
therapeutic range, although there is not much evidence that this
prevents further deterioration in renal function. However, as CKD
patients are particularly prone to lithium toxicity, this strategy
appears prudent.

.. _S6:

Dilemma 2: should we consider lithium therapy for patients already diagnosed with CKD?
======================================================================================

There is not much research evidence to support or dispute this decision.
Lithium treatment may lead to further deterioration in renal function,
which could be clinically important because the renal reserve is already
low in patients with CKD. A study of elderly patients suggested that
individuals with pre-existing CKD were more susceptible to a
lithium-associated decline in renal function\ :sup:`36` On the other
hand, we should not deprive such patients of an effective therapy
because of unproven adverse consequences. In 2012, Werneke *et al*
designed a mathematical model based on the existing, but limited,
evidence to analyse the risks and benefits of continuing or
discontinuing lithium therapy for CKD patients. They concluded that most
patients should continue lithium treatment even if long-term renal
adverse effects develop. They also recommended prescribing lithium to
CKD patients because treatment benefits outweighed the risks.\ :sup:`35`
However, at present there is not enough evidence to support any
decision.

.. _S7:

Conclusions
===========

Limited knowledge of its renal (especially glomerular) adverse effects
has led clinicians to either avoid or prematurely discontinue lithium
therapy because of the perceived risk of a negative renal outcome. Over
the past decade, a few large database studies have confirmed the
existence of lithium-associated CKD, but uncertainty remains about the
magnitude and determinants of the risks. Lithium therapy is here to stay
and we should learn to optimise its efficacy and safety. There is a need
for large-scale prospective studies focused on the early identification
of high-risk patients and for developing evidence-based guidelines to
monitor renal function in patients treated with lithium.

.. [1]
   **Dr Sumeet Gupta**, Consultant Psychiatrist, and **Dr Udayan
   Khastgir**, Consultant Psychiatrist, West Park Hospital, Darlington,
   UK.
