---
author:
- Martin Curtice[^1]
date: 2017-2
title: "A Practical Guide to the Mental Capacity Act 2005: Putting the
  Principles of the Act into Practice"
---

The Mental Capacity Act 2005 (MCA) -- which applies specifically to
England and Wales -- pervades several aspects of daily clinical care
within many clinical as well as non-clinical environments, such as care
homes.

The authors of *A Practical Guide to the Mental Capacity Act 2005* --
whose backgrounds are social work and advocacy -- observe that 'Seven
years on \[...\] the MCA is still not being adhered to nor fully
embraced within practice'. Their aim was to produce a
'theory-to-practice breakdown of the MCA' and this was readily achieved
with a fluent and erudite style of writing and continued emphasis on the
practical aspects of implementing the MCA. There were useful case
studies and checklists for practice, as well as practical top tips such
as videotaping advance statements. A minor gripe would be that, if
anything, such checklists and top tips could have been used more often
throughout the book; for example, at the end of each chapter. The most
useful chapter was that on best interests -- very salient practical
advice was afforded on the best interests process and assessments,
including how to chair meetings and using documentation. This chapter
tried to demystify the abstract concept of best interests by
conceptualising such decisions as complex and less complex. Another
strong chapter -- probably reflecting the authors\' expertise in this
area -- was on advocacy and empowerment, which examined the various
roles of the independent mental capacity advocate within the MCA
process.

The undoubted highlight was the evocative account of the 2004 case of
*HL v UK* which was the catalyst for the introduction of Deprivation of
Liberty Safeguards (DoLS) legislation, to plug the now legally infamous
'Bournewood gap'. HL was a patient with autism and challenging behaviour
who was admitted to hospital on an informal basis. He was regarded as
being compliant with care but unable to consent to admission; however,
this was found to be a contravention of Article 5 of the European
Convention on Human Rights (the right to liberty). The account is
written by HL and his carers Mr and Mrs E. Although events regarding HL
and his carers began in 1993, the account is a fascinating perspective
of one of the most, if not the most, important mental health cases in
legal history in terms of its potential impact on tens of thousands of
people, carers and clinicians on a daily basis. The authors provide
useful views on how and why the DoLS legislation has not been
implemented well so far.

Overall, this is an excellent short text which should be required
reading for those involved in care touching upon the use of the MCA, and
would be ideal for medical and nursing students. But with the Court of
Protection seemingly currently engaged in trying to crystallise the core
essence of DoLS legislation -- and with further recent key judgments
emerging in the areas of best interests, end-of-life care and DNACPR (do
not attempt cardio-pulmonary resuscitation) -- it seems likely that
this, as well as other similar guides, will need to be updated again in
the near future to keep the readership up to date with key developments.

[^1]: **Dr Martin Curtice**, consultant in old age psychiatry,
    Worcestershire Health and Care NHS Trust, New Haven, Princess of
    Wales Community Hospital, Bromsgrove, UK; email:
    <mjrc68@doctors.org.uk>
