======================================================
Waking Up: Searching for Spirituality without Religion
======================================================



Matthew M Nour [1]_
:Date: 2017-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Sam Harris has been waiting to write this book for over a decade. This
may surprise some. The subject matter – dealing reverently with human
spiritual experience – is at odds with Harris' (in)famous public persona
as a strident critic of religion. Yet, for the past 20 years Harris, who
has degrees in philosophy and neuroscience, has been on a personal quest
in search of ‘transformative insights about the nature of one's own
consciousness’.

Harris defines spiritual practice as the efforts people make, through
meditation, use of psychedelics or other means, to fully bring their
minds into the present. This practice leads to the insight that our
sense of having a unified self is an illusion and that this illusion
causes us much psychological suffering. Harris aims to convince his
reader of this using philosophical thought experiments, discoveries of
contemporary neuroscience and personal experience. He also encourages
his reader to test these hypotheses about human consciousness ‘in the
laboratory of your own mind’, through meditation practices inspired by
Buddhist Dzogchen and Vipassana teaching. He argues that these spiritual
insights can be accepted independently of the metaphysical baggage of
traditional religion, and laments that until recently they have been
under-investigated by an ‘impoverished’ neuroscience.

The resulting book is an ambitious mosaic: part memoir, part
neuropsychology text and part meditation guide. A key strength is
Harris' clear, lively and personal writing style, which instils the
prose with an endearing conversational air. Many readers will feel,
however, that by focusing almost exclusively on solitary meditation
practices and psychedelic drug-induced experiences, Harris has omitted
important dimensions of human spiritual experience, such as the
self-transcendence which may be arrived at when contemplating art or
engaging in communal ceremonial practices. Moreover, the occasional
barbed criticism of monotheistic religion will deter some readers, but
play well to the Harris faithful.

*Waking Up* is a book for the general public and is not intended to have
a clinical application. Why, then, is it being discussed in the pages of
this journal? My answer is twofold. First, as psychiatrists we are
interested in all dimensions of human experience. Consequently, the
growing scientific interest in the mystical/spiritual experience and its
potential therapeutic implications is of great importance for our
specialty. Second, psychiatrists are humans and all humans may benefit
from being reminded from time to time that our conventional sense of a
unified self sitting some 2 inches behind the eyes is likely to be a
pernicious illusion.

.. [1]
   **Matthew M Nour**, CT2 Psychiatry Trainee, South London and Maudsley
   NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK, email: matthew.nour@kcl.ac.uk
