=================================
Epistemic injustice in psychiatry
=================================



Paul Crichton
Havi Carel
Ian James Kidd
:Correspondence: Paul Crichton
(paulcrichton@doctors.org.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2017-4

:Abstract:
   It has been argued that those who suffer from medical conditions are
   more vulnerable to epistemic injustice (a harm done to a person in
   their capacity as an epistemic subject) than healthy people. This
   editorial claims that people with mental disorders are even more
   vulnerable to epistemic injustice than those with somatic illnesses.
   Two kinds of contributory factors are outlined, global and specific.
   Some suggestions are made to counteract the effects of these factors,
   for instance, we suggest that physicians should participate in groups
   where the subjective experience of patients is explored, and learn to
   become more aware of their own unconscious prejudices towards
   psychiatric patients.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Epistemic injustice is a harm done to a person in her capacity as an
epistemic subject (a knower, a reasoner, a questioner) by undermining
her capacity to engage in epistemic practices such as giving knowledge
to others (testifying) or making sense of one's experiences
(interpreting). It typically arises when a hearer does not take the
statements of a speaker as seriously as they deserve to be taken. The
prime case of epistemic injustice is testimonial: the hearer deflates
the level of credibility she gives the speaker because she is (often
unconsciously) prejudiced against the social group to which the speaker
belongs. Common examples include sexism and racism. In such cases the
testimony of a woman or a person from an ethnic minority background will
be given deflated credibility, based on the prejudicial associations
between that group and negative stereotypes. The reason we chose this
approach is that epistemic injustice provides an account for why,
despite the best intentions, physicians often do not believe what
psychiatric patients tell them. Clarifying some of the reasons for this
common prejudicial stereotype of patient unreliability may make it
possible to explore ways of overcoming the epistemic injustice that we
suggest patients, and in particular psychiatric patients, are vulnerable
to.

It is worth noting here that it is prejudicial or negative stereotypes,
not stereotypes *per se*, which often give rise to epistemic injustice.
We rely on stereotypes as heuristic aids in making credibility
judgements because they are often empirically reliable generalisations.
However, negative attitudes towards people with a mental illness may
lead to negative stereotypes and to generalisations which are resistant
to counter-evidence, owing to what philosopher Miranda Fricker calls an
‘ethically bad affective investment’. :sup:`1` It is these kinds of
stereotypes that may lead to epistemic injustice.

.. _S1:

Epistemic injustice and psychiatric patients
============================================

Epistemic injustice is important in psychiatry because of the persistent
negative stereotypes that affect people with mental disorders in
particular and lead to a credibility deficit. The consequence is that
patient testimonies and interpretations are not acknowledged as
credible, and patients are thus undermined in their capacity as knowers
and contributors to the epistemic effort to reach a correct diagnosis
and treatment. We suggest that people with mental disorders are even
more susceptible to epistemic injustice than those with physical
illnesses, for reasons that are detailed below.

We have argued in the past that people with physical illnesses are
vulnerable to epistemic injustice. :sup:`2, 3` Here we suggest that
people with mental disorder may be susceptible to even greater epistemic
injustice than people with physical illnesses. This is mainly owing to
the high prevalence and great power of negative stereotypes of
psychiatric illness. As a consequence, the patient may be telling the
truth, but the doctor deflates the level of credibility which she gives
to the patient (‘credibility deficit’) and thereby does the patient a
distinctive kind of injustice, namely epistemic injustice, which
undermines the patient specifically in her capacity as a giver of
knowledge. This has detrimental effects on individual psychiatric
patients, but also on the funding of psychiatric services and the public
perception of mental disorder. Many people are influenced by negative
stereotypes about mental disorders, are ill informed about their true
nature, and have little understanding of how to treat them. Some
measures to improve the current situation are suggested below.

.. _S2:

Measures to counter epistemic injustice
---------------------------------------

The notion of epistemic injustice has been developed by Fricker.
:sup:`1` She was interested in how social identity and power affects
people's status as knowers. She gives the example of a White police
officer who stops a Black car driver and asks him whether the car
belongs to him. If the driver truthfully says that the car is his, but
the policeman does not believe him because of racial prejudice, then he
does the driver an injustice in his capacity as a knower. :sup:`4`

The main type of epistemic injustice that Fricker discusses is
‘testimonial injustice’; it emerges from the fact that testifying, i.e.
giving information to others, depends crucially on one's perceived
credibility. If a person is seen as lacking credibility, her testimony
will be ignored or treated with suspicion, or it might not be solicited
at all. Of course, she may lack credibility for a good reason, for
instance if she is a known liar. However, testimonial injustice occurs
when a person suffers a ‘credibility deficit’ owing to some negative
stereotype or prejudice associated with her social group (e.g. gender or
race). This credibility deficit is unjustified and hence constitutes an
epistemic injustice. Fricker analyses how negative racial and sexist
prejudices unfairly deflate the credibility of people of Black and
minority ethnic background and women, such that what they say is
ignored, marginalised or otherwise excluded from epistemic
consideration. Since being able to give information to others is
essential to social life and agential action, testimonial injustice
harms those who experience it.

Carel and Kidd have argued that people with physical illnesses are more
vulnerable to epistemic injustice than healthy people. :sup:`2, 3` The
testimonies of patients are often presumed to be irrelevant, unreliable,
confused or otherwise lacking in credibility, owing to negative
stereotypes associated with ill persons. Such stereotypes include
viewing ill persons as cognitively impaired or emotionally compromised,
owing either to their somatic condition or to their psychological
reactions to it; or as existentially unstable, gripped by anxieties such
that they ‘cannot think straight’; or as psychologically dominated by
their illness in a way that warps their capacity to accurately describe
and report their experiences (e.g. ‘the moaner’ or ‘the drama queen’
stereotype). Because illness often evokes strong feelings in those
affected, their emotions are often taken by health professionals to have
a detrimental effect on patients' thinking, distorting the accounts they
give of their illness. This pattern may be more acute in cases where
subjective symptoms are driving the clinical encounter, such as
unexplained breathlessness (see
`www.lifeofbreath.org <www.lifeofbreath.org>`__), chronic pain, or other
medically unexplained symptoms. :sup:`5`

Of course, the credibility of an individual is context dependent: if
someone is talking about a subject on which she is an acknowledged
expert then she is much more likely to be believed than if she is
talking about something she is known to have little knowledge of.

.. _S3:

Epistemic injustice – real-life situations
------------------------------------------

We are sufficiently aware of the existence of people's unconscious
desires and beliefs to know that they can be mistaken about their own
desires and beliefs, but it is also the case that they have exclusive
access to many of their desires and beliefs. In the interests of
epistemic justice, physicians should accept what people with mental
disorders say about these matters as true unless there is good reason
not to. Moreover, psychiatric patients who have experience of
psychiatric services become reluctant to disclose psychotic symptoms
because they know it might make them more likely to be diagnosed with a
psychotic illness, and in some cases detained in hospital and medicated
against their will. If they nonetheless disclose such symptoms, then
psychiatrists might conclude that the symptoms are more severe in the
sense that the patients are unable to inhibit their expression and/or
that their executive function is also impaired.

Here we give three examples of epistemic injustice affecting psychiatric
patients (Boxes `1 <#box1>`__,\ `2 <#box2>`__ and `3 <#box3>`__). Their
purpose is to show that epistemic injustice can be a real problem in
psychiatry, with possibly devastating effects on the individuals who are
telling the truth. The personal details of the patients concerned have
been altered to preserve their anonymity.

One of the important factors which can predispose to epistemic injustice
is a widespread misunderstanding of the relationship between emotion and
cognition, and the positive contribution made by emotional input to a
broader conception of rationality. :sup:`6` A consequence, in a medical
and psychiatric context, is that the ‘soft evidence’ offered by patients
is often met by credibility deflation. In practice this may lead to
patient reports being ignored or discounted, especially when time
pressure and other constraints are at play. Conversely, if the ‘hard
evidence’ provided by objective investigation (e.g. blood tests) is
regarded as more reliable, then the opinions of health professionals who
can access and interpret that evidence may enjoy credibility inflation.
In some cases it may be better for the doctor to try to treat on the
basis of the symptoms reported by the patient rather than on the basis
of an abnormal blood test result or an abnormal scan alone. An example
of this is the PSA (prostate-specific antigen) test, which is a
notoriously unreliable guide for the treatment of prostate cancer.

**Box 1** Example of epistemic injustice in psychiatry 1

When one of the authors (P.C.) was a medical student in Munich, Germany,
he saw a young man on an acute psychiatric ward who said he was a
relative of the then Soviet leader. The responsible consultant took this
to be a grandiose delusion, and therefore as evidence of a psychotic
illness; it later turned out to be true.

**Box 2** Example of epistemic injustice in psychiatry 2

The second example is of a woman in her early 50s, a former nun. The
police contacted mental health services because they had been alerted by
someone doing work on her house. They found evidence of smoke damage to
the house, but not of fire damage. She was admitted to a psychiatric
ward and detained under section 2 of the Mental Health Act. She claimed
that she had been burning incense in the house for many years to drive
away evil spirits. During the week she had spent on the ward there was
no evidence of her trying to ward off evil spirits or attempting to
start a fire, or of any psychotic symptoms. The mental health tribunal
members concluded that her beliefs about incense and evil spirits were
compatible with her religious faith, that there was no evidence of a
psychotic illness, as had been claimed by the psychiatrist and one of
the psychiatric nurses, and that section 2 should therefore be
rescinded.

**Box 3** Example of epistemic injustice in psychiatry 3

The third example is of a young man who was admitted to psychiatric
hospital on section 2 despite the fact that he had agreed all along to
be admitted and remain in hospital as a voluntary patient. He had been
standing near the edge of a high cliff for about an hour until
passers-by called the police. The staff involved in his care on
admission did not believe that he could be trusted to remain in hospital
on a voluntary basis and argued in the tribunal for the maintenance of
the section. His community psychiatric nurse attended the tribunal,
stating that he should never have been placed on a section, because he
had had suicidal thoughts for many years, had gone to the same cliff
many times in the past, had been admitted to hospital on several
occasions as a voluntary patient, and had misgivings about the stigma
attached to being placed on a section. All this had been documented in
the hospital notes. She conceded that there would always be a risk of
self-harm, but that it was a matter of managing the risk without
compulsory detention and with the help of his friends and family. After
hearing this evidence the tribunal members decided to rescind the
section.

A psychiatric example is to do with making a diagnosis of epilepsy. Here
a patient may have some epileptiform waves on the electroencephalogram
(EEG), but unless there is also clinical evidence of altered
consciousness and/or involuntary movements which fit into a recognised
pattern, a diagnosis of epilepsy cannot be made. An EEG can confirm but
cannot exclude the diagnosis, which is essentially clinical. :sup:`7`

In very general terms, there are two types of contributory conditions
for epistemic injustice affecting people with mental disorders: global
and specific. Global factors are those that can affect any patient at
risk of psychiatric disorder or those diagnosed as having psychiatric
disorders. The fear of stigma among those at risk can make early
intervention difficult and those who have been diagnosed may avoid
service use and relapse more frequently.

.. _S4:

Global contributory conditions for epistemic injustice
======================================================

There are three global contributory conditions for epistemic injustice
in psychiatric illness: problems associated with, and partly caused by,
the mental disorder the higher value placed by health professionals on
‘hard’ or objective evidence compared with patient reports the
entrenched negative stereotypes associated with mental disorders.

.. _S5:

1. Problems related to mental disorder
--------------------------------------

Psychiatric patients are often disadvantaged – cognitively, socially and
economically – and these disadvantages are frequently thought to be the
patient's fault. People with mental disorders are often badly educated
because the illness has interrupted their education (‘dropouts’); they
are often financially impoverished because the effects of the illness
may make them unemployable (‘lazy’, ‘dependence culture’); and they are
frequently socially isolated (‘loners’). They may become dependent on
substances such as nicotine, alcohol and street drugs (‘lack of
willpower’) and frequently experience physical illnesses. Causes of
physical illnesses include substance misuse, self-neglect secondary to
mental disorder and/or substance misuse, and psychotropic medication,
such as atypical antipsychotics causing cardiovascular problems (‘down
to lifestyle’).

People with mental disorders are thus often seen to have largely brought
these disadvantages on themselves and are stigmatised and held
responsible for them, :sup:`1` even though some conditions contributing
to mental disorders, such as genetic factors and a dysfunctional
environment, are outside the person's control. To the extent that such
negative stereotypes are shared by their voters, politicians, who often
look to save public money, will not be motivated to redress the
imbalance in mental health funding: in 2010/2011 mental health services
were allocated only 10.8% of the National Health Service (NHS) budget,
although mental disorders constituted nearly 22.8% of the disease burden
in the NHS. :sup:`9` Simon Wessely, the president of the Royal College
of Psychiatrists, notes that despite rising demand, spending on adult
mental health by NHS trusts has fallen by 8% since 2010. :sup:`9` A
recent parliamentary report advocates ‘whole person’ care, which
includes mental and physical health, and highlights some of the barriers
to parity of esteem for mental health. :sup:`10`

.. _S6:

2. Hard *v.* soft evidence
--------------------------

Health professionals are trained to place higher value on ‘hard’ or
objective evidence, namely the results of investigations, than on ‘soft’
or subjective evidence provided by patients. In fact, some such
objective evidence (e.g. from X-rays or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
scans) is heavily dependent on interpretation, for instance by a
radiologist. This gives health professionals epistemic power, because
only they have access to this evidence and have the training to
interpret it. Montgomery :sup:`11` has argued that medicine is not
itself a science but rather an interpretive practice that relies on
clinical reasoning. A physician looks at the patient's history along
with the presenting physical signs and symptoms and juxtaposes these
with clinical experience and empirical studies to construct a tentative
account of the illness with what Montgomery calls ‘clinical judgment’.
In psychiatry, there is virtually no hard evidence and diagnoses have to
be made mainly on the basis of what patients say and how they behave.
However, some psychiatrists regard their patients as objects of their
epistemic enquiry rather than participants in an epistemic search for
the correct diagnosis and best treatment. Anthropologist Tanya Luhrmann
:sup:`12` argues that insurance companies exercise a more powerful
influence over the content of healthcare than do doctors, in that they
promote a biological approach to psychiatry because it yields explicit
therapeutic rationales, targeted treatments and quantifiable outcomes
that can be audited more easily.

Despite the lack of objective evidence in psychiatry, many psychiatrists
are influenced by their general medical training and import this bias
into the field. Although many acknowledge the biopsychosocial model of
mental disorders, they often retain their biological orientation.
:sup:`13` Biological psychiatry has been dominant since the 1950s, when
the first antipsychotic drugs were introduced, and there is little
evidence that this is changing in any significant way. This is partly
because the biological approach has practical benefits (e.g.
psychiatrists can save time by focusing on drug treatments). Based on
his experience working as a liaison psychiatrist in a large medical
hospital, one of the authors (P.C.) believes that psychiatry itself is
stigmatised within medicine and that some psychiatrists feel that they
will be more respected by their medical colleagues if they approach
mental disorders from a biological perspective. P.C. also senses that
some patients might prefer this attitude, feeling exonerated if they are
told that their mental disorder is caused by a ‘chemical imbalance in
the brain’ which can be ameliorated by a drug.

.. _S7:

3. Negative stereotypes
-----------------------

People with mental disorders are socially stigmatised and are frequently
described with derogatory terms such as ‘mad’, ‘crazy’ or ‘weird’. The
term ‘stigma’ comes from the ancient Greek word denoting the mark made
on slaves by a pointed instrument. Stigma involves negative associations
that attach to a social group. Sociologist Erving Goffman :sup:`14`
argued that stigmatised people are considered abnormal by society and
are not fully socially accepted. As a consequence, they constantly try
to adjust their social identities. These additional cognitive and social
burdens increase the pressures on stigmatised people, exacerbating their
already difficult social and cognitive situation. Thornicroft :sup:`15`
points out that patients often describe the stigma they encounter as
worse than the mental disorder itself. Stigma affects every aspect of
their lives, including employment, accommodation, financial resources
and sense of citizenship. It is a major problem throughout the world.

One of the negative stereotypes associated with mental illness is that
people with a mental illness are responsible for their condition. For
example, people diagnosed with depression are often told to ‘get a grip’
or to ‘pull themselves together’. Illness, not only mental illness, is
often seen as a mark of moral, social and epistemic failure (e.g.
drug/alcohol dependence is sometimes seen as weakness of will). Such
failures are shaped by group-specific values and commitments – for
instance, certain religious groups regard depression as a punishment by
God for their sins. :sup:`16`

However, in a legal setting, the poor insight of patients into their
mental state may be recognised by the court as a factor which reduces
the patient's responsibility for their actions. Although this diminishes
their epistemic status, it also protects them, so recognition of their
diminished responsibility may lead to them being treated in hospital
rather than imprisoned.

Thus, those who are influenced by negative stereotypes about psychiatric
patients may feel justified in cutting funding for mental health
services because they think that many psychiatric patients are to blame
for their mental health and other problems. In the case of depression,
many people who have no personal experience of the illness tend to think
that depressed people only need to think more positively for their
depression to disappear. :sup:`17,18` The fact that psychiatric services
are more poorly funded than other services in the NHS suggests that
negative stereotypes about mental disorders may have a role in funding
distribution. These negative stereotypes are also influential in the
broader context of widespread ignorance about the true nature of mental
disorders and their treatment.

.. _S8:

Types of stigma and their effects
---------------------------------

.. _S9:

General stigma
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

General stigma has negative effects on the prevention, early
intervention and treatment of mental disorders. The formulation of a
diagnosis has the advantage of making resources available for treatment,
as well as providing the best available treatment. Moreover, there is
evidence that early treatment improves the prognosis (e.g. in
schizophrenia). :sup:`7` On the other hand, having a diagnosis also
leads to stigma and discrimination, which can act as a barrier to
recovery, for instance making it more difficult to find employment and
accommodation. :sup:`15`

.. _S10:

Self-stigma
~~~~~~~~~~~

People with mental illness often accept and internalise negative
stereotypes, and this in turn leads to low self-esteem, shame,
demoralisation, confidence loss and giving up goals.

.. _S11:

Structural stigma and discrimination
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Patients typically report that they feel their views are not
sufficiently elicited or considered by those who plan and organise
psychiatric services. :sup:`19` We have already seen that psychiatric
provision for approaches other than the biopsychosocial model is
severely under-resourced.

.. _S12:

Specific contributory conditions
================================

So far we have discussed global contributory conditions for epistemic
injustice. In addition to these global conditions, there are specific
problems which can lead to further kinds of epistemic injustice as a
consequence of the particular nature of the mental disorder in question.
Here are two examples, which illustrate how the symptoms of particular
disorders may reduce the credibility of what patients report about their
own experiences to an extent that constitutes epistemic injustice.

.. _S13:

Dementia
--------

The first example is dementia, an acquired impairment of cognitive
function without impairment of consciousness. The central feature of its
commonest form, Alzheimer's disease, is memory loss, especially of
episodic memory, but there can be a wide range of other cognitive
impairments as well. The main negative stereotype associated with
dementia is the belief that the impairment of cognitive function is
severe and global; that the person has or will rapidly and inevitably
become a ‘vegetable’. In fact, this is hardly ever the case, except
perhaps in the final stage of the illness. :sup:`20`

The personality of the individual and some cognitive functions are often
well preserved. Thus, patients with mild to moderate dementia can be
much more reliable informants than they are often thought to be. There
is a need for careful neuropsychological assessment to establish the
severity of the impairment. If a person's memory is badly affected, much
can be gained by staying in the present in conversations, thereby
minimising the occurrence of behavioural markers of epistemic incapacity
that can exacerbate the risk of epistemic injustice. :sup:`20`

.. _S14:

Schizophrenia
-------------

The second example is schizophrenia. Perhaps the most common stereotype
associated with it is that because of their delusional beliefs, people
with schizophrenia are unpredictable and violent. This may diminish
their status as truth-tellers because it may be concluded from one false
(delusional) belief that none of their beliefs are credible. In fact,
although violent behaviour can occur in schizophrenia, it is much rarer
than is thought. There is a small but significant increase in violence
in patients with schizophrenia (in any one year 8% of such patients will
commit an act of violence compared with 2% of the general population).
There is, however, a much stronger association between violence and
substance misuse than with schizophrenia. The proportion of all violent
acts committed by those with schizophrenia is 3–4%. This leaves 96–97%
of all violent acts committed by people who do not have this disorder.
The risk of an individual patient with schizophrenia committing homicide
is less than 1 in 3000. Moreover, the rates of suicide are much higher
than homicide rates in psychiatric patients as a whole. :sup:`21` Thus,
although the risk of violence is much higher in patients with
schizophrenia than in the general population, the risk is lower than is
suggested in the media. :sup:`21` It also seems likely that other
factors apart from the illness itself may play a part, such as the
influence of alcohol and illicit substances at the time of the offence,
and social factors.

Such negative stereotypes are problematic for several reasons, beyond
their empirical inadequacy. They encourage unwarranted attitudes of
suspicion and distrust towards people with schizophrenia, which, in
turn, can contribute to their social isolation; this is in itself
epistemically impairing. Many of our epistemic practices are
intrinsically social, such as testifying (giving information to others)
and interpreting (making sense of one's experiences), and it is no
coincidence that Fricker focuses her analysis of epistemic injustice on
those two practices. :sup:`1` Social isolation and epistemic impairment
can be mutually reinforcing.

In the case of schizophrenia, this problem takes on a specific form: it
is integral to our social and epistemic agency that other people
perceive us as a person – an agent – capable of engaging, in a sustained
and reasonable way, in testifying, interpreting and other epistemic
practices. A self is a locus of epistemic and social agency. Yet
stereotypes about schizophrenia abide, typically the widespread but
mistaken notion that schizophrenia is chiefly characterised by a
personality split, as in the good Dr Jekyll and the evil Mr Hyde. The
term ‘schizophrenia’ was coined by the psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler to
capture a split between components of the mind – knowledge, emotion and
will. This idea of a split has been abandoned in modern diagnostic
criteria. :sup:`22` However, the stereotype of ‘split personality’ is,
of course, a perfect example of a fragmented epistemic self with whom
one cannot effectively engage either socially or epistemically.

The rare cases of homicide by patients with schizophrenia are given
intense coverage in the press. Examples include Christopher Clunis, who
killed a stranger who happened to be standing on the same platform at
Finsbury Park tube station in London in 1992; and Matthew Williams, who
had a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia and killed a young woman in an
act of cannibalism in 2014. This creates the impression that violence on
the part of patients with schizophrenia is much more common than in fact
it is, a phenomenon described by psychologist Daniel Kahneman as ‘what
you see is all there is’, namely jumping to conclusions from limited
evidence: another feature of prejudice that might lead to epistemic
injustice. :sup:`23` Such jumping to conclusions on limited evidence can
lead to prejudice (‘people with schizophrenia are violent’) and hence to
epistemic injustice, if a patient says she does not have violent
thoughts and is not believed.

As demonstrated in this section, the specific deficits found in dementia
and schizophrenia can increase the susceptibility of such patients to
epistemic injustice, in addition to the global factors which apply to
all mental disorders.

.. _S15:

Possible ways of overcoming epistemic injustice
===============================================

One effective way to integrate the subjective perspective of patients
into medicine and psychiatry may be changes in medical and psychiatric
training with a view to emphasising the psychological aspects of patient
care. ‘Schwartz rounds’, which allow health professionals to focus on
the existential, ethical and personal aspects of a medical case, are
growing in popularity in the UK. We suggest that this approach should
not only be taught to medical students but should become part of
clinical practice. :sup:`24` Regular interpersonal dynamic meetings with
members of a multidisciplinary team, which create a forum for discussing
problematic emotional contacts with patients, can enhance understanding
of these aspects of patient care and reinforce their importance.
:sup:`13`

Medical students should be taught to believe what psychiatric patients
tell them, unless there is good reason not to do so. Students are
frequently told to put patients first, but the experience of many
patients is that they are often treated as cases rather than people, and
that what is important to doctors is different to what is important to
patients. By listening carefully to what patients tell them, doctors can
make a conscious effort to imagine how things seem from the patient's
perspective. In this way the relationship can become a genuinely
collaborative one, rather than one in which the doctor decides what is
in the patient's best interests. :sup:`25`

Fricker :sup:`1` notes that hearers, in this case the physicians, need
to practise giving more credibility to members of groups they fear they
may be giving too low levels of credibility to: in this context, to
psychiatric patients. Hearers may become aware of a cognitive
dissonance: they may notice that on occasions they fail to live up to
their belief that members of these groups are to be taken seriously, and
then make a conscious effort to give them a higher level of credibility.
The hope is that, with time, this corrective policy will become second
nature.

.. _S16:

Conclusions
===========

We have suggested that there is even greater risk of epistemic injustice
in psychiatry than in general medicine. There is a need for
psychiatrists to be trained to listen carefully to what patients are
telling them and to engage with them in collaborative decision-making,
to allow patients to have a greater epistemic role and to overcome the
risk of epistemic injustice. Changes are also required in the social and
political arena. Media editors should reduce the stigmatisation of
psychiatric patients in media reports, especially if epistemic failure
(such as reliance on negative stereotypes) can be a cause of moral
failure (such as treating persons with mental disorders in an unfairly
hostile or suspicious manner). Similarly, politicians should ensure that
there is a fairer distribution of healthcare resources, not merely to
mitigate the economic cost of mental ill health.

Prejudices against people with mental disorders are entrenched in our
society in what Fricker calls the ‘collective social imagination’.
:sup:`1` They go unchecked because they operate below the radar of the
conscious scrutiny of our own beliefs. Those who are in a position to
influence public opinion have a special responsibility to oppose these
prejudices. We hope that this editorial will increase awareness of the
risks of epistemic injustice in psychiatry and thus contribute to this
goal.

We are grateful to two anonymous referees for their helpful comments.
Havi Carel is grateful to the Wellcome Trust for awarding her a Senior
Investigator Award to support her research (grant number 103340).

.. [1]
   **Paul Crichton** is a consultant psychiatrist at the Ministry of
   Justice. He has a PhD in philosophy from the University of London.
   **Havi Carel** is Professor of Philosophy at the University of
   Bristol. **Ian James Kidd** is an Assistant Professor at the
   Department of Philosophy, Nottingham University.
