---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** The need for an age-appropriate in-patient service
  for 16- to 17-year-olds led to the development of a 6-bed acute
  admissions unit in a non-metropolitan county in the UK. We provide a
  descriptive evaluation of the first 2 years of its operation. All
  admissions from April 2010 to March 2012 were reviewed, clinical
  details systematically recorded and descriptively analysed.

  **Results** Ninety-seven young people were admitted during this period
  (a third were compulsorily detained under the Mental Health Act 1983).
  The average length of stay was 3--4 weeks. The most common presenting
  complaints were self-harm and low mood, usually in the context of life
  events and childhood adversity. Nearly half had substance misuse and
  other risk-taking behaviours. A third presented with psychotic
  symptoms. Adjustment and anxiety disorders were most common, followed
  by alcohol/substance use disorders, depressive illnesses and psychotic
  illnesses. Comorbidity was the rule rather than the exception. Most
  patients improved by the time of discharge.

  **Clinical implications** The unit provides an accessible and
  effective age-appropriate service and is likely to constitute an
  important component of the comprehensive child and adolescent mental
  health service strategy in the county.
author:
- Venu Duddu
- Abdulhakim Rhouma
- Masood Qureshi
- Imran Bashir Chaudhry
- Terry Drake
- Altaf Sumra
- Nusrat HusainCorrespondence to Abdulhakim Rhouma
  (<hakim70@doctors.org.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-10
institute:
- 1Lancashire Care NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 2University of Manchester, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
title: "An acute in-patient psychiatric service for 16- to 17-year-old
  adolescents in the UK: a descriptive evaluation"
---

The UK National Service Framework envisions the establishment of a
comprehensive child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS)^1^ and
it has guided its development across the country into a four-tier
structure. In-patient services, subsumed within tier 4, are specialist
services that provide a therapeutic environment for young people with
the most complex difficulties that cannot be managed safely in tier 3
community services.

Recent reviews of tier 4 CAMHS across the country have identified
significant challenges related to increasing numbers of (emergency)
referrals, a shortage of (developmentally appropriate) in-patient beds
for 16- to 17-year-olds, an inability to deal with requests for urgent
admissions in a timely fashion and concerns about the skills of adult
in-patient wards in managing young people\'s difficulties.^2--6^ As a
consequence, 16- and 17-year-olds who need emergency psychiatric
admissions risk being denied admission or being inappropriately placed
on adult psychiatric or medical wards. The need to address this issue
became imminent in April 2010 due to the Mental Health Act 2007
amendment that required young people under 18 years of age who needed
hospital admission for a mental disorder to be accommodated in an
environment that is suitable for their age (and subject to their needs).

Different regions have adopted different solutions to meet this
challenge. Some have extended existing units to accommodate young people
up to 18 years of age. However, the forthcoming extension of the CAMHS
age range up to 18 years is likely to have implications as the severity
of illness and associated challenging behaviour of older adolescents may
have a negative impact on younger children in the unit. Furthermore, the
unit might begin to have a closer interface with local tier 3 CAMHS than
with adult community teams. Some have developed transitional intensive
support/assertive outreach services to manage this population in the
community,^8^ whereas others have opted to commission beds from private
providers. Some regions have also identified 'age-appropriate' adult
wards for emergency adolescent admissions. In part, the types of
solutions adopted have depended on local commissioning and financial
imperatives, but also on the perceived magnitude of need and appetite to
develop a comprehensive CAMHS in the region.^8^

This article describes the approach used in one county to address the
mental health needs of 16- to 17-year-olds, and attempts a descriptive
evaluation of its early experiences. Although ethical review and
individual informed consent were not sought, the evaluation was
considered and ratified by the trust\'s audit department.

# Method {#S1}

## Setting {#S2}

The setting is a non-metropolitan county in the UK with a population of
around 1.45 million. The local mental health trust is commissioned to
provide many tier 3 and tier 4 CAMHS, as well as adult mental health
services. Tier 4 CAMHS (up to the age of 16) are commissioned by the
regional specialised commissioning team (on behalf of the local primary
care trusts), whereas services for 16- to 17-year-olds are included as a
part of 'block' adult service contracts by individual primary care
trusts. In anticipation of the age-appropriate statutory requirements,
the trust developed a county-wide 6-bed acute in-patient psychiatric
unit for this patient group in April 2010. Historically, young people
have been known to 'slip through the net' and be passed from and to
different services after reaching their 16th birthday. This unit was
adopted (rather than other service developments) as it provides greater
continuity of care and a more seamless approach.^9^

The unit is staffed by a consultant psychiatrist (half-time), a
specialty doctor, an occupational therapist, a family therapist (both
part-time), a psychologist (sessional), a dietician (sessional) and a
full complement of nursing and healthcare support staff. It is supported
by a tier 4 outreach team of CAMHS workers who are involved in
pre-admission assessments and post-discharge care for up to 6 weeks. The
team support the young people by providing care coordinators that attend
all reviews and care programme approach (CPA) meetings and provide
specialist therapeutic input. From an operational perspective, the unit
accepts acute and emergency psychiatric admissions around the clock.
Primary eating disorders and intellectual disabilities were excluded,
unless the main focus was a mental health-related crisis. There are
separate commissioning arrangements with identified private providers
for young people with primary eating disorders.

Pre-admission assessments are carried out by mental health staff
(usually nurses, social workers and less frequently, occupational
therapists) from adult psychiatric gatekeeping teams (adult crisis
resolution and home treatment (CRHT) teams and allied accident and
emergency (A&E) liaison and criminal justice liaison teams) in a range
of community settings (including hospital A&E departments, custody
suites and patients\' homes). During the day, these assessments are
assisted by the CAMHS tier 4 outreach team nurses.

This article is an evaluation of the clinical experiences on this unit
within the first 2 years of its existence and its impact on the wider
tier 4 CAMHS service need in the county.

## Study {#S3}

Case notes of all admissions (*n* = 97) to the unit over a 2-year period
from April 2010 to March 2012 were reviewed retrospectively. A standard
form was used to systematically record the following information: age,
gender, area of residence, presenting complaints, salient developmental
history (personal and family history), diagnosis, comorbidity, duration
of in-patient stay, details of in-patient assessments, aftercare
arrangements and discharge accommodation. Clinical severity and change
on discharge (using the Clinical Global Impression Scale^10^) was
recorded for the initial 41 consecutively admitted patients. Data were
analysed descriptively and reported as frequencies and percentages.

To ascertain the impact of this unit on the service need for young
people in the county, data were gathered on the number of admissions to
adult wards in the 10 months leading up to April 2010, and also the
number of admissions to adult wards between April 2010 and March 2012.

# Results {#S4}

## Demographics and presenting symptoms {#S5}

Of the 97 young people admitted to the unit during the study period, 50
were received in the first year: 58 (59.8%) were 17 years old, 44
(45.4%) were male and all but 1 were White British. Twenty-two (22.7%)
had more than one admission to the unit (re-admissions). The average
length of stay during the first year was 30 days (excluding one patient
who had a 364-day admission), and 23.1 days in the second year. All were
emergency admissions and had been 'gatekept' by the CRHT. Nine (9.3%)
were admitted compulsorily under the Mental Health Act and a further 21
(21.7%) were detained after their admission.

## Assessment, management and diagnosis {#S6}

The most frequent presenting complaints are outlined in [Table
1](#T1){ref-type="table"}. Sixty-eight per cent were admitted after an
overdose or other self-harming behaviours, 55.7% had low mood and
depressive symptoms and 29.9% presented with psychotic symptoms or
paranoia.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Most frequent presenting complaints, primary diagnoses and
comorbidity^[a](#TFN2){ref-type="table-fn"},[b](#TFN3){ref-type="table-fn"}^
:::

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;">Presenting complaints</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Primary diagnoses</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Comorbid conditions</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Self-harm and/or overdose (68%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Adjustment disorder, anxiety
disorders,<br />
PTSD, social phobia (32.6%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Maladaptive coping strategies,
emerging<br />
personality difficulties (23.7%)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Low mood, depressive symptoms<br />
(55.7%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Emerging personality traits or
disorders<br />
(15.8%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Harmful use/dependence on alcohol or<br />
illicit substances, secondary psychiatric<br />
symptoms (16.5%)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Psychotic symptoms, voices and
paranoia<br />
(29.9%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Schizophrenia, unspecified
psychosis,<br />
delusional disorder, acute psychotic episode<br />
(14.7%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">ADHD and residual symptoms (11.3%)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Aggression and violence (7.2%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Dysthymia, depressive episodes and
manic<br />
episodes (14.7%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Pervasive developmental disorder,<br />
Asperger syndrome (9.3%)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Impulsivity (6.1%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Harmful use/dependence on alcohol or<br />
illicit substances, secondary psychiatric<br />
symptoms (14.7%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Intellectual disability (9.3%)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Mood fluctuations (6.1%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Impulsive self-harm (Z-codes<sup><a
href="#TFN4" data-ref-type="table-fn">c</a></sup>) (2.1%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Unspecified psychotic symptoms (6.2%)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Alcohol and drug misuse-related
symptoms<br />
(4.1%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Acute confusional state (1.0%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Conduct disorder, dissocial
aggressive<br />
traits (6.2%)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Anxiety symptoms (3%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Incomplete assessments (4.2%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Generalised anxiety disorder, PTSD,
social<br />
phobia (5.2%)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Elated and manic symptoms (1%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Eating disorder (3.1%)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Social anxiety (1%)</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

ADHD, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder; PTSD, post-traumatic
stress disorder.

In reducing order of frequency.

Presenting complaints do not add up to 100% due to patients presenting
with more than one complaint.

Z-codes are part of the ICD-10 Chapter XXI classification system.
:::

A large proportion of young people reported adverse childhood
experiences as contributing to their clinical distress. These included
bullying and emotional abuse (28.9%), sexual abuse (19.6%) and physical
abuse (8.2%). A smaller number reported other significant family events
such as parental illness and deaths (7.2%) and interpersonal and
relationship difficulties (10.3%) as contributing to their distress.

Nearly half of the young people (49.5%) acknowledged being involved in
various risk-taking behaviours, for instance illicit substance misuse,
sexual behaviours and breaking the law/criminal behaviours.

Sixty young people (61.9%) had a history of self-harm, of whom 41
self-harmed irregularly and 19 self-harmed regularly. Cutting and
overdosing were the most common modes of self-harm reported.

In terms of contact with mental health services, 40 young people (41.2%)
had previous contact with tier 3 CAMHS and 12 (12.4%) were currently
being managed by the early intervention teams (EITs) and adult community
mental health teams (CMHTs). Twenty-three (23.7%) were previously (or
currently) under the care of Social Services.

Adjustment and anxiety disorders were the most frequent primary
diagnoses in the study group (32.6%), but emerging personality
traits/disorders, alcohol and illicit substance use disorders, mood
disorders and psychotic illnesses were also well represented ([Table
1](#T1){ref-type="table"}). Nearly three-fourths of the sample had
comorbid psychiatric, psychological or social difficulties, with 42
(43.3%) young people having two diagnoses, 22 (22.7%) having three
diagnoses and 10 (10.3%) having four diagnoses. Common comorbidity
included alcohol and illicit substance misuse, maladaptive coping and
emerging personality difficulties, residual symptoms of childhood
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), developmental disorders
and intellectual disabilities ([Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}).

All young people who were admitted to the unit were assessed by the
nursing and medical team: 36 undertook a formal occupational therapy
assessment, 26 attended family therapy sessions and 25 were formally
assessed by the team psychologist. Recommendations from these
assessments guided the care planning process. Finally, 65 young people
were treated with psychotropic medications (28 with antipsychotics, 41
with antidepressants and 1 with an ADHD medication). The Clinical Global
Impression Scale was used to assess severity and clinical improvement.
The figures (Tables [2](#T2){ref-type="table"} and
[3](#T3){ref-type="table"}) show that all but 11 young people improved
significantly by the time of discharge. There were five delayed
discharges (due to accommodation issues) and two premature discharges
(against medical advice).

::: {#T2 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Clinical Global Impression severity scores on admission and on discharge
:::

|                          | Admission, *n* (%) | Discharge, *n* (%) |
|:-------------------------|:------------------:|:------------------:|
| Normal -- not at all ill |         0          |     11 (26.8)      |
|                          |                    |                    |
| Borderline mentally ill  |      5 (12.2)      |     17 (41.5)      |
|                          |                    |                    |
| Mildly ill               |      8 (19.5)      |      4 (9.8)       |
|                          |                    |                    |
| Moderately ill           |     18 (43.9)      |      4 (9.8)       |
|                          |                    |                    |
| Markedly ill             |      7 (17.1)      |      1 (2.4)       |
|                          |                    |                    |
| Severely ill             |      3 (7.3)       |      4 (9.8)       |
:::

::: {#T3 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Clinical Global Impression improvement
:::

|                                                  |  *n* (%)  |
|:-------------------------------------------------|:---------:|
| Very much improved                               |  2 (4.9)  |
|                                                  |           |
| Much improved                                    | 22 (53.7) |
|                                                  |           |
| Minimally improved                               | 6 (14.6)  |
|                                                  |           |
| No change                                        |  4 (9.8)  |
|                                                  |           |
| Minimally worse^[a](#TFN5){ref-type="table-fn"}^ |  2 (4.9)  |
|                                                  |           |
| Very much worse^[a](#TFN5){ref-type="table-fn"}^ | 5 (12.2)  |

Young people who became worse after admission were those who needed
transfer to psychiatric intensive care unit.
:::

Most young people (*n* = 58, 59.8%) were discharged to their homes, but
17 were discharged to various forms of supported accommodation (17.5%).
Eight patients (8.2%) were deemed to be (or have become) too acutely
unwell and needed to be transferred to a psychiatric intensive care unit
(PICU), whereas five (5.1%) were transferred to other hospital wards
(e.g. medical wards, adult psychiatry wards). Of the 8 young people
transferred to the PICU, 4 needed to be subsequently transferred to a
low secure/high-dependency unit for longer-term treatment for repetitive
self-harm and emerging personality difficulties.

All the young people were referred to various adult community mental
health teams (CMHTs and EITs), who supported them after discharge. The
discharge care plans also included intensive short-term step-down
support from the CRHTs and the tier 4 outreach team (the latter for up
to 6 weeks).

## Impact of the unit on admissions to adult wards {#S7}

The average bed occupancy at the unit in the second year was 76%
(monthly range 47--95%). During the evaluation period, 8 young people
were admitted to various adult psychiatric wards. Of these, 6 admissions
were due to non-availability of beds at the unit (these were brief
admissions that were transferred back to the unit as soon as an
age-appropriate bed became available) and 2 were admitted to adult
PICUs.

In the 10 months before the unit was opened, 36 young people were
admitted to adult in-patient psychiatric wards. Self-harm, low mood and
suicidal behaviours (*n* = 18), and voices, paranoia and psychotic
symptoms (*n* = 13) constituted the most common presenting complaints.

# Discussion {#S8}

The unit evaluated in this review complements an 8-bed planned
admissions unit in the county which accepts young people up to the age
of 16. Together, they constitute the in-patient components of the tier 4
CAMHS in the county.

The evaluation involves a retrospective analysis of all young people who
were admitted over a 2-year period. As such, this is a comprehensive
reflection of those young people who needed tier 4 in-patient services
in the county. However, having been gleaned from case records, data are
limited by the accuracy of the record-keeping, and are also subject to a
degree of cognitive bias in the interpretation of the same. A
prospective study utilising additional data pertaining to further
demographic details of the cohort, severity and the nature of the
illness could possibly overcome these issues. Also, qualitative reports
of the views of both the young people and the clinician in the unit
would be beneficial. Further, it is difficult to accurately extrapolate
the findings to a county-wide service-need for this population as this
evaluation has not included the entire sampling frame of all the young
people who were assessed by gatekeeping teams during this time frame
(and were deemed to not need in-patient care). Future research in this
area could explore the outcomes obtained with other, wider tier 4
services in the county.

The unit\'s operational policy has identified broad principles (around
clinical risk) to guide the assessment for suitability of admission, and
as such, is not overly restrictive in its remit. This generated some
anxieties as to whether the availability of the service would stimulate
an increase in the number of admissions. Similar anxieties revolved
around whether adult CRHTs could be reliably (and appropriately)
gatekeeping these beds, and also whether a young people\'s transitional
service model interfacing with different adult mental health services
was feasible. The results of our evaluation do not appear to bear out
these anxieties, as the average number of admissions in the first and
second years is not significantly different from the numbers in the
preceding 10 months. This also validates the stability of admission
thresholds applied by CRHTs in conducting effective gatekeeping
assessments, and in the role of tier 4 outreach teams in supporting this
process.

Our gatekeeping procedure is quite different from our sister (planned
admissions) CAMHS in-patient unit for 12- to 16-year-olds (located in
Lancaster), where a detailed pre-admission assessment is conducted by
the CAMHS team to ascertain suitability for in-patient stay. Adult CRHT
(and allied liaison and criminal justice teams) assess young people for
suitability for admission to the unit. This is a 24-hour service, with
patients being assessed in various emergency situations including
hospital A&Es, custody suites and patients\' homes. Although our
procedures might potentially increase the risk of inappropriate
admissions (due to emergency assessments by non-CAMHS mental health
professionals), they also afford the advantage of the service being more
available and accessible around the clock. The risk of inappropriate
admissions was not borne out in practice, in that all admitted patients
did need a period of in-patient risk management and a more comprehensive
assessment of their needs, which served as a basis for planning their
future care. Social and accommodation difficulties did sometimes result
in a more prolonged admission, but these were also (eventually) managed
through close liaison with Social Services and housing agencies.

There is a significant clinical interface between a number of adult
psychiatric and CAMHS clinical teams in providing care for 16- and
17-year-olds in the county. General practitioners refer young people
(over 16 years of age) to adult primary care mental health teams (or the
EITs if a psychosis is suspected), who act as the single point of
access. Following an initial assessment, young people are then
signposted to various secondary care services if clinically indicated.
Patient care is guided by CPA principles, and young people are
discharged from our in-patient unit to the care of various adult CMHTs
(including the complex care and treatment teams (CCTT) and EITs). These
(multiple and rather complex) clinical interfaces can result in the
young person often having contact with a range of different community
teams as their care progresses, and can potentially contribute to
inconsistencies and discontinuities in care. Anecdotal evidence suggests
that many young people found this stressful and overwhelming. In some
instances, we have also come across some difficulties due to differing
philosophical and clinical approaches to patient care among various
adult psychiatric and child and adolescent mental health services. These
focused mainly around CAMHS teams being perceived as more systemic and
family oriented, with a greater emphasis on a
collaborative/participatory approach to care compared with adult teams.

The clinical profile of our sample, that is the range of presenting
complaints, history, diagnostic patterns and comorbidity, is reflective
of a population of young people who have severe and complex mental
health and social difficulties, and pose significant risks to
themselves. As such, they seem to reflect the needs of 16- and
17-year-old tier 4 clients, as identified in Kurtz\'s review of the
evidence base for tier 4 CAMHS.^6^

From an outcomes perspective, the majority of young people achieved
symptom stabilisation and a reduction of distress (even during the
relatively short admission), and were discharged home with mental health
support. These findings served to allay some of our previous anxieties
and highlighted that it is possible to develop a transitional service
interfacing with various adult mental health teams. However, the
forthcoming extension of the CAMHS age range up to 18 years is likely to
have implications and the unit might begin to have a closer interface
with local tier 3 CAMHS than with adult community teams.

Among the different models of in-patient adolescent care,^6^ ours
focuses on an acute and intensive assessment, risk management and
symptom stabilisation before rapid discharge. We came across another
paper that reported on a similar model of service delivery.^11^ Although
they were more inclusive in terms of the age range, the clinical profile
of their patients, their average length of stay and outcomes are broadly
comparable with our findings, thus reiterating the assertion that it is
possible to develop a flexible, effective and efficient service for this
patient population. The only other service evaluation that we came
across was that by Cotgrove,^12^ but their service model was very
different from ours, thus precluding any comparisons.

The absence of an age-appropriate PICU and a longer-term high-dependency
therapeutic unit to support our work locally were important challenges
necessitating liaison and close collaboration with individual primary
care trust commissioners. Both these serve to emphasise that a unit like
ours only constitutes a small component of a comprehensive tier 4 CAMHS,
and is likely to work best in partnership with local commissioners, an
effective outreach team, a PICU, a longer-term planned admissions unit
(for those needing longer-term care), and an effective community service
to provide support and aftercare for discharged patients.

Finally, it was found that 1 of the 97 young people admitted to the unit
was from a Black and minority ethnic background, whereas county-wide
that number is 9%. There could be several reasons for this and they may
warrant further exploration.

We suspect that many of the challenges reported here are not limited to
this particular county, and are a reflection of generally inconsistent
and non-uniform commissioning arrangements for this patient group. It is
likely that future reviews of the National Specialised Commissioning
Team will help to iron out these inconsistencies and help in the
development of a more uniform tier 4 commissioning strategy across the
UK.

[^1]: **Dr Venu Duddu**, consultant psychiatrist, **Dr Abdulhakim
    Rhouma**, specialty trainee (ST4) in general adult psychiatry, **Dr
    Masood Qureshi**, consultant psychiatrist at Lancashire Care NHS
    Foundation Trust. **Dr Imran Bashir Chaudhry**, professor,
    University of Manchester, and consultant psychiatrist, Lancashire
    Care NHS Foundation Trust. **Terry Drake**, CAMHS Tier 4 Service
    Manager, Children & Family Services, Lancashire Care NHS Foundation
    Trust. **Altaf Sumra**, psychological wellbeing practitioner,
    Lancashire Care NHS Foundation Trust. **Dr Nusrat Husain**, reader,
    University of Manchester, and consultant psychiatrist, Lancashire
    Care NHS Foundation Trust.
