---
abstract: |
  The excitement about the application of mindfulness meditation in
  mental health settings has led to the proliferation of a literature
  pervaded by a lack of conceptual and methodological self-criticism. In
  this article we raise two major concerns. First, we consider the range
  of individual differences within the experience of meditation;
  although some people may benefit from its practice, others will not be
  affected in any substantive way, and a number of individuals may
  suffer moderate to serious adverse effects. Second, we address the
  insufficient or inconclusive evidence for its benefits, particularly
  when mindfulness-based interventions are compared with other
  activities or treatments. We end with suggestions on how to improve
  the quality of research into mindfulness interventions and outline key
  issues for clinicians considering referring patients for these
  interventions.
author:
- Miguel Farias
- Catherine WikholmCorrespondence to Miguel Farias
  (<miguel.farias@coventry.ac.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-12
institute:
- 1Coventry University, Coventry, UK
- 2National Health Service, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
title: Has the science of mindfulness lost its mind?
---

> 'I therefore recommend meditation, just as I recommend the use of
> Jacobsen\'s relaxation method or other focusing and relaxing
> techniques, as a palliative, distraction method, and advise most of my
> clients to use it with discretion and not take it too seriously or
> view it as a general therapeutic method.' Albert Ellis,^1^ p. 673.

Something has gone wrong with the science of mindfulness. The literature
on its supposed mental and physical benefits is conceptually and
methodologically precarious and has been divulged in a sensationalist
way. Academic articles describe weak results as 'encouraging' and
'exciting'; popular best-selling books about mindfulness, many of which
are written by researchers, are bursting with magical promises of peace,
happiness and well-being. The replacement of orange-robed gurus by
white-collared academics who speak of the benefits of 'being in the
present moment' is a powerful social phenomenon, which is probably
rooted in our culture\'s desire for quick fixes and its attraction to
spiritual ideas divested of supernatural elements. There is a
misrepresentation of the place and value of meditation in the Buddhist
tradition, including its depiction as a purely rational method of
self-exploration,^2^ which would feel alien to countless past
generations of Buddhists.^3^

There are two major types of problems with the attempts to study
mindfulness. First, its scientific literature is plagued by conceptual
and methodological shortcomings and the turning of a blind eye to the
fact that individuals react differently to this technique. Second, we
also have concerns about how it is being utilised by individuals with
little formal training in mental health, and its branding (often against
the alarming background of a global increase in mental illness) as the
technique of choice to develop 'mental fitness'. Our aim is not to
engage in a damning critique of mindfulness, but simply to urge caution
about its widespread use as a therapeutic technique, including its
limitations, the lack of clear evidence about its benefits, and its
'assembly-line' approach based on a reductive understanding of the human
mind.

# The thorn of individual differences {#S1}

When the practice of meditation exploded in the West and was taken into
the lab in the 1970s, the idea behind its efficacy was couched in a
language of altered states of consciousness: meditating allowed an
individual to enter a particular state of consciousness,^4^ which was
associated with a range of physiological alterations and mental health
benefits.^5^ Although the notion of 'altered states of consciousness' is
no longer popular in the medical and psychological sciences, the
supposed efficacy of mindfulness is rooted in a particular state of
consciousness: a non-judgemental awareness of the stream of our
experiences. There is an acknowledgement in the literature that
individuals will vary in their dispositional or trait levels of
mindfulness^6^ -- in other words, how naturally gifted one is in
achieving this state of consciousness -- but nevertheless the underlying
stance is a universalist one: the practice of mindfulness is regarded as
an innate human cognitive ability which, when regularly engaged in, is
beneficial to all. Given this universalist framework, it is perhaps not
surprising that mindfulness researchers have generally turned a blind
eye to the fact that individuals react differently to meditation
techniques -- and that these reactions may not always be positive.

Let us start by focusing on the benefits of mindfulness as a preventive
treatment for recurrent depression, currently the only mental illness
for which the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
recommends the use of a mindfulness intervention. Mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy (MBCT) was developed with the intent of treating
individuals at risk for recurrent depression. The early studies showed
that, when compared with a treatment-as-usual (TAU) group, mindfulness
led to lower relapse rates for those with three or more episodes of
depression.^7,8^ However, it increased the likelihood of relapse in
individuals with two or fewer depressive episodes. But there is more.
The last two major trials found that even patients with more than three
episodes of depression react differently to it. Those who benefit the
most were shown to be individuals with a personal history of childhood
trauma and abuse, in other words, those most psychologically
vulnerable.^9,10^ It is unclear what the reasons are for mindfulness
being particularly effective within this subgroup of individuals with a
high probability of depression relapse, but it certainly calls for a
more nuanced recommendation by NICE.

# Potentially adverse effects of mindfulness {#S2}

We have recently reviewed some of the evidence for what we call the
'dark side of meditation', which includes evidence of somatic,
psychological and neurological problems associated with meditation
practice.^11^ This is a surprisingly under-researched area, mostly
consisting of case studies, but not exclusively. A cross-sectional study
on the effects of intensive and long-term meditation reported that over
60% of individuals had at least one negative effect, which varied from
increased anxiety to depression and full-blown psychosis.^12^
Qualitative research on mindfulness meditation shows that it may
increase the awareness of difficult feelings and exacerbate
psychological problems.^13^ One individual reported being suddenly
confronted with material relating to a forgotten childhood trauma during
his mindfulness practice: "'I saw the depth of the pain that is buried
things that have happened to me that have not been dealt with properly.
It can be very scary to know there\'s that very strong thing in
there'^13^ p. 853." It can be argued that the emergence of difficult
emotional material from mindfulness practice may be a positive, rather
than an adverse circumstance. This will, of course, depend on the
context in which these feelings and memories emerge -- if it happens in
a therapeutic context, it may very well be; but if the person is alone
or doing mindfulness in a group setting without a trained mental health
clinician, a positive outcome is more unlikely and it may simply result
in unexpected distress.

Why do some people react badly to meditation? A possible explanation is
that it amplifies inner problems; if one has a 'disposition' to
depression, bipolar disorder or psychosis, meditation may heighten it.
This amplification thesis, however, is purely speculative and based on a
biased positive understanding of mindfulness. Another explanation is
that mindfulness is not only about 'being aware' but may also challenge
the ordinary sense of self. We call this the ego-rattling hypothesis.
Meditation techniques, including mindfulness, were originally developed
to assist with bringing about a deep change in how individuals perceive
themselves, others and the surrounding world. It is then not entirely
surprising that a person might experience emotional difficulties as a
result. For example, it has been found that after an 8-week
mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) course, some participants
experienced increased stress and depression.^14^ One experimental study,
which used the Trier Social Stress Test, found that a short mindfulness
intervention with healthy individuals led to increased biological stress
when compared with an active control group.^15^

Individual differences in mindfulness, including the potential for
adverse effects, should not be regarded as the elephant in the room.
Their study is crucial if we are to advance our knowledge of the real
therapeutic potential of mindfulness. We must understand for whom and
under what circumstances it works and when it may be contraindicated.
The neglect of individual differences has other obvious drawbacks: it
weakens our conceptual understanding of mindfulness and severely limits
the scientific usefulness of the plethora of studies that are searching
for its benefits.

# The enthusiasm is ahead of the evidence {#S3}

Contrary to popular opinion, the evidence for even the most
'well-founded' benefits of mindfulness is not consistent or conclusive.
A recent comprehensive meta-analysis^16^ of randomised clinical trials
showed that mindfulness interventions only led to moderate improvements
in depression, anxiety and pain, and very small improvements in stress
reduction and quality of life. There was no evidence that mindfulness
had an effect on other variables, such as positive mood, attention,
sleep or substance use. Further, when mindfulness was compared with
other interventions, such as physical exercise or relaxation, it was not
more effective. This confirms the result of an earlier
meta-analysis,^17^ which found that mindfulness-based interventions did
not lead to medium- or long-term (3 weeks to 3 years post-intervention)
better clinical outcomes compared with relaxation or psychoeducation.

The enthusiasm surrounding mindfulness easily leads to reporting the
evidence in a different way. Let us again take the case of mindfulness
in the treatment of recurrent depression. Its last major trial was
published with great media fanfare: 'mindfulness is as effective as
drugs for treating depression' reported the *Daily Mail* (21 April
2015).^18^ What the media did not pick up on was that the study had in
fact failed, as its hypothesis was that MBCT would be superior to
antidepressant medication in preventing depression relapse.

The media also completely ignored the results of the previous major
trial on MBCT for recurrent depression, a methodologically more
sophisticated study and one with surprising results. Williams and
colleagues^9^ employed a dismantling design to investigate the 'active
ingredient' of MBCT by comparing a typical MBCT intervention with
psychoeducation (similar in all aspects to MBCT, except it did not
involve meditation) and a TAU group. The psychoeducation groups met for
the same amount of time and learnt to recognise the warning signs of
depression and disengage from them, exactly as in the MBCT group. All
participants were assessed at 6, 9 and 12 months. The results:
participants in the MBCT group were as likely to relapse as those in the
psychoeducation and the TAU groups. The only participants for whom MBCT
proved more effective were those with a higher frequency of childhood
trauma and abuse.

There are many other findings in the literature that raise doubts about
the long-term benefits of meditation. Two meta-analyses disconfirmed the
expectation that continuous practice would lead to cumulative changes,
both in emotional-cognitive domains^19^ and in brain structure.^20^
There are no obvious interpretations for the finding that the expected
positive changes of mindfulness plateau after only some weeks of
practice, rather than increase with time. But the contrary is also true
-- there is no clear rationale for why continuous mindfulness practice
would keep improving well-being or cognitive abilities. A sort of
magical rationale for the 'power of mindfulness' appears to be the
underlying explanation. Continuous practice is supposed to add up in a
mathematical way, making you more mindful, super aware, super
controlled, super happy and eventually liberated from the illusion of
the individual self. It is against the background of this expectation
that researchers show surprise about the lack of a linear evolution of
the benefits of mindfulness.

This grandiose expectation regarding the optimisation of human
functioning through a meditation technique may be looked on as naive;
but it is also dangerous. It is driving an enthusiasm to show the
effects of mindfulness that runs way ahead of the modest evidence, as
well as tainting our perception of the data. It does something else that
we find worrying: it encourages a simplistic portrayal of the human mind
and of our inner lives. A number of analogies are used to make
mindfulness amenable to our modern mindset. A particularly popular one
is to think of mindfulness as a 'mind gym': 'Just as brushing your teeth
or going for a run are well known ways of protecting general physical
health, mindfulness exercises develop mental fitness and
resilience'.^21^ It is unclear what these metaphors refer to -- what
exactly is mental fitness and how can mindfulness promote it? Is it a
process of self-regulation mediated by improvements in attention and
awareness? Or is it a process of reappraisal of one\'s thoughts and
sense of self as unimportant or illusory?

# Recommendations and considerations {#S4}

To improve the quality of research into mindfulness we first need clear
and comprehensive theories of how it works that acknowledge the range of
experiences people can have when they meditate. Second, regarding
methodology, studies should involve active control groups, control for
expectations, and seek to explore individual differences in more depth.

Until we have better-designed studies and evidence which can shed light
on these areas, it is imperative that we consider mindfulness not as the
'go-to' approach for patients struggling with stress or recurrent
depression, but as one possible therapeutic approach among others. It is
important that we also speak openly about the potential for adverse
effects in order to de-stigmatise the issue; surely the last thing we
want is for a patient to feel that they 'failed' at using a technique,
when the reality is that it worked differently for them than for another
-- and as yet, we do not know why.

Currently, there is no professional or statutory registration required
to teach mindfulness-based interventions such as MBSR and MBCT, and no
regulatory body which oversees the training of mindfulness teachers. The
current popularity of mindfulness is encouraging the rushed, unregulated
formation of thousands of teachers. Organisations offering training may
set their 'minimum requirements' for those wanting to train, but these
vary from organisation to organisation. Unlike other mainstream
psychological interventions available in the UK in the National Health
Service (such as cognitive-behavioural or systemic family therapy), you
do not need to be a therapist or have any formal training in mental
health to deliver mindfulness courses. In other words, some mindfulness
teachers may be merely equipped to deliver a mindfulness package, in a
group setting, and may have limited experience and expertise in
identifying and managing mental health difficulties. Yet, given that
mindfulness is promoted as a way to improve mental health, it is very
likely that for individuals attending mindfulness groups in the
community (or at school, or at work) many will be experiencing some
level of mental health difficulties. For individuals experiencing common
difficulties such as stress, anxiety or depression and considering
paying for therapy or attending a mindfulness group, the combination of
media hype and the comparative affordability of a mindfulness group may
easily sway them to opt for this, potentially placing their mental
health in the hands of someone who may lack adequate training and
experience of working with psychological difficulties.

Key considerations for clinicians contemplating referring patients to
mindfulness interventions include past experiences of meditative
techniques, providing information as to the range of effects that may
occur, ensuring that the individual has support in place to help them to
manage difficult experiences should they occur, and giving them a choice
as to whether this, or some other form of therapy, would be best suited
to them.

Mindfulness has its place in therapy, as one of many techniques
available to a trained clinician. However, we need to understand who it
benefits and when, its merits and limitations. And we need to moderate
the excitement; practise a salutary modesty that acknowledges the
difficulty of personal change and of recovery. Perhaps rethink the
metaphors of how mindfulness works --- after all, picturing the exercise
of present-moment awareness as mind-pumping that will make one more
resilient to mental health bugs is probably not the most mindful of
therapeutic models.

[^1]: **Miguel Farias**, Reader in Cognitive and Biological Psychology,
    Brain, Belief & Behaviour Group, Centre for Research in Psychology,
    Behaviour, and Achievement, Coventry University, UK. **Catherine
    Wikholm**, Clinical Psychologist, National Health Service, UK.
