---
author:
- Jon Patrick[^1]
date: 2017-4
title: The Narcissist Next Door. Understanding the Monster in Your
  Family, in Your Office, in Your Bed -- in Your World
---

I find myself split in my thinking about this book. On the one hand, I
can see its appeal as an airport read; requiring little effort to get
through, and full of celebrity and political commentary as well as
easily digestible chunks of scientific evidence.

At that level, it\'s enjoyable. Especially so when it allowed me to
neatly project all my ugly narcissism into reports about Kanye West and
Sarah Palin. Perhaps a first for them to be mentioned in the *Bulletin*,
no doubt adding to their narcissistic satisfaction, should they or their
agents be subscribers.

At another level -- and this is where I\'m split -- it is an exercise in
quite contemptuous character assassination. Kluger\'s portrayal of his
example subjects is cold and sneering at times. Furthermore, he often
seems to conflate the concepts of narcissism and psychopathy, leading to
a sense that the more narcissistic of us are one step away from becoming
serial killers or workplace tyrants.

There are only brief mentions of how the presentation of narcissism
might be related to inner vulnerability, and this left me wondering if
Kluger might have been looking at the mirror crack\'d. Even as I write
this I wonder if I too am succumbing to the narcissistic appeal to feel
superior to what we read -- this is hard to contain when I am a UK
reader and the author mentions former prime minister 'Malcolm Browne'
(referring to Gordon) and the football team 'Aston Vista'. Such mistakes
feel sloppy, arousing my narcissistic contempt; perhaps a response to
feeling as though the author does not care enough about the UK to check
facts properly.

Coming from a psychoanalytic tradition, where this subject has been a
preoccupation of clinicians since Freud\'s 1914 *On Narcissism: An
Introduction*, Kluger\'s view on the dilemma of the narcissist saddened
me. We are all narcissists to some degree; it\'s what allows us to get
out of bed in the morning and feel like we are good people who might be
loved. The pathological narcissist is someone who has found their early
experiences to be lacking and who has lost their trust in acceptance by
others. To manage this insufferable situation, they create an outer self
that is contemptuous of need and full of itself, and project away their
dependent, vulnerable selves onto others. Sometimes, they are
contemptuous and dismissive of needy people. Sometimes, if society is
lucky, and the person more creative, they will look after others who are
vulnerable -- to repair the damage they feel inside themselves.

[^1]: **Jon Patrick**, Consultant Medical Psychotherapist, Royal
    Edinburgh Hospital, Edinburgh, UK; email: <jonpatrick1@nhs.net>
