---
abstract: |
  Enfant terrible of psychiatry and widely known as one of its most
  indefatigable as well as iconoclastic critics, Thomas Szasz
  (1961--2012) had a prolific writing career that extended some 51 years
  beyond the publication of his first book, *The Myth of Mental
  Illness*, in 1961. This editorial identifies and critically discusses
  three major themes in Szasz\'s writings: his contention that there is
  no such thing as mental illness, his contention that individual
  responsibility is never compromised in those suffering from what is
  generally considered as mental illness, and his perennial interest in
  calling attention to the political nature of psychiatric diagnosis.
author:
- Tony B. BenningCorrespondence to Tony B. Benning
  (<tony.benning@fraserhealth.ca>) [^1]
date: 2016-12
institute:
- 1Maple Ridge Mental Health Center, Maple Ridge, British Columbia,
  Canada
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
title: No such thing as mental illness? Critical reflections on the
  major ideas and legacy of Thomas Szasz
---

# The non-existence of mental illness {#S1}

Arguing in *The Myth of Mental Illness: Foundations of a Theory of
Personal Conduct* that they are merely 'indirect forms of
communication',^1^ Thomas Szasz posited that so-called mental illnesses
cannot legitimately be categorised as diseases. This launched an
argument that Szasz would elaborate over the course of a prolific
writing career that spanned more than 50 years. Szasz repudiated
psychiatry\'s misappropriation of concepts such as 'illness', which he
took to be relevant to medicine and its 'physicalist framework'^2^ but
not to matters of mind and human conduct. In *The Myth of Mental
Illness*,^1^ after arguing that virtually any entity can have a
counterfeit version, Szasz articulated his views with characteristic
iconoclasm, contending that only physical illnesses are real and that
mental diseases are 'counterfeit and metaphorical illnesses' (p. 34).
Illnesses are understood, according to Szasz,^3^ with respect to
deviation from a norm, and in the case of physical illness the norm
refers to the structural or functional integrity of the body or some
aspect of it. But the norm -- deviation from which results in so-called
mental illness -- is altogether more problematic for Szasz; this norm is
a 'psychosocial and ethical one'.^3^ With this as the case, first, the
search for a medical remedy seems poorly justified, and second, the
points where diagnostic lines are drawn are bound, according to Szasz,
to be somewhat arbitrary.

Szasz did not deny that humans have difficulties but he preferred to
conceptualise them not as mental illnesses or as diseases, but as
'problems in living'.^1^ Nor did he deny psychiatrists a role in
assisting individuals with problems. Psychiatrists could have a
legitimate role to play but the ideal relationship between psychiatrist
and patient, for Szasz, should be based on consensual contract rather
than coercion. Second, the psychiatrist cannot justifiably claim that
only he has the expertise to help people experiencing problems in
living, since help from 'family members, friends, clergymen, mental
health professionals, physicians, drugs, religion, faith healing,
marriage, divorce, and so on'^4^ could be legitimately solicited by or
on behalf of those experiencing problems in living, according to Szasz.

As Kendell^5^ pointed out in his rebuttal of Szasz\'s claim that mental
illnesses fail to conform to the definition of disease, Szasz\'s notion
of disease, influenced by Virchow, was overly narrow, for it placed
excessive importance on the criterion of 'cellular pathology'.^5^
Kendell also claimed that Szasz\'s argument understated the extent to
which 'suffering and incapacity are fundamental attributes of
disease'.^5^ He brought attention to the fact that in medicine generally
there is no universally agreed upon definition of disease -- and if
Szasz\'s criterion were to be widely adopted, several diseases widely
recognised in medicine, such as migraine and torticollis (neither of
which are associated with lesions or cellular pathology) would fail to
qualify.

Beginning in the 1990s, psychiatry saw an unprecedented shift in its
culture, with an explosion of interest in biological and neuroscientific
research. Shorter,^6^ on the basis of the claim that 'the discipline
today acknowledges a neurological basis for much psychiatric illness'
(p. 183), argued that contemporary neurobiological research findings in
fact provide support to counter Szasz\'s argument. This view that
Shorter attributed to 'the discipline' is arguably overstated, since
there is by no means unanimity among psychiatrists in attributing
biological aetiologies to mental illnesses. For example, several authors
writing as recently as early 2000s have contested the very claim that
schizophrenia is a brain disease.^7,8^

# Pathologisation of everyday life {#S2}

A further area examined by Szasz concerns the proliferation of new
psychiatric disorders. Szasz decried 'fictitious mental diseases'^9^
such as body dysmorphic disorder, multiple personality disorder and
frotteurism. What he appeared to be objecting to here is the
encroachment of psychiatric discourse upon ever-increasing domains of
human life. Szasz adopted a mocking tone, for example, when discussing
'the behavior we call shoplifting -- but psychiatrists call
kleptomania',^9^ arguing that the construal of such behaviours as
pathological entities for one thing perpetuates an assumption that the
individual\'s actions are devoid of motivation and that they occur
outside the orbit of their control. Medicalisation hands responsibility
for such behaviours away from the individual concerned to physicians,
specifically to psychiatrists.

In this respect, Szasz was cognizant of the interplay between diagnosis
and political and social power; medicalisation gives a pre-eminent role
to doctors, it privileges the role of medication as a therapeutic
intervention and so the pharmaceutical industry stands to profit much by
stretching the boundaries of the concept of mental disorder. Several
authors in addition to Szasz have brought critical attention to this
ever-widening reach of psychiatric diagnosis, and to the pharmaceutical
industry\'s complicity in this phenomenon,^10--14^ not only by
supporting 'new' categories of psychiatric disorder (such as adult
attention deficit disorder), but by endorsing the lowering of diagnostic
thresholds for a host of established psychiatric disorders, such as
bipolar disorder.

# Mental illness and personal responsibility {#S3}

Ever interested in the interface between psychiatry and the law, another
recurring theme in Szasz\'s writing concerns the issue of individual
agency and personal responsibility. *Law, Liberty, and Psychiatry*^3^ is
his first book-length attempt to grapple with these important issues. In
it, Szasz articulated a critical position with respect to legal and
jurisprudential orthodoxy which assumes that individuals with mental
illness, in some cases, are not responsible for their actions
(especially with reference to criminal acts). Distinguishing between
explanation and responsibility, Szasz argued that regardless of a
diagnosis of mental illness, individuals are 'always responsible for
their conduct'.^3^

In discussing the hypothetical example of a deluded individual with
schizophrenia who shoots several visitors outside the White House acting
under the belief that he was pre-emptively shooting communist assassins,
Szasz argued that the endorsement of a range of 'explanations' does not
imply that the person committing the crime did not have responsibility
for the act. Critical of what he dubbed the 'progressive
psychiatrization of the law',^3^ Szasz challenged the sorts of
assumptions about personal responsibility in mentally disordered
individuals that are reflected in such jurisprudential principles as the
M\'Naghten and Durham rules. There are other, more wide-reaching,
implications of this assumption for Szasz -- widespread in his view
among psychiatrists and in jurisprudence -- about the impairment of
personal responsibility in the 'so-called mentally ill'.^3^ These he
articulated in works such as *The Therapeutic State*^15^ and *The
Manufacture of Madness*,^16^ arguing that it is on the basis of the
false assumption that the so-called mentally ill person 'is presumed to
be incompetent'^15^ to make decisions about treatment that such
paternalistic interventions as involuntary hospitalisation and coercive
treatments are justified. These concerns gave rise to such pragmatic
developments as his concept of the psychiatric will^15^ in which it was
proposed that an individual, when well, could document an objection to
receiving coercive treatments in the event of falling sick.

# Discussion {#S4}

Szasz consistently debunked the existence of mental illness on the basis
of his assumption of the relevance to mental illness of the criteria of
physiological abnormality, or the so-called 'medical-pathological
definition of disease'.^17^ But this line of argument is problematic,
with Kendell pointing out that this criterion is of dubious merit in
physical disorder, let alone mental disorder. The scope of Szasz\'s
erudition was broad but it did not encompass non-Western
conceptualisations of mental disorder. Had it done so, the somewhat
idiosyncratic nature of his argument would perhaps have become apparent
to Szasz himself, for the criterion of physiological abnormality as a
means of validating the existence of mental disorder is anathema to
non-Western conceptualisations of mental illness.^18--22^ As such, Szasz
could appeal neither to history nor to insights from cultural psychiatry
or anthropology as a way of giving credibility to his argument.

Szasz\'s concerns about the medicalisation of emotional, behavioural and
interpersonal problems remain relevant and psychiatrists\' engagement
with them would be warranted. Vigorous effort continues to be expended
in shoehorning a range of human problems into the medical model and
resulting over-diagnosis furthers the professional interests of
psychiatrists and the pharmaceutical industry. Many contemporary
writers^10,12,13^ share a concern for the societal impact of
ever-greater number of psychiatric diagnoses and lowering of diagnostic
thresholds for existing ones. However, there is a reality and suffering
attached to mental illness, to psychological dysfunction, that Szasz\'s
writings simply fail to acknowledge. In this respect, I fully agree with
Lieberman: 'I think Szasz trivializes devastating malfunction -- serious
mental illness -- by dismissing such patients as attention seekers,
imposters, and so forth'.^23^ Admittedly, the language of
histopathological lesions, of cellular pathology and infectious
organisms has very little or no relevance to most psychiatric
conditions, but to insist that problems with thought, emotions, drive,
impulse control, cognition, perception, behaviour and so forth should be
exempted from the rubric of illness, and the assertion that there is no
such thing at all as psychopathology, seem entirely unjustified. Szasz
might have attracted less opprobrium from psychiatrists and others had
he acknowledged the reality of psychopathology and of mental illness
while conceding that it does indeed have characteristics that set it
apart from many -- although not all -- physical illnesses. These
characteristics include phenomenological overlap with spiritual
experience,^24,25^ diagnostic boundaries that are often much less well
defined than in physical illness,^12^ boundaries that are subject to the
influence of such factors as social context, and so forth. Such
characteristics behove clinicians to conceptualise mental illness in
different ways from physical illness, not to discard altogether the very
concept.

Effort needs to be poured into formulating a conceptual definition of
mental disorder^12^ that does justice to serious mental illness so that
such *bona fide* psychiatric illnesses as schizophrenia and major
depression and mere problems in living are not conflated with each
other. This would be a far more humane path along which to proceed than
following the highly flawed Szaszian strategy of jettisoning the concept
of mental illness.

Psychiatric labels have undoubtedly been deployed in the service of a
range of political agendas and Szasz was justified in bringing attention
to such historical constructs as 'drapetomania' and 'sluggish
schizophrenia',^17^ but his contention that contemporary psychiatric
diagnoses represent nothing more than the labelling of those who are
deviating from 'psychosocial, ethical, or legal norms'^17^ was
overstated. This is not a description that resonates with me as a
clinical psychiatrist and I doubt that I am alone in this regard.
Psychiatrists, contrary to what Szasz appeared to suggest, do not make
judgements about pathology on the basis of arbitrary, socially
constructed notions of normalcy, conformity and deviance. This is not to
say though that there is no concept of a normative reference point.
There is, but it usually is assumed as being an approximation to the
patient\'s previous (so-called premorbid) state of health or level of
functioning, deviation from which has resulted in distress and/or
concern from the patient or their significant others. This is quite a
different scenario from the one conceived by Szasz which would appear to
portray psychiatrists as playing some sort of role, as agents of social
control or as 'social engineers'.^3^

On the issue of Szasz\'s views on personal responsibility and on his
wholesale dismissal of the claim that individuals diagnosed with mental
disorder could ever lack competence to make treatment decisions, I agree
with Lieberman^23^ that while the default assumption on the part of
physicians should be that patients retain competence, in some
circumstances this assumption is proven to be false. In cases when a
mentally disordered individual lacks decision-making competency
psychiatric intervention may prevent them from harming themselves or
others.

The specific question of Szasz\'s legacy became all the more salient
following his death in 2012. Williams & Caplan,^26^ writing in *The
Lancet*, credited Szasz with the increasing preoccupation among
psychiatrists -- especially in the latter part of the 20th century --
with disease nosology and with the quest to elucidate biological
substrates for mental illness. The justifiability of such attribution of
credit in this respect and to this extent to Szasz is debatable since
the pursuit of a putative biological basis for mental illness is likely
to be explained, as Walter^27^ points out, by several converging streams
of influence, recent as well as remote. They include the localationist
imperatives that were advanced by Wernicke and Meynert at the end of the
19th century, the psycho-pharmacological breakthroughs of the mid-20th
century, and the genetic studies of schizophrenia that soon followed.
Williams & Caplan\'s argument, then, fails to convince. The more
persuasive claim regarding his legacy is that which credits Szasz with
engendering greater awareness around issues of psychiatric power.^28^
Today, there is growing disquiet about the fact that 'psychiatric talk'
has come to be a sort of go-to discourse for an ever-widening range of
human concerns.^10,12,13^ Undergirding that disquiet is cognizance of
the fact that psychiatric power, as Breeding suggests,^28^ need not be
overt to be pervasive. As a body of writings that can sensitise us to
these important issues, I can think of none more compelling than
Szasz\'s.

[^1]: **Tony B. Benning** is a consultant psychiatrist at the Maple
    Ridge Mental Health Center, Maple Ridge, British Columbia, Canada
