---
author:
- Jon Patrick[^1]
date: 2016-12
title: "Attachment Theory in Adult Mental Health: A Guide to Clinical
  Practice"
---

In the opening chapter of this tour through attachment theory, Jeremy
Holmes suggests a good question to ask patients: 'Who would you contact
first if there was an emergency or crisis in your life?' This is a great
way to get to the bottom of who your attachment figure is.
Interestingly, during my read of this book I found myself thinking --
'which chapter will I turn to for support with my clinical problems?'

Some chapters were more clear and mindful of their audience than others.
I particularly enjoyed the introduction to the concepts of attachment
theory as well as the chapters on psychosis, personality disorder and
eating disorders. The latter -- with their use of vignettes -- were
especially effective at helping me conjure up actual scenarios and
reminded me of how valuable attachment theory is as a way of
conceptualising therapeutic encounters. On the other hand, some chapters
had problems maintaining narrative coherence. The difference was often
determined by whether the authors used clinical material to enliven
theory. Perhaps because multiple authors were involved, attachment
theory was explained repeatedly at the start of most chapters, which
left me irritated and less responsive. Although the editors suggest that
readers might dip into the book, I found these theoretical recaps
tiring.

What the book does really well is demonstrate how Bowlby\'s theory has
allowed disparate paradigms to coexist. The influence and provision of a
common language, for thinkers from scientific backgrounds as distant as
evolution and psychoanalysis, is impressive to see here. There may be
technical disagreements but they are usefully explored by contrasting
the different approaches outlined in the book, from neurocognitive to
cognitive-behavioural to mentalisation-based.

This guide, with its many helpful ideas, illustrates the need to
consider patients from cradle to grave and how attachment thinking is
relevant across contexts, be these diagnostic, cultural or systemic. The
penultimate chapter by Seager, about using attachment theory to inform
services, is particularly relevant given current reorganisation of some
areas within the National Health Service, where sometimes it seems
people and their relationships are being forgotten. He asks a powerful
question which has made me reflect seriously about my work: 'If early
attachment relationships are this powerful and formative in human
personality development, why is our society so blind to attachments when
designing its mental health care systems?'

[^1]: **Jon Patrick**, Consultant Medical Psychotherapist, Royal
    Edinburgh Hospital, Edinburgh, UK, email: <jonpatrick1@nhs.net>
