==========================================================================================================
National survey of training of psychiatrists on advance directives to refuse treatment in bipolar disorder
==========================================================================================================



Richard Morriss
Mohan Mudigonda
Peter Bartlett
Arun Chopra
Steven Jones
:Correspondence: Richard Morriss
(richard.morriss@nottingham.ac.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To determine features associated with better
   perceived quality of training for psychiatrists on advance
   decision-making in the Mental Capacity Act 2005 (MCA), and whether
   the quality or amount of training were associated with positive
   attitudes or use of advance decisions to refuse treatment (ADRTs) by
   psychiatrists in people with bipolar disorder. An anonymised national
   survey of 650 trainee and consultant psychiatrists in England and
   Wales was performed.

   **Results** Good or better quality of training was associated with
   use of case summaries, role-play, ADRTs, assessment of mental
   capacity and its fluctuation. Good or better quality and two or more
   sessions of MCA training were associated with more positive attitudes
   and reported use of ADRTs, although many psychiatrists would never
   discuss them clinically with people with bipolar disorder.

   **Clinical implications** Consistent delivery of better-quality
   training is required for all psychiatrists to increase use of ADRTs
   in people with bipolar disorder.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Mental Capacity Act 2005 (MCA) in England and Wales provides a legal
framework for personal welfare and financial decisions to be made in
advance by individuals, who later due to an impairment or disturbance of
functioning in the mind or brain, may be unable to make these decisions
for themselves. If capacity is not present, a decision can be made on
behalf of the person based on what is in their best interests taking
consideration of their wishes using three specific provisions of the MCA
for advance decision-making: advance decision to refuse treatment
(ADRT), a legally binding provision preventing specific treatment;
advance statement of wishes and feelings, a non-legally binding
statement of preferences for treatment, and/or personal and financial
affairs; lasting power of attorney, a legally binding direction
identifying who will look after the person's personal and financial
affairs. Clinicians and their employers, especially psychiatrists, are
legally required to ‘have regard to’ MCA guidance and, if later asked,
prove that they did. :sup:`1` Therefore there is an expectation that
psychiatrists receive training in the MCA However, the methods and
amount of training that psychiatrists should receive are not specified,
nor has the quality or amount of training been related to attitudes or
use of ADRTs in practice. We chose to examine the attitudes to and use
of ADRTs by psychiatrists as these may be seen as restrictive in terms
of treatment offered by psychiatrists to people with bipolar disorder.
In a national survey of general adult and old age psychiatrists in
England and Wales, we wished to explore how the quality and amount of
training they have received may be associated with their implementation
of ADRTs in people where capacity is lost (e.g. mania, severe
depression) and regained (e.g. bipolar disorder) to complement a survey
of patient experience in bipolar disorder. :sup:`2`

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Objectives and design
---------------------

Our objectives were: to determine what aspects of training in the MCA
were associated with higher or lower perceived quality of training in
the view of psychiatrists; and to examine whether the quality and amount
of training were associated with reported attitudes or use of ADRT in
people with bipolar disorder. We anticipated that high-quality training
may be required to overcome professional resistance to the use of ADRTs
should any be present.

.. _S3:

Participants
------------

Inclusion/exclusion criteria were: participants practice within England
and Wales, i.e. the jurisdiction of the MCA specialise in either general
adult or old age psychiatry they were consultant psychiatrists or in
training grades (CT1-CT3, ST4-ST6).

.. _S4:

Procedure
---------

We aimed to recruit a national sample of 500 psychiatrists in a 12-month
period for the survey. No data were available for a formal power
calculation. The study was advertised with the help of the National
Institute of Health Research-funded Mental Health Research Network
(MHRN) and the Royal College of Psychiatrists. The College agreed to
publicise the study by tweeting the link to the survey and the study
team also attended a national conference organised by the College to
publicise the study. Consultants, senior and junior trainees in general
adult and old age psychiatry were selected from different regions to
ensure maximum variance of practical clinical experience. To maximise
the participation rate of psychiatrists and the frankness of their
responses, we anonymised the survey, not asking for personal information
such as age, gender or workplace, and placed it online or if they
preferred we administered it face to face, by telephone or posted it.

.. _S5:

Measures
--------

The survey was divided into nine sections that addressed the following
topics: Section A: Preliminary information – position, years since
qualification, place of work (e.g. in-patient, crisis team), geographic
location. Section B: MCA training – how many sessions attended, whether
mandatory, how recent, whether training considered advance
decision-making that included ADRTs, nature of training, quality of
training (e.g. in your opinion how much of the training focused on
advance decision-making (including ADRTs) – a significant amount, a
reasonable amount, a minimal amount, none?). Section C: ADRTs and
bipolar disorder – whether psychiatrists had experience of patients
making ADRTs, whether they had advised on making ADRTs, content of
ADRTs, factors influencing their decision to advise regarding ADRTs.
Section D: ADRTs and other conditions – content of ADRTs. Section E:
ADRTs and the Mental Health Act 1983 – whether psychiatrists had
encountered ADRTs in context of patients admitted to psychiatric units
or sectioned under the Mental Health Act. Section F: ADRTs in clinical
practice – how often should they be discussed (e.g. in your opinion how
often do you feel that discussion of ADRTs should take place – at every
consultation, every 6 months, at care programme approach meetings, only
when I think I might be relevant, only when another health or social
care professional raises the topic, only if the patient or carer raises
the topic or never?). Section G: Advance statement of wishes and
feelings – whether psychiatrists had experience of patients using these;
what was contained, whether the frequency was changing among people with
bipolar disorder. Section H: ADRTs and implementation of the MCA –
whether psychiatrists had experience of patients using ADRTs and their
contents. Section I: Lasting power of attorney – whether psychiatrists
had experience of patients making lasting powers of attorney, who
advised on these.

.. _S6:

Analysis
--------

Descriptive statistics were employed in the survey to explore the
professional characteristics of psychiatrists and their experience of
training. Univariate analysis indicated that several demographic or
service provision factors may be associated with the use of the MCA.
Binary logistic regression was applied to three separate analyses: the
quality of training (dependent variable) perceived by psychiatrists was
explored in relation to the methods, site and content of training the
quality of training (dependent variable) was then related to attitudes
and experiences of psychiatrists to implementing ADRTs in their clinical
practice the amount of training (dependent variable) was related to
their attitudes and experiences of implementing ADRTs. Checks for
collinearity were applied by exploring the Spearman correlations between
the independent variables that might enter the logistic regression. None
of the independent variables were excluded because of collinearity. Odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) are presented for any
significant variables.

.. _S7:

Results
=======

A total of 650 psychiatrists were recruited for the survey. `Table
1 <#T1>`__ shows the grade, work setting, country of medical training
and duration of time since medical qualification of this sample. Within
the sample, there were 374 (57.5%) consultants in general adult or old
age psychiatry, and the remainder were trainees, with a slight majority
qualified in medicine outside the UK. Psychiatrists were recruited for
the study between May 2011 and June 2012. Of 607 respondents who
identified the geographic location of their work, 133 (21.9%) were from
the West Midlands, 116 (19.1%) from the East Midlands, 80 (13.2%) from
the South West, 116 (19.1%) from the South East, 74 (12.2%) from the
East of England, 46 (7.6%) from London and 10 (1.6%) from the North West
of England.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Professional characteristics and nature of Mental Capacity Act
      2005 training of psychiatrists (*n* = 650)

   ======================================= === ====
   Work characteristic                     *n* %
   ======================================= === ====
   Grade                                       
       Consultant general adult psychiatry 283 43.5
       Consultant old age psychiatry       91  14.0
       ST4–6 trainee                       111 17.1
       CT1–3 trainee                       130 20.0
       Missing                             35  5.4
   \                                           
   Main work setting                           
       Community mental health team        349 53.7
       In-patient                          216 33.3
       Crisis team/EIP/ACT                 77  11.9
       Missing                             8   1.2
   \                                           
   Years since medical qualification           
       0–10                                210 32.3
       11–20                               241 37.1
       21–30                               146 22.5
       30+                                 51  7.8
       Missing                             2   0.3
   \                                           
   Country of medical qualification            
       UK                                  306 47.1
       European Union                      51  7.8
       Outside European Union              288 44.3
       Missing                             5   0.8
   \                                           
   Number of training sessions                 
       0                                   55  8.5
       1                                   128 19.7
       2                                   183 28.2
       3                                   113 17.4
       >3                                  169 26.0
       Trained but missing data            2   0.3
   \                                           
   Method of training `a <#TFN2>`__            
       Case examples                       491 75.5
       Role-play                           82  12.6
       Watch video                         44  6.8
       None of these                       86  13.2
   \                                           
   Source of training `a <#TFN2>`__            
       Local NHS trust                     489 75.2
       Royal College of Psychiatrists      133 20.5
       Legal or solicitor                  48  7.4
       Pharmaceutical company              35  5.4
       Other                               89  13.7
   \                                           
   Perceived quality of training               
       Excellent                           24  4.0
       Very good                           153 25.7
       Good                                269 45.2
       Average                             134 22.5
       Below average                       12  2.0
       Missing                             58  8.9
   \                                           
   Primary reason for attending                
       Mandatory NHS trust training        172 28.9
       Approved clinician training         194 32.6
       Educational event                   128 71.5
       Personal interest                   79  13.3
       Other                               22  3.7
       Missing                             55  8.4
   ======================================= === ====

   ACT, assertive community treatment; EIP, early intervention in
   psychosis; NHS, National Health Service.

   Categories are not mutually exclusive.

`Table 1 <#T1>`__ shows the number of training sessions, methods used
for training, source of the training, quality of training and reasons
for attending the training: 595 (91.5%) had attended at least one
training session on the MCA; 465 (71.5%) had attended two or more
sessions; and 326 (50.1%) had been to a training session in the previous
year. Of the 595 psychiatrists trained in the MCA 489 (75.2%) had been
trained by their local National Health Service (NHS) trust. The quality
of the training was perceived to be high, with 446 (75.0% receiving
training) rating it as good, very good or excellent (`Table 1 <#T1>`__).
However, 209 (35.1% receiving training) psychiatrists stated that either
minimal or no attention was paid to ADRTs in the training sessions.

`Table 2 <#T2>`__ examines the binary multiple logistic regression
associations between the quality of training and the methods of
training, the site of training, the number of training sessions and
topics covered in the training. Compared with average or poor training,
good or better (very good or excellent) training was associated
positively with the use of case summaries, role play, coverage of
advance decision-making (including ADRTs) and assessment of capacity.
Video feedback was only carried out in good or better quality of
training (44 or 9.9%, Fisher's exact 2-tailed test *P* < 0.001). Average
or poor training was associated with training in their own NHS trust
compared with good or better training (`Table 2 <#T2>`__). In relation
to the specific use of advance decision-making including ADRTs and the
need to be able to assess fluctuating capacity in conditions such as
bipolar disorder with highly variable severity and therefore capacity,
it is notable that even good or better-quality training covered these
issues in only just over 45% and 37% of cases respectively.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Content and method of training related to perceived quality of
      training in the Mental Capacity Act 2005 `a <#TFN4>`__ (
      *n*\ =588)

   +--------+--------+------+------+------+------+--------+--------+
   |        | Q      |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   |        | uality |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   |        | of     |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   |        | tr     |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   |        | aining |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   +========+========+======+======+======+======+========+========+
   | Used   | 76     | 17.1 | 26 6 | 4.1  | 3.32 | 1.3    | 0.008  |
   | rol    |        |      |      |      |      | 7–8.07 |        |
   | e-play |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   +--------+--------+------+------+------+------+--------+--------+
   |        |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   +--------+--------+------+------+------+------+--------+--------+
   | Tr     | 203    | 45.6 | 26   | 17.8 | 2.58 | 1.5    | <0.001 |
   | aining |        |      |      |      |      | 4–4.31 |        |
   | in     |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | a      |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | dvance |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | dec    |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | ision- |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | making |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | `      |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | b <#TF |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | N5>`__ |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   +--------+--------+------+------+------+------+--------+--------+
   |        |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   +--------+--------+------+------+------+------+--------+--------+
   | Ca     | 410    | 92.3 | 107  | 74.3 | 2.80 | 1.5    | 0.001  |
   | pacity |        |      |      |      |      | 6–5.02 |        |
   | asse   |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | ssment |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   +--------+--------+------+------+------+------+--------+--------+
   |        |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   +--------+--------+------+------+------+------+--------+--------+
   | Tr     | 355    | 80.0 | 132  | 91.7 | 0.39 | 0.2    | 0.007  |
   | aining |        |      |      |      |      | 0–0.77 |        |
   | in     |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | their  |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | NHS    |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   | trust  |        |      |      |      |      |        |        |
   +--------+--------+------+------+------+------+--------+--------+

   NHS, National Health Service.

   55 psychiatrists received no Mental Capacity Act training, 7 missing
   responses.

   Including advance decision to refuse treatment.

Only 94 (14.5%) of surveyed psychiatrists had encountered a patient with
bipolar disorder who had made an ADRT; 136 (20.9%) had encountered a
patient with bipolar disorder who had made an oral or written statement
of wishes and feelings; and 91 (14.0%) had encountered a patient with
bipolar disorder who had made a lasting power of attorney relating to
health or personal welfare. Of the 259 psychiatrists expressing an
opinion, 208 (80.3%) considered that the number of people with bipolar
disorder making ADRTs had remained the same since the implementation of
the MCA in 2007, and 41 (15.8%) considered that it had increased by less
than 10%. Of the 252 psychiatrists expressing a view regarding
statements of wishes and feelings by people with bipolar disorder, 187
(74.2%) thought that the frequency remained the same since the MCA came
into force, and 46 (18.3%) that it had increased by less than 10%.

`Table 3 <#T3>`__ displays the binary multiple logistic regression
associations between the quality of training and the discussion of ADRT
with patients with bipolar disorder or other patients who may lose
mental capacity but then regain it. Compared with average or poor
training, good or better training was associated with fewer
psychiatrists who never discuss ADRTs with patients, and fewer
psychiatrists who believed that they had insufficient time to discuss
ADRTs with patients. `Table 4 <#T4>`__ shows that compared with only
receiving one training session on the MCA receiving two or more training
sessions was associated with more psychiatrists discussing ADRTs at care
programme approach meetings and fewer psychiatrists who believed that
they had insufficient training to discuss ADRTs with patients. There
were no other associations between the quality of MCA training or number
of MCA training sessions and reported practice or beliefs about
implementing ADRTs.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Relationship between quality of training in the Mental Capacity
      Act 2005 and barriers to implementing ADRTs `a <#TFN7>`__

   +--------+--------+------+----+------+------+--------+-------+
   |        | Q      |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   |        | uality |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   |        | of     |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   |        | tr     |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   |        | aining |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   +========+========+======+====+======+======+========+=======+
   | Never  | 96     | 21.5 | 48 | 32.9 | 0.53 | 0.3    | 0.010 |
   | d      |        |      |    |      |      | 5–0.79 |       |
   | iscuss |        |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   | ADRTs  |        |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   +--------+--------+------+----+------+------+--------+-------+
   |        |        |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   +--------+--------+------+----+------+------+--------+-------+
   | Insuff | 177    | 39.7 | 79 | 54.1 | 0.57 | 0.3    | 0.002 |
   | icient |        |      |    |      |      | 7–0.88 |       |
   | time   |        |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   | to do  |        |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   | ADRTs  |        |      |    |      |      |        |       |
   +--------+--------+------+----+------+------+--------+-------+

   ADRTs, advance decisions to refuse treatment.

   55 psychiatrists received no Mental Capacity Act training, 7 missing
   responses on quality of training and 3 missing responses on amount of
   training.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T4

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Relationship between amount of training in the Mental Capacity Act
      2005 and barriers to implementing ADRTs `a <#TFN9>`__

   +-------+-------+-------+----+------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | A     | Mu    |    |      |       |       |       |
   |       | mount | ltiva |    |      |       |       |       |
   |       | of    | riate |    |      |       |       |       |
   |       | tra   | stati |    |      |       |       |       |
   |       | ining | stics |    |      |       |       |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+====+======+=======+=======+=======+
   | Di    | 77    | 16.6  | 11 | 8.7  | 2.372 | 1.17  | 0.017 |
   | scuss |       |       |    |      |       | –4.83 |       |
   | ADRTs |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | rout  |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | inely |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | at    |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | care  |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | prog  |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | ramme |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | app   |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | roach |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | mee   |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | tings |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+----+------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+----+------+-------+-------+-------+
   | In    | 178   | 38.3  | 80 | 63.8 | 0.41  | 0.27  | <     |
   | suffi |       |       |    |      |       | –0.63 | 0.001 |
   | cient |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | tra   |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | ining |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | to do |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   | ADRTs |       |       |    |      |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+----+------+-------+-------+-------+

   ADRTs, advance decisions to refuse treatment.

   55 psychiatrists received no Mental Capacity Act training, 7 missing
   responses on quality of training and 3 missing responses on amount of
   training.

However, 206 (46.3%) psychiatrists would not discuss ADRTs even if the
person with bipolar disorder or carer raised it, and even after good or
better training 96 (21.5%) would never discuss ADRTs. Furthermore, 177 (
39.7%) and 178 (38.3%) of psychiatrists still believed they had
insufficient training and time to discuss ADRTs in clinical practice
despite good or better training and two or more training sessions
respectively.

.. _S8:

Discussion
==========

Although the need for training of psychiatrists and other clinical
health staff in the MCA is often recommended or even required,
:sup:`1,3,4` and clinical guidelines also support the importance of
considering the MCA in people with bipolar disorder, :sup:`5` there is
an assumption that all training is likely to help clinicians become more
familiar with the MCA and that such training will improve attitudes and
use in practice of the MCA by psychiatrists. We found that there was
plenty of training in the MCA being offered to and taken up by
psychiatrists at trainee and consultant level; 92% of trainee and
consultant psychiatrists had received at least one training session on
the MCA, with 50% receiving the training in the past year. Although 75%
of psychiatrists rated their training in the MCA as good or better,
ADRTs were only covered in 65% of the MCA training.

Psychiatrists preferred MCA training that was not didactic and merely
information giving, rating training as good or better that utilised
discussion of the MCA in relation to case summaries, used role-play, and
covered topics such as ADRT, the assessment of capacity and the
assessment of fluctuating capacity. Although the assessment of mental
capacity was usually covered in MCA training, the topic of fluctuating
capacity was rarely discussed, whereas the potentially challenging issue
of ADRTs was discussed in only 39% of MCA training attended by
psychiatrists. Therefore in the view of the authors, training of
psychiatrists was rarely of sufficient quality to meet the needs of
people with bipolar disorder under the MCA Training arranged by NHS
trust was not perceived to be as good as training provided by the Royal
College of Psychiatrists, law firms or other external agencies. The
reasons for this view are unclear.

There was some evidence that good- or better-quality MCA training
received by psychiatrists was associated with fewer psychiatrists
reporting that they would never discuss ADRTs under any circumstances.
Receipt of two or more sessions of MCA training was associated with an
increased likelihood that ADRTs would be discussed routinely in
multidisciplinary care programme approach meetings. Both better quality
and more training sessions were associated with a reduced likelihood
that psychiatrists had insufficient time to address ADRTs. Although
these data are associations and not a comparison of interventions
delivered in a randomised controlled trial, there was some evidence that
higher-quality training and more than one training session may be
helpful in both improving the attitudes to and use in clinical practice
of ADRTs by psychiatrists in patients with bipolar disorder or other
patients who lose and then regain mental capacity. Another alternative
explanation is that psychiatrists who are interested in helping people
with bipolar disorder through the MCA attend more than one session of
training and find better-quality training.

Nevertheless offering training in the MCA that psychiatrists perceive as
good or better quality seems insufficient to improving their attitudes
to ADRTs and their use in practice in people with bipolar disorder. Even
after good or better training, 22% of psychiatrists would never discuss
ADRTs under any circumstances, 46% would not discuss ADRTs even if the
person with bipolar disorder or carer raised it, and 39% believed they
had insufficient training and time to discuss ADRTs in clinical
practice. These findings chime with the experience of people with
bipolar disorder in a national survey we carried out :sup:`2` where
neither knowledge nor use of ADRTs were associated with seeing a
psychiatrist, although knowledge and use of ADRTs were associated with
seeing other mental health professionals and attendance at peer support
groups.

A strength of the survey was that to our knowledge it is the first of
its sort inquiring into quality of training of psychiatrists and
relating it to their attitudes and use of ADRTs with people with bipolar
disorder. The survey was large, national and deliberately anonymised so
that psychiatrists would feel able to comment frankly without any
possible constraint. We judged that this advantage of the methodology
outweighed the disadvantage that we do not know how many psychiatrists
had the opportunity to take part in the survey but decided not to. We
also do not know much about the characteristics of psychiatrists in
terms of the demographic characteristics of who did or did not take part
in the survey. A further limitation was that this survey was completed 4
years ago so the quality of training and use of ADRTs in clinical
practice may have improved. Furthermore, by concentrating on MCA
training in relation to ADRTs in bipolar disorder, we cannot comment on
other aspects of MCA training on other forms of advance decision-making,
application of ADRTs in people who are less likely to regain mental
capacity and deprivation of liberty.

The findings confirm those of a 4-year re-audit study where increases in
MCA training and improved documentation had a minimal impact on the
recording of the MCA by psychiatrists in patient records. :sup:`6` There
seems to be some consistency in studies of advance planning that the
therapeutic relationship between mental health professionals, including
psychiatrists, and their patients is improved with advance planning.
:sup:`7,8` The House of Lords heard much evidence that the
implementation of the MCA had failed to make much of an impact on
clinical practice in the way that was intended, and made 39
recommendations to improve the implementation of the MCA :sup:`3` We
have not had the opportunity to study the effects of these
recommendations but note that none of these relate to the quality or
amount of training that psychiatrists or other health professionals
receive in relation to the MCA. The Academy of Royal Medical Colleges
were asked to report on measures to improve the uptake of the MCA
:sup:`3,4` So far it has organised educational events on the MCA but has
not made recommendations on the content, form or amount or frequency of
training that psychiatrists or other health professionals should receive
in relation to the MCA. :sup:`9`

Therefore we conclude that there is a need to improve the quality of
training that psychiatrists receive on the MCA so that fluctuating
capacity and ADRTs are covered, and that techniques such as case
summaries and role-play are employed to improve confidence and
competencies of psychiatrists in its use. There may be a case for adding
training in the MCA to mandatory training under the Mental Health Act
section 22 training regulations. There is a need for further
implementation research on ways to improve the knowledge and use of the
MCA including ADRTs, by people with bipolar disorder or other conditions
where capacity is lost and then regained, and also on how to improve the
attitudes of psychiatrists and assist them further to discuss ADRTs with
people who have bipolar disorder or similar conditions.

.. [1]
   **Richard Morriss**, Professor of Psychiatry, Division of Psychiatry
   and Applied Psychology, Institute of Mental Health, University of
   Nottingham, UK. **Mohan Mudigonda**, Research Assistant, Division of
   Psychiatry and Applied Psychology, Institute of Mental Health,
   University of Nottingham, UK. **Peter Bartlett**, Professor of Mental
   Health Law, School of Law and Institute of Mental Health, University
   of Nottingham, UK. **Arun Chopra**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Royal
   Edinburgh Hospital, Edinburgh, UK. **Steven Jones**, Professor of
   Clinical Psychology, Spectrum Centre, University of Lancaster, UK.
