---
abstract: |
  The use of the Mental Capacity Act 2005 in assessing decision-making
  capacity in patients with borderline personality disorder (BPD) is
  inconsistent. We believe this may stem from persisting confusion
  regarding the nosological status of personality disorder and also a
  failure to recognise the fact that emotional dysregulation and
  characteristic psychodynamic abnormalities may cause substantial
  difficulties in using and weighing information. Clearer consensus on
  these issues is required in order to provide consistent patient care
  and reduce uncertainty for clinicians in what are often emergency and
  high-stakes clinical scenarios.
author:
- Karyn Ayre
- Gareth S. Owen
- Paul MoranCorrespondence to Karyn Ayre (<karyn.ayre@slam.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2017-2
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London
- 2Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King\'s College
  London
- 3University of Bristol
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
title: Mental capacity and borderline personality disorder
---

-   [Applicability of the Act in borderline personality
    disorder](#S1){#toc-S1}
-   [How does BPD affect capacity?](#S2){#toc-S2}
-   [How this affects clinical practice](#S3){#toc-S3}
-   [Conclusions](#S4){#toc-S4}

Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a severe mental disorder
affecting around 1% of the population. ^[@R1]^ It is associated with
significant psychiatric comorbidity, ^[@R2]^ impairment in social
function ^[@R3]^ and a high rate of service utilisation. ^[@R4]^
Personality disorder as a whole is associated with reduced life
expectancy. ^[@R5]^ People with BPD may engage in self-harming behaviour
as a way of regulating negative affect, particularly at times of crises.
^[@R6]^ Assessing decision-making capacity in a patient with BPD who
requires medical treatment following an act of self-harm is particularly
challenging. ^[@R7]^ In the overlap between the Mental Health Act 1983
and Mental Capacity Act 2005 (the Act), it is the decisions around
physical healthcare treatment without consent, i.e. those that the
Mental Health Act cannot be used to enforce unless treatment is
recognised as treatment for mental disorder, that in our experience
generate considerable anxiety. This is particularly true in a general
hospital setting as exemplified in the tragic case of Kerrie Wooltorton.
^[@R8]^

The Mental Capacity Act is the legal framework used in England and Wales
for assessing capacity. It also provides protection to a clinician who
makes decisions on behalf of an incapacitous patient, providing its
terms are satisfied and the clinician is acting in the patient\'s best
interests. Assessment of capacity is time- and decision-specific,
however, in our clinical experience there is inconsistency surrounding
the use of the Act with BPD patients. This is partly the result of
disputes relating to the nosological status of personality disorder as a
whole. ^[@R7],[@R9]^ Such disputes are discordant with increasing
knowledge about the natural history of BPD and its neurobiological
abnormalities and treatability. In this article we explore the key
reasons for inconsistency on whether BPD has the potential to give rise
to the 'impairment of, or disturbance in the functioning of, the mind or
brain' criterion of the Act, as well as highlighting the need for
clearer guidance on the use of the Act with such individuals.

# Applicability of the Act in borderline personality disorder {#S1}

As indicated by Section 2(1) of the Act, patients must demonstrate an
'impairment of, or disturbance in the functioning of, the mind or brain'
for the Act to apply -- sometimes known as the 'diagnostic threshold'.
Applicability to patients with a psychotic illness or a severe affective
disorder is rarely questioned, presumably because these conditions are
clearly described and widely accepted as constituting mental disorders
that have the potential to impair or disturb function. ^[@R7]^ However,
in one of the few discussions of the impact of personality disorder on
competence to refuse treatment, Winburn & Mullen ^[@R10]^ point out that
personality disorder, although classed as such under the Mental Health
Act 1983, 'has always been considered to be at the margins of what
constitutes mental disorder'. Although it is by no means an exhaustive
list, paragraph 4.12 of the Mental Capacity Act Code of Practice
^[@R11]^ does not include personality disorder among the other
conditions it recommends as having the potential to cause impairment or
disturbance in the functioning of the mind or brain. Indeed, as recently
as the past decade, lingering doubts about the nosological status of
personality disorders in general were still being voiced by senior
figures in academic psychiatry. ^[@R9]^

Over the past 10--15 years, the empirical evidence base for personality
disorders in general and particularly for BPD has expanded
substantially. Robust longitudinal studies have charted the natural
history of BPD ^[@R12]^ and shown that while symptomatic improvement is
common, enduring impairment in social functioning ^[@R3]^ is a defining
feature of the condition. Cost of illness studies have shown that the
costs of managing people with BPD exceed the costs associated with
managing people with depression. ^[@R4]^ Other studies have shown that
the life expectancy of people with personality disorder is markedly
reduced and that the loss of lived years is at least equivalent to that
seen in schizophrenia. ^[@R5]^ There is also growing evidence of
underlying neurobiological abnormalities associated with BPD.
^[@R13],[@R14]^ Finally, the increasing number of well-conducted
clinical trials which show that effective treatment is possible provides
further evidence supporting the validation of the construct of BPD.
^[@R15]^

In summary, as a result of considerable research endeavour, we now know
that BPD is, without doubt, a valid category of mental disorder. As
such, it must be considered 'an impairment of, or a disturbance in, the
functioning of the mind or brain'. Therefore, not only is the Mental
Capacity Act framework applicable to people with BPD, but it is
clinically inappropriate not to consider its relevance when assessing
people with BPD. There is a need for greater consensus regarding this,
to eradicate the assumption that capacity assessments, *tout court*,
cannot apply to such patients. ^[@R7],[@R11]^

Perhaps another reason why this assumption has been so pervasive relates
to Parsons\'s notion of the 'sick role'. ^[@R16]^ This illustrates the
link between illness and its social benefits: among these, the
absolution of responsibility. ^[@R17]^ The doctor\'s role is key, as it
is the doctor who confers this role on the patient and provides social
sanction for receipt of those benefits. ^[@R16]^ Doctors are often
divided as to whether patients with BPD can be thought of as being ill
and thus entitled to a sick role. ^[@R9],[@R18]^ As the Act requires the
presence of an 'impairment' or 'disturbance in function' to be
applicable, one might view its application to BPD patients as being
synonymous with sanctioning an adoption of the sick role. Such a view
may not sit comfortably with a clinician who may view a volitional act
of self-harm as being 'manipulative'. ^[@R9],[@R18]^

The issue of volitional control and, by inference, manipulation,
therefore seems the crux of the matter. Pickard ^[@R19]^ points out that
it is hard to accept that patients with a personality disorder
completely lack control over their actions. She qualifies this by
pointing out they 'may not always have full conscious knowledge of why
they are behaving as they do'. ^[@R19]^ Similarly, Szmukler has
speculated that suicidal impulses may sometimes stem from 'an inner
disturbance the \[person\] finds difficult to describe'. ^[@R7]^ The
question for clinicians is that, in situations where high-stakes
decisions must be made, how does the phenomenology of BPD impair an
individual\'s ability to understand and reflect on both the risks and
benefits of treatment, and also the motivation underlying their
behaviour?

# How does BPD affect capacity? {#S2}

Fuchs ^[@R20]^ identified that, at the extremes of emotional
dysregulation, BPD patients become enveloped in that mental state to the
extent that they are unable to view things objectively. Over time,
repetition of this cycle leads to the chronic feelings of emptiness that
characterise the disorder, meaning that patients 'miss the experience of
agency or authorship of their life'. ^[@R20]^ Broadly speaking, this key
concept can be illustrated in two general clinical scenarios.

The first is a patient presenting as an emergency at the extreme of an
episode of emotional dysregulation. Self-harming behaviours may serve an
affect regulation function ^[@R6]^ and assessment of capacity to accept
or refuse treatment following a severe episode of self-harm is a common
clinical scenario. The framework for decision-making, per the Act,
requires the patient to understand the pros and cons of treatment for
their condition. If the self-harm is life threatening, accepting
treatment would therefore be life saving, and to refuse, by inference, a
decision likely to result in death.

To 'use or weigh' relevant information about options in the process of
deciding is the element of the capacity test that causes most
interpretative difficulty in BPD. As Principle 4 of the Act states: 'a
person is not to be treated as unable to make a decision merely because
he makes an unwise decision'. Deciding to refuse life-saving treatment
may be unwise, but it is not the decision *per se* that we are
assessing, rather how 'accountable' the patient is for the decision.
^[@R21],[@R22]^ Elliot has argued that in depression, even though
patients may understand the risks, ultimately the disorder may affect
whether they 'care' about that risk, thus reducing the 'authenticity' of
the decision. ^[@R22]^ If depression can lead to a pathological lack of
'care' about one\'s own interests, could the drive to emotionally
regulate via self-harm lead to a pathological 'resistance' to acting in
one\'s own best interests that robs BPD patients of decision
authenticity?

Research has suggested that key interpersonal schemas in BPD include
sadomasochistic behaviour, where patients hurt themselves in an
internalised 'punitive parent' mode. ^[@R23]^ The relevance to treatment
refusal here seems clear. In addition, as Szmukler points out, any
capacity assessment is essentially a dynamic between the patient and the
doctor. ^[@R7]^ Refusal of the doctor\'s recommendation could also be
viewed within this sadomasochistic paradigm. This is surely the source
of the sense of 'manipulation' ^[@R18]^ frequently felt by doctors
treating these patients.

The great trap in these scenarios is assuming that refusal of
life-saving treatment is equivalent to a wish to die and an acceptable
'unwise' decision. While this may indeed be the case in some instances,
this *de facto* assumption endangers the lives of some BPD patients, as
in some cases the decision to refuse *per se* may simply be a
manifestation of the disorder, rather than a carefully considered wish
to die. The risk to these patients is compounded by an intolerance of
'manipulation' felt by the doctor, who in turn may take this as evidence
that the patient has full insight into the situation and accept their
refusal as an unwise but capacitous decision. In summary, as a direct
consequence of the mental disorder itself, BPD patients may unwittingly
become caught up in a destructive iatrogenic cycle of harm.

A second clinical example which aptly illustrates the lack of
'authorship' of life ^[@R19]^ that may occur for people with BPD while
dealing with doctors has been provided by Winburn & Mullen. ^[@R10]^
They describe the case of a BPD patient who was judged incapacitous to
refuse a potentially life-saving blood transfusion. Her decision to
refuse treatment was viewed as a consistent, chronic behavioural pattern
and overall constituted a 'disturbed form of engagement ... rather than
an effort to disengage'. Case law reflects these views, as seen in the
case of *B v Croydon Health Authority*, ^[@R24]^ where a young woman
with BPD was starving herself to the point where enforced nasogastric
feeding was considered. Lord Justice Hoffman wrote in his judgment that
he found it difficult to conclude that the patient had capacity, despite
her seeming to have a good understanding of the risks and options. It
was this that made him question whether her choice was truly autonomous,
because, while being able to make cogent and articulate statements about
her wishes, it was hard for him to deem someone capacitous when she is
'crying inside for help but unable to break out of the routine of
punishing herself'.

# How this affects clinical practice {#S3}

The assessment of mental capacity in BPD patients is complex and may
therefore cause clinicians significant anxiety where high-stakes
decisions are to be made. It is conceivable that such anxiety may lead
to risk-averse practices. In her review of suicide risk management in
BPD patients, Goodman ^[@R25]^ highlighted the influence of medico-legal
concerns on clinicians, by referring to a survey ^[@R26]^ that had shown
that 85% of clinicians working with BPD patients had, within the past
year, practised in a way 'that would relieve their anxiety over
medicolegal risks'. In our example of the BPD patient refusing
life-saving treatment following self-harm and where capacity is
marginal, risk-averse practice would presumably involve erring on the
side least likely to result in death, i.e. a judgement of incapacity,
detention and enforced treatment.

However, Pickard ^[@R19]^ points out that it is particularly in the
interests of patients with BPD that we attribute decision-making
responsibility to them where possible, as this is the basis of some of
the most effective psychological treatments for BPD, where self-control
and mentalisation development are key. Szmukler suggests that when
capacity could be argued from both sides, 'one might conclude that ...
the patient\'s account, although not the one preferred by the clinician,
is an adequate one, and sufficient to demonstrate that the patient has
capacity'. ^[@R7]^ Law states that 'with regard to the degree of
incapacity the nearer to the borderline the more weight must in
principle be attached to \[the patient\'s\] wishes and feelings'.
^[@R27]^ In application to BPD this would appear to imply that if the
incapacity is only marginal the patient should, in effect, be approached
as if with capacity.

So how do we balance over- and under-attributing capacity to BPD
patients in clinical practice? Buchanan\'s work ^[@R28]^ is relevant to
this problem. He describes that when capacity is in doubt, we may vary
our threshold for deciding what constitutes true incapacity, based on
the stakes of the decision. Thus, when the negative consequences of a
decision are likely to be severe, the clinician would require a more
robust demonstration of capacity. ^[@R28]^ In essence, the clinician is
balancing possible infringement of autonomy with negative consequences
of the outcome of the decision. Ultimately, capacity is judged legally
to be either present or absent, but as Lord Donaldson pointed out in the
case of *Re T (Adult: Refusal of Treatment)*, ^[@R29]^ doctors should
consider whether the capacity that is there is 'commensurate' with the
seriousness of the decision.

One might argue that proportionality merely reflects the clinicians\'
increasing anxiety about higher-stakes situations, thus not addressing
the underlying problem: that there is little consensus and guidance on
whether and how BPD may affect decision-making. Clearer guidance and
consensus on how BPD may affect decision-making abilities in different
clinical scenarios will reduce anxiety for clinicians and may help the
Act become more predictable in its application.

# Conclusions {#S4}

Borderline personality disorder is a mental disorder. The use of the law
in treating patients with BPD should be predictable and its application
to clinical scenarios reproducible. The current use of the Mental
Capacity Act 2005 in assessing decision-making capacity in such patients
is lacking in these respects.

While BPD should be viewed as a mental disorder, this only means the Act
is applicable; it is not synonymous with the view that people with BPD
necessarily lack capacity for decision-making or responsibility for
their actions. The psychopathology of BPD and specifically the way this
affects the 'using and weighing' element of decision-making capacity is
extremely complex and not acknowledged widely enough either in clinical
practice or within the Mental Capacity Act itself. This leads to
inconsistency in patient care. Further research into this field, along
with clearer clinical consensus and legal guidance, is urgently
required.

[^1]: **Karyn Ayre** is an Academic Clinical Fellow, South London and
    Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London; **Gareth S. Owen** is a
    Clinical Senior Lecturer and Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist,
    Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King\'s
    College London; **Paul Moran** is a Reader and Honorary Consultant
    Psychiatrist, Centre for Academic Mental Health, School of Social
    and Community Medicine, University of Bristol.
