=================================================================
A service evaluation of outcomes in two in-patient recovery units
=================================================================



Rob Macpherson
Claudia Calciu
Chris Foy
Kim Humby
Dave Lozynskyj
Charles Garton
Hannah Steer
Helen ElliottCorrespondence to Rob Macpherson (rob.macpherson@nhs.net)
 [1]_
:Date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To evaluate outcomes for patients during their
   admission or in the first year of treatment in two in-patient
   recovery units. Changes in health and social functioning, service use
   and need (rated by patients and staff) were evaluated.

   **Results** In 43 patients treated, there was a large (30%) increase
   in patients discharged to their own tenancies, rather than supported
   accommodation. There was minimal change in Health of the Nation
   Outcome Scales (HoNOS) scores in the course of the admission but
   staff- and patient-rated unmet needs reduced and met needs increased.
   Needs changed mainly in domains relating to social functioning.
   Reductions in risk to self and others were rated by staff but not
   patients. There were no cases of patients being readmitted to acute
   hospital during the study period.

   **Clinical implications** Although these results offer some support
   to the treatment approach described in these in-patient recovery
   units, further research in larger samples is needed to identify how
   these services can best be deployed to help individuals with severe
   mental illness and complex needs.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

From the start of 2011 it was decided to develop greater understanding
of the outcomes of the work of our two 2gether Foundation National
Health Service (NHS) Trust recovery in-patient units, by evaluating
outcomes assessed by staff and patients at admission, mid-point and
discharge from the units. These services have in the past decade adopted
a strong recovery-based model of practice, in line with the UK
government policy *No Health Without Mental Health*. :sup:`1` A major
strategic aim in this policy is for more people with mental health
problems to recover, defined as: ‘a greater ability to manage their own
lives, stronger social relationships, a greater sense of purpose, the
skills they need for living and working, improved chances in education,
better employment rates and a suitable and stable place to live’.
:sup:`1` The literature on personal recovery emphasises the individual
journey in recovery, in which regaining hope, taking back control and
finding new opportunities are key processes. :sup:`2` It has been argued
that a transformation of mental health services is required for this to
occur; :sup:`3` mental health professionals recognising patients'
strengths and expertise as experts in their own health and acknowledging
the importance of personal narratives, alongside other forms of
evidence. The increasing focus in UK and international healthcare policy
on recovery has occurred at a time of generally increasing personal
autonomy in wider society while health services have shifted their focus
towards helping every individual to make the most of their health,
rather than relating mainly to those with illness. :sup:`4`

The recovery units studied provide active rehabilitation for 10 and 13
residents respectively. The units are remote from the main psychiatric
hospital services but provide full in-patient support and are registered
to take detained patients. The focus of the work in the units is with
patients who have complex, severe mental illness, predominantly
psychosis, characterised by treatment resistance and other
complications. Treatment is provided through a full multi-disciplinary
team and includes approaches to optimise health through use of
medication, talking therapies including family work, guidance on healthy
living, and treatment and support for substance use problems. A wide
range of social approaches include help with daily living skills
including budgeting, self-care, shopping and cooking, help with
finances, benefits and accommodation, and support to develop interests
and activity such as sport, leisure activities and work. The work in
these units differs from acute in-patient work in focusing more on
treating long-term, disabling mental health problems and impaired social
functioning over longer time periods, rather than dealing with brief,
episodic illness. Typical admissions last approximately 9 months, rather
than just over 1 month in acute units (based on November 2016 2gether
Foundation NHS Trust data).

The original model of the recovery units described was developed to help
patients in their rehabilitation from long-stay hospitals, :sup:`5`
aiming to support patients with complex illness to reintegrate into the
community. They have subsequently evolved to work mainly with patients
who need longer-term rehabilitation after acute psychiatric admission or
any patients who have developed disability due to severe mental illness.
Over the past 20 years in the UK, in association with NHS and local
authority funding changes, there has been a disinvestment in these
services, :sup:`6` despite recognition in recent commissioning guidance
:sup:`7` that this form of treatment is needed as part of a spectrum of
care provision in each district.

The evidence from research in this field has previously been reviewed,
:sup:`8` showing that in-patient recovery units can effectively support
most patients accepted by them, the majority of whom can be resettled to
less dependent community placements over a period of months or years.
The research indicates that treatment in recovery units is associated
with improvement in social functioning and social networks and reduced
levels of negative symptoms in schizophrenia. Placements are associated
with relatively few long-term readmissions. These findings have been
replicated in other countries such as Australia, the USA Northern
Ireland, Norway and Italy. :sup:`9` The quality of the research evidence
is however variable and there has been very little formal research
carried out in this area. :sup:`5` A recent study of outcomes 5 years
after in-patient rehabilitation :sup:`10` found that around 40% of
patients had remained in stable accommodation or moved to independent
placement and sustained this.

Although UK commissioning frameworks have consistently argued the need
for services of this type to help patients with complex needs in their
pathway from acute or secure hospital to the community, there still
seems to be a shortage of appropriate residential places in some areas,
particularly for those with the most severe and enduring mental health
problems. A study of hospital services in Birmingham, UK, :sup:`11`
showed that long-stay (more than 6 months) patients were consistently
found to occupy 20% of acute beds. The authors noted that where staff
made recommendations for community placements, ‘by far the majority’
required 24-hour residential care, suggesting a need to improve access
to this sort of provision. A recent paper :sup:`12` noted that problems
may arise from the fragmentation due to use of private sector psychiatry
and made a strong case for local, well-organised, NHS rehabilitation
services. A survey :sup:`13` of English rehabilitation services showed
that despite closures of nearly all NHS long-stay hospital beds, most
areas still had active rehabilitation units available to help people
with complex, treatment-resistant illness. In 93 local authority
regions, most (77%) had short-term (up to 12 months) rehabilitation
units, with an average of 13 beds. It appears that although services are
available in most areas, the level of provision is variable and patchy.
Hospital services in the UK continue to be under pressure and there are
often suggestions of a need for more beds. However, it has been argued
:sup:`14` that alternatives to acute in-patient admission could reduce
this pressure and that around one in four cases in acute units could be
managed in a unit run by nurses or care workers.

.. _S1:

Aims of the evaluation
======================

This service evaluation aimed to describe, prospectively, aggregated
outcomes for new residents over the duration of their admission or in
the first year of treatment. The evaluation considered changes in health
and social circumstances from admission to the units, to discharge or 1
year after admission. Utilisation of acute hospital treatment was
monitored before and during treatment in the recovery units.

.. _S2:

Method
======

This project was carried out as a service evaluation with a formal
protocol and a project steering group which met regularly during the
project's work. The County Research and Development Support Unit
assessed and gave written agreement for the project, prior to
commencement. The use of aggregated data was preferred to other methods,
such as the use of within-participant findings. This was a pragmatic
decision, as the introduction of routine outcome monitoring was hoped to
improve and make more systematic individual care planning, as well as to
enable individual and service-level evaluation of outcome. The measures
used in the project were selected to support the new way of working.

.. _S3:

Participants
------------

At the point of admission to the unit, demographic and health-related
data were collected for all patients, on a specially designed form. The
patient's key worker rated the Camberwell Assessment of Need Short
Appraisal Schedule (CANSAS) :sup:`15` and Health of the Nation Outcome
Scales (HoNOS) :sup:`16` scores at the time of admission. CANSAS forms
were given by key workers to patients for self-completion, with an
explanation about how to complete them. Key workers were instructed to
ensure that patient rating of need was independent of their own rating
and access to support from local advocacy services was offered if this
was considered helpful. Where a carer had a significant role with the
patient, this individual was also approached to assess the needs of the
patient (with consent, following the usual clinical permissions
pathway).

To be included in the evaluation, patients were required to have
continuous treatment for a minimum of 3 months in one of the units. This
was to ensure that patients who were occasionally admitted briefly from
the acute ward, due largely to problems such as homelessness leading to
delays in discharge, but were not assessed to require the therapeutic
approach of the recovery unit, did not bias the sample. It was also felt
that patients discharged before 3 months would not have had time to
engage meaningfully with the therapeutic work of these services.

The same ratings were repeated 6 months after admission and at
discharge, or at the end of the first year of treatment. Demographic and
health-related data were collected at the point of discharge from the
unit or at the end of the first year of admission.

.. _S4:

Measures
--------

The CANSAS :sup:`15` rates need as ‘absent’ (no problem), ‘met’ (problem
addressed by services) or ‘unmet’ (significant, ongoing problem) across
22 social and healthcare domains. The HoNOS :sup:`16` is a 12-item scale
that rates various aspects of health and social functioning on a 5-point
Likert scale to measure levels of problem severity.

.. _S5:

Data management
---------------

At admission, patients were allocated a number for identification
purposes and from this time all data were held anonymously, with the
identification number only used on forms, held securely by the unit
administration lead, who managed the data collection processes. Data
sheets were held in a locked office in secure filing cabinets or on a
password-protected Trust PC.

.. _S6:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

C.F. advised on the use of descriptive, demographic and illness-related
information and the analysis of change scores from admission to
discharge using aggregated HoNOS scores and CANSAS total, met and unmet
need total scores. Data were entered into SPSS for analysis (SPSS
version 18 for Windows). Non-parametric Wilcoxon matched pairs signed
ranks tests were used to assess changes in mean HoNOS and CANSAS
ratings.

.. _S7:

Ethical consideration
---------------------

This work was an attempt to evaluate whether the recovery units were
effective in their intended work. It was a service evaluation and did
not have a randomised controlled design. Information was collected as
part of the work of the units and it was used at an individual level to
more systematically understand patient need and plan treatment. There
was no intention to use experimental tools or to compare units or employ
a control group. As a result of the design it was noted that results
would not be generalisable, although it was hoped that they may be of
value at a time of greater attention to treatment outcomes and
considering issues of service quality and innovation. Patient consent
was not formally taken but was considered to be given by participation,
where patients gave individual ratings of need and this was always
explained to be optional and unrelated to the rest of the patient's
treatment. Prior to starting the project, the need for formal ethics
committee submission was considered by our County Research Support Unit,
which advised that this was not required and gave written approval for
the project.

.. _S8:

Results
=======

Data collection was carried out in the two units from April 2011 to June
2014. During that time a total of 43 patients were admitted for a period
of at least 3 months. Data were collected on the patients over this
period, the gaps in data being largely due to the challenges of managing
data collection within a standard clinical setting, rather than (with
the infrastructure permitted by research funding) as a research project.
Gaps in the data-set are reported within the results presented below.
These related often to patient choice and willingness to participate in
routine data collection. Although access to advocacy was freely
available and advocates were working regularly in both units through the
project, we do not know how often they provided specific support to
patients in completing outcome measures. We believe this was rare and in
the great majority of cases patients completed forms independently or
with minor support from staff.

The study group of 43 patients included 28 (65%) male patients, aged
18–62 years (mean 36.5, s.d. = 10.3); 39 (91%) were single, 2 (5%)
married and 2 (5%) divorced. Most patients (*n* = 23, 53%) were admitted
from an acute psychiatric ward, the remainder (*n* = 20, 47%) direct
from the community. In the year prior to the recovery unit admission,
patients had spent a mean of 20.7 weeks (range 0–52, s.d. = 24.5) in a
psychiatric hospital. Patients had experienced a mean of 1.0 admissions
in the year before entering the recovery unit (range 0–4, s.d. = 0.55).

At the time of admission all patients were unemployed, and 23 (53%)
lived in supported accommodation, 19 (44%) in their own tenancy and 1
(2%) with family. Overall, 27 (63%) were under an assertive outreach
team, 11 (26%) under a community recovery team (community mental health
team) and 5 (12%) under early intervention services.

Patients spent a mean of 380 days (s.d. = 177) in the recovery units;
there were no recorded episodes of acute psychiatric readmission during
this time. In total, 38 of discharges (74%) were planned and 5 patients
(12%) were discharged for other reasons.

At the time of discharge, 42 (98%) were unemployed, 1 patient being a
part-time student. Overall, 32 (74%) had their own tenancy, 4 (9%) were
living in supported accommodation and 2 (5%) were living with family. In
total, 29 (67%) were under an assertive outreach team, 11 (26%) under a
community recovery team and 3 (7%) were under early intervention
services.

The main changes over the course of this evaluation were: there was a
small increase in employment following treatment in the units; there was
a 30% increase in patients living in their own tenancy; and some
patients were taken over by assertive outreach teams during their
admission, mostly moving from early intervention teams.

No individuals were readmitted to acute in-patient care during their
recovery in-patient admission.

Baseline and final mean HoNOS and CANSAS met/unmet need scores are
presented in `Table 1 <#T1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Mean HoNOS and CANSAS ratings at baseline and discharge/12-month
      follow-up

   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                | Baseline       | Disc           | Wilcoxon       |
   |                | rating         | harge/12-month | signed ranks   |
   |                | Mean (s.d.)    | rating         | 2-tailed test  |
   |                |                | Mean (s.d.)    |                |
   +================+================+================+================+
   | HoNOS          | 19.9 (8.2)     | 18.5 (9.0)     | *Z*\ = −1.46,  |
   |                |                |                | *P*>0.05       |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Staff-rated    | 7.2 (4.3)      | 7.3 (3.9)      | *Z*\ = −0.41,  |
   | CANSAS met     |                |                | *P*>0.05       |
   | need           |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Staff-rated    | 3.7 (3.6)      | 3.4 3.0)       | *Z*\ = −0.76,  |
   | CANSAS unmet   |                |                | *P*>0.05       |
   | need           |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Patient-rated  | 3.9 (4.5)      | 4.8 (4.4)      | *Z*\ = −1.39,  |
   | CANSAS met     |                |                | *P*>0.05       |
   | need           |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Patient-rated  | 2.8 (3.3)      | 2.2 (2.5)      | *Z*\ = −1.32,  |
   | CANSAS unmet   |                |                | *P*>0.05       |
   | need           |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

   HoNOS, Health of the Nation Outcome Scales; CANSAS, Camberwell
   Assessment of Need Short Appraisal Schedule.

CANSAS scores by domain at baseline and discharge/12 months are
represented in `Table 2 <#T2>`__ for patient ratings and `Table
3 <#T3>`__ for staff ratings.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Patient CANSAS ratings of met, unmet and no needs by domain at
      baseline and discharge/12 months

   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        | Met    | Unmet  | No     | Total  |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   |        | need   | need   | need   | com    |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   |        |        |        |        | pleted |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   |        |        |        |        | CANSAS |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   |        |        |        |        | r      |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   |        |        |        |        | atings |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +========+========+========+========+========+====+========+====+====+========+====+
   | Social | 5      | 13     |   8    | 13     | 10 | −3     | 11 | 6  | −5     | 29 |
   | life   |        |        | (28)   |        |    | (10)   |    |    | (17)   |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | P      | 7      | 12     |   5    | 10     | 6  | −4     | 13 | 12 | −1 (3) | 30 |
   | sychol |        |        | (17)   |        |    | (13)   |    |    |        |    |
   | ogical |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | di     |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | stress |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Ph     | 10     | 12     |   2    | 6      | 5  | −1 (3) | 15 | 14 | −1 (3) | 31 |
   | ysical |        |        | (7)    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | health |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | In     | 5      | 3      | −2 (7) | 9      | 14 |   5    | 16 | 13 | −3     | 30 |
   | timate |        |        |        |        |    | (17)   |    |    | (10)   |    |
   | r      |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | elatio |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | nships |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | D      | 10     | 16     |   6    | 10     | 4  | −6     | 9  | 9  |   0    | 29 |
   | aytime |        |        | (21)   |        |    | (21)   |    |    | (0)    |    |
   | acti   |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | vities |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Sexual | 3      | 4      |   1    | 10     | 10 |   0    | 16 | 15 | −1 (3) | 29 |
   | expr   |        |        | (3)    |        |    | (0)    |    |    |        |    |
   | ession |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | A      | 9      | 19     |   10   | 8      | 1  | −7     | 13 | 11 | −2 (7) | 30 |
   | ccommo |        |        | (33)   |        |    | (23)   |    |    |        |    |
   | dation |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Psy    | 11     | 14     |   3    | 11     | 7  | −4     | 9  | 7  | −2 (7) | 31 |
   | chotic |        |        | (10)   |        |    | (13)   |    |    |        |    |
   | sy     |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | mptoms |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Safety | 9      | 6      | −3     | 4      | 2  | −2 (7) | 18 | 23 |   5    | 31 |
   | to     |        |        | (10)   |        |    |        |    |    | (16)   |    |
   | self   |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Infor  | 18     | 23     |   5    | 2      | 2  |   0    | 11 | 6  | −5     | 31 |
   | mation |        |        | (16)   |        |    | (0)    |    |    | (16)   |    |
   | on     |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | tre    |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | atment |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Enough | 14     | 18     |   4    | 2      | 3  |   1    | 15 | 10 | −5     | 31 |
   | food   |        |        | (13)   |        |    | (3)    |    |    | (16)   |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Use of | 7      | 3      | −4     | 4      | 7  |   3    | 19 | 20 |   1    | 30 |
   | public |        |        | (13)   |        |    | (10)   |    |    | (3)    |    |
   | tra    |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | nsport |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Basic  | 2      | 8      |   6    | 2      | 0  | −2 (7) | 27 | 23 | −4     | 31 |
   | edu    |        |        | (19)   |        |    |        |    |    | (13)   |    |
   | cation |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Bud    | 8      | 8      |   0    | 5      | 10 |   5    | 18 | 13 | −5     | 31 |
   | geting |        |        | (0)    |        |    | (16)   |    |    | (16)   |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Safety | 3      | 1      | −2 (7) | 0      | 1  |   1    | 27 | 28 |   1    | 30 |
   | to     |        |        |        |        |    | (3)    |    |    | (3)    |    |
   | others |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Care   | 8      | 15     |   7    | 3      | 3  |   0    | 12 | 12 |   0    | 30 |
   | of     |        |        | (23)   |        |    | (0)    |    |    | (0)    |    |
   | home   |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Sel    | 11     | 10     | −1 (3) | 3      | 2  | −1 (3) | 17 | 19 |   2    | 31 |
   | f-care |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    | (7)    |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | No     | 4      | 2      | −2 (7) | 2      | 1  | −1 (3) | 25 | 28 |   3    | 31 |
   | n-pres |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    | (10)   |    |
   | cribed |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | drugs  |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Be     | 9      | 10     |   1    | 1      | 4  |   3    | 16 | 12 | −4     | 26 |
   | nefits |        |        | (4)    |        |    | (12)   |    |    | (15)   |    |
   | taken  |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | up     |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Use of | 4      | 5      |   1    | 0      | 0  |   0    | 27 | 26 | −1 (3) | 31 |
   | tel    |        |        | (3)    |        |    | (0)    |    |    |        |    |
   | ephone |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | A      | 2      | 4      |   2    | 4      | 1  | −3     | 25 | 26 |   1    | 31 |
   | lcohol |        |        | (7)    |        |    | (10)   |    |    | (3)    |    |
   | pr     |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | oblems |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Chi    | 2      | 1      | −1 (3) | 1      | 0  | −1 (3) | 27 | 29 |   2    | 30 |
   | ldcare |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    | (7)    |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+

   CANSAS, Camberwell Assessment of Need Short Appraisal Schedule.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Staff CANSAS ratings of met, unmet and no needs by domain at
      baseline and discharge/12 months

   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        | Met    | Unmet  | No     | Total  |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   |        | need   | need   | need   | com    |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   |        |        |        |        | pleted |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   |        |        |        |        | CANSAS |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   |        |        |        |        | r      |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   |        |        |        |        | atings |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +========+========+========+========+========+====+========+====+====+========+====+
   | Social | 12     | 18     |   6    | 18     | 16 | −2 (5) | 10 | 6  | −4     | 40 |
   | life   |        |        | (15)   |        |    |        |    |    | (10)   |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | P      | 19     | 21     |   2    | 11     | 8  | −3 (8) | 8  | 9  |   1    | 38 |
   | sychol |        |        | (5)    |        |    |        |    |    | (3)    |    |
   | ogical |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | di     |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | stress |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Ph     | 18     | 20     |   2    | 7      | 7  |   0    | 14 | 12 | −2 (5) | 39 |
   | ysical |        |        | (5)    |        |    | (0)    |    |    |        |    |
   | health |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | In     | 7      | 3      | −4     | 13     | 16 |   3    | 12 | 13 |   1    | 32 |
   | timate |        |        | (13)   |        |    | (9)    |    |    | (3)    |    |
   | r      |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | elatio |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | nships |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | D      | 22     | 23     |   1    | 16     | 13 | −3 (8) | 2  | 4  |   2    | 40 |
   | aytime |        |        | (3)    |        |    |        |    |    | (5)    |    |
   | acti   |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | vities |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Sexual | 8      | 3      | −5     | 10     | 13 |   3    | 10 | 12 |   2    | 28 |
   | expr   |        |        | (18)   |        |    | (11)   |    |    | (7)    |    |
   | ession |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | A      | 12     | 21     |   9    | 13     | 9  | −4     | 15 | 10 | −5     | 40 |
   | ccommo |        |        | (23)   |        |    | (10)   |    |    | (13)   |    |
   | dation |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Psy    | 20     | 23     |   3    | 18     | 14 | −4     | 1  | 2  |   1    | 39 |
   | chotic |        |        | (8)    |        |    | (10)   |    |    | (3)    |    |
   | sy     |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | mptoms |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Safety | 19     | 10     | −9     | 4      | 4  |   0    | 16 | 25 |   9    | 39 |
   | to     |        |        | (23)   |        |    | (0)    |    |    | (23)   |    |
   | self   |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Infor  | 27     | 33     |   6    | 2      | 0  | −2 (5) | 12 | 8  | −4     | 41 |
   | mation |        |        | (15)   |        |    |        |    |    | (10)   |    |
   | on     |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | tre    |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | atment |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Enough | 20     | 22     |   2    | 3      | 2  | −1 (3) | 17 | 16 | −1 (3) | 40 |
   | food   |        |        | (5)    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Use of | 7      | 4      | −3 (8) | 6      | 7  |   1    | 24 | 26 |   2    | 37 |
   | public |        |        |        |        |    | (3)    |    |    | (5)    |    |
   | tra    |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | nsport |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Basic  | 7      | 11     |   4    | 1      | 0  | −1 (2) | 33 | 30 | −3 (7) | 41 |
   | edu    |        |        | (10)   |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | cation |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Bud    | 17     | 13     | −4     | 9      | 13 |   4    | 13 | 13 |   0    | 39 |
   | geting |        |        | (10)   |        |    | (10)   |    |    | (0)    |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Safety | 17     | 7      | −10    | 2      | 2  |   0    | 21 | 31 |   10   | 40 |
   | to     |        |        | (25)   |        |    | (0)    |    |    | (25)   |    |
   | others |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Care   | 11     | 15     |   4    | 12     | 10 | −2 (6) | 13 | 11 | −2 (6) | 36 |
   | of     |        |        | (11)   |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | home   |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Sel    | 19     | 17     | −2 (5) | 6      | 7  |   1    | 16 | 17 |   1    | 41 |
   | f-care |        |        |        |        |    | (2)    |    |    | (2)    |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | No     | 14     | 5      | −9     | 2      | 3  |   1    | 24 | 32 |   8    | 40 |
   | n-pres |        |        | (23)   |        |    | (3)    |    |    | (20)   |    |
   | cribed |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | drugs  |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Be     | 20     | 22     |   2    | 1      | 0  | −1 (3) | 13 | 12 | −1 (3) | 34 |
   | nefits |        |        | (6)    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | taken  |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | up     |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Use of | 5      | 7      |   2    | 0      | 0  |   0    | 36 | 34 | −2 (5) | 41 |
   | tel    |        |        | (5)    |        |    | (0)    |    |    |        |    |
   | ephone |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | A      | 15     | 13     | −2 (5) | 6      | 4  | −2 (5) | 20 | 24 |   4    | 41 |
   | lcohol |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    | (10)   |    |
   | pr     |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   | oblems |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   |        |        |        |        |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+
   | Chi    | 3      | 4      |   1    | 1      | 1  |   0    | 35 | 34 | −1 (3) | 39 |
   | ldcare |        |        | (3)    |        |    | (0)    |    |    |        |    |
   +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+----+--------+----+----+--------+----+

   CANSAS, Camberwell Assessment of Need Short Appraisal Schedule.

There were improvements in patient-rated met needs in domains relating
to accommodation, social life, care of the home and daytime activity,
most other domains showing no change or minor increases and decreases.
There were reductions in patient-rated unmet needs in accommodation,
daytime activity budgeting and intimate relationships, with about half
the domains showing minimal change. It can be seen that the main changes
in patient-rated need were in domains relating to social functioning.

There were increases in staff-rated met needs in domains relating to
accommodation, social life and information about treatment. Apparent
reductions in staff-rated met need in the domains safety to others,
safety to self and use of non-prescribed drugs appeared to be explained
by comparable increases in levels of ‘no need’ in these domains.
Staff-rated unmet needs showed smaller levels of change, the domains
which reduced most being accommodation, daytime activities and psychotic
symptoms.

.. _S9:

Discussion
==========

We have shown that it is possible as part of routine clinical outcome
measurement to assess longitudinal outcomes in a standard recovery
in-patient setting, using staff- and patient-rated measures. The results
included some gaps in data which were due largely to patients declining
to complete CANSAS ratings of need or incomplete participation by staff
members. However, the results seem likely to be reasonably
representative of the patients admitted to the units over this time,
other than those patients who were admitted and then discharged or
readmitted to the acute ward within a short time (these patients were
excluded from the study population).

.. _S10:

Results and limitations of research
-----------------------------------

We found minimal change in HoNOS scores in the course of the recovery
unit admission but overall staff and patient assessed unmet needs tended
to reduce and met needs tended to increase, although not at a
statistically significant level. This may have related to the relatively
small sample size. The main changes in need found over the study period
rated by staff and patients related to improved social functioning, a
finding which accords with the primary clinical aims of these services;
to help individuals to regain life skills lost through periods of severe
illness and ideally to try to achieve the most independent living
situation possible. Our evaluation included patient and staff
evaluations of need, both being included as the research indicates that
they differ, and that the patient's perspective may be particularly
important. :sup:`17` The reduction in staff-assessed risk to self and
others was encouraging and may have linked to reduced substance misuse,
as these units have a strict drug-free policy and during admission
patients are supported to remain drug free. A recent survey :sup:`18` of
in-patient rehabilitation units in Birmingham, UK, found chronically
high levels of problematic and socially inappropriate behaviours and
suggested that new approaches, focusing on engagement and the management
of challenging behaviour, may be helpful.

A number of limitations result from the method of this service
evaluation. There was no control group and, as a result, the findings
cannot be generalised. We are only aware of the existence of one, small,
randomised controlled trial in this area, :sup:`19` and arguably this
type of research is not really feasible in this setting, :sup:`5`
although it remains vital to learn more about outcomes in these
important and relatively expensive services. The numbers in our study
group were small and it would be helpful to compare our results with
studies using similar outcome measures in other settings, ideally with
larger patient groups. Further limitations arise from the lack of data
relating to progress at different time points during the treatment in
the recovery units: it is possible that greater benefits occur early or
later in the treatment process, which we were unable to evaluate. The
scales used allow limited understanding of the patient experience, which
could be more fully accessed through the use of qualitative studies and
a number of tools assessing aspects of patient-rated recovery are now
available. :sup:`20` Qualitative studies in this area have emphasised
the importance of choice and autonomy for many patients :sup:`21` and
have shown the potential for personal recovery to be facilitated through
appropriate supported living accommodation. :sup:`22`

Of interest, poorer outcomes were associated with non-adherence to
medication and our finding that most patients were discharged to
assertive outreach teams suggests that many patients will continue to
need a high level of support following treatment in recovery units. A
recent study using retrospective care records :sup:`9` found
significantly reduced hospital admission 2 years after in-patient
rehabilitation and that a substantial proportion of the sample went into
more independent living. We found a large increase (30%) in the number
of patients discharged to their own tenancies, rather than supported
accommodation.

.. _S11:

Consideration of findings against previous research
---------------------------------------------------

At a time of increasing pressure on in-patient services, our findings
accord with previous research :sup:`23` suggesting that alternatives to
acute in-patient care could reduce this pressure and that many cases
could be managed in facilities such as recovery units. More than half
the admissions to our in-patient recovery units were from acute wards
and their ability to manage cases effectively without return to hospital
and, most importantly, achieve clinical improvements, emphasises the
importance of having these services available in each region/district
where acute units operate. Our findings were in line with previous
research :sup:`14` showing improved outcomes in terms of accommodation
and stable social functioning following treatment in recovery units. It
is important to have a long-term perspective due to the ongoing, high
levels of chronic morbidity in this population. :sup:`10` There is a
continuing need for different types of supported accommodation, although
in our study a substantial number progressed to fully independent
living.

Research in supported accommodation has been classified :sup:`5` into
three domains: quality of care; external evaluation and quality of life;
and subjective satisfaction by the resident. In terms of quality of
care, the most important factors appear to be the effectiveness of an
individually centred, targeted programme of care and the quality of the
physical environment. A systematic review of the quality of care in
longer-term mental healthcare settings :sup:`23` found eight domains of
institutional care that were key to recovery: living conditions,
interventions for schizophrenia, physical health, restraint and
seclusion, staff training and support, therapeutic relationship,
autonomy and patient involvement. The two units investigated have both
embraced the recovery approach, working alongside patients in pursuit of
their goals and promoting autonomy and empowerment of the individual.
Previous research :sup:`24` has shown that quality of care is heavily
determined by the personality and orientation of project leaders and
staff working in these units drew on extensive experience of local
rehabilitation/recovery work, which has resulted in three major reviews
and redevelopment of services and extensive staff training in recovery
methods. The units were both accredited as ‘excellent’ in 2016 within
the rehab-AIMS national benchmarking of rehabilitation units. :sup:`25`
However, the results in our study show that the patient population is
highly disabled with high levels of need and high usage of hospital
care. Our results, showing clinical stability alongside progress in
personal and social domains, was encouraging and hopeful. These units
support many patients who due to their illness have difficulty creating
their own structure, with consequent loss of internal security and often
associated fears of losing control. The provision of support, treatment
and therapeutic approaches available 24 hours provides an important
support :sup:`26` which enables patients to feel stable, secure and then
able to progress with rebuilding their lives. It is however important to
consider differences between professional and patient preferences. When
asked their view, patients have tended to prefer the option of their
own, independent accommodation :sup:`27` over rehabilitation or
supported accommodation. Family members tend to align with the
professional view and prefer their relatives being cared for in staffed
environments. :sup:`28` An important criticism of staffed settings is
the potential for institutional regimes and a poor rehabilitative
culture, which could impede independence and autonomy. :sup:`29`
Conversely, some patients and family members have reported that
independent tenancies can be socially isolating :sup:`27` and it seems
that many patients benefit from treatment in these units, particularly
if they maintain a collaborative approach and provide a wide range of
therapeutic options.

We would like to thank the recovery units' staff and patients for their
support with this project and for completing the necessary rating scales
required. We thank Natasha Wallace for her administration and support
more widely for the project.

.. [1]
   **Dr Rob Macpherson**, 2Gether Foundation NHS Trust. **Dr Claudia
   Calciu**, 2Gether Foundation NHS Trust. **Mr Chris Foy**,
   Gloucestershire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. **Dr Kim Humby**,
   2Gether NHS Foundation Trust. **Mr Dave Lozynskyj**, 2Gether NHS
   Foundation Trust. **Mr Charles Garton**, 2Gether NHS Foundation
   Trust. **Dr Hannah Steer**, 2Gether NHS Foundation Trust. **Mrs Helen
   Elliott**, 2Gether NHS Foundation Trust.
