---
author:
- Debbie Mountain[^1]
date: 2016-12
title: "Enabling Recovery: The Principles and Practice of Rehabilitation
  Psychiatry (2nd edn)"
---

The first edition of Enabling Recovery was a much-welcomed arrival for
the discipline of rehabilitation psychiatry as it emerged from its
marginal 'resettlement' function in the late 1990s. The discipline is
now accepted as part of mainstream psychiatric practice.

This second edition takes into account new data and developments, and
adds an international perspective. The book covers a wide range of
topics over 31 chapters, comprehensively written by 42 contributors from
diverse backgrounds, including researchers, clinicians, patients,
managers and policy makers. To start with, there are historical accounts
of altered mental states and how cultures through the ages have
understood them and protected/treated people. The authors integrate
themes of recovery, personalisation, social exclusion and disability
with contemporary practice. Interventions are described -- medication, a
range of psychological therapies, physical healthcare and guidance
around challenging behaviour and substance misuse. The section
discussing service delivery in a range of settings presents the
rehabilitation pathway as a whole-system approach, moving through
different settings as people become more independent. It usefully
details what is required for effective in-patient care, community care
and supported accommodation, housing and work. Also included are special
topics such as brain injury, autism, risk management and international
psychiatry and, finally, a chapter on the expanding evidence base for
the practice of specialist rehabilitation.

Although the book focuses on rehabilitation psychiatry, its appeal is
wider and it is useful to multidisciplinary mental health teams, medical
students and other healthcare practitioners. It is easy to read -- the
diversity of topics allows each chapter to stand alone so readers can
dip in and out of the book as they please. It also functions as a
'toolkit' to support shared decision-making when faced with complexity.
The chapters 'Assessment for Rehabilitation' and 'Rehabilitation at the
Coalface' are particularly handy as they describe practical approaches
to developing formulations, engaging with people and developing goals
and treatment plans.

[^1]: **Debbie Mountain**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Royal Edinburgh
    Hospital, Edinburgh, email: <debbie.mountain@nhslothian.scot.nhs.uk>
