=============================================================================================================================
Pokorny's complaint: the insoluble problem of the overwhelming number of false positives generated by suicide risk assessment
=============================================================================================================================



Olav Nielssen
Duncan Wallace
Matthew LargeCorrespondence to Olav Nielssen (olavn@ozemail.com.au)
 [1]_
:Date: 2017-2

:Abstract:
   Alex Pokorny's 1983 prospective study of suicide found that 96.3% of
   high-risk predictions were false positives, and that more than half
   of the suicides occurred in the low-risk group and were hence false
   negatives. All subsequent prospective studies, including the recent
   US Army Study To Assess Risk and Resilience in Servicemembers
   (STARRS), have reported similar results. We argue that since risk
   assessment cannot be a practical basis for interventions aimed at
   reducing suicide, the alternative is for mental health services to
   carefully consider what amounts to an adequate standard of care, and
   to adopt the universal precaution of attempting to provide that to
   all of our patients.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _S1:

Pokorny's pioneering study
==========================

It is over 30 years since the publication of Alex Pokorny's landmark
prospective study of suicide among consecutive first admissions to the
Houston Veterans Administration Medical Center. :sup:`1, 2` Pokorny
examined a cohort of 4800 men using a comprehensive array of relevant
and reliable rating scales and assessed 803 (17%) to be at high risk of
suicide because of the presence of a combination of risk factors. In the
next 5 years, 30 (3.7%) high-risk patients and 37 (0.9%) of the 3997
lower-risk patients died by suicide, an odds of suicide that was 4 times
greater in the high-risk group.

The 37 suicides among lower-risk patients were in effect false
negatives. Pokorny considered false negatives to be inevitable because
patients sometimes conceal their suicidal plans and their circumstances
change over time. What concerned him more was the overwhelming
proportion of false positives, because 96.3% of the patients categorised
as high-risk did not commit suicide. He concluded: “‘We might tolerate
50% false negatives; if we could apply a screening test that would
correctly identify only half of the future suicides without false
positives that would be very helpful. However, with currently known
tests to identify the actual suicides, we will also have to make a great
many false-positive identifications, labeling up to a quarter of the
total group as future suicides when only 1% to 5% actually are. From a
cost-benefit standpoint, the application of such a test is simply not
feasible.’ :sup:`1`”

.. _S2:

Other prospective studies of suicide
====================================

There have been relatively few prospective studies of the factors
associated with subsequent suicide, probably because of the
methodological and logistical difficulties involved. Not long after
Pokorny, Goldstein *et al* :sup:`3` followed up a cohort of 1906
patients diagnosed with affective disorders and found that none of the
46 suicides occurred among the group, albeit smaller than in Pokorny's
study, defined as being at high risk. More recently, two prospective
studies examined the proportion of suicide deaths among those considered
to be at high risk. :sup:`4–6` Madsen *et al* :sup:`4, 5` reported a
suicide rate of 0.14% among those defined as high risk in a national
study of the suicide of psychiatric in-patients in Denmark, and Steeg
reported the suicide of 0.5% of patients identified as being at high
risk among a large cohort of people who presented to emergency
departments in three English counties after self-harm. :sup:`6`

Faced with growing concern about suicides among veterans and current
serving members of the U.S. Armed Forces, the U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs and the U.S. Department of Defense included the use of
risk stratification in clinical practice guidelines. :sup:`7` As part of
the Study to Assess Risk and Resilience in Servicemembers (STARRS),
Kessler and associates then examined factors associated with suicide
among 53 769 American soldiers in the 12 months after discharge from
military psychiatric hospitals, :sup:`8` with the benefit of the very
detailed longitudinal US Army personnel database and highly
sophisticated statistical techniques derived from artificial
intelligence research. They identified a high-risk group comprising 2689
admissions, or 5% of the sample, from which there were 36 suicides,
corresponding to a 22 times increased risk of suicide in that group.
However, in other respects the results were eerily familiar, as nearly
half of the suicides occurred among the 51 080 low-risk patients, and
only 1.3% of the high-risk group died by suicide, leaving an
overwhelming number of false positive cases.

The problem remains of the disturbingly high suicide rates among
psychiatric patients as a whole. For example, in the Madsen study, the
rate of suicide of psychiatric in-patients was 72 times that of the
general community, at 860 per 100 000 patient years, and in the Steeg
study the suicide rate among all patients presenting to hospital after
self-harm was 622 per 100 000 patient years. Hence, although we know
that all of the patients under our care are at greatly increased risk of
suicide compared with the wider community, :sup:`5` our ability to
distinguish between groups of patients with respect to the probability
of subsequent suicide risk is, at best, quite modest.

.. _S3:

Implications for mental health services
=======================================

This observation has important implications for mental health services,
given the unrealistic expectations for risk assessment to prevent
serious adverse events, and the way risk assessment has changed
professional practice. :sup:`9` If risk stratification is to be a part
of how mental health services approach suicide prevention, we need to
carefully consider the interventions offered to patients believed to be
at high risk but denied to those assessed to be at lower risk. Because
the vast majority of high-risk patients will not die by suicide, any
intervention has to be shown to be somewhat effective, but also benign
enough so as not to infringe on the rights of the many with false
positive assessments. However, if we do have an effective and benign
intervention, it is then hard to justify denying this to low-risk
patients, who, after all, are still many times more likely to die by
suicide than the general community.

If there is no effective and yet benign intervention to justify offering
different treatments to groups of patients on the basis of risk
stratification, how can mental health services respond to the knowledge
that our patients are at greatly increased risk of suicide compared with
the wider community?

The alternative is the application of universal precautions to all
patients, including the design of in-patient facilities that minimise
the opportunity to attempt suicide, :sup:`10` the provision of community
treatment for all patients in the weeks after discharge from hospital,
:sup:`11` and safety planning at the point of contact in emergency
departments. :sup:`12` Most importantly, every patient should have
access to timely, individualised, high-quality treatment for psychiatric
disorder. Modifiable factors associated with suicide should be addressed
in all patients, not only those considered to be at greatest risk.
Moreover, no intervention can be justified on the basis of the assessed
risk alone. We go so far as to suggest that the assessed risk of suicide
on its own is not a sufficient reason for restrictive interventions such
as involuntary detention in hospital or other coercive treatment,
:sup:`13,14` which would then need to be justified on additional
grounds, including the patient's inability to recognise the potential
benefit of treatment and their particular circumstances and treatment
needs. In any case, preventive detention in hospital of all patients
assessed to be at high risk of suicide would be impossible, because of
the huge numbers of patients identified and the long duration of secure
detention that would be required to protect such patients.

Addressing the modifiable risk factors in populations of patients
involves ensuring the adequate identification, assessment and treatment
of patients with a range of mental disorders, addressing substance use
and, wherever possible, limiting the availability of potentially lethal
means to die by suicide. Treatment should be with the patient's consent,
or provided on the basis that the patient lacks the capacity to consent,
rather than being based on perceived risk, which we now know we are not
able to reliably assess.

A further implication for mental health services of the demonstrated
limitation of risk assessment is in responding to lawsuits for failing
to predict the suicides of individual patients. While the suicide of any
patient might be foreseeable in the legal sense of being not fanciful or
far-fetched, mental health services cannot be reasonably expected to be
able to identify which patients will die by suicide. Expert evidence in
one recent case on the estimated probability of suicide after discharge
included absurdly high estimates of between a 5 and 70% chance of
suicide within days of discharge. :sup:`15` Instead of guessing the
probability with the help of hindsight bias, :sup:`16` negligence claims
after suicides should hinge on the accepted standard for care of people
with various psychiatric disorders, regardless of the presence of known
risk factors. Services should be concerned about the adverse
consequences of failing to provide an adequate standard of care to any
patient they assess or treat, not only those considered to be at high
risk.

Pokorny's complaint that the overwhelming number of false positives
renders suicide risk assessment unfeasible is just as valid in 2016 as
it was in 1983. His finding, which has been replicated in all subsequent
studies, poses a challenge to military and civilian mental health
services that have been developed around a model of identifying and
managing risk. In response, we recommend abandoning attempts to design
interventions based on risk stratification and instead aim to provide an
adequate standard of care to all of our patients.

.. [1]
   **Olav Nielssen** MBBS, MCrim, PhD, FRANZCP, is a psychiatrist at St
   Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, a Senior Lecturer at the School of
   Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, and Senior Research Fellow
   at the Department of Psychological Medicine, Sydney Medical School,
   University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. **Duncan Wallace**
   MBBS, MA, FRANZCP, is a Senior Lecturer at the School of Psychiatry,
   University of New South Wales, and a psychiatrist with the Australian
   Defence Force Centre for Mental Health, Mosman, New South Wales,
   Australia. **Matthew Large** BSc (Med), MBBS, FRANZCP is a Professor
   at the School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, and a
   psychiatrist at The Prince of Wales Hospitals, Sydney, New South
   Wales, Australia.
