---
abstract: |
  Mindfulness is an increasingly popular therapeutic approach.
  Mindfulness-based interventions have been tried out in a wide range of
  mental disorders, with the strongest evidence for use in depression
  and anxiety. Mindfulness operates by changing the person\'s
  relationship with unhelpful thoughts and emotions. The need for home
  practice is both a strength and a weakness. Some find home practice
  too demanding and a barrier to effective utilisation of mindfulness.
  Others discover a set of practical tools that, once learnt, can be
  applied to ongoing life difficulties; in this way mindfulness may have
  a place in promoting recovery beyond the acute treatment of a
  disorder. Additionally, mindfulness may be beneficial for clinicians
  to promote well-being and enhance the therapeutic relationship.
author:
- Paramabandhu GrovesCorrespondence to Paramabandhu Groves
  (<paramabandhu.groves@candi.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-12
institute:
- 1Camden and Islington NHS Foundation Trust, London
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
title: Mindfulness in psychiatry -- where are we now?
---

Over the past 15 years there has been a surge of interest in mindfulness
as a therapeutic modality. Mindfulness is being applied to an
increasingly diverse range of conditions and the number of academic
publications on the subject has grown exponentially. In the UK the
interest is so great that an all-party group was formed to look at the
potential benefits of mindfulness. Their recently produced report
(*Mindful Nation UK*)^1^ made recommendations for using mindfulness in
health, education, criminal justice and the workplace.

# What is mindfulness? {#S1}

A popular working definition of mindfulness coined by Jon Kabat-Zinn is
learning to pay attention moment by moment, intentionally, and with
curiosity and compassion.^2^ Any object, internal or external, can be
the focus of mindful attention; however, in mindfulness training for
psychiatric disorders the chief emphasis is on deliberately attending to
internal experience, such as body sensations, thoughts and emotions.
There is a stress on noticing direct experience, rather than getting
caught up in the stories about the experience. Importantly, the quality
of attention is essentially non-judgemental, emphasising interest and a
sense of kindness to whatever experience arises. Thus a core feature of
mindfulness is about how we pay attention to experience, rather than the
content of experience *per se*.

# A brief history of mindfulness in the West {#S2}

Mindfulness has been practised for over 2 millennia, in particular in
the Buddhist tradition. In the late 1970s Kabat-Zinn set up a clinic in
Massachusetts, USA, inviting physicians to refer people with chronic
pain or stress. He delivered an 8-week course in mindfulness, and showed
that it benefited people with chronic pain, also at a 4-year
follow-up.^3,4^ The course came to be called mindfulness-based stress
reduction (MBSR) and was found to be helpful for a variety of conditions
including anxiety,^5^ psoriasis,^6^ fibromyalgia^7^ and enhancing immune
function.^8^

Despite its popularity in North America, mindfulness for health problems
did not catch on greatly in the UK until the work of Zindel Segal, Mark
Williams and John Teasdale.^9^ In 1992 they were tasked with developing
a maintenance form of cognitive therapy that could prevent further
episodes of depression in those currently recovered, using a group
format for cost-effectiveness. Initially they intended to inject a
little mindfulness into a cognitive-behavioural therapy course, but
ended up with a mindfulness course with some elements added from
cognitive therapy. Their course, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
(MBCT), drew heavily on Kabat-Zinn\'s MBSR. A three-centre randomised
controlled trial showed that MBCT halved the relapse rate in those with
three or more episodes of depression.

The publication of their work engendered a burgeoning interest in the
application of mindfulness as a therapeutic approach, producing a whole
family of mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs). As well as being used
as a stand-alone treatment, mindfulness is also a component of other
treatment modalities such as dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT) and
acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT).

# How does mindfulness work? {#S3}

The simple version -- useful for explaining mindfulness to course
participants -- is the ABC of MBIs. 'A' stands for developing awareness.
This is the foundation, with a particular emphasis on cultivating body
awareness. Usually the first main formal mindfulness practice that is
introduced is the body scan, in which one is led through paying
attention systematically to different parts of the body. Usually within
moments of starting the practice, the mind gets caught up in thinking
about something else. The basic instruction is to notice when the mind
wanders off and then return to the body sensations. Noticing where the
mind has gone off to, one discovers in detail the habitual patterns of
the mind. Returning back to the body teaches how to step out of being
caught up in mental distractions.

'B' is for being with experience. Building on the foundation of body
awareness, once a person has gained some familiarity with noting the
mind going off and returning back to the object of meditation (such as
the body sensations), the next step is to learn to turn towards
difficult experience with an attitude of acceptance. This counters
typical reactions of pushing away unwanted experience. Finally, 'C' is
for making wise choices. Having learnt to stay with persistent or
painful experiences, one is in a better position to judge what the most
helpful thing to do next is.

Being with difficult thoughts or emotions is the crux of MBIs, but it
can feel counterintuitive. Usually, when difficult experiences arise
they are avoided (e.g. by the use of substances in addiction) or one is
sucked into them in an unhelpful way (such as with rumination in
depression). MBIs, through turning towards unwanted experience, steer
away from these twin responses of 'blocking' or 'drowning'. In many
disorders there is an overuse of a conceptual narrative focus; for
example, in recurrent depression, getting caught up in thoughts such as
'Why do I feel so bad?', 'What is wrong with me?' or in social phobia,
'What if I can\'t get my words out? People can see that I am red and
sweaty'.

A study using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) suggests that
mindfulness training leads to a move away from narrative focus to
experiential focus (attention to direct sensory experience).^10^
Training produces a decoupling of the medial prefrontal cortex
(associated with narrative focus) from the insula (viscero-somatic
signals), and an increased connection between the insula and the lateral
prefrontal cortex (associated with experiential focus). That is,
thoughts, feelings and body sensations are seen less as good or bad, and
more as transient mental events.

# What is the evidence for MBIs? {#S4}

The original work with MBCT has been extended to suggest promising
evidence for use in treatment-resistant depression,^11,12^ in people
with current symptoms of anxiety or depression,^13^ including those
currently depressed and suicidal,^14^ and in improving residual symptoms
regardless of the number of previous episodes of depression.^15^ A
recent trial found similar relapse rates with those who used MBCT to
help taper off and discontinue antidepressant medication (44% relapsed),
and those remaining on antidepressant medication without using MBCT (47%
relapse rate).^16^ This study indicated that those with a history of
abuse did particularly well with MBCT, suggesting that people most at
risk of relapse might benefit most from MBCT. In bipolar disorder MBCT
does not appear to prevent relapse, but may reduce anxiety and
depressive symptoms between episodes.^17,18^

Mindfulness may help to prevent relapse into addiction by interrupting
the automaticity of substance use in response to triggers and by
reducing unhelpful attention biases and memory responses to
triggers.^19^ A review of seven randomised controlled trials showed that
substance use improved in five studies and was similar to controls in
two studies,^20^ with benefits also found in subsequent studies.^21,22^
There were improvements in some other outcomes such as overall
psychological and social adjustment. Patient satisfaction was high and
between half and 80% continued to practise mindfulness after the
programme had finished.

In the past meditation was thought to be contra-indicated in people with
psychosis. However, recent pilot studies have shown that mindfulness may
be safe. In this population, it is recommended that practices are
shorter, guidance is more frequent, and explicit reference is made to
psychotic phenomena.^23^ Mindfulness may promote acceptance of psychotic
experiences and increase the capacity to disengage from them.

Other areas with initial evidence for the usefulness of mindfulness
include eating disorders,^24^ obsessive-compulsive disorder,^25^
hypochondriasis,^26^ somatisation disorders (especially irritable bowel
syndrome),^27^ autism-spectrum disorders (in adults)^28^ and
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.^29^

A meta-analysis by Khoury *et al*^30^ concluded that MBIs are an
effective treatment for a variety of psychological problems, and
especially for reducing anxiety, depression and stress. They included
209 studies that consisted of pre-post comparisons, waiting list
controls and comparisons with other active treatments. Not surprisingly,
the strongest evidence was for pre-post comparisons and against waiting
list controls. MBIs were more effective than some psychological
treatments, although there was no difference in effectiveness when
compared with traditional cognitive--behavioural therapy, behaviour
therapies or pharmacological treatments.

An overview of reviews and meta-analyses by Gotink *et al*^31^ suggested
that, compared with waiting list controls and other active treatments,
MBIs improved depressive symptoms, anxiety, stress, quality of life and
physical functioning.

# What is the place of mindfulness now? {#S5}

Mindfulness does not appear to be more effective than other established
treatments. However, where there is an evidence base, it offers an
alternative treatment approach, which may either be a sufficient
treatment in its own right or may complement other strategies. Thus,
mindfulness may increase the range of treatment choices for patients.
Given the potential usefulness of mindfulness in depression and anxiety
as well as in addiction, it has been suggested that mindfulness may also
be a helpful approach for patients with dual diagnosis.^32^

The plethora of popular books on mindfulness suggests that it may have a
wide appeal. One of the main factors that can put patients off is the
home practice, which some find too demanding. Typical courses in MBIs
are characterised by daily home practice for up to an hour, although
there is a trend towards shortening the practices. Home practice appears
to be linked to outcome, but the minimum effective dose is not known.
The corollary is that those who are able to practise at home report
coming away from a course with a practical toolkit that they can
continue to use after the course has finished.

A possible advantage of mindfulness is as a life skill that goes beyond
the immediate treatment of a particular disorder. Mindfulness training
may therefore dovetail well with the emphasis in treatment services on
recovery. Some patients may perceive mindfulness as a spiritual approach
to mental health problems, without needing to be affiliated to any
particular religious group.

Finally, practising mindfulness may be of benefit for clinicians
themselves. The *Mindful Nation UK* report^1^ recommends developing
mindfulness programmes for public sector staff to combat stress and
improve organisational effectiveness. A number of studies have been
conducted among medical students and other health professionals. As well
as improving well-being,^33^ reducing mood disturbance and helping to
deal with stress,^34^ mindfulness training appears to increase empathy
levels.^35^ Thus, mindfulness may have the potential to enhance the
therapeutic relationship and so benefit clinical outcomes.

[^1]: **Paramabandhu Groves**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Islington
    Specialist Alcohol Treatment Service, Camden and Islington NHS
    Foundation Trust, London, UK.
