=============================================================================================================================
The cognitive therapy of depression rests on substantial theoretical, empirical and clinical foundations: a reply to Dr Gipps
=============================================================================================================================



Stirling Moorey
:Correspondence: Stirling Moorey
(stirling.moorey@slam.nhs.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2017-10

:Abstract:
   Dr Gipps claims that the cognitive therapy for depression rests on a
   mistake. But his anachronistic analysis of Beck's early research from
   the perspective of current psychoanalytic theory misses the point.
   The value of the research was not that it disproved psychoanalytic
   theory, but that it generated a model of depression that has
   revolutionised psychotherapy research. Psychoanalysts are belatedly
   adopting research methods that Beck pioneered half a century ago. The
   cognitive model of depression has explanatory power for both
   maintenance and vulnerability and has substantial research
   underpinning it. Cognitive therapy for depression has a larger body
   of evidence for its efficacy and relapse prevention effect than any
   other psychotherapy. Transference-focused approaches to depression
   have yet to establish themselves in the same way.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Dr Gipps's polemic against Beck's cognitive therapy for depression rests
on two assumptions. First, that cognitive therapy ‘doesn't work very
well’ for the condition, and second, that the cognitive model is invalid
because it is based on a flawed understanding of psychoanalysis. The
first statement is misleading – cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) has
the most comprehensive evidence base of all the psychological therapies.
The second statement is largely irrelevant – the cognitive model of
depression rests on a substantial body of research that is independent
of the experiences that led to its original formulation. This reply will
review the evidence for the effectiveness of psychological treatments
for depression, highlighting the selectiveness of Dr Gipps's
interpretation of the literature. It will then examine the cognitive
model, demonstrating that it is far richer than he suggests, and has
developed and changed in the light of extensive research. Finally,
Gipps's caricature of CBT practice will be challenged: contemporary CBT
does have something to say about experiential avoidance and
interpersonal processes. It has the flexibility to address these as and
when necessary without making them the sole vehicle for change. Gipps
seems to believe that by denigrating Beck's psychoanalytic credentials
and claiming his theory is based on a misunderstanding he can somehow
erase nearly 60 years of research supporting the cognitive model. This
is merely opinion, not reasoned scientific discourse.

Dr Gipps argues that current treatments for depression ‘fare little
better than placebo’ so we should turn to psychoanalysis. He claims poor
results for medication, counselling and CBT, but neglects to mention
that trials of psychodynamic psychotherapy have not demonstrated it does
better than CBT (the reverse may actually be the case).\ :sup:`1` If we
take a non-partisan approach, the conclusion is that a number of
treatments work for depression. For instance, a recent meta-analysis of
randomised controlled trials (RCTs) reported effect sizes for CBT,
counselling and short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy at 0.67, 0.57 and
0.69, respectively.\ :sup:`2` Dr Gipps, however, disingenuously selects
a small uncontrolled trial of intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy
(*n* = 10) as his argument for the potential superiority of the
psychodynamic approach.\ :sup:`3` All these psychological treatments are
as effective as antidepressants, but the superiority of all treatments
over placebo may, as he suggests, be less than was once
assumed.\ :sup:`4` There is indeed a powerful placebo effect in mild
depression, but this seems to lessen as severity of depression
increases.\ :sup:`5–9` It is also important to note that although
placebo may do well in the short term, patients are more likely to
relapse.\ :sup:`10` Cognitive therapy still has the largest evidence
base of all the psychotherapies for depression; not only is it effective
in the acute phase, but it also reduces relapse.\ :sup:`11,12` Its
effects are not restricted to RCTs: in naturalistic settings 40% of
patients recover and 64% show reliable improvement.\ :sup:`13` The
empirical data give us no reason to abandon CBT for depression.

.. _S1:

Psychopathological theory
=========================

The implication of Dr Gipps's rather condescending analysis is that
cognitive therapy would not have been created if Aaron Beck had been a
better psychoanalyst (we are pointedly told that Beck failed entry to
the American Institute of Psychoanalysis). According to Gipps, Beck got
the wrong end of the stick, and his misunderstanding of theory led him
to devise a set of experiments that set psychopathology off on the wrong
track for the next half century. The problem here is that Beck's early
work is scrutinised from the perspective of current psychoanalytic
theory rather than seen in its historical context. It appears the
‘mistake’ Beck made was to be unaware of British psychoanalysis when he
carried out his ground-breaking research in the late 1950s. Gipps's main
reference is Trevor Lubbe's 2011 book written from the perspective of
the British object relations school, which Beck is unlikely to have
encountered in his analytic training in the USA – a training inclined
towards instinctual and ego theories. Should we then abandon all Freud's
work because his theories, originally framed in biological terms, were
based on a misunderstanding of modern neurology?\ :sup:`14` Gipps
describes clearly what he sees as the current consensus of
psychoanalytic thinking on depression which has unconscious avoidance of
emotion at its centre: avoidance of feelings of loss, avoidance of anger
towards those to whom we are attached, and avoidance of fear. Rather
than face these feelings the patient retreats into depression,
preferring to live ‘in a dismal and diminished version of himself, his
situation and his future.’ Beck's investigations tested one aspect of
the anger-avoidance theory of depression: the masochism hypothesis.
Anger towards another is repressed because it is unacceptable, but it
breaks through and is then turned on the self. This internalised
hostility leads to self-punishment, manifested in the self-criticism and
self-abasement found in depression. Gipps wonders why Beck was drawn to
the masochism hypothesis to the exclusion of others. The simple answer
is that the introjected anger hypothesis was the prevailing theory of
depression in American psychoanalysis at the time. Even in 1988 David
Milrod could still write that ‘the essential elements in a depression
are the self-directed aggression and the mood state to which it
leads’.\ :sup:`15` In this context Beck's investigation of internalised
hostility is very reasonable, and his research design perfectly
acceptable for its time. But the significance of this research is not
that it disproved psychoanalytic theory, but that it stimulated a
powerful new theory. Whether one accepts the cognitive model or not, it
has made an enormous contribution to the development of empirically
based research in depression. Beck showed that it was possible to
construct a theory that was refutable, and his steadfast focus on
testing his theories has led to changes and modifications on the basis
of research evidence. This is in contrast to psychoanalysis, which tends
to change on the basis of new theoretical or clinical trends, but rarely
in response to new research evidence. The first outcome study of
cognitive therapy for depression, for instance, demonstrated that
psychological therapy could be as effective as pharmacotherapy and
showed that therapy could be operationalised and manualised.\ :sup:`16`
Even psycho-analysts now admit the value of treatment
manuals!\ :sup:`17` Any studies demonstrating the efficacy of
psychoanalytic psychotherapy therefore owe a considerable methodological
debt to Beck's pioneering work in outcome research.

So what is this mistaken cognitive model of depression? According to
Beck, pervasive negative thinking is at the centre of depression:
negative views of the self, the world and the future. These thoughts
result from an information processing bias that selectively attends to
negative events, negatively interprets situations, and encodes them as
negative memories. These processes result from the activation of
underlying cognitive structures or schemas, in the form of dysfunctional
beliefs.\ :sup:`18–20`

There is considerable evidence for this cross-sectional model: for a
shift in information processing, for the reciprocal interaction between
low mood and negative thinking, and for the presence of dysfunctional
beliefs in depression.\ :sup:`21,22` Beck also formulated a
developmental model to explain vulnerability to depression. Negative
events in childhood, for example loss of a parent, lead to negative
beliefs which become activated when specific events impinge on these
schemas. Beck revised this theory in the light of findings that severe
life events are not always necessary to precipitate depression. An
accumulation of milder stressful events can contribute, and with each
successive episode the severity of event needed to trigger depression
becomes lower (the kindling effect).\ :sup:`23` A further refinement of
the model came with the discovery that when a depressed mood was evoked
people prone to depression exhibited negative cognitive biases
(cognitive reactivity).\ :sup:`24` These new findings were integrated
into the theory using the concept of the depressive mode – a network of
cognitive affective, motivational, behavioural and physiological schemas
activated in depression. The mode is ‘a complex neural network,
including multiple relevant brain regions that are activated or
deactivated during depression’ (p. 971).\ :sup:`19` With repeated
depressive episodes the network of beliefs becomes stronger and
relatively autonomous, so that minor stressors trigger the depressive
mode. The cognitive model provides a comprehensive account of both
vulnerability to and maintenance of depressive episodes. It does focus
on unconscious processes, i.e. schemas and information processing
biases, but these are unconscious because they are automatic, not
because they are repressed. Regardless of its origins, the cognitive
model stands on its own merits as an account of significant phenomena in
depression.

.. _S2:

Therapeutic practice
====================

Dr Gipps's main criticism of CBT practice seems to be that it is not
psychoanalysis. The collaborative, problem-solving relationship which is
at the heart of good CBT is ridiculed as superficial because it
apparently misses the opportunity to work with the transference. CBT,
unlike psychoanalysis, is a problem-focused therapy, and one of its
strengths lies in the way the problem is placed on the table and the
therapist and patient work together to solve it. In depression this
allows for a partnership in solving realistic problems and the
identification of blocks to problem-solving arising from the patient's
negative thought processes. For instance, negative predictions about
being rejected may lead a patient to be socially avoidant, further
reinforcing their depression. The therapist helps the patient test their
beliefs by attending a social event and noting the outcome. This
‘collaborative empiricism’, together with the structure and focus of
therapy, engages the healthy adult functioning mode and minimises
regressive transference so that the patient can learn strategies to help
them out of their depression.\ :sup:`25` When negative interpretations
of the therapist's behaviour arise these can be worked on together, for
instance by noting how the patient's fear that the therapist may be
cross with them is an example of a pattern of depressive
misinterpretation that occurs outside the session with others. As the
developmental conceptualisation is deepened over the course of therapy,
the underlying assumptions that drive this reaction might be identified
(e.g. ‘If I make a mistake I'll be rejected’), their origins in parental
criticism discussed, and the schemas modified. This is work with the
transference but in the service of learning how to manage negative
reactions activated when the person is depressed. With patients with
personality disturbance the focus on the interpersonal relationship
becomes more important and changing interpersonal schemas becomes one of
the key goals of therapy This is what Gipps calls the ‘real-time
eliciting and challenging of the patient's underlying emotional
preoccupations.’ However, CBT has the flexibility to work with the
therapeutic process when necessary, but is not shackled to it as the
only vehicle for change.

A second, more interesting, point made by Gipps concerns the role of
experiential avoidance in depression. This is central to CBT for
anxiety, where much of therapy focuses on identifying negative
predictions and setting up behavioural experiments to test the fear.
This is indeed often done in real time, through experiments in the
session such as panic induction. This is of course very effective
without any reference to transference. Recent developments in
‘third-wave’ CBT explicitly address emotional avoidance, and there is
room for more attention to this within the standard cognitive model of
depression. In mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, for instance,
mindfulness meditation is taught as a skill to help patients practise
moving from the ruminative depressive mode into a mode where they are
present for whatever they are experiencing, approaching difficult
feelings rather than moving away from them.\ :sup:`26` Although this
concept of avoidance of emotions is similar to that in the
psychoanalytic model, the significant differences are that it is not
conceptualised as a motivated avoidance arising from a dynamic
unconscious, and that it is perfectly possible to work with it outside
the transference.

Dr Gipps's final criticism of CBT practice regards its project of
‘dreary self-management’. Psychoanalytic psychotherapy, by contrast,
‘offers an intrinsically mutative emotional exchange which … constitutes
a growth in self-possession and a change of heart, obviating the need
for such self-management.’ This is wonderful news. Many of us would love
to engage in a therapy that magically transforms us so that we do not
have to pay attention to our habitual patterns that so frustratingly
trip us up, but this is not what good psychodynamic psychotherapy is
actually about. It involves noticing reactions outside the session as
well as within, and considerable repetitive work on the self. Depression
is a relapsing condition and it is patronising and misleading to imply
that learning ways to manage it is unnecessary. Patients who
successfully negotiate the vicissitudes of recurrent depression learn to
identify risk factors that make them vulnerable, recognise how
structuring their week helps to maintain positive mood, and how they can
easily fall into negative thought patterns. Cognitive therapy gives them
tools for doing this, but also changes underlying beliefs, to reduce
vulnerability to depression.

.. _S3:

Conclusions
===========

Cognitive therapy is a tried and tested therapy for depression. It has a
proven relapse prevention effect, but is not a panacea and is not the
only effective treatment for depression. Most of these therapies do not
work with the transference, and there is nothing to suggest that a
transference-focused therapy will be hugely more effective or reduce
dropout rates. The results from the two reported trials of
psychoanalytic therapy are promising, but much more research is needed
before they can be compared with the accumulated evidence for the
effectiveness of CBT. Dr Gipps's article is based on a mistaken reading
of the research into CBT as a therapy, and an anachronistic approach
which judges Beck's evaluation of psychoanalytic theory in 1959 by the
standards of 2016. What Beck developed stands not on this, but on almost
60 years of research. This has not only generated a robust theoretical
model of depression, but has given psychoanalysts methodologies they now
use to evaluate their own theories and therapies. The cognitive model of
depression is likely to be around for another 60 years, but it will
evolve and change on the basis of empirical research rather than
theoretical whimsy.

.. [1]
   **Stirling Moorey** Consultant psychiatrist in cognitive–behavioural
   therapy, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
