---
author:
- Peter Agulnik
date: 2016-10
references:
- id: R1
subtitle: ": Formerly Honorary Consultant Neuropathologist, The Bethlem
  Royal andThe Maudsley hospitals, Reader in Neuropathology, Institute
  of Psychiatry and Consultant Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist,
  Croydon Child Guidance Clinic"
title: Dr Sabina Strich BCh, DM, MRCPath, MRCP, FRCPsych
---

![](287f1){#F1}

Dr Sabina Strich, who died aged 90 on 23 May 2015, made pioneering
discoveries in the 1950s on the effects of head trauma on the brain.
While carrying out histopathological studies with Peter Daniel in
Oxford, she identified characteristic changes to brain cells following
severe head injuries. She showed that shearing injuries, arising as a
result of rapid acceleration or deceleration at the time of trauma,
produced diffuse degeneration of the cerebral white matter^1^. The
histopathological changes she described later became known as diffuse
axonal injury (DAI) or Sabina Strich syndrome. She claimed that cellular
changes of this type were the cause of later dementia. In 1957, shortly
after the publication of this highly original work, she followed Peter
Daniel to the Institute of Psychiatry, London where she continued her
work on the histopathology of the brain, being appointed senior lecturer
and subsequently Reader in Neuropathology.

However, in 1973, she decided to change specialties and retrain as a
child psychiatrist and psychotherapist. In many ways a private person,
she volunteered little on what led to that change. Even to close
friends, she only revealed that she was more interested in the mind than
the brain. One conjectures an epiphany associated with having undergone
a Freudian and then a Jungian analysis, linked perhaps to her family\'s
cultural heritage and lifelong interest in ideas.

Two years after becoming an honorary clinical assistant at the Belgrave
Hospital for Children, she moved on to senior registrar posts, first at
King\'s College Hospital and then at The Royal London Hospital. In 1977
she was appointed consultant psychiatrist to the Croydon Child Guidance
Clinic. Here she particularly enjoyed working with families and joined
The Association of Family Therapists. She was noted for her friendly but
idiosyncratic clinical style, often forthright, but touched with a warm
humour. In addition to the benefits deriving from her own
psychoanalysis, she obtained experience of group work during the early
years of the Institute of Group Analysis. Later, as a member, she was
actively involved in training group analysts on courses as far apart as
Manchester and Heidelberg. By the time of her retirement in 1984, she
recalled with some pleasure that she had attained membership of the two
Royal Colleges devoted to medicine and pathology, and fellowship of the
Royal College of Psychiatrists.

Sabina Strich was born in Munich into an intellectual Jewish family of
private means. An older sister died when 9 years old. Her younger sister
moved and brought up a family in the United States, where Sabina was a
frequent visitor. With the rise of the Nazi party the family fled
Germany, settling in Cambridge, where she attended The Perse School. In
1943 she won a scholarship to study medicine at Lady Margaret Hall,
University of Oxford, gaining a degree in physiology before embarking on
clinical studies as one of the earliest clinical students of the Oxford
Medical School at the Radcliffe Infirmary. She qualified BM BCh in 1949.
Following house posts in medicine and surgery in Oxford and Swansea, in
1951 she was awarded a Medical Research Council (MRC) scholarship for
training in research methods, initially at Manchester and then in
Professor Sir Hugh Cairns\' surgical department at Oxford. Here she
obtained a personal MRC grant to study the neuropathology of severe head
injuries with Peter Daniel.

After her retirement she returned to Oxford, in many ways her spiritual
home. She bought a riverside apartment and set about creating a new and
active life. She loved companioned walking and travelling far afield.
Not ready to give up psychotherapy, she approached the Isis Centre, an
open access NHS counselling service whose small number of core staff was
augmented by associate counsellors. Sabina generously volunteered in a
number of roles -- such as a consultant in weekly case discussion groups
-- and in a range of educational events. She ran a client group and an
experiential group for nurses studying psychodynamic practice, saw
couples and did some family work. She was especially valued as a
supervisor in all these modalities as well as in individual work. She
developed a small private practice and took active roles within the
Oxford Psychotherapy Society, of which she was a founding member. She
spoke on a number of occasions, as well as submitting articles and
commentaries.

To all her professional activities she brought a distinctive 'Sabinoid
style'. As a supervisor, her comments tended to be few and
authoritative, but never critical, thus facilitating an ambience which
encouraged others to develop their own ideas. After 11 years she left
the Isis Centre, but remained linked with her many friends in the
psychotherapy world.

Towards the end of this period, she developed a new interest. Having
been led to believe as a child that she had no artistic abilities, she
experimented with clay and was surprised and delighted to discover that
distinctive, often quirky figures, with vitality and movement, emerged
from her fingertips. Encouraged, she took lessons in sculpture and soon
became an accomplished sculptress, exhibiting her work in local private
exhibitions. Maybe it was in this creative work that her belief in the
unconscious, her self-assurance and above all her empathic interest in
people came to the fore.

Recognising mild cognitive impairment, in her 80th year she moved to a
pleasant apartment in a retirement complex. Art exhibitions, theatre and
music played an important part in her life; she regularly attended
concerts and read widely. Always fond of poetry, she published a small
book of her own verse, with poems which were short, powerful and laced
with dry humour.

She found increasing deafness and lapses in memory deeply frustrating
but -- typically -- Sabina responded by forming a group for the elderly
with early dementia. She was active in maintaining her interests in
medicine, religion, philosophy and psychoanalysis, attending a seminar
in the last week of her life. Ever a realist, and having contentedly
reached 90 years, she was reconciled to her own death and died after a
short illness.
