================================================================
Measuring relational security in forensic mental health services
================================================================



Verity Chester
Regi T. Alexander
Wendy MorganCorrespondence to Verity Chester
(VerityChester@priorygroup.com)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** Relational security is an important component of
   care and risk assessment in mental health services, but the utility
   of available measures remains under-researched. This study analysed
   the psychometric properties of two relational security tools, the See
   Think Act (STA) scale and the Relational Security Explorer (RSE).

   **Results** The STA scale had good internal consistency and could
   highlight differences between occupational groups, whereas the RSE
   did not perform well as a psychometric measure.

   **Clinical implications** The measures provide unique and
   complimentary perspectives on the quality of relational security
   within secure services, but have some limitations. Use of the RSE
   should be restricted to its intended purpose; to guide team
   discussions about relational security, and services should refrain
   from collecting and aggregating this data. Until further research
   validates their use, relational security measurement should be
   multidimensional and form part of a wider process of service quality
   assessment.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Serious incident investigations in forensic mental health services have
been linked to relational security breakdowns. :sup:`1` However,
relational security has been described as the ‘poor relation’ :sup:`2`
when compared with physical or procedural security. This is most likely
due to definition difficulties. Chester & Morgan :sup:`3` noted that
numerous conceptualisations of relational security exist, all
referencing different phenomena, such as ‘therapeutic relationships’ and
‘boundaries’, without describing how such concepts can affect security.
:sup:`3` The authors noted that the most practically useful definitions
emphasise exactly how relational issues affect security, in two stages:
(1) staff knowledge of patients and therapeutic relationships; and (2)
how patient knowledge and therapeutic relationships are used to foresee
potential and manage actual security incidents, for example: ‘The
professional relationships between staff and patients so that … the
staff to get to know … their patients, their moods and problems, to
facilitate interventions before these become major problems, or lead to
incidents of a security nature’ (p. 171). :sup:`4` As such, relational
security is intrinsically linked to short- and long-term assessment and
management of risk in mental health and forensic services.

Relational security is therefore a service quality indicator of interest
within forensic and general mental health services. Its measurement
should allow practitioners to explore background causes and respond
accordingly with appropriate interventions. Due to the definitional
complexities, there are subsequent challenges to measurement. Previously
available tools only measure partial aspects of relational security or
individual patient needs. :sup:`3` However, two tools have been
developed in recent years, the Relational Security Explorer :sup:`5` and
the See Think Act scale. :sup:`2` As limited research has examined the
clinical utility of these measures, the present study examines their
psychometric properties to support the aim of relational security
measurement.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Design
------

The study employed a within-participants (reliability testing) and
between-participants (assessing the measures' ability to identify
differences between occupational groups according to the variables level
of security, ward gender and length of experience working in secure
services) cross-sectional questionnaire design.

.. _S3:

Participants
------------

Participants were recruited from a forensic service for people with
intellectual disability. As guidance recommends that relational security
implementation should involve all occupational groups working within
secure services, :sup:`6` the study invited all staff who have contact
with patients as part of their role to take part in the study (*n* =
216), and of these 41% (*n* = 89) responded. The majority of the
participants were female (63%), and the average length of service
working in secure services was 6 years (range 0.12–20). The majority of
participants were from the nursing department (57%), followed by
occupational therapy (16%), psychology (9%), social work (6%),
psychiatry (2%) and housekeeping (8%), and two participants identified
their occupation as ‘other’. The level of security in which respondents
worked in at the time of the study was medium (23.6%), low (27%) and
locked rehabilitation (16.9%). There are no national data available
which describe the demographics of the forensic mental health workforce,
although the reported characteristics reflected the socio-demographic
and occupational breakdown of the study service and the broader mental
health workforce as a whole, :sup:`7` being predominantly female and
with nursing staff comprising the largest department followed by other
members of the multidisciplinary team. As participants responded
anonymously, it was not possible to undertake any analyses comparing
participants with non-responders.

.. _S4:

Measures
--------

.. _S5:

See Think Act (STA) scale :sup:`2`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The STA scale is the first attempt to create a direct measure of
relational security. The 28 items were developed from the Department of
Health conceptualisation of relational security, :sup:`6` and reflect
relational security scenarios (e.g. ‘We speak up if we think we can see
that a colleague has been put in a difficult position that could weaken
security’). Individual staff members complete the questionnaire in
relation to the ward they work on, and select how closely their ward
team resembles provided statements on a 4-point Likert scale, with
scores of 3 ‘Just like our team’, 2 ‘Quite like our team’, 1 ‘A little
like our team’ and 0 ‘Not like our team’. A principal components
analysis confirmed a four-component structure of the measure:
Therapeutic Risk Management, Pro-Social Team Culture, Boundaries and
Patient Focus. :sup:`2` Initial examinations indicated good convergent
validity with related measures (e.g. EssenCES :sup:`8` ), and internally
consistent subscales. :sup:`2` There is currently no normative data
available for the STA scale.

.. _S6:

The Relational Security Explorer (RSE) :sup:`5`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The RSE is a tool designed to help clinical teams working within secure
settings to communicate and assess their competence in relational
security. The tool requires users to provide a numerical score of their
team's confidence in eight areas of relational security: Therapy,
Boundaries, Patient Mix, Patient Dynamic, Personal World, Physical
Environment, Visitors and Outward Connections on a scale ranging from 1
(no confidence) to 10 (extremely confident). The RSE was not developed
as a psychometric measure; however, the tool requests clinical teams to
provide a numerical score of their confidence in each of the eight
areas. In doing so, the tool lends itself for use as an outcomes measure
and, anecdotally, the authors are aware of service's collecting and
analysing this data, despite it not being validated for this purpose.
This is in line with the suggestion that when numerical indices and
cut-off points are available, clinical decisions tend to be reduced to
those numbers. :sup:`9` Participants were asked to complete the RSE on
an individual, rather than a team basis, to investigate the tool
performance as an outcomes measure.

.. _S7:

Procedure
---------

The researcher arranged one-to-one meetings with staff eligible for the
research, at which informed consent was sought. Once obtained, staff
members were asked to complete and return the questionnaires. A debrief
form was provided for participants, which detailed further information
about the study.

.. _S8:

Ethics
------

Ethical approval was obtained from the London Metropolitan University
Research Ethics Review Panel. The National Research Ethics Service
Committee for the East of England – Norfolk was also approached for
ethical review of the project, who advised that as the relational
security measures were being used in routine clinical practice within
the study service, the study does not require National Health Service
ethical approval. :sup:`10,11`

.. _S9:

Data analysis
-------------

Prior to analysis, assumption testing for parametric tests was
completed. The assumption of homogeneity of variance was violated, and
the data were negatively skewed, violating the assumption of normal
distribution. Transformations of the data were attempted, but this did
not reduce the skew. A number of cases appeared as outliers for all
outcome variables, and notably, these cases were all from the
housekeeping department. Data were therefore examined using
non-parametric methods. This point was discussed with our statistician,
who assured us that the loss of power associated with the non-parametric
tests was small.

Therefore, internal consistency was examined using Spearman's Rho
correlation to calculate the Corrected Item-Total Correlation (CITC)
coefficient values for subscales of the STA and the RSE. Convergent
validity was analysed by correlating subscales of the STA scale and the
RSE using Spearman's Rho. The Sidak adjustment was used to adjust for
multiple comparisons.

Non-parametric statistical tests were used to examine the association
between scores on the STA and the RSE, and the variables requested in
the demographic questionnaire (length of experience working in secure
services, the ward and level of security worked on, the gender of the
patients on their ward, and staff department/occupational discipline).
Analysis between individual wards and staff occupational discipline
could not be completed due to small and unequal numbers between the
groups. To examine the association between level of security and the
subscales of the two measures, the Kruskal-Wallis test was used. The
Wilcoxon Mann-Whitney *U*-test was used to examine the association
between gender of patients and the subscales. To examine the association
between length of experience working in secure services and the
subscales, Spearman's Rho correlation was used.

.. _S10:

Results
=======

.. _S11:

Internal consistency
--------------------

Internal consistency was assessed using CITC coefficients. A CITC value
above 0.5 is considered high, but if less than 0.3, items within a
subscale may be measuring more than one construct. All RSE subscales
exceeded the CITC 0.30 cut-off, although there was some variation, with
the Personal World subscale having the highest internal consistency at
0.80, and the Physical Environment subscale the lowest at 0.49. All the
STA subscales had CITC scores over 0.9. `Table 1 <#T1>`__ displays the
CITC coefficient values for each subscale of the two measures.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Corrected Item-Total Correlation (CITC)

   =============================== ====
   Measure                         CITC
   =============================== ====
   Relational Security Explorer    
       Therapy                     0.66
       Boundaries                  0.61
       Patient Mix                 0.57
       Patient Dynamic             0.65
       Personal World              0.80
       Physical Environment        0.49
       Visitors                    0.62
       Outward Connections         0.68
   \                               
   See Think Act scale             
       Therapeutic Risk Management 0.90
       Pro-Social Team Culture     0.96
       Boundaries                  0.92
       Patient Focus               0.92
   =============================== ====

.. _S12:

Convergent validity between measures
------------------------------------

There was little convergent validity between the subscales of the two
measures. All four subscales of the STA scale correlated significantly
with each other, whereas subscales of the RSE did not. The Spearman's
Rho values are detailed in `Table 2 <#T2>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Correlations matrix of the subscales of See Think Act scale and
      Relational Security Explorer

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | See   | Relat |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       | Think | ional |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       | Act   | Sec   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       | scale | urity |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       |       | Exp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       |       | lorer |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+===+
   | See   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Think |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Act   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | scale |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |     T | 1     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | herap |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | eutic |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Risk  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Manag |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | ement |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | 0.8   | 1     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |   Pro | 08\ ` |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | S     | \*\*  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | ocial | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Team  | 1>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Cu    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | lture |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | 0.7   | 0.8   | 1     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Bound | 80\ ` | 78\ ` |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | aries | \*\*  | \*\*  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       | <#TFN | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       | 1>`__ | 1>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   | Pa    | 0.8   | 0.8   | 0.7   | 1     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | tient | 12\ ` | 46\ ` | 95\ ` |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Focus | \*\*  | \*\*  | \*\*  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       | <#TFN | <#TFN | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       | 1>`__ | 1>`__ | 1>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   | Relat |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | ional |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Sec   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | urity |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Exp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | lorer |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | 0.424 | 0.436 | 0.344 | 0.413 | 1     |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |    Th |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | erapy |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | 0.470 | 0.411 | 0.367 | 0.341 | 0.4   | 1     |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Bound |       |       |       |       | 69\ ` |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | aries |       |       |       |       | \*\*  |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       |       |       |       |       | 1>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | 0.444 | 0.468 | 0.5   | 0.401 | 0.338 | 0.293 | 1     |       |       |       |       |   |
   |    Pa |       |       | 82\ ` |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | tient |       |       | \*\*  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Mix   |       |       | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   |       |       |       | 1>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | 0.453 | 0.482 | 0.457 | 0.401 | 0.5   | 0.300 | 0.6   | 1     |       |       |       |   |
   |    Pa |       |       |       |       | 15\ ` |       | 68\ ` |       |       |       |       |   |
   | tient |       |       |       |       | \*\*  |       | \*\*  |       |       |       |       |   |
   | Dy    |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |       | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |   |
   | namic |       |       |       |       | 1>`__ |       | 1>`__ |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | 0.485 | 0.487 | 0.391 | 0.465 | 0.5   | 0.4   | 0.319 | 0.4   | 1     |       |       |   |
   |   Per |       |       |       |       | 88\ ` | 39\ ` |       | 47\ ` |       |       |       |   |
   | sonal |       |       |       |       | \*\*  | \*\*  |       | \*\*  |       |       |       |   |
   | World |       |       |       |       | <#TFN | <#TFN |       | <#TFN |       |       |       |   |
   |       |       |       |       |       | 1>`__ | 1>`__ |       | 1>`__ |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | 0.091 | 0.182 | 0.247 | 0.246 | 0.251 | 0.249 | 0.110 | 0.173 | 0.239 | 1     |       |   |
   |   Phy |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | sical |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | E     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | nviro |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   | nment |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | 0.320 | 0.236 | 0.171 | 0.278 | 0.273 | 0.266 | 0.297 | 0.300 | 0.5   | 0.186 | 1     |   |
   |    Ou |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | 56\ ` |       |       |   |
   | tward |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | \*\*  |       |       |   |
   | C     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |       |       |   |
   | onnec |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | 1>`__ |       |       |   |
   | tions |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+
   |       | 0.301 | 0.262 | 0.211 | 0.247 | 0.207 | 0.237 | 0.267 | 0.235 | 0.5   | 0.145 | 0.5   | 1 |
   |   Vis |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | 73\ ` |       | 65\ ` |   |
   | itors |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | \*\*  |       | \*\*  |   |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |       | <#TFN |   |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | 1>`__ |       | 1>`__ |   |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+---+

   Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level.

.. _S13:

Between-groups analysis
-----------------------

.. _S14:

Level of security
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Significant differences in scores on the two measures were found between
staff working in different levels of security Staff working on medium
secure wards tended to have the lowest scores on both measures, followed
by staff on low secure wards, with the highest scores on rehabilitation
wards. On the STA scale, this reached statistical significance on the
Therapeutic Risk Management (*P*\ < 0.001), Boundaries (*P* = 0.012) and
Patient Focus (*P* = 0.034) subscales. There were also significant
differences on the RSE, on the Patient Mix (*P*\ < 0.001), Patient
Dynamic (*P* = 0.008) and Personal World (*P* = 0.011) subscales.
Descriptive data for this variable are presented in `Table 3 <#T3>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Descriptive statistics for level of security on the See Think Act
      scale and Relational Security Explorer

   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |                   | Level of          |             |             |
   |                   | security, mean    |             |             |
   |                   | (s.d.)            |             |             |
   +===================+===================+=============+=============+
   | See Think Act     |                   |             |             |
   | scale             |                   |             |             |
   | `a <#TFN2>`__     |                   |             |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Therapeutic   | 2.34 (0.44)       | 2.54 (0.39) | 2.8 (0.25)  |
   | Risk Management   |                   |             |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Pro-Social    | 2.34 (0.49)       | 2.52 (0.48) | 2.68 (0.41) |
   | Team Culture      |                   |             |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Boundaries    | 2.5 (0.43)        | 2.64 (0.41) | 2.83 (0.31) |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Patient Focus | 2.5 (0.45)        | 2.76 (0.49) | 2.76 (0.34) |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |                   |                   |             |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Relational        |                   |             |             |
   | Security Explorer |                   |             |             |
   | `b <#TFN3>`__     |                   |             |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Therapy       | 7.46 (1.61)       | 7.47 (0.26) | 8.07 (1.61) |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Boundaries    | 7.85 (1.21)       | 8.3 (0.26)  | 8.3 (1.21)  |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Patient Mix   | 7.54 (0.97)       | 7.1 (1.56)  | 8.71 (0.61) |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Patient       | 7.15 (1.34)       | 7.1 (1.34)  | 8.3 (0.83)  |
   | Dynamic           |                   |             |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Personal      | 7.31 (1.7)        | 7.41 (1.18) | 8.5 (1.09)  |
   | World             |                   |             |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Physical      | 7.23 (1.7)        | 7.88 (1.4)  | 8.07 (1.33) |
   | Environment       |                   |             |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Visitors      | 7.0 (1.09)        | 7.0 (1.12)  | 7.64 (1.98) |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Outward       | 7.23 (1.36)       | 7.17 (1.74) | 8.07 (1.59) |
   | Connections       |                   |             |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+

   The scale for the See Think Act scale is 0–3.

   The scale for the Relational Security Explorer is 1–9.

.. _S15:

Ward gender
~~~~~~~~~~~

There were no differences in STA scale scores between staff working on
wards caring for male patients, as compared to female patients. However,
on the RSE, staff working with male patients reported higher scores on
the Patient Dynamic (*P* = 0.024) subscale, compared with staff working
with female patients.

.. _S16:

Length of experience working in secure services
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was no correlation between the number of years staff had been
working in secure services, and their confidence in relational security,
on the STA scale or the RSE.

.. _S17:

Discussion
==========

Serious incidents within forensic mental health services can be linked
to breakdowns of relational security. :sup:`1` Available measures should
therefore provide insight into the quality of relational security within
services, direct exploration of strengths and weaknesses, and prompt
timely, appropriate interventions before an incident occurs.
Furthermore, tools should be accessible to all occupation groups.
:sup:`6` This study therefore evaluated the psychometric properties of
the STA and the RSE, including internal consistency, convergent validity
and their ability to highlight differences between groups.

Study limitations include a relatively small sample size, and
participants being drawn from a single service, which limit
generalisability. It is categorised as a preliminary study for these
reasons. However, the study reports interesting findings in relation to
the specific tools examined and the wider task of measuring relational
security by investigating the perspectives of staff members across
occupational professions and levels of security. The study setting, a
secure intellectual disability service, may be viewed as a strength, as
previous studies have been completed only within generic forensic
psychiatric services, and as a weakness, due to the extent of the study
findings generalising to non-intellectual disability services. Research
comparing patient characteristics between mainstream forensic and
specialist intellectual disability services is scarce, however there are
a number of notable differences between the two populations which may
have an effect on relational security. These include communication
difficulties which could affect the development of therapeutic
relationships, increased levels of behavioural incidents, :sup:`12` and
higher assessed risk on structured clinical judgement tools.
:sup:`13–15` That said, the present research reports many findings which
echo those of previous research. :sup:`2`

Test–re-test reliability was not examined in the present research,
although it may be an interesting area for further study. At present,
the stability of relational security levels are unclear, and it may not
be realistic or relevant to expect stability over time, as relational
security is a fundamentally a dynamic concept.

The internal consistency aspect of reliability was examined, with the
STA scale demonstrating high levels in accordance with previous
research. :sup:`2` Its subscales correlated significantly, suggesting
they are statistically related concepts. Internal consistency for the
RSE was adequate but its subscales did not all correlate significantly,
possibly indicating that some of the concepts measured are statistically
unrelated. Although the RSE and the STA both aim to measure relational
security, convergent validity was low. Collectively, these findings
suggest that the RSE does not perform as well as the STA as a
psychometric outcome measure. This raises questions regarding the
practice of collecting and analysing data from the RSE, despite not
being validated for this purpose. Lodewijks *et al* :sup:`9` explicitly
advise against the use of numerical indices and cut-off points, due to
clinicians' tendency to reduce clinical decisions to numbers if they are
available.

Particular subscales of the two measures were able to detect differences
between groups in relational security confidence, thus facilitating the
comparison of wards and staff disciplines within a service, potentially
between services comparisons, and directing intervention as necessary.
Significant findings were reported between wards of different levels of
security, with relational security confidence lowest on medium secure
wards, increasing on low secure wards, and highest on rehabilitation
wards. Tighe & Gudjonsson :sup:`2` also reported this effect, as well as
authors investigating social climate in secure settings. :sup:`16,17` A
possible explanation for this is that medium secure wards represent the
beginning of the care pathway accepting newly admitted patients and, as
such, staff have had less opportunity to develop the knowledge of
patients and therapeutic relationships necessary to achieve good
relational security. As patients progress through the low secure and
rehabilitation stages of the care pathway, this provides an opportunity
for the components necessary to relational security to develop.

The study also compared relational security confidence between staff
working with male and female patients. This was examined as authors have
documented difficulties in building therapeutic relationships with
women, due to their clinical complexity. :sup:`18,19` However, there
were few differences between these two groups on the subscales of the
two measures, although staff working with male patients reported higher
scores on the Patient Dynamic (*P* = 0.024) subscale of the RSE.
:sup:`5`

It was expected that staff with more experience working within secure
services would be more confident in their judgements of relational
security, but there were no significant associations. However,
relational security relies on knowledge of patients and therapeutic
relationships, within a dynamic environment. For example, if a new
patient is admitted to a ward, all staff, regardless of experience will
begin to develop their knowledge and their therapeutic relationships
with this patient at the same time. Furthermore, if an experienced staff
member is asked to move onto a different ward, they will know little
about the patients on that ward and have to develop new knowledge and
therapeutic relationships. In this sense, all staff members, regardless
of experience, are repeatedly beginning and developing their knowledge
of individual patients and new therapeutic relationships.

Housekeeping staff felt less confident in relational security, as
compared to all other departments. This is probably due to the measures
tapping into areas of clinical practice that housekeeping staff would
not be involved in, and the comparable lack of training offered to this
group. However, guidance recommends that relational security
implementation should involve all occupational groups working within
secure services. :sup:`6` As housekeeping staff are a daily presence on
forensic wards, they are equally as vulnerable to relational security
issues and in a position to witness threats to security. Further
research should investigate ways to support all occupational groups with
relational security.

.. _S18:

Measuring relational security: further considerations
-----------------------------------------------------

Some points are of note when interpreting data obtained from relational
security measures. Initial assumption testing indicated negatively
skewed data, suggesting that most participants rated their confidence in
relational security at the top end of each measures' respective scale.
This could indicate that staff working in this particular service are
highly confident in their relational security practice. However, it is
unclear how confidence scores relate to the actual quality of relational
security within a ward, for example is a highly confident team an
experienced team or a complacent team? It could also indicate positive
responding, as essentially, measures are asking individuals to rate
themselves in an aspect of their role in which they are expected to be
competent. Introducing some negatively worded items could improve this.

High scoring may also be due to the way the two tools conceptualise
relational security. Both measures are based on the STA
conceptualisation of relational security, :sup:`6` which places much of
the responsibility onto staff and teams, thus neglecting the
‘quantitative’ aspects of relational security, for example
‘staff-to-patient ratio and amount of time spent in face-to-face
contact’ (p. 434) :sup:`20` and the supportive role and responsibility
of service management. For example, to achieve quality therapeutic
relationships with patients, ward staff and teams need to be stable,
with minimum staff ward moves, turnover and absenteeism, :sup:`3`
factors outside of staff members' control. Incorporating items
reflecting such aspects of relational security could provide a more
comprehensive picture.

Normative data are not currently available for either of the two
measures, which limits the interpretability of the results. Both
measures are designed to be used by staff members in relation to one
specific ward. However, many employees work across multiple wards in
secure services, with 27% respondents in this sample working across
wards. These participants were typically from occupational departments
other than nursing, such as psychology, psychiatry, social work and
occupational therapy.

.. _S19:

Conclusions
-----------

The increased attention relational security is receiving within the
forensic field is a welcome advance. There is growing awareness around
the importance of this concept, and resources aiming to raise awareness
and support the implementation of relational security are widely
available. :sup:`21` However, until recently there have been few
mechanisms to assess the quality of relational security within services.
The results of this study suggest that the STA scale and the RSE hold
unique and complimentary roles attempting to support relational
security. The RSE did not perform well as a psychometric measure, and
therefore its use should be limited to its intended purpose – as a tool
to guide team discussions about relational security – and services
should refrain from using the RSE as an outcomes measure. However,
deciding on a numerical score of relational security confidence may
serve a function within the context of a team discussion, for example,
if one team member feels the ward should score highly, whereas another
member feels the ward should be given a lower score, this could suggest
team splitting and form a basis for discussion. At present, the STA
scale is best placed to provide insight into the quality of their
relational security, while taking into account the aforementioned issues
when interpreting the data.

Further research is needed in all areas of relational security:
definition, implementation and measurement. This research should examine
the relationship between relational security and negative outcomes, such
as institutional aggression or serious incidents. Future studies should
evaluate the clinical utility of the RSE, examine the psychometric
properties and provide normative data for the STA. Until more is known
about relational security, the approach to implementing and measuring it
should be multidimensional, :sup:`22` i.e. incorporating staff, patient
and service management perspectives.

The authors are grateful to Paul Bassett for his help with statistical
analysis.

.. [1]
   **Verity Chester**, research and projects associate, Department of
   Psychiatry, Partnerships in Care Learning Disability Services. **Regi
   T. Alexander**, consultant psychiatrist, Department of Psychiatry,
   Partnerships in Care Learning Disability Services, and Research Lead
   Consultant, Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust. **Wendy Morgan**,
   senior lecturer, Department of Psychology, Social Work and Allied
   Health Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian University.
