================================================================================================
Flexible assertive community treatment (FACT) model in specialist psychosis teams: an evaluation
================================================================================================



Loopinder Sood
Andy Owen
Richard Onyon
Aarohi Sharma
Jessica Nigriello
Dominic Markham
Hannah Seabrook
:Correspondence: Andy Owen (andy.owen@covwarkpt.nhs.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2017-8

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** The impact of flexible assertive community
   treatment (FACT) has been observed in people previously supported by
   assertive community treatment (ACT) teams, but its effect on those
   previously with a community mental health team (CMHT) has not been
   studied in the UK. An observational study was conducted of 380 people
   from 3 CMHTs and 95 people from an ACT team, all with a history of
   psychosis, following service reconfiguration to 3 FACT teams.

   **Results** People previously with a CMHT required less time in
   hospital when the FACT model was introduced. A smaller reduction was
   observed in people coming from the ACT team. Both groups required
   less crisis resolution home treatment (CRHT) team input.

   **Clinical implications** FACT may be a better model than standard
   CMHT care for people with a history of psychosis, as a result of
   reduced need for acute (CRHT and in-patient) services.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Recent years have seen a widespread disinvestment from assertive
community treatment (ACT), with many teams being merged into generic
community mental health teams (CMHTs).\ :sup:`1,2` Such changes have
been criticised for moving away from evidence-based systems, instead
adopting untested models of service delivery, with poorer quality care,
described in a King's Fund report as ‘a leap in the dark’.\ :sup:`3` In
some cases new services have adopted a flexible ACT (FACT) model, with
people able to access intensive support delivered in the community using
a team case-load and ACT principles, as and when they require
it.\ :sup:`4,5` In this model, care coordinators manage individual
case-loads, but also work together to provide shared care for people at
times of increased need, enabling seamless transition between high- and
low-intensity care.

An observational study in the UK has not shown negative effects in
people previously supported by ACT teams in terms of hospital admissions
or need for crisis resolution home treatment team (CRHT)
interventions.\ :sup:`6,7` However, there have been no UK studies
assessing whether there could be advantages for people previously
supported by a CMHT but now receiving FACT. It might be expected that
some people who have not previously had access to periods of more
intensive support within the CMHT could benefit from the FACT approach,
perhaps with a reduced need to have interventions from a CRHT or
hospital admission.

.. _S1:

Method
======

In South Warwickshire there had previously been a single,
well-established ACT team, with outcome data over a 10-year period
showing a reduced need for time in hospital.\ :sup:`8` The area was also
served by three generic CMHTs and a single early intervention team. The
early intervention services were maintained, whereas each of the three
CMHTs was divided into a team for people with a history of psychosis
(recovery teams) and a team for people with other non-organic mental
disorders. At the same time they became ‘age-independent’, with no upper
age limit. The previous ACT team was disbanded and merged into the new
recovery teams, which were configured to deliver services using the FACT
model. A few months prior to the changes, the ACT team had absorbed a
community rehabilitation team and therefore fidelity to the original ACT
model had reduced. Characteristics of the ACT, CMHT and FACT teams are
shown in `Table 1 <#T1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Characteristics of the different teams

   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                | CMHT           | ACT            | FACT           |
   +================+================+================+================+
   | Case mix       | People with    | People with    | People with a  |
   |                | psychotic or   | history of     | history of     |
   |                | non-psychotic  | severe         | psychosis      |
   |                | disorders      | psychosis who  |                |
   |                |                | have           |                |
   |                |                | difficulty     |                |
   |                |                | engaging with  |                |
   |                |                | traditional    |                |
   |                |                | services       |                |
   |                |                | and often with |                |
   |                |                | comorbid       |                |
   |                |                | problems       |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Age range,     | 17–65 for new  | 17–65 for new  | 17 and upwards |
   | years          | referrals, no  | referrals, no  | for new        |
   |                | upper age      | upper          | and existing   |
   |                | limit for      | age limit for  | users of the   |
   |                | existing       | existing users | service        |
   |                | users of the   | of the         |                |
   |                | service        | service        |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Care planning  | Individual     | Shared care    | Individual     |
   |                | case           |                | case           |
   |                | management     |                | management     |
   |                |                |                | with           |
   |                |                |                | periods of     |
   |                |                |                | shared care as |
   |                |                |                | needed         |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Interface with | Referrals made | All            | All            |
   | mental         | between        | professionals  | professionals  |
   | health         | professionals  | involved in    | involved in    |
   | professionals  | when needed    | delivery of    | delivery of    |
   |                |                | care without   | care without   |
   |                |                | referrals, on  | referrals,     |
   |                |                | a needs-led    | on a needs-led |
   |                |                | basis          | basis          |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Care           | 30             | 12–15          | 25             |
   | coordinator:   |                |                |                |
   | patient ratio  |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

   ACT, assertive community treatment; CMHT, community mental health
   team; FACT, flexible assertive community treatment.

There was no change in acute hospital bed availability during the study
period. However, a long-stay rehabilitation ward was closed at about the
same time as the other changes took place, with most residents being
discharged either to nursing homes or to intensive community placements
with 24-hour live-in staff support. This group had been care-coordinated
by the ACT team both prior to and following discharge.

The current study was a service evaluation of the new FACT-based
recovery teams. It assessed their impact in enabling people to avoid
time in hospital, to reduce the use of crisis home treatment support,
and to examine how much face-to-face support people received from the
new service. There were multiple changes associated with setting up the
teams, all of which took place in June 2014. Many people experienced a
change in care coordinator and/or consultant, and there were various
teething problems with the transition. In order to avoid these becoming
confounding variables, we chose to study a 13-month period starting 6
months after the creation of the new services: December 2014 until
January 2016. We compared this with a 13-month period in the old
services a year earlier (December 2012 until January 2014).

The trust uses a computerised notes system for all staff in the
community, which constitutes the sole record of any contacts with
clients. It can generate detailed reports on clinical contacts between
specified time periods, broken down by team or staff member, and is
routinely used for gathering trust performance data. Because people are
constantly moving in and out of services, we decided to study only those
people who were open to the new FACT service during the 13-month study
period, and who had also been in one of the 3 CMHTs or the ACT team
during the comparison 13-month period. Because of the closure of the
rehabilitation ward, there was potential for a considerable impact on
bed use data in the ACT arm of the study – the patients, having spent
several years in hospital, were moving to nursing care or 24-hour
live-in support. For this reason, we excluded from the bed use analysis
those who were being discharged from hospital after several years into
nursing or live-in community care.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

A total of 475 people who had also been with one of the previous legacy
teams the year before were identified as being open to the new service.
Of these, 95 had previously been with the ACT team and 380 with one of
the CMHTs. Results were analysed separately for these two groups. Tests
of significance between the old systems and the new FACT service were
carried out using 2-tailed paired *t*-tests or, when data were skewed,
using the Wilcoxon signed rank test. A Monte Carlo permutation test, as
described by Good\ :sup:`9` and derived from Fisher,\ :sup:`10` was used
when there was no standard statistical method available, such as to
compare partially paired data. This type of testing gives a *P*-value
directly (much like Fisher's exact test) without an intermediary test
statistic such as a *t*-value. To keep the false detection rate (i.e.
the overall type 1 error) low at 0.05 on account of multiple testing, we
used the Benjamini-Hochberg\ :sup:`11` correction, which gave a
significance level alpha of 0.0288. This means that *P*-values of less
than 0.0288 are significant. Where a significant difference was observed
in one group but not in the other, *post hoc* power calculations were
carried out in order to check for any potential type 2 errors.
Demographic and clinical characteristics of people from the two legacy
teams are shown in `Table 2 <#T2>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Demographic and clinical characteristics of the cohorts

   ============================== ========== ===========
   Previous team                  ACT        CMHT
                                  (*n* = 95) (*n* = 380)
   ============================== ========== ===========
   Gender, male: %                66.0       54.2
   \                                         
   Age, years: mean               45.3       47.7
   \                                         
   Time in services, years: mean  13.7       11.0
   \                                         
   ICD-10 diagnosis, %                       
       Schizophrenia              78.3       53.4
       Schizoaffective disorder   16.3       4.7
       Bipolar affective disorder 4.3        28.2
       Other                      1.1        13.8
   ============================== ========== ===========

   ACT, assertive community treatment; CMHT, community mental health
   team.

.. _S3:

Face-to-face contacts with the FACT teams
-----------------------------------------

For people previously with the ACT team, the number of face-to-face
contacts with a member of the new FACT team reduced from 1.16 to 0.69
per week, with a corresponding reduction in mean duration of contacts
from 65 to 38 minutes per person. These differences were statistically
significant and are of similar magnitude to the changes observed in the
other UK study of FACT.\ :sup:`6,7` The number of contacts by support
workers was not significantly different (0.25 compared with 0.29), but
the proportion increased from 22 to 43%. In other words, the reduction
of face-to-face contacts in the new FACT system for people previously in
the ACT team was a result of less involvement of qualified staff. The
number of community-based contacts reduced significantly in the new
service, but the proportion was greater, indicating that, overall, more
contacts had been lost in clinic settings compared with those in the
community. For people previously with a CMHT there was very little
difference in number and duration of contacts when the service adopted
the FACT model. However, there was greater use of support workers and
more contacts were in community settings, consistent with the principles
of the FACT model (`Table 3 <#T3>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Contacts with FACT team compared with previous service (ACT or
      CMHT)

   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | P       | ACT     | CMHT    |         |         |         |         |
   | revious | (*n* =  | (*n* =  |         |         |         |         |
   | team    | 95)     | 380)    |         |         |         |         |
   +=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+
   | Face-   | 1.16    | 0.69    | <0      | 0.47    | 0.45    | 0       |
   | to-face |         |         | .0001\  |         |         | .6018\  |
   | c       |         |         | `a <#TF |         |         | `a <#TF |
   | ontacts |         |         | N10>`__ |         |         | N10>`__ |
   | per     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | week:   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | mean    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |     Du  | 64.80   | 38.13   | <0      | 26.38   | 25.33   | 0       |
   | ration, |         |         | .0001\  |         |         | .5544\  |
   | m       |         |         | `a <#TF |         |         | `a <#TF |
   | inutes: |         |         | N10>`__ |         |         | N10>`__ |
   | mean    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |     By  | 0.25    | 0.29    | 0       | 0.07    | 0.15    | <0      |
   | support |         |         | .3941\  |         |         | .0001\  |
   | worker: |         |         | `a <#TF |         |         | `a <#TF |
   | mean    |         |         | N10>`__ |         |         | N10>`__ |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |     By  | 21.45   | 42.60   | <0      | 14.18   | 33.86   | <0      |
   | support |         |         | .0001\  |         |         | .0001\  |
   | worker: |         |         | `b <#TF |         |         | `b <#TF |
   | %       |         |         | N11>`__ |         |         | N11>`__ |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |     In  | 0.74    | 0.51    | 0       | 0.25    | 0.29    | 0       |
   | the     |         |         | .0001\  |         |         | .0314\  |
   | com     |         |         | `a <#TF |         |         | `a <#TF |
   | munity: |         |         | N10>`__ |         |         | N10>`__ |
   | mean    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |     In  | 63.81   | 73.73   | 0       | 52.42   | 63.85   | <0      |
   | the     |         |         | .0001\  |         |         | .0001\  |
   | com     |         |         | `b <#TF |         |         | `b <#TF |
   | munity: |         |         | N11>`__ |         |         | N11>`__ |
   | %       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | CRHT    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | use     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 28      | 16      | 0       | 128     | 88      | <0      |
   |  People | (0.29)  | (0.17)  | .0023\  | (0.34)  | (0.23)  | .0001\  |
   | with    |         |         | `a <#TF |         |         | `a <#TF |
   | any     |         |         | N10>`__ |         |         | N10>`__ |
   | face-   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | to-face |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   |     c   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ontact: |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | *n*     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | (mean)  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 5.83    | 1.94    | 0       | 7.14    | 2.83    | <0      |
   |   Face- |         |         | .0237\  |         |         | .0001\  |
   | to-face |         |         | `a <#TF |         |         | `a <#TF |
   | co      |         |         | N10>`__ |         |         | N10>`__ |
   | ntacts: |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | mean    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |     D   | 151.87  | 51.03   | 0       | 250.98  | 97.15   | <0      |
   | uration |         |         | .0455\  |         |         | .0001\  |
   | of      |         |         | `a <#TF |         |         | `a <#TF |
   | face-   |         |         | N10>`__ |         |         | N10>`__ |
   | to-face |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | c       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ontacts |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   |     per |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | person, |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | m       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | inutes: |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | mean    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 29      | 23      | 0       | 134     | 119     | 0       |
   |  People | (0.31)  | (0.24)  | .1584\  | (0.35)  | (0.31)  | .0190\  |
   | with    |         |         | `a <#TF |         |         | `a <#TF |
   | any     |         |         | N10>`__ |         |         | N10>`__ |
   | te      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | lephone |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | or      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   |   face- |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | to-face |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | c       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ontact: |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | *n*     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | (mean)  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | H       |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ospital |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | use     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 31.76   | 25.86   | 0       | 19.34   | 12.35   | 0       |
   |    Days |         |         | .7413\  |         |         | .0006\  |
   | in      |         |         | `c <#TF |         |         | `c <#TF |
   | ho      |         |         | N12>`__ |         |         | N12>`__ |
   | spital: |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | mean    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 0.20    | 0.12    | 0       | 0.25    | 0.18    | 0       |
   |    Admi |         |         | .0776\  |         |         | .0535\  |
   | ssions: |         |         | `c <#TF |         |         | `c <#TF |
   | mean    |         |         | N12>`__ |         |         | N12>`__ |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 15      | 11      | 0       | 71      | 52      | 0       |
   |  People |         |         | .3458\  |         |         | .0388\  |
   | with    |         |         | `b <#TF |         |         | `b <#TF |
   | any     |         |         | N11>`__ |         |         | N11>`__ |
   | adm     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ission: |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | *n*     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+

   ACT, assertive community treatment; CMHT, community mental health
   team; FACT, flexible assertive community treatment.

   2-tailed paired *t*-test.

   Monte Carlo permutation test.

   2-tailed Wilcoxon.

   *P*>0.0288 not significant (after Benjamini–Hochberg correction).

.. _S4:

Contact with the CRHT and hospital use
--------------------------------------

The number of face-to-face contacts with the CRHT was compared before
and after the changes, and significant reductions were seen in both
groups. Similarly, the number of people who required any face-to-face
support from the CRHT was significantly lower following the changes.

For people who had previously been with the ACT team there was a 19%
reduction in number of days spent in hospital, which failed to reach
statistical significance. However, the power calculated *post hoc* was
only 4%, which indicates that the numbers were insufficient to conclude
there was no difference following the change of model. There was also a
reduction in mean number of admissions in this group but numbers were
too low for a meaningful comparison to be made. In the CMHT group,
reductions in bed use were much greater, with a 36% reduction following
the introduction of the FACT model, which reached statistical
significance. There was also a non-significant reduction in admissions
in this group.

.. _S5:

Discussion
==========

.. _S6:

People previously with a CMHT
-----------------------------

There have been no other UK studies exploring the effect of the FACT
model on people who had previously been with a CMHT. We observed that
these people experienced less than half the number of face-to-face
interventions with the CRHT than when they were with a CMHT, which was
statistically significant. This is consistent with the FACT philosophy
of enabling people to seamlessly move to a high-intensity team approach
at times of increased need.\ :sup:`12` Hence, it is possible that during
periods of crisis, people were able to receive intensive community
support within the FACT team, reducing the need for transfer to the
CRHT. Similarly, the reductions in bed use would be consistent with the
ability of the FACT model to support people at times of crisis with less
need for admission. There were no changes in background bed availability
in the services that would provide an alternative explanation for these
reductions.

.. _S7:

People previously with the ACT team
-----------------------------------

The other UK evaluation of FACT considered 112 people who had previously
been with an ACT service, comparing their hospital and CRHT use before
and after the change,\ :sup:`6,7` but without an appraisal of the impact
of people going to FACT from a CMHT. Our findings for people who had
previously been supported by the ACT team were similar, with no evidence
of adverse consequences in terms of increased need for admission or
increased crisis home treatment team contact in the first year. This was
despite a considerable reduction in face-to-face support from mental
health services. In fact, bed use was reduced, but not significantly,
although this has to be interpreted with caution and may not be
clinically meaningful as the number of people admitted during the study
period was very low.

A possible explanation for this is that a FACT approach could be a more
efficient model than ACT because people only receive high-intensity
team-based interventions at times of need, freeing up resources for
those who most need them. However, our previous follow-up study of the
ACT population in South Warwickshire\ :sup:`8` showed that most people,
once they had been with the service for 5 years, reverted to a
relatively low level of bed use. The average time with the ACT team had
been over 6 years, and by the time the services changed most of these
people were relatively stable. Hence, it might be expected that they
would cope well with a move to a less intensive service. Any conclusion
that there was no evidence of harm when moving from ACT to FACT would
therefore be limited to the context of people who have already received
a period of several years of intensive ACT interventions.

.. _S8:

Limitations
-----------

Because there were a number of changes to services, including moving to
an ‘age-independent’ model, caution needs to be exercised in
interpreting the findings as being solely attributable to the FACT
model. One of the limitations of the observational design is the
possibility of regression to the mean or background variations which
could contribute to reduced hospital use or less contact with the CRHT.
Change point analysis can mitigate against this,\ :sup:`13–15`
particularly if combined with start points staggered in time in order to
reduce the effect of wider system changes which might influence results.
However, because the time period under study was relatively short and
the changes in team structure occurred on the same date it was not
possible to use this technique. The most robust method for addressing
confounding factors would be a randomised controlled trial, but this was
beyond the scope of our pragmatic evaluation. The pragmatic method was
limited to routinely collected contact data and did not capture more
personally meaningful information about satisfaction, social functioning
and engagement with services, which are known benefits of
ACT.\ :sup:`16`

ACT teams have had varying levels of success in terms of achieving
fidelity to the model.\ :sup:`17` Without the use of an objective
measure, such as the Dartmouth Assertive Community Treatment Scale
(DACTS),\ :sup:`18` it is not possible to know with certainty the degree
to which the South Warwickshire team was practising according to the ACT
principles. Although previous DACTS measures taken several years earlier
had shown high fidelity, this had been eroded with less use of shared
case-loads and lower staff to patient ratios. Hence, the observations
about the outcome for people who had been with the ACT team cannot be
extrapolated with certainty to other ACT teams with higher fidelity.
This argument also applies to the Firn studies\ :sup:`6,7` of
dismantling ACT teams, which failed to measure ACT fidelity. Although a
FACT fidelity scale is available (from The Netherlands),\ :sup:`12` this
has never been validated in a UK setting. As Dutch FACT teams also
undertake the role of a 24-hour crisis home treatment service, it would
not be meaningful to use this scale with a service in the UK, where this
function is provided by separate teams.

.. _S9:

Conclusions
-----------

This is the first study in the UK which has examined the impact of
adopting the FACT model on people previously supported by a CMHT within
a generic community psychosis service. Although limited by the
observational design, the results are consistent with the hypothesis
that FACT may be of benefit to this group, who previously did not have
access to ACT. People who had been with the CMHT were able to receive
increased support delivered with a team case-load at times of increased
need, a key component of the FACT approach, thereby reducing their need
for the help of the CRHT. We would argue that there is still a case for
maintaining ACT teams, which have been much more rigorously assessed
than FACT, and that the benefits to patients justify the investment in
these services. However, where mental health providers are planning to
disband ACT services, there would be value in configuring new teams
according to the FACT model, which appears to be a safe alternative in
the short term for people who have been with an ACT team for several
years.

.. [1]
   **Loopinder Sood**, Associate Specialist, **Andy Owen**, Consultant
   Psychiatrist, **Richard Onyon**, Consultant Psychiatrist and **Aarohi
   Shaima**, Specialist Trainee, all at Coventry and Warwickshire
   Partnership NHS Trust; **Jessica Nigriello**, Specialist Trainee,
   University Hospital Coventry and Warwickshire; **Dominic Markham**,
   Clinical Psychologist and **Hannah Seabrook**, Clinical Psychologist,
   both at Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust.
