---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** There is currently no trial or other scientific
  evidence informing the efficacy of any crisis intervention for people
  with borderline personality disorder (BPD). We aimed to assess the
  patterns of service use by patients with BPD taken on for crisis
  resolution and home treatment between 2010 and 2013. Patients with a
  diagnosis of BPD were identified and demographic and clinical data
  were collected.

  **Results** All patients were female, and a high proportion had
  recurrent presentations to crisis and home treatment services in
  Edinburgh. Many appeared to benefit from intensive home treatment, as
  measured by the Clinical Global Impression scale. A small number of
  patients (*n* = 5) were responsible for more than half of all
  referrals. Polypharmacy, or regular use of multiple medications, was
  common, with 62% of all patients receiving three or more regular
  medications.

  **Clinical implications** Crisis and home treatment services can be
  beneficial to most people with BPD in crisis. The high rate of
  polypharmacy seen in this study is of concern.
author:
- Sibel Turhan
- Mark TaylorCorrespondence to Mark Taylor (<marktaylor2@nhs.net>) [^1]
date: 2016-12
institute:
- 1NHS Lothian, Edinburgh, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
title: The outcomes of home treatment for borderline personality
  disorder
---

Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a complex and severe mental
disorder that manifests as a pervasive pattern of instability in
interpersonal relationships and self-image, mood disturbance, impulsive
behaviours and repeated self-injury, and dissociation or quasi-psychotic
experiences.^1,2^ It is also associated with substantial impairment of
social, psychological and occupational functioning and quality of
life.^2^ People with BPD are particularly at risk of suicide, with
completed suicide occurring in 8--10% of individuals with this disorder,
a rate that is approximately 50 times higher than the general
population.^1^

BPD is the most common personality disorder seen in clinical settings.
It is present in 10% of out-patient mental health clinics, 15--20% of
psychiatric in-patients, and 30--60% of clinical populations with a
personality disorder. It occurs in an estimated 2% of the general
population and has an estimated gender ratio of more than 3:1 for
women/men.^1^

The extent of the emotional and behavioural problems experienced by
people with BPD varies considerably. Some people with BPD are able to
sustain some relationships and occupational activities. Others, with
more severe BPD, experience very high levels of emotional distress. They
have repeated crises, which can involve self-harm and impulsive
aggression, and can have high rates of comorbidity, including
addictions. Despite this, people with BPD can be difficult to engage in
treatment and frequently present to health services in crisis.^2^
Because of the nature and potential consequences of these crises, the
identification and utilisation of effective crisis management
interventions with this population is of considerable importance.^2^

The Department of Health in England and Wales has recommended crisis
resolution and home treatment (CRHT) in its best practice and policy
implementation guides since 2002,^3^ and in 2007 described CRHT as a key
step in implementing the National Service Framework, partly to ensure
in-patient care was used only where necessary.^3^ National Health
Service (NHS) services in Scotland were not constrained by the National
Service Framework and did not incorporate functionalised teams such as
assertive outreach, early intervention and CRHT teams until 2008.

In this observational study, we evaluated the current patterns of
service use in patients with BPD taken on by Edinburgh Intensive Home
Treatment Team (IHTT), which is a CRHT that facilitates early discharge
from hospital as well as providing intensive home-based care. It was
established in 2008 and has been linked to a reduction in psychiatric
admissions and positive feedback.^2--4^

# Method {#S1}

Data were collected during a retrospective examination of medical
records of all patients who had primary ICD-10 diagnosis of BPD (code
F60.3) taken on by Edinburgh Intensive Home Treatment Team (IHTT)
between 2010 and 2013 (4 years). Using unique patient identifiers, each
included e-case record was reviewed using *a priori* criteria. IHTT
records the severity of the presenting mental disorder using the
Clinical Global Impression Scale (CGI)^2^ at admission and clinicians
note the improvement or lack thereof in the presenting condition via the
CGI-I score at the point of discharge from IHTT. Prospective approval
for this service evaluation project was obtained from the local clinical
governance department.

The CGI has two components: the CGI-Severity (CGI-S), which rates
illness severity, and CGI-Improvement (CGI-I), which rates change from
the initiation of treatment (baseline). CGI-S is rated on the following
7-point scale: 1 normal/not at all ill, 2 borderline mentally ill, 3
mildly ill, 4 moderately ill, 5 markedly ill, 6 severely ill, 7 among
the most extremely ill patients. CGI-I is similarly rated on a 7-point
scale: 'compared with the patient\'s condition at admission, this
patient\'s condition is\' 1 very much improved, 2 much improved, 3
minimally improved, 4 no change, 5 minimally worse, 6 much worse, 7 very
much worse.^3^

Data collected included: patients\' age and genderany medical
comorbiditiescurrently prescribed medicationssource and reason for
referral to IHTTthe nature of the crisis intervention by IHTTduration of
treatment by IHTTCGI scores on entrance to and at exit from
IHTTsubsequent service provider at discharge from IHTTnumber of repeat
referrals/contact with the same patient (i.e. frequency of any IHTT
referral).

Each patient\'s regular medications were reviewed and classified into
six groups: antidepressant drugs (selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin and noradrenalin re-uptake inhibitors
(SNRIs) and tricyclics (TCAs)), antiepileptic drugs used as mood
stabilisers, antipsychotic drugs (first- and second-generation
antipsychotics (FGAs and SGAs)), anxiolytics (benzodiazepines) and
substitute treatment for opioid dependency (methadone).

## Statistical analysis {#S2}

Pearson χ^2^ with Yates correction was used to test the association
between CGI score and hospital admission. An unpaired *t*-test of the
means of two groups was also used (with the assumption of normality in
CGI distribution being satisfied) to test whether there was a
statistically significant reduction in CGI for those who were
successfully discharged from IHTT compared with those who needed
hospital admission.

# Results {#S3}

The total number of referrals for the 4-year period was 64, and 100%
were female. The median age of patients was 39 years ([Table
1](#T1){ref-type="table"}).

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Demographic data by year
:::

|                               | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 | 2013 |
|:------------------------------|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|
| Number of BPD patients        |  20  |  21  |  8   |  15  |
|                               |      |      |      |      |
| Median age, years             | 40.5 |  39  | 38.5 |  45  |
|                               |      |      |      |      |
| Total number of IHTT patients | 1374 | 1318 | 1344 | 1284 |

BPD, borderline personality disorder; IHTT, intensive home treatment
team.
:::

Of the 64 referrals, the number of individual patients was only 27, as
some patients required multiple contacts with the IHTT. Thirteen
patients were responsible for 50 referrals (78% of all referrals). A
small number of patients (*n* = 5) presented to emergency services
frequently owing to repeated crises and suicidal thoughts -- they were
responsible for 53% (*n* = 34) of all referrals. These five patients
were all women who had a traumatic background and multiple prior
hospital admissions.

The number of patients who had only one-off contact with IHTT fluctuated
from 10% of all referrals in 2011 to 50% of all referrals in 2012, as
depicted in [Table 2](#T2){ref-type="table"}.

::: {#T2 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Frequency of contact by year
:::

|                                                           |  2010   |  2011  | 2012  |  2013   |
|:----------------------------------------------------------|:-------:|:------:|:-----:|:-------:|
| Referrals, *n* (patients)                                 | 20 (12) | 21 (9) | 8 (6) | 15 (11) |
|                                                           |         |        |       |         |
| Patients with one-off contact, *n*                        |    7    |   2    |   4   |    8    |
|                                                           |         |        |       |         |
| Patients with ⩽3 contacts in the same year, *n*           |    2    |   3    |  --   |    1    |
|                                                           |         |        |       |         |
| Patients with previous contacts with IHTT since 2010, *n* |   --    |   5    |   4   |    4    |

IHTT, intensive home treatment team.
:::

There were two completed suicides from the cohort of 27 patients during
this period. Both patients were previously known to IHTT but at the time
of the suicide were not under the team\'s care. The first suicide took
place in 2013 when the patient was being seen by the local community
mental health team, while the second suicide took place in hospital
following a lengthy admission.

The majority of referrals (71%) were from the community owing to
deterioration in mental health and increased suicidal behaviour; 66%
(community referrals and ward referrals for early discharge) were
discharged back into community following IHTT interventions. However,
for the remaining 34% of referrals IHTT intervention was not enough to
manage suicide risk and hospital admission was required ([Table
3](#T3){ref-type="table"}), whereas 41% of admissions (9 patients) were
re-admitted owing to failed early discharge attempt despite IHTT
support.

::: {#T3 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Referrals and outcome
:::

| Year                               | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 | 2013 |
|:-----------------------------------|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|
| Reason for referral, *n*           |      |      |      |      |
|     Deterioration in mental health |  11  |  14  |  8   |  10  |
|     Facilitating early discharge   |  8   |  6   |  --  |  5   |
|                                    |      |      |      |      |
| Source of referral: community, *n* |  12  |  15  |  8   |  11  |
|                                    |      |      |      |      |
| Early discharge                    |  8   |  6   |  --  |  4   |
|                                    |      |      |      |      |
| Outcome of patients from IHTT      |      |      |      |      |
|     Discharge home                 |  13  |  13  |  7   |  9   |
|     Hospital admission             |  7   |  8   |  1   |  6   |

IHTT, intensive home treatment team.
:::

The mean value of CGI of all patients at admission to IHTT was 3.3 (and
similarly the mean CGI of the five patients who needed frequent IHTT
intervention was 3.2). Using the CGI, an improvement in mental state and
behaviour was documented in the majority of patients. The mean CGI
improved from a baseline of 3.3 to 2.4 at the time of IHTT discharge in
39 patients. Twenty-two patients were admitted to hospital despite IHTT,
with a mean baseline CGI of 4.2. There are significant associations
between a lack of improvement as measured by CGI, and hospital
admissions (*P*\<0.0001; χ = 16, d.f. = 1 with Yates correction), as
illustrated in [Table 4](#T4){ref-type="table"}.

::: {#T4 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scale improvement in patients with and
without hospital admission and IHTT involvement
:::

| CGI score                    | Admitted | Not admitted | Total |
|:-----------------------------|:--------:|:------------:|:-----:|
| 1 or 2: improved, *n*        |    1     |      25      |  26   |
|                              |          |              |       |
| 3 or more: not improved, *n* |    21    |      17      |  38   |
|                              |          |              |       |
|                              |    22    |      42      |  64   |

IHTT, intensive home treatment team.
:::

Further analysis comparing those who needed hospital admission (mean CGI
pre- and post-IHTT involvement: 3.6 and 4.2 respectively) with those who
were successfully discharged from IHTT (mean CGI value pre- and
post-IHTT: 3.2 and 2.4, unpaired *t*-test) showed a significant
difference in CGI between those admitted to hospital and those who were
not admitted (two-tailed *P*\<0.0001 and 95% CI 1.4 to 2.2).

Polypharmacy is common among this group of patients: 44% of patients who
were referred to IHTT were prescribed four or more associated regular
medications and 68% were prescribed three or more regular medications
([Table 5](#T5){ref-type="table"}).

::: {#T5 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Classes of medications
:::

|                           | *n* = 20 | *n* = 21 | *n* = 8 | *n* = 15 |
|:--------------------------|:--------:|:--------:|:-------:|:--------:|
| Year                      |   2010   |   2011   |  2012   |   2013   |
|                           |          |          |         |          |
| SSRIs/SNRI, *n*           |    16    |    11    |    4    |    10    |
|                           |          |          |         |          |
| Mood stabiliser, *n*      |    5     |    4     |    4    |    3     |
|                           |          |          |         |          |
| SGA, *n*                  |    11    |    13    |    5    |    9     |
|                           |          |          |         |          |
| FGA, *n*                  |    4     |    7     |    1    |    6     |
|                           |          |          |         |          |
| Benzodiazepines, *n*      |    12    |    11    |    5    |    8     |
|                           |          |          |         |          |
| Methadone, *n*            |    --    |    --    |    1    |    2     |
|                           |          |          |         |          |
| Regular medications, mean |   3.2    |   3.3    |    3    |   3.3    |

FGA, first-generation antipsychotic; SGA, second-generation
antipsychotic; SNRI, serotonin and noradrenalin re-uptake inhibitors;
SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
:::

# Discussion {#S4}

A systemic review by Borschmann *et al*^5^ found no randomised
controlled trials comparing crisis intervention for people with BPD with
usual care, no intervention or waiting list controls. There is currently
no adequate evidence base to support any specific crisis intervention
for people with BPD.

In this observational study, IHTT\'s interventions were recorded as
'increased support', referring to a combination of brief psychosocial
interventions, behavioural activation, judicious use of medication,
and/or facilitating immediate access to appropriate services (such as
health, housing or legal advice) to alleviate distress. There is no
identified specific crisis intervention for this population. In the
majority of cases IHTT interventions were successful as the mean CGI
improved from baseline 3.3 to 2.4 in those patients who were discharged
back into community. The remaining 34% of referrals required hospital
admission despite IHTT interventions, with almost 41% needing
re-admission owing to failed early discharge despite IHTT intervention.

Relatively few patients (18%, *n* = 5) were responsible for the majority
of referrals to IHTT (51%), and were all women in their mid-40s (apart
from one) who were regularly prescribed at least four different
psychotropic medications. They all had a traumatic background and
multiple prior hospital admissions. Interpersonal difficulties (mostly
among family members) were usually noted as the main precipitating
factor for crisis and increased suicidal thoughts. This small group of
individuals were responsible for 50% of all the BPD hospital admissions
during this period, illustrating the challenges of working with this
population, and the disproportionate demand on the NHS. IHTT
interventions and even hospital admissions were not always effective as
patients were frequently referred back to IHTT, or indeed later
re-admitted to hospital. The reasons for this are unclear, but may
include only partial adherence to or rejection of therapeutic
interventions.

There has been much debate on the effectiveness of pharmacotherapy in
treating different facets of BPD.^6--9^ Several guidelines recommend the
use of medications for the treatment of core symptoms of BPD, despite
concerns raised regarding the strength of evidence for these
recommendations.^4^ The American Psychiatric Association (APA)
guidelines, and Abraham & Calabrese, recommend the use of SSRIs as
first-choice treatment for affective dysregulation and
impulsive-behavioural symptoms, and low-dose antipsychotics for
cognitive-perceptual symptoms in BPD.^4--6^ However, Leib *et al*^8^
argue that the previous guidelines were based on research published only
up to 1998 and recommend using anticonvulsants for affective
dysregulation symptoms and impulsive-behavioural symptoms, and
antipsychotics for cognitive-perceptual symptoms.^7^ Nevertheless,
despite considering similar evidence to Leib *et al*, the National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines draw
different conclusions and make clear recommendations against the use of
any regular pharmacotherapy in this group: "'Drug treatment should not
be used specifically for borderline personality disorder or for the
individual symptoms or behaviour associated with the disorder (for
example, repeated self-harm, marked emotional instability, risk-taking
behaviour and transient psychotic symptoms). Antipsychotic drugs should
not be used for the medium- and long-term treatment of borderline
personality disorder. (...) Short-term use of sedative medication may be
considered cautiously as part of the overall treatment plan for people
with borderline personality disorder in a crisis.'^9^" Despite this, in
routine clinical practice clearly a broad spectrum of medications is
used for the symptomatic treatment of BPD, as demonstrated in [Table
5](#T5){ref-type="table"}, with 93% of patients prescribed at least two
regular medications and more than 60% of patients on at least three
regular associated medications; 87% of our BPD patients were on
long-term antipsychotic medication.

Compared with the conflicting advice on medication in BPD, the
international guidelines are more in agreement regarding the role of
psychotherapy. APA recommends psychotherapy as the core treatment for
BPD (and more than one type of psychotherapy is effective), along with
adjunctive medication.^4^

There does not appear to have been a previous study of crisis or home
treatment for BPD. However, a randomised trial by Bateman & Fonagy^11^
examining the effectiveness of partial hospitalisation on BPD showed
that those who received individual or group psychoanalytic psychotherapy
for 18 months had a significant fall in their symptoms (namely,
frequency of suicide attempts, self-harm, the number and duration of
hospital admissions, depressive symptoms and interpersonal functioning)
by 6 months, with continued improvement until the end of treatment at 18
months. In contrast, their control group (standard psychiatric care)
showed limited change or even deterioration over the same period.^11^

Our observational study showed that patients with BPD are frequent users
of psychiatric services, and that some but not all respond well to home
treatment as an alternative to hospitalisation. Indeed, the high
re-admission rate for BPD suggests that hospital-based care is not
always helpful. Despite the frequent crises experienced by this
population and associated risks, there is a dearth of evidence on the
best psychological and pharmacological treatments for BPD. More
high-quality large studies in this area are needed.

Thanks to Dr I. Kader and Dr A. Mirakhur.

[^1]: **Sibel Turhan**, Trainee Psychiatrist, **Mark Taylor**,
    Consultant Psychiatrist, UK Royal Edinburgh Hospital, NHS Lothian,
    Edinburgh, UK.
