======================================================
Handbook on Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
======================================================

Lynne M. Drummond [1]_
:Date: 2017-8


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

This multi-author book examines the disorders categorised in DSM-5 as
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders (OCaRDs) and also covers two
other related disorders: illness anxiety and obsessive-compulsive
personality disorders. The text is written by experts in the field, many
of whom were instrumental in developing the concept of OCaRDs in DSM-5.
Unlike many multi-author publications, this is brief and to the point.
Each of the chapters is arranged in a structured format which includes a
general introduction; diagnostic criteria and symptomatology;
epidemiology; comorbidity; course and prognosis; psychosocial
impairment; developmental considerations; gender-related issues;
cultural aspects of phenomenology; assessment and differential
diagnosis; aetiology and pathophysiology; treatment (somatic as well as
cognitive and behavioural) and a summary of key points at the end. Most
chapters also contain illustrative case vignettes which demonstrate the
disorders and their potential severity.

This excellent title should be on the bookshelf of every psychiatrist,
whether working with adults or children. Mental health workers, managers
and commissioners often overlook common conditions such as
obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder, regarding
them as less severe and important than conditions such as schizophrenia.
This work describes the hugely detrimental effects these conditions can
have on the individual's mortality, morbidity and social functioning. It
also considers newly defined disorders, such as hoarding and
skin-picking disorders. These conditions are poorly understood and have
generally not been researched extensively. They do, however, appear to
be widespread and often have extreme consequences on the individual's
mental and physical well-being. For example, hoarding disorder, which
was previously often classified as obsessive-compulsive disorder or else
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, may affect up to 6% of the
adult population. Excessive hoarding can lead to death due to fire risk
or the falling of large numbers of possessions resulting in an
avalanche. It also frequently coexists with self-neglect and – owing to
the extreme shame – social isolation. Nevertheless, few community mental
health teams in the UK offer comprehensive treatment for hoarding
disorders. Some enlightened councils have developed hoarding protocols
incorporating housing agencies, social services, and mental and physical
health services but overall these are patchy and rare.

Hopefully, heightened awareness will lead to systematic research and a
better understanding of the disorders and their treatment, as well as
the development of effective services. This handbook would be a perfect
introduction to these areas for a busy practitioner seeking brief but
authoritative information.

.. [1]
   **Lynne M. Drummond**, Consultant Psychiatrist and Clinical Lead,
   National and Trustwide Services for OCD/BDD, South West London and St
   George's NHS Trust, London, UK; email: lynnemd@sgul.ac.uk
