---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** To examine gender differences in self-reported
  depression and prescribed antidepressants (ADs). The Hospital Anxiety
  and Depression Scale was used to assess depression, and information on
  prescribed ADs was obtained from the Swedish Prescribed Drug Register.

  **Results** Depression was reported by 11.7% of the participants
  (12.3% men and 11.2% women). ADs were prescribed for 7.6% of the
  participants (5.3% men, 9.8% women). Among men, 1.8% reported
  depression and used ADs, 10.5% reported depression but did not use
  ADs, and 3.6% used ADs but did not report depression. The
  corresponding figures for women were 2.6%, 8.6% and 7.2%.

  **Clinical implications** Men report depression to a greater extent
  than women but are prescribed ADs to a lesser extent, possibly a sign
  of under-treatment. Women are prescribed ADs without reporting
  depression more often than men, possibly a sign of over-treatment.
  Although the causes remain unclear, diagnostic and treatment
  guidelines should benefit from considering gender differences in these
  respects.
author:
- Lena Thunander Sundbom
- Kerstin Bingefors
- Kerstin Hedborg
- "Dag IsacsonCorresponding author: Lena Thunander Sundbom
  (<lts@hig.se>) [^1]"
date: 2017-6
institute:
- 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
- 2University of Gävle, Gävle, Sweden
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
- id: R37
- id: R38
- id: R39
- id: R40
- id: R41
- id: R42
- id: R43
- id: R44
- id: R45
- id: R46
- id: R47
- id: R48
- id: R49
- id: R50
- id: R51
- id: R52
- id: R53
title: Are men under-treated and women over-treated with
  antidepressants? Findings from a cross-sectional survey in Sweden
---

-   [Method](#S1){#toc-S1}
    -   [Participants](#S2){#toc-S2}
    -   [Assessment of depression and prescribed
        antidepressants](#S3){#toc-S3}
    -   [Analyses](#S4){#toc-S4}
-   [Results](#S5){#toc-S5}
-   [Discussion](#S6){#toc-S6}
    -   [Limitations](#S7){#toc-S7}
    -   [Summary of findings](#S8){#toc-S8}

Depression is currently considered one of the largest and fastest
growing health hazards. ^[@R1]^ Although only a small percentage of all
those with mental health problems contact healthcare professionals and
obtain a diagnosis, depression is one of the most common causes of sick
leave and disability. ^[@R2]--[@R5]^ Diagnosed depression was relatively
unusual 20 years ago, but the incidence has increased remarkably with
the introduction of new diagnostic guidelines and antidepressant drugs.
What was previously considered psychological distress was then
interpreted as a disease, with the risk of over-diagnosis and
over-treatment. ^[@R6]--[@R10]^ The point prevalence of depression in
the general population is now estimated as 3--9%. ^[@R1],[@R11],[@R12]^
There is an explicit gender impact on diagnosed depression, with a 2:1
ratio of women/men; about one in four women and one in ten men will
develop depression severe enough to require treatment at some time in
their lives. ^[@R1],[@R2],[@R11],[@R12]^ Moreover, depression may
present differently in women and men. Women may be more prone to somatic
symptoms of depression, whereas men appear to have more melancholic
symptoms and to be more susceptible to drug misuse and aggressive
behaviour. ^[@R13]--[@R17]^ To date, however, there is no clear
understanding of what causes these gender disparities in depression.
They are considered likely to be a combination of several factors:
biological, social and behavioural. ^[@R18],[@R19]^

Depression is a long-lasting and, if left untreated, often chronic
condition. Treatment usually lasts at least 6--12 months, and includes
pharmacological therapy with antidepressants (ADs). ^[@R20]^ The use of
ADs has increased dramatically in recent years. ^[@R21]^ According to
the national Swedish Prescribed Drug Register (SPDR), almost 9% of the
Swedish population was prescribed ADs in 2014, and 65% of these ADs were
prescribed for women. ^[@R22]^ Similar patterns have been found in other
countries. ^[@R23]--[@R25]^ The explanation for this escalation,
especially seen in women, remains unclear, but has sometimes been
interpreted as a sign of inappropriate use. ^[@R8],[@R9]^ Nevertheless,
despite the widespread use of ADs, depression has repeatedly been shown
to be inadequately treated in the general population. Some studies have
found that fewer than one in four patients with depression are
prescribed ADs and that the duration of treatment is often shorter than
recommended. ^[@R26],[@R27]^

The ADs prescribed are primarily selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), although others, for example serotonin--noradrenaline reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), are also used depending on illness severity,
the patient\'s age and various adverse drug reactions.
^[@R20],[@R28],[@R29]^ Gender impact has been observed not only on the
number of ADs prescribed but also on their type. For example, women are
prescribed SSRIs more often than men. ^[@R30]^

We examined gender differences in the relationship between self-reported
depression and prescribed ADs, in the prevalence of self-reported
depression, and in the number and type of prescribed ADs.

# Method {#S1}

## Participants {#S2}

A questionnaire was sent to a random sample (*n* = 16 000, aged 18--84
years) of the Swedish population (totaling 9.5 million); responses were
received from 7725 people (48.3%), as presented in [Fig.
1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}. The study complies with ethical research
requirements, as approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in
Uppsala, Sweden (Dnr 2012/073). Participation in the study was voluntary
and information about its purpose was sent out with the questionnaire.
Filling in and returning the questionnaire was considered to be
equivalent to the respondent giving their agreement to participate in
the study.

![Study population, responders and non-responders, Sweden
2012/2013.](146f1){#F1}

## Assessment of depression and prescribed antidepressants {#S3}

Self-reported depression was assessed using the Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scale (HADS). ^[@R31]^ Of the 7725 available participants,
7618 (3435 men, 4183 women) filled in the HADS form ([Fig.
1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}) and all analyses were based only on these
participants. The HADS was developed to detect patients with high levels
of psychological distress and does not include assessment of somatic
symptoms. It contains two subscales, one each for anxiety and
depression, each consisting of 7 items (score range 0--21) capable of
distinguishing between these diagnoses. Higher scores indicate higher
levels of psychological distress. Each subscale has three categories
based on the score: 0--7 (normal), 8--10 (borderline) and 11--21
(abnormal). In this study, a cut-off level of +8 was used on the
depression scale; this level indicates at least mild depression and
provides an optimal balance between sensitivity and specificity.
^[@R32]^

Information on depression obtained from the HADS was linked (through the
participants\' identification number, a unique lifetime personal
identifier given to all Swedish citizens) to prescription data.
Prescribed ADs were obtained from the SPDR, a national register held by
the National Board of Health and Welfare, which gathers data on all
dispensed prescriptions for patients in ambulatory care from the entire
Swedish population. ^[@R22],[@R33]^ We collected information on ADs 0--6
months prior to the HADS evaluation. SPDR drugs are classified according
to the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system.
^[@R34]^ The ADs (N06A) were categorised as TCAs (N06AA, e.g.
amitriptyline, imipramine), SSRIs (N06AB, e.g. citalopram, fluoxetine),
'others' (N06AX, including SNRIs (e.g. venlafaxine) and tetracyclic
antidepressants (TeCAs, e.g. mirtazapine)), and monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs; N06AF, N06AG, e.g. moclobemide). The MAOIs were
excluded due to few users.

## Analyses {#S4}

The Statistical Analysis System software (SAS9.2, Cary, North Carolina,
USA) was used to perform chi-squared tests (χ^2^,*P*) to examine gender
differences in the relationship between self-reported depression and
prescribed ADs, and in prevalence of self-reported depression,
prescribed ADs, and type of ADs prescribed. Logistic regression analysis
(odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals) was used to examine
gender differences in self-reported depression, controlling for age.

# Results {#S5}

In total, 11.7% of the study population (12.3% men, 11.2% women; χ^2^,
n.s.) was classified as having self-reported depression. Logistic
regression analysis showed that the difference between men and women was
statistically significant, i.e. men reported depression more often than
women (OR 1.226 (CI 1.062--1.414)). According to the SPDR, 7.6% of the
study population had been prescribed at least one AD during the 6 months
prior to the HADS evaluation. Significantly more women than men were
prescribed ADs: 5.3% of the men and 9.8% of the women were prescribed at
least one AD (*P*\<0.0001).

[Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"} presents gender differences in the
relation between prescribed ADs and self-reported depression in the
study population. Among the men, 1.8% reported depression and used ADs,
10.5% reported depression but did not use ADs, and 3.6% used ADs but did
not report current depression, while 84.1% were neither depressed nor
used ADs. The corresponding figures for women were 2.6%, 8.6%, 7.2% and
81.6%. The gender difference was statistically significant (χ^2^
*P*\<0.001) in all age groups except the youngest, and was most marked
in the groups aged 45--64 and 65--74 years.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

Relation between self-reported depression (assessed using the HADS) and
prescribed antidepressants (ADs) in the study population (*n* = 7618),
Sweden 2012/2013
:::

              Men  Women                                                      
  -------- ------ ------- ------ ----- ------ ------ ----- ----- ----- ------ ---------
  18--34      593   1.7    8.9    2.0   87.4     831  1.8   9.8   3.6   84.8    N.S.
                                                                              
  35--44      475   1.9    11.8   2.3   84.0     576  3.1   8.7   6.8   81.4  \<0.01
                                                                              
  45--64     1277   1.8    10.6   4.6   82.9    1537  3.3   9.0   8.3   79.4  \<0.001
                                                                              
  65--74      740   1.5    9.9    3.6   85.0     811  2.1   6.8   9.2   81.9  \<0.001
                                                                              
  75--84      350   2.3    12.6   3.7   81.4     428  1.9   7.9   7.0   83.2  \<0.05
                                                                              
  Total      3435   1.8    10.5   3.6   84.1    4183  2.6   8.6   7.2   81.6  \<0.001

χ^2^ analyses comparing men and women.
:::

The participants who had received at least one prescribed AD during the
6 months studied (*n* = 592: men *n* = 182, women *n* = 410) were
analysed with respect to the type of AD prescribed ([Table
2](#T2){ref-type="table"}). SSRIs were the most commonly prescribed ADs
for both men (62.8%) and women (71.0%), although women were prescribed
them more often than men, particularly in the age group 45--64 years
(χ^2^ *P*\<0.05). By contrast, there was no statistically significant
gender difference for the TCAs (men 14.8%, women 10.2%), except for in
the age group 45--64 years. Further, men were prescribed 'other' ADs
(e.g. SNRIs and TeCAs) significantly more often than women (men 39.3%,
women 28.1%; χ^2^ *P*\<0.01).

::: {#T2 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

Types of antidepressant (ATC classification) among participants
prescribed at least one antidepressant (*n* = 592), by age and gender,
Sweden 2012/2013
:::

            Users, *n*   SSRIs (N06AB)   TCAs (N06AA)   Others (N06AX) ^[a](#TFN3){ref-type="table-fn"}^                                                       
  -------- ------------ --------------- -------------- -------------------------------------------------- ------ -------- ------ ------ -------- ------ ------ --------
  18--44       144            42             102                              69.1                         73.5     NS     9.5    5.9      NS     38.1   29.4     NS
                                                                                                                                                               
  45--64       260            82             178                              58.5                         71.3   \<0.05   20.7   12.4   \<0.05   37.8   25.8   \<0.05
                                                                                                                                                               
  65--84       188            58             130                              64.4                         68.5     NS     10.2   10.8     NS     42.4   30.0   \<0.05
                                                                                                                                                               
  Total        592            182            410                              62.8                         71.0   \<0.05   14.8   10.2     NS     39.3   28.1   \<0.01

ATC, Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical; NS, not significant; SSRIs,
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; TCAs, tricyclic
antidepressants.

For example, serotonin--noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, tetracyclic
antidepressants.

χ^2^ analyses comparing men and women.
:::

# Discussion {#S6}

The present study found that the relationship between self-reported
depression and prescribed ADs differs by gender. As in several other
studies, ^[@R26],[@R27]^ the majority of those who reported depression
in our study did not use ADs, and overall, men used ADs to a lesser
extent than did women, although they reported depression to a greater
extent. This could have been caused by several factors. Many people,
especially men, prefer not to seek healthcare. ^[@R35]^ Women are
clinically diagnosed with depression far more often than men, probably
not only because they are more depressed but also because they are more
likely to seek healthcare, thus increasing the chance that their
depression will be detected. ^[@R36]^ Also, diagnostic criteria for
depression originate from a female norm and symptoms provided by women,
leading to an increased likelihood that depression in women will be
diagnosed. ^[@R15]^ Depression in men has a different presentation than
the classic depressive symptoms more often than in women, and this could
lead to men\'s mental health problems not being recognised and therefore
being under-treated. ^[@R13],[@R35]^

In contrast to diagnosed depression, previous studies using HADS to
assess depression have mostly found no gender differences or, like our
study, found a higher prevalence of depression in men. ^[@R37],[@R38]^
Since men experience more melancholic symptoms and women more somatic
symptoms (e.g. increased appetite and weight, and hypersomnia),
^[@R13]--[@R17]^ the reversed gender differences in depression assessed
with HADS compared with clinically diagnosed depression could be due to
the fact that HADS\'s focus is more on melancholic rather than somatic
symptoms. Whether the HADS might be more sensitive than other scales in
detecting depression in men is as yet unclear.

Other factors that could explain the relatively low use of ADs in our
study among the sample with depression might be that the depressed
participants may have been reluctant to accept treatment with ADs, a
choice that is possibly more common among men; they may not have needed
drug treatment, perhaps because other treatments were used (in mild
depression psychotherapy is considered as effective as drugs); or they
may not have had the prescribed drug dispensed. Many patients do not
adhere to treatment instructions, for example do not even obtain their
prescribed drugs (primary non-adherence), and prior studies have
suggested that both gender and illness severity affect adherence.
^[@R39]--[@R42]^

In our study, it was twice as common for women as for men to use ADs
when not currently depressed. This could indicate that their depression
was in remission, but it could also mean that women are being
over-treated with ADs. Several studies have found AD use to be higher
among women, and the increased prescription of ADs in recent decades is
especially notable among women. ^[@R23]--[@R25],[@R30],[@R43]^ The
higher level of AD prescribing to women may in part be attributed to the
greater consumption of healthcare among women in general.
^[@R36],[@R44]^ Apropos of this, there are studies that show that women
are more likely than men to receive a prescription during their medical
visits. ^[@R45]^ The lower threshold for prescribing ADs has led to a
debate about the possibility of over-prescription or of ADs being
sometimes prescribed where alternatives would be better. ^[@R7]--[@R9]^
It seems that even mild symptoms are now considered indicative of
disease and treated with medications, although the efficacy is often
limited in mild to moderate depression. ^[@R7],[@R46],[@R47]^ Further,
an expanding number of indications (e.g. neuropathic pain, anxiety
disorders, eating disorders and sleep disorders) seen more often in
women than in men are contributors to the increasing trend to prescribe
ADs, and this could explain some of the AD use without depression seen
in our study. ^[@R9],[@R48]^

As in other studies, the SSRIs were the main drugs in our study.
^[@R28],[@R30]^ Because of gender differences in the pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics of ADs, and because depression may present
differently in women and men, it has been suggested that men and women
could differ in their response to treatment and that pharmacological
treatments should therefore be chosen by gender. ^[@R49]--[@R51]^ The
women in our study used SSRIs more often than the men. It could be that
somatic symptoms respond better to SSRIs than to TCAs. Another cause
might be gender differences in adverse drug reactions. However,
supporting data are limited and sometimes conflicting, and current
treatment guidelines do not take gender into account.
^[@R49],[@R50],[@R52]^ Regardless, it is important to continue to
examine any differences between men and women concerning
pharmacotherapeutic efficacy and adverse drug reactions.

## Limitations {#S7}

The SPDR offers complete data on all dispensed drugs; however, it does
not give information on actual usage. Also, ADs during the 6-month
period were analysed without distinguishing whether the drugs had been
used for a long or a short time. Moreover, ADs are sometimes prescribed
for indications other than depression, which we could not control for.
However, previous studies have reported that depression remains the main
indication for AD use. ^[@R53]^ Participation in the study was voluntary
and there may have been selection biases. For example, non-responders
were more likely to be men than women. It is also possible that people
with current symptoms of depression would be less likely to respond,
introducing further bias to participant selection. Depression assessed
using the HADS (in the previous week) was not directly linked to
prescribed ADs via the SPDR (0--6 months prior to the HADS evaluation).
However, depression is often a prolonged state, and problems in this
respect that were encountered in the previous week were probably not
temporary. Finally, it is important to emphasise that a cross-sectional
design does not permit evaluation of causality to be derived from the
results.

## Summary of findings {#S8}

The relationship between self-reported depression and use of ADs
differed by gender. Overall, men were prescribed ADs to a lesser extent
than women, although they reported depression to a greater extent. By
contrast, women were prescribed ADs without reporting depression more
often than men. This may be a sign for under-treatment among men and
over-treatment among women. Further, men and women were prescribed
different types of ADs, possibly because of gender differences in
treatment outcomes and adverse drug reactions. Although the causes of
these findings remain unclear, diagnostic and treatment guidelines
should benefit from considering gender in these respects.

[^1]: **Lena Thunander Sundbom**, Pharm.Lic, Pharmacoepidemiology and
    Pharmacoeconomics, Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University,
    Uppsala, Sweden, and Faculty of Health and Occupational Studies,
    Department of Health and Caring Sciences, University of Gävle,
    Gävle, Sweden; **Kerstin Bingefors**, Associate Professor,
    Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Department of Pharmacy,
    Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; **Kerstin Hedborg**, Med.Dr,
    Faculty of Health and Occupational Studies, Department of Health and
    Caring Sciences, University of Gävle, Gävle, Sweden; **Dag
    Isacson**, Professor, Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics,
    Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
