---
abstract: |
  Ambulatory deep brain stimulation (DBS) became possible in the late
  1980s and was initially used to treat people with movement disorders.
  Trials of DBS in people with treatment-resistant psychiatric disorder
  began in the late 1990s, initially focusing on obsessive--compulsive
  disorder, major depressive disorder and Tourette syndrome. Despite
  methodological issues, including small participant numbers and lack of
  consensus over brain targets, DBS is now being trialled in a wide
  range of psychiatric conditions. There has also been more modest
  increase in ablative procedures. This paper reviews these developments
  in the light of contemporary brain science, considers future
  directions and discusses why the approach has not been adopted more
  widely within psychiatry.
author:
- Kenneth BarrettCorrespondence to Kenneth Barrett
  (<kenbarrett80@yahoo.com>) [^1]
date: 2017-10
institute:
- 1North Staffordshire & Keele University
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
- id: R37
- id: R38
- id: R39
- id: R40
- id: R41
- id: R42
- id: R43
- id: R44
- id: R45
- id: R46
- id: R47
- id: R48
- id: R49
- id: R50
- id: R51
- id: R52
- id: R53
title: "Psychiatric neurosurgery in the 21st century: overview and the
  growth of deep brain stimulation"
---

-   [Background](#S1){#toc-S1}
-   [Technicalities: electrodes and procedures](#S2){#toc-S2}
-   [Brain targets and treatment rationales](#S3){#toc-S3}
    -   [Stimulation procedures](#S4){#toc-S4}
        -   [Deep brain](#S5){#toc-S5}
        -   [Cortical surface (epidural)](#S6){#toc-S6}
        -   [Vagus nerve (depression)](#S7){#toc-S7}
    -   [Ablative procedures](#S8){#toc-S8}
        -   [Thermocoagulation](#S9){#toc-S9}
        -   [Radiosurgery ('gamma knife')](#S10){#toc-S10}
-   [Protocols, conditions and outcomes](#S11){#toc-S11}
-   [The future](#S12){#toc-S12}
-   [Conclusions](#S13){#toc-S13}

In 2014 the Mayo Clinic posted an online video in which a musician plays
the violin while a neurosurgeon operates on his brain. Electrodes are
being directed to an area of his thalamus with the aim of suppressing an
essential tremor by electrical stimulation. Playing the violin during
surgery was the best way to test whether the electrodes were in the
right place. They were, and the operation was a success.^[@R1]^

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) was first used to treat severe tremor in
people with Parkinson\'s disease in 1987 and was subsequently found
effective in severe dystonia.^[@R2]^ Since then, tens of thousands of
people have undergone the procedure for movement disorders and the
technique has largely replaced earlier lesion-based methods. The most
recent application, to 'benign' essential tremor, perhaps highlights its
relatively low side-effect profile and patient acceptance. In 1999 a
Belgian team used DBS in three people with treatment-resistant
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), with favourable results. There have
since been DBS trials in a wide range of psychiatric conditions, and a
more modest increase in ablative procedures.^[@R3]^ 2014 saw the
publication of *Psychosurgery: New Techniques for Brain Disorders* by
French neurosurgeon Marc Lévêque, the first 'state of the art' textbook
to use that term in 40 years.^[@R4]^ It was a translation from the
French; Anglophone practitioners in the field prefer a word with less
toxic associations: neuromodulation.^[@R5]^

Whatever you call it, the use of DBS -- and to a lesser extent
lesion-based psychiatric neurosurgery -- is on the rise, and this paper
will review these developments. The aim is to inform rather than tilt
opinion in a particular direction, but given the polarising nature of
the subject it seems relevant to state the perspective from which it is
written. The author is a retired neuropsychiatrist who formerly worked
in a comprehensive service for working-age adults, within which the most
frequent neurological diagnosis was acquired brain injury While in
training, he obtained a doctorate in electroencephalogram-based
psychophysiology. A history project on psychiatric neurosurgery in the
mid-20th century led to several outcomes, including an essay that
prompted the Editor to commission this review.^[@R6]^

# Background {#S1}

Renewed interest in psychiatric neurosurgery has occurred against a
background of major revisions in the way we think about the brain. At
the beginning of the 20th century, anatomist Santiago y Cajal wrote:
"'Once brain development has ended the fount of growth and regeneration
of axons and dendrites dries up irrevocably. In adult centres the nerve
paths are something fixed, ended and immutable'.^[@R7]^" That
'immutable' view of neurons held sway within brain science for much of
the past century, although there were dissenting voices, particularly
between the World Wars.^[@R8]^ The brain\'s capacity to structurally
adapt and even regenerate was eventually demonstrated at the end of the
century, by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), functional MRI (fMRI) and
other techniques. In addition, simplistic notions of functional
localisation are being replaced by task-related and 'default' systems
and networks.^[@R9]^ The past 25 years have also witnessed a
transformation in our understanding of glial cells. Once viewed simply
as the brain\'s scaffolding and housekeepers, they are now known to
guide brain development, shape response to injury, modulate synaptic
transmission, and operate an independent chemically based communication
system.^[@R10]^ How all this produces mind remains a topic rich in
speculation, with recent theories encompassing 'embodied' cognition and
quantum biology.^[@R11],[@R12]^ The implication of all this for
psychiatry remains to be determined.

In the 1930s neurologist Egas Moniz speculated that in the brains of
some people with chronic mental illness, 'the cellular bodies remain
altogether normal ... but their multiple liaisons, very variable in
normal people ... have arrangements that are more or less
fixed'.^[@R13]^ He believed the most likely location for such an
aberration was the pathway between the prefrontal cortex and the
thalamus. In 1935/6 he tested his theory by directing a surgeon to
produce small lesions in that area, in 20 patients with mental illness
-- the first 'prefrontal leucotomy' series. Moniz\'s targeted and
theory-based approach was soon eclipsed by Freeman & Watts\' more
destructive and indiscriminate procedure.^[@R14]^ The extensive damage
that it produced often rendered behaviourally disturbed hospital
patients with psychosis docile and, in some cases, dischargeable. The
potential economic benefits of that were not lost on the architects of
the UK\'s National Health Service (NHS): in its first 5 years, there
were more than 7000 leucotomies.^[@R15]^

Chlorpromazine rendered such destructive procedures in people with
psychosis unnecessary and over the following 20 years psychosurgery
teams -- focusing on a narrower range of disorders -- sought maximum
benefit from minimum damage. Nonetheless, public distrust and dissenting
voices increased, particularly in the USA, a trend fuelled by
experiments on behaviourally disturbed children and aggressive
prisoners.^[@R16]^ Beginning in 1974 a US Congressional Committee held
hearings on psychosurgery, with a view to a possible ban. In the end,
they recommended better regulation and, in any event, the number of
operations fell dramatically over the next 30 years.^[@R14]^

Ambulatory DBS became possible in the 1980s because of technical
developments (MRI, microprocessors, batteries, etc.) but also because
the brain structures and pathways that produce movement had been mapped.
Although the structures underlying emotion and behaviour, and the paths
between them, have also been mapped, exactly how they produce the
complexities of emotional life is much less clear. For that reason, a
wide variety of brain areas have been targeted in this new wave of
psychiatric neurosurgery. Despite the many theories as to how and why
DBS and ablative procedures improve some psychiatric conditions, we do
not actually know.

# Technicalities: electrodes and procedures {#S2}

All but two of the procedures in current use involve insertion of
electrodes into the brain. The exceptions are vagus nerve stimulation
(VNS) and gamma knife capsulotomy. Such surgery usually involves
attaching a stereotactic cage to the head as a means of directing
electrodes to brain locations mapped by MRI. VNS involves isolating the
left vagus nerve in the carotid sheath in the neck and looping two
electrodes around it. Electrodes in both cases are wired to a
programmable stimulator placed subcutaneously in the upper chest wall
([Fig. 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}).^[@R17]^

![Illustration of an implanted deep brain stimulation
system.](282f1){#F1}

Each electrode includes an anode and a cathode. When an electrical
current is applied the brain tissue between them joins the circuit.
Three to five volts are usually applied in DBS at pulse frequencies
above 100/s. At such frequencies brain tissue immediately surrounding
the electrodes is deactivated/depolarised. However, just outside that
area, volume conduction leads to electrical stimulation of axons,
propagated upstream to cell bodies and downstream to synapses,
interrupting local brain function while also producing effects more
remotely. At frequencies below 100 -- 15 pulses/s, for example, in VNS
-- stimulation is also produced in the tissue immediately surrounding
the electrodes. Electrodes have been used experimentally to stimulate
brain tissue in humans since the late 1940s.^[@R18]^ They have also been
used to produce lesions, through thermocoagulation. In anterior
cingulotomy, for example, a 10 mm exposed portion of the electrode is
heated to 85°C for 60 s.

In gamma knife surgery, multiple narrow beams of gamma radiation
intersect at a pre-mapped point in the brain, hence the skull is not
opened.^[@R17]^

# Brain targets and treatment rationales {#S3}

[Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"} summarises the brain targets used
in most psychiatric neurosurgery over the past 20 years, and the
conditions treated in each case. The targets for current lesion surgery
are those that have been found to produce the most benefit with the
fewest adverse effects. The targets used for psychiatric DBS were chosen
in four ways.

1.  The first trial, in 1999, targeted the anterior limb of the internal
    capsule because lesion surgery to that area has been found in some
    cases to reduce the symptoms of severe OCD.^[@R3]^ The anterior
    cingulate and subcaudate areas, and the combination of the two, were
    chosen for similar reasons, in relation to major depressive disorder
    (MDD).

2.  The subthalamic nucleus (STN) is the favoured target in Parkinson\'s
    disease. Following DBS, some patients with comorbid OCD experienced
    a reduction in the severity of those symptoms, hence its selection
    for trials in OCD.

3.  fMRI has revealed increased metabolic activity in the subgenual
    cortex and habenula in some patients with MDD. Hence, those areas
    were targeted based on the hypothesis that such hyperactivity may be
    causal, rather than simply a manifestation of depression.

4.  Tourette syndrome sits on the boundary between movement and
    compulsive disorder, which has contributed to the wide range of
    brain targets available, including the thalamus, STN, globus
    pallidum, nucleus accumbens and internal capsule.

**Box 1** Brain targets used in psychiatric neurosurgery

## Stimulation procedures {#S4}

### Deep brain {#S5}

-   Anterior limb internal capsule (obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD),
    depression, anorexia nervosa)

-   Nucleus accumbens (OCD, depression, anorexia nervosa, addictions)

-   Subgenual cortex (depression)

-   Globus pallidus (Tourette syndrome)

-   Habenula (depression)

-   Posterior hypothalamus (aggressive behaviour)

-   Thalamus centromedian nucleus (Tourette syndrome)

-   Subthalamic nucleus (OCD)

-   Inferior thalamic peduncle (depression)

-   Nucleus basalis (Alzheimer\'s disease)

-   Fornix (Alzheimer\'s disease)

-   Basolateral amygdala (post-traumatic stress disorder)

### Cortical surface (epidural) {#S6}

-   Dorsolateral frontal (depression)

-   Orbitofrontal (depression)

### Vagus nerve (depression) {#S7}

## Ablative procedures {#S8}

### Thermocoagulation {#S9}

-   Anterior capsulotomy (OCD, depression)

-   Cingulotomy (OCD, depression, addiction)

-   Limbic leucotomy (OCD)

-   Subcaudate tractotomy (depression, OCD)

-   Nucleus accumbens (addiction)

### Radiosurgery ('gamma knife') {#S10}

-   Capsulotomy (OCD)

VNS was first used in the 1990s to treat some forms of refractory
epilepsy. Improvement in the mood of some individuals was noticed, an
effect that was independent of seizure response. Trials in
treatment-resistant depression yielded positive outcomes, but a later
study including a 'sham' surgery group suggested a significant placebo
effect.^[@R19]^

Several authors have sought to explain the beneficial effects of
stimulation-based procedures and lesion surgery on depressed mood and
anxiety by reference to two cortico-striato-thalamocortical (CSTQ
'loops'.^[@R20]^ Similar loops were previously identified in relation to
movement, prior to the introduction of DBS, including inhibitory
(GABA-based) and excitatory (glutamate-based) pathways.^[@R21]^ The CSTC
loops, by contrast, involve a wider range of neurotransmitters, with
complex interactions that are yet to be defined. Such 'circuits' may,
however, explain the variety of targets that seem to produce at least
some benefit in psychiatric DBS studies. It seems reasonable to
speculate that tapping into and stimulating the loop at many points
could influence and modify the whole network.

# Protocols, conditions and outcomes {#S11}

Lesion-based, ablative surgery continues to be available, including at
two centres in the UK, but in most countries it is confined to a very
small number of cases each year.^[@R22],[@R23]^ The exceptions are
Russia and China where it is now frequently used in the treatment of
addiction.^[@R24],[@R25]^ Radiosurgery has made lesion surgery possible
without opening the skull and one report confirmed efficacy in OCD
comparable to older techniques.^[@R26]^ At the Editor\'s direction, the
remainder of this review will focus on DBS.

The investigators who first applied DBS to the treatment of psychiatric
disorders were aware of the legacy of past psychosurgical excesses and
the ethical issues it raised. With that in mind a collaborative group
drew up a list of research guidelines, published in 2002.^[@R27]^ They
include independent evaluation of potential participants according to
strict diagnostic, severity and duration criteria; the need to ensure
that individuals are able to give informed consent at the outset and for
as long as the treatment continues; and ensuring DBS is never used for
'political, law enforcement or social purposes'.^[@R27]^ Most
investigators also use established severity ratings and response
criteria based on them (such as a 35% or more reduction on the
Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale^[@R28]^).

In the early years the focus of DBS studies was on people with
treatment-resistant OCD, Tourette syndrome and MDD. The textbook cited
at the beginning of this paper tabulates all such studies up to 2013 for
each of these diagnoses, including patient numbers, brain targets,
follow-up times and reported outcomes.^[@R29]^ In summary: OCD: 11
studies involving 9 targets in a total of 86 patients followed up from 3
to 31 months; positive outcomes in 33--100%Tourette syndrome: 10 studies
involving 7 targets in 40 patients followed up from 3 to 36 months;
positive outcomes in 23--82%MDD: 6 studies involving 5 targets in 55
patients followed up from 12 to 36 months; positive outcomes in 30--75%.

The longer the duration of the follow-up overall, the better outcomes
tended to be, but no one target appeared markedly superior. Whereas in
movement disorder, and to an extent in Tourette syndrome, improvement
occurred soon after stimulation commenced, in OCD and MDD improvement
took many weeks to begin, symptoms diminishing further as time
progressed. This perhaps indicates that rather than simply turning off
'malfunctioning' neurons, stimulation causes gradual beneficial change
in the networks and systems it taps into. One exception to this delayed
response was a study in which seven people with MDD received DBS to the
medial forebrain bundle. The pulse frequency was lower than usual (see
'Technicalities' section) and at 1 year positive responses were reported
in six people; all began to improve within a week of stimulation
commencing.^[@R30]^

Despite these apparently favourable outcomes, the small patient numbers,
bewildering array of brain targets, variable follow-up times, and the
impossibility of the double-blind placebo control methods, may lead many
to conclude that the efficacy of this approach is far from proven.
Although Lévêque considers the efficacy of DBS in OCD to be established,
in relation to MDD he concedes that 'although the benign nature of these
techniques is in the process of being established, their efficacy
remains difficult to demonstrate'.^[@R29]^ Nonetheless, he and others
offer several reasons why these outcomes should be taken seriously.

1.  The patients treated have severe conditions that have failed to
    respond to all other treatments over a prolonged period.

2.  Some studies target structures that had proved effective in
    lesion-based surgery (stimulation being used to simulate a lesion).

3.  DBS allows for a form of 'double blind' methodology as the
    stimulating device may be turned on and off, the status at any point
    being kept from patient and assessor.

4.  In some clinically improved cases temporary deterioration followed
    battery failure or inadvertent disconnection.^[@R30],[@R31]^

Although the reversible nature of DBS makes it more acceptable than
lesion surgery, is it as effective in psychiatric applications, and does
it result in fewer side-effects? The technique may only simulate a
lesion, but if the patient requires that simulation to be in place for
the rest of their life, what is the difference, apart from indefinite
maintenance costs? A recent paper addressed that question by reviewing
outcomes in 20 studies of treatment-resistant OCD.^[@R32]^ 108 patients
who underwent capsulotomy were compared with 62 patients who received
stimulation to the internal capsule or the nucleus accumbens. Of those
undergoing capsulotomy 62% responded favourably, compared with 52% of
those undergoing stimulation, but the difference was not statistically
significant. Weight gain, which was common after lesion surgery, did not
occur with stimulation. Apathy and disinhibition were also experienced
by a small number of patients after lesion surgery but not during DBS.

Adverse effects reported after DBS include postoperative problems such
as wound infection, haemorrhage (asymptomatic or resulting in transient
motor signs), single seizures and syncopal episodes.^[@R33]^ Additional
undesirable effects develop when the stimulator is turned on but seem
generally to disappear once the stimulation parameters are altered
(voltage, frequency, etc.). These include physical symptoms such as
paraesthesia, muscle contractions, dysarthria, diplopia and strabismus,
and psychiatric features, particularly excitement, irritability and
occasionally hypomania. Cognitive function is usually assessed before
and during treatment and a recent review concluded that no adverse
cognitive effects had occurred. In fact, as time progressed improvements
in scores tended to occur, mirroring improvements in mental
state.^[@R34]^ The most common longer-term problems in psychiatric and
movement disorder applications seem to be device-based. For example, one
study of 84 patients with Parkinson\'s disease recorded hardware-related
complications in 8.4% of patients each year, including lead fractures,
migrations and disconnections.^[@R35]^ Technical improvements have
doubtless occurred since that report, but the consequences of such
mishaps in patients with severe psychiatric disorders may be grave, and
are among the reasons that regular ongoing follow-up is deemed
important.

A further stimulation technique that does not involve penetrating the
brain has recently been tried in people with MDD.^[@R36]^ Electrodes
were placed in the epidural space over the dorsolateral frontal cortex
in a single-blind study of 12 patients who were followed up for 2 years,
with results comparable to the best DBS studies. A later paper discussed
the combination of this technique with psychotherapy, a fascinating
subject, sadly beyond the scope of this review.^[@R37]^

The major advantage of DBS over lesion-based surgery is that if it does
not work the hardware can be turned off and removed. In the longer term,
stimulation could be stopped temporarily to assess whether it is still
necessary. But as we now know, the brain is not 'immutable' and
unresponsive to such challenge. It adjusts and adapts, chemically and
structurally to changing circumstances and, in fact, the delayed onset
of improvement in some of these applications seems to depend on such
adaptation. The long-term implications of such changes are not clear.

In light of the relatively low side-effect profile of DBS in these early
trials and apparently favourable outcomes, the technique has been
extended to a number of other conditions including addiction,^[@R38]^
eating disorder,^[@R39]^ posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),^[@R40]^
early Alzheimer\'s disease^[@R41]^ and, most controversially, aggressive
behaviour disorder.^[@R42]^ Each of these has a defining clinical
feature that suggests a particular brain target (in turn, nucleus
accumbens, hypothalamus, amygdala, mammillary-fornix-hippocampal
complex/nucleus basalis, hypothalamus). Although it is probably too
early to comment on the outcome of this work, the target selections in
two of these conditions are illustrative of the current approach and
will be described briefly. The amygdala is being targeted in PTSD as a
result of post brain-injury MRI and fMRI evidence (amygdala damage
protecting against developing the condition and evidence of increased
metabolic activity), and a positive response to amygdala stimulation in
an animal model. The fornix is being targeted in early Alzheimer\'s
disease as a way into the mammillary-fornix-hippocampal complex. This
follows the serendipitous finding of improved memory and increased
hippocampal volume following stimulation of the anterior hypothalamus
undertaken for an unrelated condition, and animal studies showing
stimulation-related neural growth.^[@R43]^

# The future {#S12}

In 2013 President Obama launched a US\$100 million research programme
with the acronym B.R.A.I.N (Brain Research through Advancing Innovative
Neurotechnologies).^[@R44]^ 'Emerging technologies' would be applied to
the investigation of brain function and the treatment of disorders. This
would include nanotechnology and, in relation to treatments, 'wireless
fully implantable neural interface medical devices for human use ...
closed loop systems able to deliver targeted neural
stimulation'.^[@R45]^ A patient group singled out for such innovative
treatments was injured war-fighters, particularly those with
treatment-resistant PTSD and memory problems due to acquired brain
injury. This was a remarkable proposal, not least because at that point
no 'wired' device-based treatments had been found useful or even
trialled in either condition, and closed loop technology had only been
used in cardiac dysrhythmia and epilepsy.^[@R46]^

Closed loop technology has been more widely identified as important for
the future of this work. In the context of epilepsy, implanted closed
loop devices monitor an area where seizure originates, detect electrical
activity that indicate a seizure is due, and respond with electrical
stimulation or cooling to interrupt it.^[@R46]^ In the psychiatric
context, the possibilities of such devices include using nanotechnology
to measure neurotransmitter levels and trigger therapeutic
outputs.^[@R47]^

Another development of possible importance is optogenetics.
Light-sensitive ion channels that respond to different colours are
delivered to and incorporated into individual neurons via a virus. Light
channelled into the brain via fibroptics can then be used to turn on and
off such channels. Although this sounds the stuff of science fiction, a
similar procedure has apparently succeeded in animal studies and trials
in humans are expected in due course.^[@R48],[@R49]^

# Conclusions {#S13}

Given the torment of severe treatment-resistant depression, OCD and
other psychiatric conditions, and the enthusiasm for DBS in relation to
movement disorder, it is reasonable to ask why the technique has not
been more widely adopted in psychiatry? A neurosurgeon recently
addressed this question and identified a number of reasons: the legacy
of 'old-fashioned' psychiatric surgery, the complexity and heterogeneity
of psychiatric symptoms, and the multitude of brain circuits likely to
be involved in them, 'tricky ethical questions related to potential
manipulation of the mind', difficulty in conducting large trials in
these conditions, and inconsistent results.^[@R50]^ He might have added
lack of consensus over targets in the conditions most often treated and
the limited number of 'placebo' (sham treatment) controlled trials.
Nonetheless, the US Food and Drug Administration gave approval for DBS
in treatment-resistant OCD in 2009, albeit through a 'humanitarian
device exemption'.^[@R33]^

In the UK, new medical procedures tend to be adopted and funded
following pressure from patients and their interest groups, clinicians,
medical Royal Colleges and the media. It is difficult to envisage such
pressure for psychiatric DBS at the moment. The legacy of mid-20th
century psychosurgery includes not only public and professional distrust
(the charity OCD-UK 'do not recommend DBS as a treatment for OCD *and
remain concerned that the dangers associated with the procedure continue
to be overlooked by the medical community'*^[@R51]^ -- my italics) but
also ethical and methodological rules that require complex, expensive,
multiprofessional teams. In 2013 the NHS Commissioning Board published
DBS guidelines for the treatment of movement disorders. They included an
estimated cost of £26 070 for each procedure, but acknowledge that
savings resulting from clinical and quality-of-life improvements offset
ongoing maintenance costs.^[@R52]^

In an afterword to the psychosurgery text mentioned at the beginning of
this paper, and a related article, Marwan Hariz, a particularly cautious
and thoughtful 'functional' neurosurgeon, warns that 'hyping' DBS in
psychiatry at this stage could lead to its demise.^[@R50]^ He also
expresses concern at recent suggestions that the technique could be used
to enhance 'normal' functioning or even control antisocial behaviour.
'Neuromodulation' he concludes, 'should not be allowed to become
neuromanipulation'.^[@R53]^ It remains to be seen whether a new
generation of 'millennial' psychiatrists and neurosurgeons armed with
these emerging technologies will follow his advice.

[^1]: **Kenneth Barrett**, retired Consultant Neuropsychiatrist and
    Senior Lecturer, North Staffordshire and Keele University.
