---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** We examined non-medical use (NMU) of olanzapine
  among adults on methadone treatment. Information was collected on
  patient demographics and NMU of olanzapine. The Alcohol, Smoking and
  Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST) was administered to
  assess risk among current users of olanzapine.

  **Results** Ninety-two clients participated and 30% reported lifetime
  history of NMU of olanzapine. Nine people reported doses of 30 mg or
  higher on a typical day of use, with three typically using 100 mg. The
  most common reasons for use were to relieve anxiety and to aid sleep,
  but a quarter used it to 'get stoned'. Eleven participants (12%)
  reported NMU of olanzapine in the preceding month. Eight completed the
  ASSIST with four scoring in the high-risk zone.

  **Clinical implications** Self-medication is the dominant motivator
  for NMU of olanzapine, but hedonic motivations also occur. A small
  minority show features of dependency. All doctors should be aware of
  the potential NMU of olanzapine, especially among patients with
  history of addiction.
author:
- Philip David James
- Ali Shaik Fida
- Pavel Konovalov
- Bobby P. SmythCorrespondence to Philip James (<philip.james@hse.ie>)
  [^1]
date: 2016-12
institute:
- 1Health Service Executive, Louth/Meath, Ireland
- 2Chilliwack, British Columbia, Canada
- 3Dublin North City and County CAMHS, Dublin, Ireland
- 4Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Trinity College Dublin,
  Ireland
- 5Health Service Executive, Dublin, Ireland
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
title: Non-medical use of olanzapine by people on methadone treatment
---

Globally, there is a long history of non-medical use of prescription
drugs (NMUPD), evident across many sectors of society.^1--3^ Opioid
analgesics and benzodiazepines are the drug classes most frequently
encountered in studies of NMUPD.^1,2,4^ The past 20 years have witnessed
a move towards non-medical use (NMU) of an increasing spectrum of
medications, including the newer hypnotics,^5^ methylphenidate^6^ and
antidepressants.^7^ People who engage in NMUPD against a background of
polysubstance use tend to use more regularly and in larger quantities
than those who engage in NMUPD alone.^4^ Various terms are encountered
in the literature that describe situations where medications are being
used without a valid prescription from a medical practitioner, such as
non-medical use, non-prescription use, abuse and misuse. For the purpose
of this article we will use the term non-medical use (NMU).

Antipsychotics are among the medications most commonly prescribed by
psychiatrists but evidence, typically single case studies, has emerged
regarding their NMU. One of the earliest reports involves psychiatric
patients who appear to have become dependent on their antipsychotic
medications, including haloperidol and trifluoperazine.^8^ In a study of
adolescents attending addiction treatment in Ireland it emerged that NMU
of antipsychotics exceeded that of stimulant medications for
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).^3^ Quetiapine appears
to be the most commonly encountered antipsychotic appearing in reports
on NMU, used orally, intranasally and intravenously.^9--12^

Literature also suggests that NMU of olanzapine may occur. A case report
outlines NMU of olanzapine for anxiolytic effects and euphoric effects
and to manage cocaine-related adverse effects.^13^ Further case reports
describe apparent withdrawals and psychological dependence on prescribed
olanzapine.^14,15^ In light of increasing reports in the literature and
anecdotal reports of patients in our clinical practice reporting NMU of
olanzapine, we decided to conduct a study to assess its prevalence among
patients on methadone maintenance treatment (MMT).

# Method {#S1}

## Setting {#S2}

We conducted a survey of adult patients attending the National Drug
Treatment Centre (NDTC) in Dublin. Patients attending from one clinical
team in the NDTC, which provides treatment to about 130 individuals,
were included. They were invited to participate in the survey on a
voluntary basis.

## Instruments {#S3}

We developed a structured questionnaire to explore past and recent NMU
of olanzapine and what motivated it. This was informed by previous
research on NMUPD. The questionnaire was administered via interview and
took about 15 min to complete. It provided information on basic
demographics, psychotropic medication use, illicit substance use, and
health and psychosocial issues related to the study aims. Participants
were also given the opportunity to provide additional qualitative
information to questions and the data were analysed and categorised by
two of the authors (P.J. and B.S.).

The Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST)
is a World Health Organization (WHO) structured clinical interview.^16^
For each substance category, questions are asked about the 3-month
period prior to interview. This then generates a risk score for that
substance which ranges from 0 to 39. A score over 27 indicates high-risk
use and that a specific addiction treatment response is required. A
score of 4 to 26 indicates moderate risk use and a brief intervention is
advised. We applied the ASSIST questions to olanzapine in cases where a
person reported any NMU of olanzapine in the month before the interview.

# Results {#S4}

We interviewed 92 people, which constituted about 70% of the eligible
group. Information was not recorded on patients who were unavailable,
uninterested or unwilling to participate. The respondents were
predominantly male (*n*=60, 65%), were on methadone a mean of 5 years
and had a mean age of 31 years. Twenty-eight (30%) reported a lifetime
history of NMU of olanzapine. They did not differ significantly from
those without a history of use in terms of gender, age or duration of
methadone treatment.

Of participants reporting a lifetime history of NMU of olanzapine, two
reported currently being prescribed this medication and only taking it
as prescribed. Information on patterns of use was missing for one
person. The recent use characteristics of the remaining 25 people are
outlined in [Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}. Nine people reported doses
of 30 mg or higher on a typical day of use, three of whom reported using
100 mg. The three heaviest users of olanzapine consumed 900 mg, 1200 mg
and 1800 mg, respectively, in the month preceding the interview.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Characteristics of 25 patients reporting non-prescription olanzapine use
:::

|                                                                                                | *n* | Median |   % |   IQR    |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----:|-------:|----:|:--------:|
| Currently prescribed olanzapine                                                                |   3 |        |  12 |          |
|                                                                                                |     |        |     |          |
| Describes tolerance^[a](#TFN2){ref-type="table-fn"}^                                           |   9 |        |  41 |          |
|                                                                                                |     |        |     |          |
| Describes compulsion to use^[b](#TFN3){ref-type="table-fn"}^                                   |   9 |        |  37 |          |
|                                                                                                |     |        |     |          |
| Experience of adverse effects or problems with olanzapine use^[b](#TFN3){ref-type="table-fn"}^ |     |        |     |          |
|     None                                                                                       |   2 |        |   8 |          |
|     Excessive cost                                                                             |  10 |        |  42 |          |
|     Feel tired and sick                                                                        |  19 |        |  79 |          |
|     Feel sleepy most of the time                                                               |  18 |        |  75 |          |
|     Loss of interest in sex                                                                    |   7 |        |  29 |          |
|     Do not want to go to work                                                                  |  11 |        |  46 |          |
|     Loss of appetite                                                                           |   0 |        |   0 |          |
|     Cannot stay focused                                                                        |  11 |        |  46 |          |
|     Feel nauseous or uncomfortable                                                             |   1 |        |   4 |          |
|                                                                                                |     |        |     |          |
| Positive impact of olanzapine^[b](#TFN3){ref-type="table-fn"}^                                 |     |        |     |          |
|     None                                                                                       |   0 |        |   0 |          |
|     Give me the high I like                                                                    |   1 |        |   4 |          |
|     Feel less worry or fear                                                                    |  18 |        |  75 |          |
|     Sleeping better                                                                            |  23 |        |  96 |          |
|     More interest in sex                                                                       |   4 |        |  17 |          |
|     Better appetite                                                                            |  15 |        |  62 |          |
|     Less pain                                                                                  |   4 |        |  17 |          |
|     Relieves side-effects of methadone                                                         |   4 |        |  17 |          |
| Any NMU of olanzapine in past month?^[b](#TFN3){ref-type="table-fn"}^                          |  11 |        |  46 |          |
|     Days used in past month among users                                                        |     |     15 |     |  4--30   |
|     Number of uses per day                                                                     |     |      2 |     |   1--3   |
|     Total dose olanzapine on typical day, mg                                                   |     |     20 |     |  15--60  |
|     Total dose consumed in past month, mg                                                      |     |    400 |     | 200--600 |

NMU, non-medical use.

Data missing in three cases.

Data missing in one case.
:::

Of the 11 people reporting current NMU of olanzapine, 8 completed the
modified ASSIST: 4 had scores indicating high-risk use (range 29--35)
and the other 4 had scores in the moderate risk zone (range 13--19).

All 28 people who reported that their first use of olanzapine was
prescribed indicated why it was prescribed. Three of these were vague
answers. Of the remaining 25 participants, 19 (76%) reported that they
had been prescribed it to treat psychosis or a psychotic symptom (e.g.
paranoia, delusions). Depression was mentioned by 4 (16%), anxiety by 3
(12%) and anger/agitation and bipolar affective disorder (BPAD) by 2
(8%) participants.

In addition to the list of possible reasons for NMU of olanzapine
presented in the questionnaire ([Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}),
clients were asked to name any additional reasons why they used it; 7
(25%) specifically stated 'to get stoned'. All those who reported NMU of
olanzapine were also asked what happens if they miss a dose. Again, all
28 answered this question, with 8 (29%) indicating that missing a dose
had no effect or they never took it regularly enough to notice any
effect. The most common effect of missing a dose was feeling anxious or
nervous, which was reported by 14 participants (50%). The next most
common effects were feeling angry or agitated (*n*=5, 18%), paranoid or
psychotic (*n*=3, 11%), low mood (*n*=2, 7%) and feeling frustrated
(*n*=2, 7%).

# Discussion {#S5}

This is the first study to formally examine the extent of NMU of
olanzapine. The finding that 30% of the clients surveyed reported NMU
supports the evidence from previous case studies that it is a medication
with misuse potential. Of those engaged in current use who completed the
ASSIST, all had scores that indicated some risk, with half in the
high-risk/probable dependence category.

The most common reasons for NMU of olanzapine were to relax or relieve
tension, to aid sleep or simply to escape from worries. This is
consistent with the reports from case studies.^13,15^ Two of the
published case studies describe a euphoric feeling or a 'high' from
olanzapine.^13,15^ A quarter of those who engaged in NMU of olanzapine
used it to 'get stoned'. Therefore our findings support a
self-medication style of NMU of olanzapine as the dominant motivator for
use, with hedonic motivations being present in a minority. The
self-medication hypothesis has been proposed as a major precipitator and
perpetuator of substance use in heroin-dependent populations.^17^ By
comparison, the published case studies on NMU of quetiapine seem to
involve clients using it for its euphoric effects,^8,11,12^ but this is
not exclusively the case.^10^

This study has a number of limitations. It was completed within one
clinic in one city and findings may not generalise to other settings.
Although the ASSIST is a validated instrument, the questionnaire used in
this study has not been assessed for reliability or validity.
Furthermore, the study relied on self-reported use of olanzapine and was
not independently verified by any objective biological testing method.

In the previous case studies published on olanzapine all the patients
appear to have been prescribed it for varying psychiatric conditions and
all were in contact with psychiatric services.^13--15^ While our
findings and the previous case reports suggest caution when prescribing
olanzapine to people with a history of dependence, there is also growing
evidence that olanzapine is effective in the treatment of individuals
with schizophrenia and a co-occurring substance use disorder.^18^
Similarly, there is evidence that quetiapine may also be effective
specifically in helping those with substance use disorders.^19,20^ There
are also studies indicating that other antipsychotics including
aripiprazole,^21^ risperidone^22^ and clozapine^23--25^ have positive
effects on a variety of substance use-related outcomes such as cravings
and relapse. Petrakis *et al*,^26^ however, reported that atypical
antipsychotics had no superior benefit in substance use outcomes when
compared with traditional antipsychotics.

A small number of patients were using olanzapine in very large
quantities. Olanzapine, and other antipsychotic medications, carry a
large number of potential side-effects. There is no information on the
particular risks of long-term very high-dose olanzapine use. The advice
is that olanzapine should be used with caution in particular among
individuals with hepatic impairment.^27^ Chronic hepatitis C is highly
prevalent in this patient group and this is frequently compounded by
high-risk alcohol use.^28,29^ Consequently, compromised hepatic
functioning may pose particular hazards for people on methadone
treatment and NMU of olanzapine. Those working within substance use
services need to be mindful of the potential for NMU of antipsychotic
medications and be cautious when considering introducing these
medications. Since this study was completed, it has emerged that
olanzapine was detected in 6.3% of all poisoning deaths in Ireland in
2012, twice as many as 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA).^30^
While clinicians worry about the increased appetite, weight gain and
possible metabolic syndrome which can occur with therapeutic doses of
olanzapine, it is noteworthy that over three-fifths of those who engaged
in NMU of olanzapine cited improved appetite as a desired and positive
effect of taking this drug, particularly as drug users frequently
complain of weight loss and poor appetite.^31^

In light of our findings, and the literature in general, a great deal
more research is needed to ascertain the extent of NMU of
antipsychotics. While there is a need to be aware of risks, doctors
treating individuals with medications that have misuse potential should
not become paralysed by a fear of NMU as this could cause ill patients
to get substandard care.^32^

Our findings indicate that NMU of olanzapine occurs in a significant
minority of patients on methadone treatment. Further research is
warranted to ascertain the level of NMU of other antipsychotics and
among other patient groups. It appears that NMU is mainly motivated by a
desire to get relief from a variety of unpleasant symptoms, although
some individuals use it for hedonic effects. Staff working with
substance users ought to be vigilant to the potential NMU of
antipsychotics as these substances are not detected in standard drug
screening and can contribute to adverse medical outcomes. All doctors
should be aware of the potential NMU of olanzapine, especially among
patients with a history of addiction.

[^1]: **Philip James**, clinical nurse specialist in adolescent
    substance use, Health Service Executive, Louth/Meath, Ireland. **Ali
    Shaik Fida, consultant general adult and addiction psychiatrist,
    Chilliwack, British Columbia, Canada. Pavel Konovalov**, registrar
    in child and adolescent psychiatry, Dublin North City and County
    CAMHS, Dublin, Ireland. **Bobby P. Smyth**, consultant child and
    adolescent psychiatrist, Health Service Executive, Dublin, Ireland,
    and clinical senior lecturer, Department of Public Health and
    Primary Care, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.
