---
author:
- Teifion Davies[^1]
date: 2016-12
title: "Suicide: A Modern Obsession"
---

If the poor have been with us always, then so too has suicide. I read Al
Alvarez\'s *The Savage God* as a preclinical student trying to make
sense of the sudden and unexplained death of my beloved uncle. His
death, so many years ago, still rends my family in two: those who
sympathise with and those who accuse his widow. Alvarez, who was himself
trying to untangle the suicide of his friend the poet Sylvia Plath and
the emotions generated by it, provided some valuable insights but
precious little comfort. In many cultures it had always been so, it
seemed, with all associated with such an act -- whether dead or
surviving, aware or unaware of the victim\'s intentions -- being held
blameworthy for commission of sin or omission of care by some in the
victim\'s family, community, religion or state.

The search for answers to the murky and emotionally laden questions
surrounding suicide is widespread. This book -- written by a
psychiatrist and a journalist -- attempts to answer many of the
frequently asked questions and poses some others to 'tease out fact from
fiction, pragmatism from hysteria and common sense from nonsense'
(p.16). The book is biased towards general-interest readers and arose
from the authors\' concerns at the proliferation of suicide prevention
programmes in a country (Ireland) with a relatively low suicide rate --
the modern obsession referred to in the title.The structure and style
have elements of investigative journalism rather than either patient
support manual or academic treatise, with headings such as 'Why?' (p.
38) and 'Irresponsible and responsible media reporting of suicide'
(p.130). The content is composed chiefly of a fairly conventional but
selective review of the topic of suicide, sprinkled with case studies
and extracts from interviews with experts conducted by one of the
authors.

Had this book, rather than Alvarez\'s, been available to me, would it
have provided the answers and comfort I sought? Sadly, no, it would have
left me frustrated by its rather self-defensive tone and by statements
of what might be obvious to a seasoned mental health professional but
not to a general-interest reader nor a grieving relative. All those
well-known risk factors (with such feeble positive predictive value) and
'Safety-planning interventions' (p.186) militate against accepting that
'Not all suicides are preventable and there are no foolproof measures
... ' (p. 214). And no amount of understanding could expiate the guilt.

[^1]: **Teifion Davies**, Visiting Senior Lecturer, Institute of
    Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King\'s College London,
    London, UK, email: <teifion.da-vies@kcl.ac.uk>
