---
abstract: |
  This commentary argues the importance of robust, meaningful assessment
  of clinical and functional outcomes in psychiatry. Outcome assessments
  should be fit for the purpose of measuring relevant concepts of
  interest in specific clinical settings. As well, the measurement model
  selected to develop and test assessments can be critical for guiding
  care. Three types of measurement models are presented: classical test
  theory, item response theory, and Rasch measurement theory. To
  optimise current diagnostic and treatment practices in psychiatry,
  careful consideration of these models is warranted..
author:
- Skye P. Barbic
- Stefan J. CanoCorrespondence to Stefan Cano
  (<stefan.cano@modusoutcomes.com>) [^1]
date: 2016-10
institute:
- 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
- 2Modus Outcomes, Stotfold, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
subtitle: ": Commentary on ... Screening for depression in primary
  care[â€ ](#fn1){ref-type=\"fn\"}"
title: The application of Rasch measurement theory to psychiatric
  clinical outcomes research
---

Unlike many fields in medicine, most clinical outcomes in psychiatry are
not directly observable and cannot be captured with diagnostic tests
such as blood work or imaging. In recent years, the importance of the
routine use of clinical outcome assessments (patient-reported outcomes,
clinician-reported outcomes, observer-reported outcomes and performance
outcomes) for measuring the symptoms of disease and treatment outcomes
has been increasingly emphasised.^1^ Clinical outcome assessments such
as the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9)^2^ are now commonly used
in clinical research and practice to provide an assessment of a
patient\'s severity of mood and improvement in response to treatment.^3^
More broadly, as the demand increases for a broad range of mental health
services to be patient-centred, clinical outcome assessments are used to
capture outcomes such as sustained symptom reduction, return to full
functioning and optimal patient well-being.^4^

To optimise mental healthcare, clinical outcome assessments used in
psychiatry should be shown to be fit for purpose. They should
appropriately capture the concept of interest (e.g. depression) in the
context of use (e.g. patients attending primary care clinics reporting
symptoms of depression).^1^ They should also be underpinned by an
appropriate measurement model, that is they should have evidence that
the summed score of their individual items is 'psychometrically
sound'.^1^ To this end, there are three main psychometric approaches
based on three types of measurement model: classical test theory (CTT),
Rasch measurement theory (RMT) and item response theory (IRT).^5^

The current dominant paradigm in clinical outcomes research is CTT, the
foundations of which were laid down by Charles Spearman at the turn of
the twentieth century.^6^ CTT is associated with the psychometric
properties most commonly recognised and understood by clinicians (e.g.
reliability, validity and ability to detect change). However, there are
four important limitations^7^ that prevent CTT methodology from
fulfilling the requirements of scientific rigour demanded of high-stakes
clinical decision-making: (a) measurements generated are ordinal rather
than interval; (b) scores for persons and samples are scale dependent;
(c) scale properties, such as reliability and validity, are sample
dependent; (d) data can support group-level inferences but are not
suitable for individual patient measurement.

Georg Rasch, a Danish mathematician, argued that the core requirement of
social measurement should be the same as that in physical measurement,
and developed the simple logistic model now known as the 'Rasch
model'.^8^ In essence, RMT methods assess the extent to which observed
clinical outcome assessment data (e.g. patient ratings on the items of
the PHQ-9) 'fit' with predictions of those ratings from the Rasch model
(which defines how a set of items should perform to generate reliable
and valid measurements).^8^ The difference between the expected and
observed scores reveals the extent to which valid measurement is
achieved. In turn, this gives rise to a range of potential
investigations to better understand the extent to which the clinical
outcome assessment under investigation is an appropriate measurement
instrument (e.g. scale-to-sample targeting, adequacy of type and kind of
response options, item and person fit, item dependency (or bias),
stability between subgroups).^7,9^ Importantly, RMT addresses^7^ each of
the four limitations of CTT described above: (a) linear measurements can
be constructed from ordinal-level data; (b) item estimates provided are
free from the sample distribution and person estimates are free from the
scale distribution; (c) subsets of items from each scale rather than all
items can be used (i.e. the foundation for item banking and computerised
adaptive testing); (d) estimates are suitable for individual person
analyses rather than only for group comparison studies.

IRT is another body of psychometric methodology that is used to
ascertain the degree to which a given model and parameter estimates can
account for the structure of and statistical patterns in a clinical
outcome assessment dataset.^10^ The distinction between RMT and IRT is
subtle but important. IRT models are statistical models used to explain
data, and the aim of an IRT analysis is to find the statistical model
that best explains the observed data.^9^ By contrast, the aim of RMT is
to determine the extent to which observed clinical outcome assessment
data satisfy the measurement model.^8^ When the data do not fit the
model, they are examined to try to explain the misfit. This is the
central tenet of the Rasch model and one that distinguishes it from IRT
models. Specifically, its defining property is its mathematical
embodiment of the principle of invariant comparison. Thus, the
comparison of two people is independent of which items are used within a
set of items assessing the same concept of interest. In this way, the
Rasch model is taken as a criterion for the structure of the responses,
rather than simply a statistical description of the responses from
patients. This central tenet distinguishes the RMT diagnostic paradigm
from the IRT modelling paradigm.^9^

In this issue, Horton and Perry provide an example of diagnostic
information that can be attained using RMT methods, not available using
information gleaned from CTT or IRT methods.^11^ The availability and
increased application of RMT psychometric methods for developing and
evaluating clinical outcome assessments in psychiatry has important
implications for future research and practice. By better understanding
the strengths, weaknesses and measurement potential of such assessments,
we are able to build an evidence base towards optimising the
organisation and delivery of healthcare in psychiatry.^12^

[^1]: **Skye P. Barbic** (PhD) is post-doctoral fellow at the Faculty of
    Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia,
    Vancouver, Canada, and **Stefan J. Cano** (PhD, CPsychol, AFBPsS) is
    co-founder and chief science officer of Modus Outcomes, Stotfold,
    UK.
