---
abstract: |
  This review considers juvenile delinquency and justice from an
  international perspective. Youth crime is a growing concern. Many
  young offenders are also victims with complex needs, leading to a
  public health approach that requires a balance of welfare and justice
  models. However, around the world there are variable and inadequate
  legal frameworks and a lack of a specialist workforce. The UK and
  other high-income countries worldwide have established forensic child
  and adolescent psychiatry, a multifaceted discipline incorporating
  legal, psychiatric and developmental fields. Its adoption of an
  evidence-based therapeutic intervention philosophy has been associated
  with greater reductions in recidivism compared with punitive
  approaches prevalent in some countries worldwide, and it is therefore
  a superior approach to dealing with the problem of juvenile
  delinquency.
author:
- Susan Young
- Ben Greer
- Richard ChurchCorrespondence to Susan Young
  (<susan.young1@imperial.ac.uk>) [^1]
date: 2017-2
institute:
- 1Imperial College London, London, UK
- 2Broadmoor Hospital, Crowthorne, UK
- 3South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
- id: R37
- id: R38
- id: R39
- id: R40
- id: R41
- id: R42
- id: R43
- id: R44
- id: R45
- id: R46
- id: R47
- id: R48
- id: R49
- id: R50
- id: R51
- id: R52
- id: R53
- id: R54
- id: R55
- id: R56
- id: R57
- id: R58
- id: R59
- id: R60
- id: R61
- id: R62
- id: R63
- id: R64
- id: R65
- id: R66
- id: R67
- id: R68
- id: R69
- id: R70
- id: R71
- id: R72
- id: R73
- id: R74
- id: R75
- id: R76
- id: R77
- id: R78
- id: R79
- id: R80
- id: R81
- id: R82
- id: R83
- id: R84
- id: R85
- id: R86
- id: R87
- id: R88
- id: R89
- id: R90
- id: R91
- id: R92
- id: R93
- id: R94
- id: R95
- id: R96
- id: R97
- id: R98
- id: R99
- id: R100
- id: R101
- id: R102
- id: R103
- id: R104
- id: R105
- id: R106
- id: R107
- id: R108
- id: R109
- id: R110
title: "Juvenile delinquency, welfare, justice and therapeutic
  interventions: a global perspective"
---

-   [What is juvenile delinquency?](#S1){#toc-S1}
    -   [Who counts as juvenile?](#S2){#toc-S2}
    -   [What is a crime?](#S3){#toc-S3}
-   [General principles of juvenile justice](#S4){#toc-S4}
    -   [Welfare *v.* justice models](#S5){#toc-S5}
    -   [Between the less and more punitive systems](#S6){#toc-S6}
-   [Trends in youth crime](#S7){#toc-S7}
    -   [Juvenile gang membership](#S8){#toc-S8}
        -   [Influence on crime involvement](#S9){#toc-S9}
        -   [Mental health](#S10){#toc-S10}
-   [Forensic child and adolescent psychiatric services](#S11){#toc-S11}
-   [Treatment](#S12){#toc-S12}
    -   [Prevalence of mental health problems among juvenile
        offenders](#S13){#toc-S13}
    -   [Evidence-based treatments for mental health
        problems](#S14){#toc-S14}
        -   [Treatment of PTSD](#S15){#toc-S15}
        -   [Mood/anxiety disorders and self-harm](#S16){#toc-S16}
        -   [Evidence-based treatments for conduct disorder: family
            approaches](#S17){#toc-S17}
    -   [Substance misuse](#S18){#toc-S18}
    -   [Employment and education](#S19){#toc-S19}
    -   [Language and communication](#S20){#toc-S20}
-   [Delivery of therapeutic services](#S21){#toc-S21}
    -   [Common challenges to a therapeutic youth justice
        pathway](#S22){#toc-S22}
    -   [Factors associated with good outcomes](#S23){#toc-S23}
    -   [Factors associated with poor outcomes](#S24){#toc-S24}
-   [Conclusions](#S25){#toc-S25}

Recent years have seen sustained public and academic interest in
criminality and mental health, with attention often focused on
antisocial behaviour by children and adolescents. The scale of the
problem of juvenile delinquency has provoked mixed responses from
governments and the media across the world, with calls for improved
rehabilitation and support for juvenile offenders competing with voices
advocating more punitive approaches. ^[@R1]^ Meanwhile, decades of
rigorous academic scrutiny have shed light on the complex and diverse
needs of children who come into conflict with the law. ^[@R2]--[@R5]^
Much of the growing body of literature on juvenile offenders shows
considerable overlap between criminological, social and biomedical
research, with a consensus emerging around the significance of a
developmental understanding of the emergence of juvenile delinquency.

Importantly, juvenile offenders have consistently been identified as a
population that suffers from a markedly elevated prevalence and severity
of mental disorder compared with the general juvenile population.
^[@R6],\ [@R7]^ Meeting the needs of these young offenders presents
practical and ethical challenges concerning treatment and management,
including liaison with other agencies.

# What is juvenile delinquency? {#S1}

## Who counts as juvenile? {#S2}

Juvenile delinquency is a term commonly used in academic literature for
referring to a young person who has committed a criminal offence,
although its precise definition can vary according to the local
jurisdiction. The specific reasons underlying these differences are
unclear, but they may arise from the lack of an agreed international
standard. ^[@R8]^

A 'juvenile' in this context refers to an individual who is legally able
to commit a criminal offence owing to being over the minimum age of
criminal responsibility, but who is under the age of criminal majority,
when a person is legally considered an adult. The minimum age of
criminal responsibility varies internationally between 6 and 18 years,
but the age of criminal majority is usually 18 years.

In some cases individuals older than 18 years may be heard in a juvenile
court, and therefore will still be considered juveniles; indeed, the
United Nations (UN) defines 'youth' as between 15 and 24 years of age.
The term 'child delinquents' has been used in reference to children
below the age of 13 who have committed a delinquent act, ^[@R9]^
although elsewhere 'children' are often defined as being under 18 years
of age. The term 'young offenders' is broad, and can refer to offenders
aged under 18 years or include young adults up to their mid-20s.

## What is a crime? {#S3}

A 'delinquent' is an individual who has committed a criminal offence.
Delinquency therefore encompasses an enormous range of behaviours which
are subject to legislation differing from one jurisdiction to another,
and are subject to changes in law over time. Whereas acts of theft and
serious interpersonal violence are commonly considered to constitute
criminal offences, other acts including alcohol consumption and sexual
behaviour in young people are tolerated to very differing degrees across
the world. Sometimes these differences arise as a consequence of
historical or cultural factors, and they may be underpinned by
traditional religious laws, such as in some Middle Eastern countries.
Some offences may be shared between jurisdictions but be enforced to
differing standards -- for instance, 'unlawful assembly', often used to
prevent riots, is applied in Singapore to young people meeting in public
in groups of five or more as part of police efforts to tackle youth
gangs. Furthermore, 'status offences' -- acts that would be permissible
in adults but criminalised in children, such as consumption of alcohol
or truancy -- not only vary between jurisdictions, but contribute to
discontinuity when comparing juvenile delinquency with adult populations
in the same jurisdiction.

Lack of clarity can also arise in jurisdictions where a young offender
is processed via a welfare system rather than a youth justice process.
Countries with a high minimum age of criminal responsibility may not
technically criminalise young people for behaviour that would normally
be prosecuted and therefore classed as 'delinquent' elsewhere.

Not all incarcerated juveniles are 'delinquent', since some may be
detained pre-trial and may not be convicted of an offence. Even if
convicted, it would be wrong to assume that every 'juvenile delinquent'
meets criteria for a diagnosis of conduct disorder; offences vary
considerably and may not be associated with a broad repertoire of
offending behaviour. Also, most 'juvenile delinquents' do not pose an
immediate risk of violence to others, and the vast majority of convicted
juveniles serve their sentences in the community.

To meet the diagnostic criteria of conduct disorder requires evidence of
a persistent pattern of dissocial or aggressive conduct, such that it
defies age-appropriate social expectations. Behaviours may include
cruelty to people or animals, truancy, frequent and severe temper
tantrums, excessive fighting or bullying and fire-setting; diagnosis of
conduct disorder can be made in the marked presence of one of these
behaviours. ^[@R10]^

Overall, the term 'juvenile delinquent' is used extensively in academic
literature, but requires some care. It can be a potentially problematic
term, and in some contexts can strike a pejorative tone with misleading
negative assumptions. For several years the UN has used the phrase
'children in conflict with the law' to describe the breadth of the
heterogeneous group of individuals under the age of 18 who have broken
the law or are at risk of doing so.

# General principles of juvenile justice {#S4}

## Welfare *v.* justice models {#S5}

The sentencing of an individual convicted of a criminal offence is
largely driven by three key considerations: retribution (punishment),
deterrence and rehabilitation. In the case of juvenile offenders the
principle of rehabilitation is often assigned the greatest weight.
^[@R11]^

Special consideration for juveniles within the criminal justice system
is not a new concept. In Roman law, the principle of *doli incapax*
protected young children from prosecution owing to the presumption of a
lack of capacity and understanding required to be guilty of a criminal
offence. Most countries have some provision for special treatment of
children who come into conflict with the law, however, the degree to
which this is provided varies across the world. ^[@R1],[@R12]^ In some
countries a 'welfare' model prevails, which focuses on the needs of the
child, diagnosis, treatment and more informal procedures, whereas other
countries favour a 'justice' model, which emphasises accountability,
punishment and procedural formality.

Belgium is frequently cited as an example of a country with a strong
welfare process, supported by a high minimum age of criminal
responsibility of 18 years. Similarly, France built a strong welfare
reputation by placing education and rehabilitation at the centre of
youth justice reforms in the 1940s. New Zealand in 1989 established the
widely praised system of Family Group Conferencing as an integral part
of youth justice, with a focus on restoration of relationships and
reduction of incarceration that would be considered part of a welfare
approach. In contrast, the UK and the USA have traditionally been
associated with a justice model and low age of criminal responsibility
-- 10 years in England and Wales, and as low as 6 years in several US
states.

Within welfare or justice models, a young person may at some point be
'deprived of liberty' -- defined as any form of detention under official
authorities in a public or private location which the child is not
permitted to leave. Locations in which children may be deprived of
liberty include police stations, detention centres, juvenile or adult
prisons, secure remand homes, work or boot camps, penitentiary colonies,
locked specialised schools, educational or rehabilitation
establishments, military camps and prisons, immigration detention
centres, secure youth hostels and hospitals. ^[@R13]^

## Between the less and more punitive systems {#S6}

The UN supports the development of specialised systems for managing
children in conflict with the law. When the first children\'s courts
were set up in the USA in the 1930s, they were widely praised as a
progressive system for serving the best interests of the child. Although
informality was championed as a particular benefit, in the 1960s
substantial concerns arose about due process and the protection of the
legal rights of minors. The subsequent development of formal juvenile
courts occurred in the context of a continuing ethos of rehabilitation
of young people, with a move away from incarceration of juveniles in the
1970s, especially in Massachusetts and California. However, following a
marked peak in juvenile offending statistics during the 1980s and 1990s,
public and political opinion swung firmly in a more punitive direction.
This was accompanied by legal reforms that increased the severity of
penalties available to juvenile courts and lowered the age threshold for
juveniles to be tried in adult criminal courts.

When the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child entered into force in
1990, the USA was not a signatory owing to 22 states permitting capital
punishment of individuals who had committed their crimes as juveniles.
It is reported that 19 juvenile offenders were executed in the USA
between 1990 and 2005. Although this number may represent a small
percentage of the total who faced the death penalty in the USA during
that period, the practice was widely criticised by international bodies
and organisations. ^[@R14]^ A landmark ruling in the US Supreme Court
^[@R15]^ outlawed the execution of juvenile offenders in the USA, but to
date a small number of countries worldwide still implement this
practice, sometimes as a result of religious laws.

However, it would be wrong to assume that welfare systems are
automatically preferable to a juvenile justice approach, since welfare
arrangements can be equally coercive in terms of deprivation of liberty
of juveniles. They may lack due process, safeguards for obtaining
reliable evidence from young people, processes for testing evidence, and
procedures for scrutiny or appeal following disposal.

# Trends in youth crime {#S7}

The USA witnessed a dramatic increase in arrest rates of young people
for homicide and other violent crimes in the 1980s and 1990s, sometimes
referred to as the 'violence epidemic'. ^[@R16]^ The ensuing moral panic
led to harsh and punitive policy changes in juvenile justice and,
although official statistics document a subsequent fall of 20% in court
case-loads between 1997 and 2009, victimisation surveys have indicated a
degree of continuity in high levels of offending, consistent with a
reported increase in juvenile offending between 2000 and 2006. ^[@R17]^

In common with the USA and several other high-income countries, the UK
also experienced a rise in juvenile offending in the 1980s and 1990s,
but figures from the Youth Justice Board for England and Wales appear to
indicate a general improvement in recent years. Between 2009/2010 and
2014/2015 a 67% reduction has been observed in the number of young
people entering the juvenile justice system for the first time, a 65%
reduction in the number of young people receiving a caution or court
disposal and a 57% reduction in the number of young people in custody.
^[@R18]^ These figures support an overall decrease in juvenile offending
noted since the early 1990s. ^[@R19]^

Youth crime figures from Australia have documented a 4% reduction in the
overall number of young offenders in 2013/2014, ^[@R20]^ although the
number of violent offences committed by young people in the urbanised
and densely populated region of Victoria has increased by 75% between
2000 and 2010. ^[@R21]^

The Nordic countries have witnessed an increase in the number of
law-abiding youths from 1994 and 2008. ^[@R22]^ In Sweden, both
objective levels of juvenile crime ^[@R23]^ and self-reported
involvement in juvenile crime ^[@R24]^ have fallen between 1995 and
2005. Similarly in Finland, where, despite fluctuating trends in
juvenile drug use, juvenile property and violent crime is reported to
have decreased between 1992 and 2013. ^[@R25]^

To summarise, whereas regional and annual trends in juvenile offending
are observed and expected, a global trend characterised by decreased
juvenile offending appears to have emerged in recent years. Indeed, UN
data from a sample of 40 countries lend support to this conclusion,
indicating a decrease in the proportion of juveniles suspected (10.9% to
9.2%) and convicted (7.5% to 6%) of crime between 2004 and 2012,
respectively. ^[@R26]^

## Juvenile gang membership {#S8}

### Influence on crime involvement {#S9}

One of the features of urbanisation across the world has been the rise
of youth gangs, groups of young people often defined by geographical
area, ethnic identity or ideology; recent reports indicate a rise in
groups with extremist views. Explanatory models for the rise in youth
gangs include factors such as economic migration, loss of extended
family networks, reduced supervision of children, globalisation and
exposure to inaccessible lifestyle 'ideals' portrayed in modern media.

Authorities in Japan attributed a surge in serious youth crime in the
1990s primarily to juvenile bike gangs known as 'bosozoku', who were
deemed responsible for over 80% of serious offences perpetrated by
juveniles, putatively bolstered by a crackdown on yakuza organised crime
syndicates. ^[@R27]^ Although difficult to quantify, gang involvement
appears to feature in a large proportion of juvenile offences, and there
is evidence that gang membership has a facilitating effect on
perpetration of the most serious violence including homicide. ^[@R28]^

### Mental health {#S10}

Compared with general and juvenile offender populations, juvenile gang
members exhibit significantly higher rates of mental health problems
such as conduct disorder/antisocial personality disorder, post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety disorders and attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). ^[@R29]^ Gang members, compared with
non-violent men who do not belong to a gang, are far more likely to
utilise mental health services and display significantly higher levels
of psychiatric morbidity, most notably antisocial personality disorder,
psychosis and anxiety disorders. ^[@R30]^ Gang membership has also been
positively correlated with an increased incidence of depressed mood and
suicidal ideation among younger gang members. ^[@R31]^ Prevalence of
ADHD is significantly greater in incarcerated youth populations (30.1%)
than in general youth population estimates (3--7%), ^[@R32]^ therefore
it may be reasonable to expect a similarly increased prevalence in
juvenile gang members. ADHD has also been associated with a
significantly increased risk of comorbid mood/affective disorder.
^[@R33]^

# Forensic child and adolescent psychiatric services {#S11}

Increased awareness of constitutional and environmental factors that
contribute to juvenile offending has strengthened a public health
perspective towards the problem, and in the UK entry into the youth
justice system has been adopted as an indicator of general public
health. ^[@R34]^

Dictionaries frequently define 'forensic' as meaning 'legal', implying a
relationship with any court of law. Indeed, many forensic psychiatrists,
particularly in child and adolescent services, undertake roles that
encompass multiple legal domains relevant to mental health, including
criminal law, family and child custody proceedings, special educational
tribunals, and immigration or extradition matters.

Specialist forensic psychiatric services vary considerably between
countries, ^[@R35]^ but usually forensic psychiatrists assess and treat
individuals in secure psychiatric hospitals, prisons, law courts, police
stations and in the community under various levels of security,
supervision and support. In some countries there has been a trend
towards forensic psychiatrists working almost exclusively with courts of
law, providing independent specialist opinion to assist the court.

In the UK, forensic child and adolescent psychiatry has emerged as a
clinical subspecialty. Some services are based in specialist secure
hospitals for young people and cater for the relatively small number of
high-risk young offenders with the most severe mental disorders. In the
absence of such specialist resources, young people may be managed in
suboptimal environments such as juvenile prisons, secure residential
placements or secure mental health wards for adults, or even fail to
receive treatment at all.

In light of growing evidence-based interventions for juvenile offenders
within a public health framework, ^[@R36]^ the role of child and family
mental health services may increase over time. Aside from direct
clinical roles, practitioners in forensic child and adolescent
psychiatry are also well placed to work with a wide range of partner
agencies on the planning and delivery of broader interventions for the
primary and secondary prevention of juvenile delinquency.

# Treatment {#S12}

## Prevalence of mental health problems among juvenile offenders {#S13}

Rates of mental health problems among juvenile offenders are
significantly higher than in their non-offender peers, with two-thirds
of male juvenile offenders in the USA suggested as meeting criteria for
at least one psychiatric disorder. ^[@R37]^ One in five juvenile
offenders is estimated to suffer severe functional impairment as a
result of their mental health problems. ^[@R38]^ Paradoxically, these
needs are often unmet, ^[@R39],[@R40]^ despite evidence of increased
contact with mental health services, particularly among first-time
juvenile offenders. ^[@R41],[@R42]^ Of additional concern are the
reported associations between mental health problems and mortality in
incarcerated juveniles, ^[@R43]^ including an elevated suicide rate for
males. ^[@R44]^ Mental health problems must be a target in interventions
for juvenile offenders; however, treatments which focus solely on
clinical problems are unlikely to result in benefit for criminogenic
outcomes. ^[@R45]^ There is therefore a clear need for effective
interventions which address both the clinical and criminogenic needs of
these individuals.

## Evidence-based treatments for mental health problems {#S14}

### Treatment of PTSD {#S15}

Estimates regarding the prevalence of PTSD among juvenile offenders
suggest that 20 to 23% meet the clinical criteria, ^[@R46],[@R47]^ with
prevalence rates significantly higher among females than males (40% *v*.
17%). ^[@R46]^ Moreover, with 62% experiencing trauma within the first 5
years of life ^[@R47]^ and up to 93% experiencing at least one traumatic
event during childhood or adolescence, ^[@R48]^ this should be a target
for intervention.

Cognitive--behavioural therapy (CBT) is regarded as the most effective
intervention for adults with PTSD ^[@R49]^ and also has demonstrated
efficacy for juvenile non-offenders. ^[@R50],[@R51]^ There is limited
evidence suggesting a significant reduction in self-reported symptoms of
PTSD following group-based CBT in male juvenile offenders, ^[@R52]^ and
of an adapted version of CBT, cognitive processing therapy, ^[@R53]^
also resulting in a significant reduction in self-reported symptoms of
PTSD and depression compared with waitlist controls. ^[@R54]^

A trauma-focused emotion regulation intervention (TARGET) has received
preliminary empirical support for use in this population. TARGET
resulted in nearly twice as much reduction in PTSD symptom severity as
treatment as usual (TAU), ^[@R55]^ in addition to significant reductions
in depression, behavioural disturbances and increased optimism. ^[@R56]^

### Mood/anxiety disorders and self-harm {#S16}

Juvenile offenders in the UK present with a high prevalence of mood and
anxiety disorders (67% of females, 41% of males), self-harm (11% of
females, 7% of males) and history of suicide attempts (33% of females,
20% of males). ^[@R57]^ Similarly high prevalence has also been observed
cross-culturally, namely in the USA, ^[@R37],[@R58]^ Switzerland
^[@R59]^ and Finland. ^[@R60]^

Despite such high prevalence, there appears to be a paucity of
high-quality evaluations regarding the effectiveness of interventions
for juvenile offenders with mood and/or anxiety disorders, or problems
with self-harm. However, the limited evidence that is available suggests
that group-based CBT may aid symptom reduction. ^[@R61]^ Recovery rates
for major depressive disorder following group-based CBT are over double
those for a life skills tutoring intervention (39% *v*. 19%,
respectively), although no significant difference was noted at 6- or
12-month follow-up. CBT also resulted in significantly greater
improvements in self- and observer-reported symptoms of depression and
social functioning. ^[@R62]^

However, group-based CBT is not reported to be significantly different
from TAU in reduction of self-harm, ^[@R63]^ whereas individual CBT is
not significantly different from TAU in outcomes for depression,
anxiety, conduct disorder or PTSD. ^[@R64]^ Yet recruitment to and
retention in intervention seems good, suggesting that CBT is feasible to
implement in juvenile offender populations. ^[@R64]^

Evaluations of alternative interventions have posited muscle relaxation
as effective in improving juvenile offenders\' tolerance of frustration.
^[@R65]^ Dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT) has also been reported to
significantly reduce incidences of physical aggression in a juvenile
offender population ^[@R66]^ and among juvenile non-offenders expressing
suicidal ideation. ^[@R67]^ It significantly reduced serious behavioural
problems and staff punitive actions among juvenile offenders within a
mental health unit, although no similar significant reductions were
observed for those without mental health problems. ^[@R68]^

### Evidence-based treatments for conduct disorder: family approaches {#S17}

Relationships with family and peers are recognised as key factors in the
criminogenic profile of juvenile offenders. ^[@R69]^ Multisystemic
therapy (MST) is a family-focused intervention targeting characteristics
related to antisocial behaviour, including family relationships and peer
associations, ^[@R70]^ with evidence from US and UK studies suggesting
MST is a beneficial intervention for juvenile offenders. When compared
with conventional services offered by juvenile offending services, MST
was associated with a significant reduction in the likelihood of
reoffending, ^[@R71]^ maintained 2 and 4 years post-treatment.
^[@R72],[@R73]^ Offenders engaging in MST are reported to be
significantly less likely to become involved in serious and violent
offending. ^[@R73],[@R74]^ Significant improvements have also been
observed in both self- and parent-reported delinquency, ^[@R74]^ family
relations and interactions, ^[@R73]^ and home, school, community and
emotional functioning. ^[@R71]^ A cost offset analysis of MST among UK
juvenile offenders suggested that combining MST and conventional
services provides greater cost savings than conventional services alone,
as a result of its positive effects on recidivism. ^[@R75]^ Qualitative
impressions of MST from juvenile offenders and their parents indicate
that key components of a successful delivery of MST include the quality
of the therapeutic relationship and ability to re-engage the offender
with educational systems. ^[@R76]^

Some evidence also exists regarding the efficacy of MST when delivered
to non-offender antisocial juvenile populations outside the USA and the
UK. Compared with TAU, MST resulted in a significantly greater increase
in social competence and caregiver satisfaction, and a significant
reduction in referrals for out-of-home placements, in Norwegian
juveniles exhibiting serious behavioural problems. ^[@R77]^ However, no
significant difference between MST and TAU was reported in outcomes for
antisocial behaviour and psychiatric symptoms in Swedish juvenile
offenders. ^[@R78]^ MST was also found to have no significant benefit
over TAU in outcomes including recidivism in a sample of Canadian
juvenile offenders. ^[@R79]^ These differing outcomes have been posited
as the result of barriers in transferring MST from US and UK populations
owing to differing approaches to juvenile justice between countries
(i.e. a welfare *v*. justice approach). ^[@R78]^ The heterogeneous
nature of studies concerning MST in juvenile offender populations
prevent a firm conclusion being drawn as to its superiority over
alternative interventions, although this does not diminish the positive
outcomes which have been observed. ^[@R80]^

## Substance misuse {#S18}

Motivational interviewing represents a promising approach for juvenile
offenders, particularly as a treatment for substance misuse. ^[@R81]^
Group-based motivational interviewing has received positive feedback
from participants when implemented with first-time juvenile alcohol or
drug offenders, ^[@R82]^ and compared with TAU, juvenile offenders in
receipt of motivational interviewing have greater satisfaction and
display lower, though not statistically significant, rates of recidivism
at 12-months post-motivational interviewing. ^[@R83]^ There is therefore
preliminary evidence for the acceptability and feasibility of
motivational interviewing for substance-misusing juvenile offenders, but
future research regarding long-term outcomes is warranted. To date,
motivational interviewing for difficulties faced by juvenile offenders
beyond that of substance misuse does not appear to have received much
research attention. Juvenile offenders are known for their difficulty to
engage in rehabilitative services, therefore further investigation of
the effectiveness of motivational interviewing in encouraging engagement
is warranted.

Preliminary investigations have also developed a conceptual framework
for the delivery of mindfulness-based interventions (MBI) to
incarcerated substance-misusing juveniles, with qualitative impressions
suggesting this is a potentially feasible and efficacious intervention.
^[@R84]^ Although literature regarding the effectiveness of MBI in
juvenile offenders is scarce, qualitative feedback has indicated
positive reception of this style of intervention, with particular
improvements in subjective well-being reported by juvenile participants.
^[@R85]^

## Employment and education {#S19}

Engaging juvenile offenders with education and skills-based training is
an important component of successful rehabilitation, with positive
engagement in meaningful activities associated with improvements in
areas such as self-belief ^[@R86]^ and protection against future
participation in criminal activities. ^[@R87]^ It is concerning
therefore that an evaluation of the use of leisure time over a 1-week
period by probationary juvenile offenders in Australia indicated only
10% of this time was spent engaging in productive activities, such as
employment or education, with 57% used for passive leisure activities, a
level 30% higher than that of their non-offender peers. ^[@R88]^

Efforts to engage juvenile offenders in vocational and/or occupational
activities have shown benefits in a number of areas. A specialised
vocational and employment training programme (CRAFT) emphasising
practical skills was evaluated against conventional education provision
to juvenile offenders in the USA. Over a 30-month follow-up period,
those engaged in CRAFT were significantly more likely to be in
employment, to have attended an educational diploma programme and to
have attended for a significantly longer period of time. ^[@R89]^
Benefits have also been reported with regard to risk of reoffending,
with an after-school programme in the USA incorporating practical
community projects, educational sessions and family therapy resulting in
a significant reduction in recidivism at 1-year follow-up. ^[@R90]^

Qualitative investigations of US juvenile offenders suggest there is not
a lack of interest in pursuing education among this population, but
rather a disconnection with educational systems when education providers
are perceived not to care about students\' progress. ^[@R91]^ Ensuring
education providers are perceived as proactive and caring in this regard
may therefore be an important consideration for efforts to engage
juvenile offenders with educational systems. Significant barriers to
engagement include difficulties in obtaining accurate information
regarding the offender\'s educational history, in addition to
identifying community-based education providers willing to accept
previously incarcerated juveniles on their release. ^[@R92]^

## Language and communication {#S20}

Difficulties with language and communication skills appear to be
prevalent among juvenile offenders, with estimates of those falling into
the poor or very poor categories ranging from 46 to 67%; overall, up to
90% of juvenile offenders demonstrated language skills below average.
^[@R93]^ Specifically, high rates of illiteracy are reported in this
population, ^[@R94]^ with evidence to suggest that an awareness of such
problems among juvenile offenders themselves is associated with
dissatisfaction and poor self-esteem. ^[@R95]^ These difficulties may
act as barriers to engagement in therapeutic interventions, particularly
those delivered in group settings, as well as re-engagement with
educational systems. Awareness of the challenges these young people face
with regard to confidence and ability to communicate is important, and
potential involvement of a speech and language therapist could be
considered. Preventing deficits in language and communication through
effective schooling and appropriate support in the early years of life
may serve as an aid to effective engagement in rehabilitative
interventions, and may also mitigate the risk of engagement in criminal
activities in the first instance.

# Delivery of therapeutic services {#S21}

## Common challenges to a therapeutic youth justice pathway {#S22}

There are common obstacles to smooth care pathways between different
parts of systems, such as in transitions between secure settings and the
community, between prisons and secure psychiatric settings, and between
child and adult services. In some jurisdictions individuals can only be
treated pharmacologically against their will in a hospital setting, a
safeguard which limits the extent to which individuals can be treated in
prison, but there is still great scope for intervention by prison mental
health teams in juvenile prisons.

## Factors associated with good outcomes {#S23}

A meta-analysis has revealed three primary factors associated with
effective interventions for juvenile offenders: a 'therapeutic'
intervention philosophy, serving high-risk offenders, and quality of
implementation. ^[@R96]^ These findings are consistent with factors
posited as correlating with good outcome in residential centres for
troubled adolescents and juvenile offenders: good staff-adolescent
relations, perception of staff as pro-social role models, positive peer
pressure, an individualised therapeutic programme approach,
developmentally appropriate programmes and activities, clear
expectations and boundaries, and placement locations which allow for
continued family contact. ^[@R97],[@R98]^

In the community, coercive styles of engagement have been found to be
less successful at achieving adherence among juvenile offenders than a
client-centred approach. ^[@R99]^

## Factors associated with poor outcomes {#S24}

'Scared Straight' programmes expose juveniles who have begun to commit
offences to inmates of high-security prisons, yet these approaches have
been discredited due to evidence that risk of recidivism may in fact
increase following such exposure. ^[@R100]^ Similarly poor outcomes have
been observed in programmes modelled on military boot camps, in which
harsh discipline is considered to be of therapeutic benefit, ^[@R101]^
and initiatives such as curfew, probation and hearing juvenile cases in
adult court were also shown to be ineffective in reducing recidivism.
^[@R13]^

Over recent years it has been repeatedly demonstrated that exposure to
juvenile court itself appears to have a detrimental effect on juvenile
offending. ^[@R102]--[@R104]^ This may be partially explained by effects
of labelling, stigma and negative self-image associated with a criminal
conviction, but also the practical consequences of sentences, including
assortment of delinquent peers in community or prison sentences.
Incarceration presents several additional harms, including disturbance
of care and pro-social relationships, discontinuity in education,
association with delinquent peers, and exposure to violence. Half of
detained young offenders in the UK reported victimisation during their
current prison term, ^[@R57]^ while 12% of incarcerated youth in the USA
reported sexual victimisation in the previous year. ^[@R105]^
International agreements state that deprivation of liberty (such as
juvenile prison) should be used as a last resort and for the shortest
time necessary, so should be reserved for the highest-risk offenders.
The cost of juvenile antisocial behaviour is known to be high, and to
fall on many agencies. ^[@R106]^ The current climate of austerity in
public services demands that any interventions should be not only
effective, but also cost-effective, raising a clear challenge -- and
opportunity -- for the implementation of interventions for this
population of vulnerable young people. For example, parenting programmes
have demonstrated sustained benefits for this population,
^[@R107],[@R108]^ with economic analysis indicating gross savings of
£9288 per child over a 25 year period. ^[@R109]^ Considered together
with wider costs of crime, these gross savings exceed the average cost
of parenting programmes (£1177) by a factor of approximately 8 to 1.

# Conclusions {#S25}

Many argue that we have a long way to go before arriving at 'child
friendly' juvenile justice. ^[@R110]^ Around the world there are
variable and inadequate legal frameworks that are not age-appropriate,
there is a lack of age-appropriate services and establishments, and a
lack of a specialist workforce, leading to challenges around training
and supervision to work with this vulnerable population. In the UK and
other high-income countries worldwide, forensic child and adolescent
psychiatry is a multifaceted discipline incorporating legal, psychiatric
and developmental fields. This approach has navigated clinical and
ethical challenges and made an important contribution to welfare and
justice needs by its adoption of an evidence-based therapeutic
intervention philosophy.

[^1]: **Susan Young** is a Senior Lecturer in Forensic Clinical
    Psychology, Imperial College London, UK, and Director of Forensic
    Research and Development, Broadmoor Hospital, West London Mental
    Health NHS Trust, UK. **Ben Greer** is a Student Research Assistant,
    Broadmoor Hospital, West London Mental Health NHS Trust, UK.
    **Richard Church** is a Consultant Forensic and Child and Adolescent
    Psychiatrist, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust,
    King\'s College London, UK.
