==========================================================================================================================================
Systematic review into factors associated with the recruitment crisis in psychiatry in the UK: students', trainees' and consultants' views
==========================================================================================================================================

Abid Choudry
Saeed FarooqCorrespondence to Abid Choudry (abidchoudry@doctors.org.uk)
 [1]_
:Date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To review the literature to examine the factors
   that may be affecting recruitment into psychiatry in the UK. We
   systematically searched four databases to identify studies from 1974
   to 2016 and identified 27 papers that met the specified inclusion
   criteria.

   **Results** Most papers (*n* = 24) were based on questionnaire
   surveys. The population in all studies comprised of 1879
   psychiatrists, 6733 students and 220 746 trainees. About 4–7% of
   students opt for a career in psychiatry. Enrichment activities helped
   to attract students more towards psychiatry than just total time
   spent in the specialty. Job content in terms of the lack of
   scientific basis, poor prognosis and stigma towards psychiatry,
   work-related stress and problems with training jobs were common
   barriers highlighted among students and trainees, affecting
   recruitment. Job satisfaction and family-friendly status of
   psychiatry was rated highly by students, with lifestyle factors
   appearing to be important for trainees who tend to choose psychiatry.

   **Clinical implications** Negative attitudes and stigma towards
   psychiatry continue to persist. Teaching and training in psychiatry
   needs rethinking to improve student experience and recruitment into
   the specialty.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Psychiatry as a career has been negatively regarded and unpopular among
medical students. About 3.6% of British graduates decide on a career in
psychiatry whereas about 6% are needed. :sup:`(n.d.a)` From 2000 to
2011, the absolute number of consultant psychiatrists in England rose
from 2904 to 4394 (an increase of 51%), with similar increases in
Scotland and Wales, in line with the expansion of the consultant
workforce in most secondary care specialties. :sup:`(n.d.a)` A need for
more psychiatric consultant posts has been predicted based on
projections of increasing workloads due to the increased population
needs. :sup:`(n.d.b)` A perceived fall in the proportion of UK medical
school graduates choosing a postgraduate career in psychiatry, and low
competition ratios for first-year core specialist training (CT1) posts
in psychiatry, :sup:`(n.d.c)–(n.d.d)` has led to many questions about
the way in which psychiatry is taught at medical school and how
psychiatry could be made as an attractive career option.
:sup:`(n.d.e)–(n.d.f)`

Low recruitment in psychiatry is a global issue, highlighted in a number
of publications. :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.h)` However, the problem also has
country-specific dimensions, as each country has different factors such
as the pay scale for the specialty, medical education system and
training programmes, which may attract or dissuade medical students from
a career in psychiatry. The subject has not been reviewed systematically
especially in the context of recruitment in the UK. The review question
was: what are the factors that influence recruitment to psychiatry as a
career choice and how can this be improved? The aim of this paper is to
systematically review the literature from the UK on psychiatry as a
career choice. We are specifically interested in identifying the factors
that influence the recruitment into psychiatry with emphasis on barriers
and facilitators affecting recruitment. A greater understanding of the
views ranging from medical students to trainees and consultants working
in the UK may enable curriculum developers and recruitment leads to
design programmes that attract students and trainees to psychiatry as a
career and improve students' attitudes towards psychiatry in the long
term.

.. _S1:

Method
======

We followed the PRISMA statement :sup:`(n.d.i)` as a guide for
conducting the systematic review. The following electronic databases
were searched from 1974 onwards: Medline, EMBASE, CINAHL, PsycINFO.
These databases were selected in view of the fact that almost all the
literature published from the UK would be covered in these databases.
Keywords used in the searches included: medical students, trainees,
doctors, consultant, attitudes, psychiatry, career, undergraduate
psychiatry. Boolean operations and truncations were added to allow for
alternative endings in the keyword searches. The search was last updated
in August 2016.

We included studies that described a UK sample, were published in
English in a peer-reviewed journal and provided original data on careers
in psychiatry or factors affecting recruitment in psychiatry. We
excluded studies that had the primary objective of addressing other
issues that were not directly relevant to recruitment in psychiatry but
only mentioned their effects on career choice as a secondary effect.
Studies which provided data on medical careers in general were included
if these provided data relevant to psychiatric careers or recruitment.

The electronic search returned 601 relevant abstracts and titles. We
screened the titles and abstracts and excluded the studies that were not
directly relevant to the objectives of the review. Therefore we excluded
the studies that did not describe a UK sample or did not provide the
original data. We also excluded the studies that described the
recruitment to certain subspecialties and therefore not relevant to the
recruitment to psychiatry in general. After screening these titles and
abstracts we decided to examine 56 full text papers. Finally, we
included 27 papers in the review. Further details are provided in `Fig.
1 <#F1>`__. The studies were conducted in a number of different
populations, settings and periods, and also used diverse methodologies
varying from surveys to statistics derived from databases. The 30-item
Attitudes Towards Psychiatry (ATP-30), :sup:`(n.d.j)` a validated tool
used to assess attitudes of students towards psychiatry, was used in
four papers; other papers used different questionnaires to assess
attitudes. Due to the diverse methodologies it was inappropriate to pool
the data to produce a statistical summary. We therefore describe the
main findings and produce a narrative summary of results.

.. figure:: 346f1
   :alt: Summary of the abstracts reviewed to identify relevant papers.
   CAMHS, child and adolescent mental health services.
   :name: F1

   Summary of the abstracts reviewed to identify relevant papers. CAMHS,
   child and adolescent mental health services.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

.. _S3:

Characteristics of included studies
-----------------------------------

`Table 1 <#T1>`__ shows the characteristics of the 27 studies included
in the review. The majority of studies (*n* = 24) were surveys and
questionnaire-based studies. The other studies included one database
study of doctors entering training posts and two retrospective cohort
studies, which looked at which medical school psychiatrists had
attended. These reported on medical students (*n* = 12), trainees (*n* =
10), medical students and trainees (*n* = 1), trainees and consultants
(*n* = 1) and consultants (*n* = 3). One of these studies looked at data
from postgraduate departments in different medical schools, and one
study reported on the database of applicants to MMC (Modernising Medical
Careers) for training posts.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Study characteristics

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Author/year | Population  | Me          | Total       | M:F ratio,  |
   |             |             | thod/design | sample, *n* | %/          |
   |             |             |             |             | response    |
   |             |             |             |             | rate, %     |
   +=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
   | Brook, 1976 | Medical     | Re          | 531         | No data     |
   | :su         | school of   | trospective |             | provided    |
   | p:`(n.d.k)` | origin      | cohort      |             |             |
   |             | for         |             |             |             |
   |             | ps          |             |             |             |
   |             | ychiatrists |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Brook, 1983 | Medical     | Re          | 1229        | No data     |
   | :su         | school of   | trospective |             | provided    |
   | p:`(n.d.l)` | origin      | cohort      |             |             |
   |             | for         |             |             |             |
   |             | ps          |             |             |             |
   |             | ychiatrists |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Levine *et  | Medical     | Survey      | 30          | No M:F      |
   | al*, 1983   | students    |             |             | data/100    |
   | :su         |             |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.m)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Brook *et   | Medical     | Survey      | 498         | 64:36/40    |
   | al*, 1986   | students    |             |             |             |
   | :su         |             |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.n)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Calvert *et | Medical     | Survey      | 392         | M:F, no     |
   | al*, 1999   | students    |             |             | significant |
   | :su         |             |             |             | di          |
   | p:`(n.d.o)` |             |             |             | fference/70 |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Mcparland   | Medical     | Cohort      | 379         | 54:46/84    |
   | *et al*,    | students    | study –     |             |             |
   | 2003        |             | survey      |             |             |
   | :su         |             |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.p)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Maidment    | Medical     | Survey      | 837         | 33.         |
   | *et al*,    | students    |             |             | 6:66.4/99.6 |
   | 2003        |             |             |             |             |
   | :su         |             |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.q)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Petrides &  | Medical     | Cohort      | 8283        | Only        |
   | McManus,    | students    | study –     |             | descriptive |
   | 2004        |             | survey      |             | data        |
   | :su         |             |             |             | provided in |
   | p:`(n.d.r)` |             |             |             | this paper  |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Rajagopal   | Medical     | Survey      | 301         | 3           |
   | *et al*,    | students    |             |             | 1.9:68.1/52 |
   | 2004        |             |             |             |             |
   | :su         |             |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.s)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Cu          | Medical     | Survey      | 467         | 44:64/51    |
   | rtis-Barton | students    |             |             |             |
   | & Eagles,   |             |             |             |             |
   | 2011        |             |             |             |             |
   | :su         |             |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.t)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Budd *et    | Medical     | Survey      | 905         | 36:64/Not   |
   | al*, 2011   | students at |             |             | provided    |
   | :su         | 4           |             |             | clearly     |
   | p:`(n.d.u)` | different   |             |             | reported    |
   |             | medical     |             |             | range       |
   |             | schools     |             |             | 50–85%      |
   |             |             |             |             | depending   |
   |             |             |             |             | on          |
   |             |             |             |             | medical     |
   |             |             |             |             | school      |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Archdall    | Medical     | Survey      | 15          | 30:70/100   |
   | *et al*,    | students    |             |             |             |
   | 2013        |             |             |             |             |
   | :su         |             |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.v)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Halder *et  | Medical     | Survey      | 484         | 34:66/None  |
   | al*, 2013   | students –  |             |             |             |
   | :su         | 18 UK       |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.w)` | medical     |             |             |             |
   |             | schools     |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Farooq *et  | Medical     | Survey      | 291         | Males       |
   | al*, 2014   | students    |             |             | 37:63/16    |
   | :su         | (only UK    |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.x)` | data used)  |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Maidment    | Trainee     | Survey      | 234         | 52.         |
   | *et al*,    | doctors     |             |             | 1:47.9/67.4 |
   | 2004        |             |             |             |             |
   | :su         |             |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.q)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Goldacre    | Trainee     | Survey      | 21 845 year | Year 1      |
   | *et al*,    | doctors     |             | 1           | 55:45/75    |
   | 2005        | (graduates  |             | 17 741 year | Year 3      |
   | :su         | from 1974   |             | 3           | 56:44/74    |
   | p:`(n.d.y)` | to          |             |             |             |
   |             | 2000, UK    |             |             |             |
   |             | medical     |             |             |             |
   |             | schools)    |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Lambert *et | Trainee     | Survey      | 572         | No M:F      |
   | al*, 2006   | doctors     |             |             | data/74     |
   | :su         |             |             |             |             |
   | p:`(n.d.z)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Fazel *et   | Trainee     | Database    | 31 434      | No M:F data |
   | al*, 2009   | doctors     | analysis    |             |             |
   | :sup        | (all        |             |             |             |
   | :`(n.d.aa)` | applicants  |             |             |             |
   |             | to MMC for  |             |             |             |
   |             | training    |             |             |             |
   |             | posts)      |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Barras &    | Trainee     | Survey      | 359         | 52.         |
   | Harris,     | doctors     |             |             | 2:47.8/16.1 |
   | 2012        |             |             |             |             |
   | :sup        |             |             |             |             |
   | :`(n.d.ab)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Goldacre    | Trainee     | Survey      | 9155        | 37:63/56    |
   | *et al*,    | doctors who |             |             |             |
   | 2012        | had         |             |             |             |
   | :sup        | qualified   |             |             |             |
   | :`(n.d.ac)` | in 2002,    |             |             |             |
   |             | 2005,       |             |             |             |
   |             | 2008        |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Goldacre    | Trainee     | Survey      | 33 974      | Year 1      |
   | *et al*,    | doctors who |             |             | 49:51/65.9  |
   | 2013        | qualified   |             |             | Year 3      |
   | :sup        | between     |             |             | 51:49/68.6  |
   | :`(n.d.ad)` | 1974        |             |             | Year 5      |
   |             | and 2009    |             |             | 52:48/69.5  |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Svirko *et  | Trainee     | Survey      | 9348        | 46.         |
   | al*, 2013   | doctors who |             |             | 9:55.8/52.2 |
   | :sup        | qualified   |             |             |             |
   | :`(n.d.ae)` | 2005, 2008, |             |             |             |
   |             | 2009        |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Collier &   | Hospital    | Survey      | 19 medical  | No M:F      |
   | Moreton,    | p           |             | schools     | data/70     |
   | 2013        | ostgraduate |             |             |             |
   | :sup        | departments |             |             |             |
   | :`(n.d.af)` | of 19       |             |             |             |
   |             | medical     |             |             |             |
   |             | schools     |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Woolf *et   | Medical     | Cohort      | 105         | 34:66/50    |
   | al*, 2015   | students    | study –     |             |             |
   | :sup        | and         | survey      |             |             |
   | :`(n.d.ag)` | trainee     |             |             |             |
   |             | doctors     |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Korszun *et | Trainee     | Survey      | 309         | 61.         |
   | al*, 2011   | doctors,    |             |             | 5:38.5/None |
   | :sup        | academics,  |             |             |             |
   | :`(n.d.ah)` | trust       |             |             |             |
   |             | clinicians  |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Dein *et    | Consultants | Survey      | 72          | 68:32/82.7  |
   | al*, 2007   |             |             |             |             |
   | :sup        |             |             |             |             |
   | :`(n.d.ai)` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Denman *et  | Consultants | Survey      | C           | 55:45/41.7  |
   | al*, 2016   | and         |             | onsultants: | (           |
   | :sup        | trainees    |             | 47          | consultants |
   | :`(n.d.aj)` |             |             | Trainees:   | 42%,        |
   |             |             |             | 51          | trainees    |
   |             |             |             |             | 41%)        |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

   M, male; F, female; MMC, Modernising Medical Careers.

   Data not used from this paper just broad findings in review.

In survey-based studies response rates varied from 16% to 100%. Mean
response rate from the papers which had figures available (*n* = 20) was
63.3%. The population in all studies comprised of 1879 psychiatrists,
6733 students and 220 746 trainees. One database study :sup:`(n.d.aa)`
looked at 31 434 trainee doctors, and studies by Goldacre *et al* were
aimed at all doctors in training, accounting for large numbers of
respondents in the trainee subcategory. :sup:`(n.d.y)–(n.d.ae)`

.. _S4:

The influence of the medical school and teaching practices
----------------------------------------------------------

Most of the research addressing the influence of the medical school and
teaching practices on selecting psychiatry as a career was carried out
in the 1970's and 1980's. Two studies by Brook *et al*
:sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.n)` looked at the medical school of origin for 531
psychiatrists between 1961 and 1970 and reported no significant
relationship between schools that had a professional unit or specific
teaching programme and students pursuing psychiatry in the long term.
However, it was noted that those schools that produced fewer
psychiatrists tended to have either a recently established professional
unit or none. :sup:`(n.d.k)`

No clear pattern emerged in terms of the type of teaching offered at
each university and the impact this had on choice of psychiatry as a
career in the long term. :sup:`(n.d.k)` All four Scottish schools, and
Cambridge and Oxford were noted to be higher in terms of producing
psychiatrists, attributed possibly to the well-established professional
units such as the Maudsley and Bethlem Royal hospitals. :sup:`(n.d.k)`
The personality, charisma and enthusiasm of teachers were associated
with an increase in the uptake of psychiatry in the long term.
:sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.l)`

Brook *et al* :sup:`(n.d.l)` found that the effectiveness of teaching
rather that the amount of teaching had an effect on student attitudes
and recruitment into psychiatry The attitude of non-psychiatric teachers
appeared to be influential with doctors experiencing negative attitudes
of other doctors towards psychiatry. :sup:`(n.d.l)` The two hospitals
which ranked top in terms of producing psychiatrists had changed their
teaching model. One stressed the importance of psychiatry as being part
of general medicine, emphasising the effectiveness of physical therapy,
whereas the other placed emphasis on liaison psychiatry and
psychotherapy. :sup:`(n.d.l)`

More recent work by Collier *et al* :sup:`(n.d.af)` looked into the
teaching time allocated for psychiatry in foundation programmes across
the country. They found that only 2.3% of teaching was dedicated to
psychiatry compared with 44.1% to medical and surgical topics.
:sup:`(n.d.af)` Exposure to psychiatry remained limited with 4 out of 17
hospitals in the survey not having any teaching on psychiatry for
medical students. :sup:`(n.d.af)` Doctors generally led a higher
proportion of medicine and surgery teaching sessions (63%) compared with
psychiatry (48%). :sup:`(n.d.af)`

.. _S5:

Medical students' views of psychiatry and factors affecting career choice
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Twelve studies examined the factors affecting medical students' career
choice and one study looked at both medical students and trainees.
Petrides *et al* :sup:`(n.d.r)` studied the theoretical understanding of
how different medical specialties are perceived and how choices are
made. Psychiatrists were found to have a more artistic approach to
medicine, seeing interpreting and responding imaginatively to a range of
medical, social, ethical and other problems. This is in keeping with
early work by Levine *et al* :sup:`(n.d.m)` who also found that there
was a group of students who were ‘psychologically minded’ and they could
be identified and encouraged to make psychiatry as career choice.

Budd *et al* :sup:`(n.d.u)` found that job satisfaction (98%, *n* = 128)
and family-friendly status of psychiatry (79%, *n* = 103) were important
for students who rated psychiatry as one of their top three choices.
:sup:`(n.d.u)` The academic status was significantly less important
(48%) for students who placed psychiatry as their top three specialty
schools *v.* 63% for those who did not place psychiatry in their top
three choice. :sup:`(n.d.u)`

.. _S6:

Choice of psychiatry as a career among medical and sixth form students
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The number of students choosing psychiatry has remained fairly stable at
around 4–7%. :sup:`(n.d.t)–(n.d.x)` Three per cent of students from six
medical schools placed psychiatry as their first choice, with 18%
seriously considering it. :sup:`(n.d.n)` Halder *et al* :sup:`(n.d.w)`
found similar results in 18 medical schools; 16% chose psychiatry as a
future career on entering medical school but by the final year only 3%
had decided to pursue a career in the subject. These results were
replicated by Farooq *et al* :sup:`(n.d.x)` In a survey of sixth form
students, Maidment *et al* :sup:`(n.d.ak)` reported that 60.9% (*n* =
363) indicated that it would be very likely or they would definitely
want to pursue psychiatry as a career. In terms of overall intentions to
pursue a career in a specialty, the ratings for psychiatry was similar
to general medicine at 12.4% (*n* = 72) *v.* 12.2% (*n* = 69)
respectively. :sup:`(n.d.ak)`

.. _S7:

Effect of undergraduate attachment and education on choosing psychiatry as a career
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Positive attitudes towards psychiatry and the influence by a teacher
during the attachment correlated with an intention to purse psychiatry
as a career in the long term. :sup:`(n.d.ak)–(n.d.q)` Three studies
highlighted the importance of psychiatric attachment. Student attitudes
improved as the attachment progressed. :sup:`(n.d.u),(n.d.p),(n.d.q)`
Maidment *et al* :sup:`(n.d.ak)` found 1.4% of fourth-year medical
students expressed a definite intention to pursue which rose to 4.7%
after their attachment. :sup:`(n.d.ak)` McParland *et al* :sup:`(n.d.p)`
reported that 19% (*n* = 58/309) of students were very attracted to
psychiatry or had a definite intention to pursue psychiatry at the start
of the placement, which increased to 27% (*n* = 101/373) of students at
the end of the attachment. The importance of the undergraduate
experience was highlighted by a recent study showing 50% of consultants
and 37% of trainees surveyed decided on a career in psychiatry while
still at medical school. :sup:`(n.d.aj)`

Calvert *et al* :sup:`(n.d.o)` looked into the attitudes of medical
students towards psychiatry and psychiatric patients at year 1, 3 and 5
in medical school. First-year medical students were more likely to have
stereotypical views compared with third- and fifth-year students, and
were more likely to agree with statements such as ‘Psychiatry deals with
imaginary illness’ (mean 1.4, s.d. = 0.9, *P* < 0.5). :sup:`(n.d.o)`
Fifth-year students (mean 3.2, s.d. = 1.4) showed lower agreement than
third-year medical students (mean 3.6, s.d. = 1.2, *P* < 0.5) with the
statement ‘Psychiatry is as a challenging career’. :sup:`(n.d.o)` As
they progressed through medical school, students recognised that mental
illness has serious morbidity and that people do recover from mental
illness, :sup:`(n.d.o)` showing that attitudes towards psychiatric
patients improved with greater clinical experience but possibly became
more negative towards psychiatry as a career.

Other factors that appeared to affect students positively included
enrichment activities, i.e. activities beyond standard teaching and
clinical placements led to a significantly increased interest in
psychiatry. :sup:`(n.d.w)` These included research experience in
psychiatry (13% *v.* 4% in those not interested in psychiatry, *P* =
0.001), university psychiatry clubs (38% *v.* 11%, *P* < 0.001),
psychiatry electives (14% *v.* 1%, *P* < 0.001) and psychiatry special
study modules (38% *v.* 16%, *P* < 0.001). :sup:`(n.d.w)`

McParland *et al* :sup:`(n.d.p)` identified factors which increased
interest in psychiatry, including: influence or encouragement by someone
during the attachment (74%, *n* = 282), particularly the influence by
consultants (43%, *n* = 163), exposure to interesting and stimulating
ideas (29%, *n* = 110), liking someone's approach (27%, *n* = 103),
feeling someone believed in their ability (11%, *n* = 41) and having
formed close working relationships (9%, *n* = 33). :sup:`(n.d.p)` Other
factors that had a significant impact were: receiving encouragement from
the consultants (*n* = 374, *P* < 0.001, *r* = 0.26), seeing patients
respond to treatment (*n* = 374, *P* < 0.001, *r* = 0.20) and having a
direct role in the involvement of patient care (*n* = 374, *P* < 0.001,
*r* = 0.26). :sup:`(n.d.p)`

.. _S8:

Factors which did not affect career choice of medical students
--------------------------------------------------------------

Seeing patients in different settings or different phases of the illness
had no effect on career choice of medical students when deciding their
career intentions. :sup:`(n.d.w)` Interestingly, one study found that
the earning potential and status of psychiatry had no effect on
selecting psychiatry as a career choice. :sup:`(n.d.u)` Other factors
related to teaching such as quality of rating of small group teaching
and lectures, :sup:`(n.d.w)` the curriculum type used
:sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.q)` and performance at viva examinations and multiple
choice questions also had no effect on the career choice. :sup:`(n.d.q)`

.. _S9:

Factors discouraging medical students to choose psychiatry as a career
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Curtis-Barton *et al* :sup:`(n.d.t)` in their survey (*n* = 467) found
that the factors discouraging students to pursue a career in psychiatry
included: prognosis of patients (62%), perception that there is a lack
of evidence in diagnosis (51%), lack of scientific basis (53%) and the
amount of bureaucracy and paperwork in the specialty (48%). Other
discouraging factors included the stigma towards psychiatry (30%), the
standing of the profession among medical colleagues (31%) and comments
by other specialists (26%). :sup:`(n.d.t),(n.d.v)` Psychiatry scored the
lowest among the specialties as a career choice. Students described
psychiatry as boring, unscientific, depressing, stressful, frustrating
and ‘not enjoying the rotation’. :sup:`(n.d.s)`

Many students experienced psychiatry as being different to other
specialties. For some this was a reason not to pursue psychiatry as a
career but for others it was a positive aspect of the specialty Students
felt ward rounds focused on ‘social issues’ rather than medical
conditions. Some found it an ‘emotional burden’ and others felt that
psychiatry could not ‘fix’ people and no one is being cured.
:sup:`(n.d.v)`

A survey by Korszun *et al* :sup:`(n.d.ah)` examined the views of
trainee, academics and clinicians on students not taking up psychiatry.
The following factors were identified as deterring the students from
psychiatry: negative attitudes towards psychiatrists from other doctors
and health professionals (57%), stigmatisation of psychiatry (40%),
stigma associated with mental health disorders (39%), poor teaching and
role modelling from psychiatrists (37%), psychiatry not seen as medical
or scientific enough (26%) and poor morale among psychiatrists (26%).
:sup:`(n.d.ah)`

.. _S10:

Factors affecting trainees' and consultants' choice of psychiatry
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Fazel *et al* :sup:`(n.d.aa)` found that psychiatry was the sixth most
popular specialty out of ten specialty groups for trainees applying for
training places. A higher proportion of female graduates were shown to
choose psychiatry between 1974 (32%) and 1999 (59%). :sup:`(n.d.aa)`
However, a more recent survey showed a slight decline in the number of
women choosing psychiatry over the last decade, 4.9% (1999) *v.* 4.6 %
(2009). :sup:`(n.d.ad)`

Goldacre *et al* :sup:`(n.d.y)` examined career choices for medical
students over the past 40 years. The number of doctors choosing
psychiatry as a career has hardly changed and remains around 4–5%, which
is similar to figures from 1975. :sup:`(n.d.y)` It was noted that
students who went on to work in psychiatry 10 years after graduation,
52% (224 out of 428) had chosen psychiatry in the first year after
graduation and 71% (308 out of 434) had chosen it in year 3.
:sup:`(n.d.y)`

In common with the factors attracting students towards psychiatry,
numerous studies identified factors that appear to attract trainees
towards psychiatry The major attractions for choosing psychiatry are
listed in `Box 1 <#box1>`__. Denman *et al* :sup:`(n.d.aj)` found that
the most common factor influencing core trainees' (60%) and consultants'
(70%) decisions to specialise in psychiatry was emphasis on the patient
as a whole. :sup:`(n.d.aj)` Trainees highlighted that mental health was
an area of need (53%) and empathy and concerns for people with mental
illness (53%) were important reasons for choosing psychiatry.
:sup:`(n.d.aj)`

**Box 1** Factors attracting medical students and trainees in pursuing
psychiatry as a career

.. _S11:

Medical students
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Encouragement by colleagues :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.u),(n.d.p),(n.d.q)`

-  Influence by someone during the placement :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.p)`

-  Females are more likely to favour a career in psychiatry
   :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.x),(n.d.p)`

-  Family history of mental illness was associated with choosing
   psychiatry :sup:`(n.d.m)`

-  Quality of experience :sup:`(n.d.u),(n.d.x),(n.d.p),(n.d.o)`

-  Role models can have a positive impact on students pursuing a career
   in psychiatry :sup:`(n.d.w),(n.d.p),(n.d.o)`

-  Enrichment activities :sup:`(n.d.x),(n.d.w)`

.. _S12:

Trainees
~~~~~~~~

-  Hours and conditions of work :sup:`(n.d.ad),(n.d.q),(n.d.aj)`

-  The doctor's personal assessment of their aptitudes and skills,
   :sup:`(n.d.ad),(n.d.q),(n.d.aj)` for example recognising factors such
   as using one's intellect to help others :sup:`(n.d.ag)`

-  Experience of the subject as a student :sup:`(n.d.ad),(n.d.q)`

-  Inclinations before medical school and a positive student experience
   :sup:`(n.d.ad),(n.d.ag)`

-  Attitudes and inclination to psychiatry as a medical student
   :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.q),(n.d.ag)`

-  Lifestyle factors :sup:`(n.d.aj),(n.d.ag)`

-  Encouragement from consultants and senior doctors :sup:`(n.d.q)`

-  Emphasis on the patient as a whole person and empathy/concern for
   mentally ill people :sup:`(n.d.aj)`

.. _S13:

Barriers associated with not choosing psychiatry as a long-term career choice for trainees
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Barras & Harris :sup:`(n.d.ab)` explored trainee's experiences (*n* =
359) within psychiatry. Trainee attitudes were grouped into different
categories. The attitudes towards psychiatry (12.6%), professional role
(12%) and day-to-day working (11.3%) were identified as the main
negative factors. Trainees raised concerns with the training programmes
in psychiatry, such as problems with the rota and not having enough time
with patients. :sup:`(n.d.ab)` Many trainees felt frustrated with the
Annual Review of Competence Progression (ARCP) process and
workplace-based assessments, as well as the duplication of paperwork
being a constant frustration. :sup:`(n.d.ab)`

The studies identified a number of barriers against choosing psychiatry
as a career (`Box 2 <#box2>`__).

Trainees felt improvements were needed in terms of training
opportunities and felt this could be enhanced by providing a variety of
jobs, increasing research opportunities and increasing medical aspects
of training. :sup:`(n.d.ab)`

Work looking into consultant psychiatrists' views into why they chose
psychiatry was limited to two papers. :sup:`(n.d.aj),(n.d.ai)` Dein *et
al* :sup:`(n.d.ai)` found that the majority of consultants (46%) chose
psychiatry as a career soon after leaving medical school, and a recent
study surveying consultants in the West Midlands found that 50% had made
their choice by graduation from medical school. :sup:`(n.d.aj)` The main
reasons cited by consultants for choosing psychiatry as a career
included: empathy for those with a mental disorder (36.1%), interface
with neuroscience (25%), expectation of better working conditions in
psychiatry (20%) and influence of teaching at medical school (19.4%).
:sup:`(n.d.ai)` Denman *et al* :sup:`(n.d.aj)` highlighted several ‘very
important’ reasons for consultants choosing psychiatry including: career
in psychiatry would be intellectually challenging (60%), sense of
fulfilment expected from seeing patients improve (47%) and enjoyment of
problem-solving (47%). Lifestyle factors such as salary, better working
conditions and quality of life were shown to be more important reasons
for choosing psychiatry for trainees compared with consultants.
:sup:`(n.d.aj)`

**Box 2** Barriers associated with not choosing psychiatry as a career

-  Job content (71.7%) (*n* = 71) (including the lack of scientific
   basis, job not being clinical, poor prognosis)
   :sup:`(n.d.z),(n.d.ad),(n.d.t),(n.d.s),(n.d.ah),(n.d.ab)`

-  Poor public image of psychiatry :sup:`(n.d.z),(n.d.t),(n.d.ah)`

-  Lack of respect towards psychiatry as a specialty by other
   specialties :sup:`(n.d.z),(n.d.t),(n.d.ah)`

-  Work-related stress cited by (49%) :sup:`(n.d.z)` trainees in
   psychiatry :sup:`(n.d.ab)`

-  25–50% of trainees leaving psychiatry as a specialty cited lack of
   resources as one of the main reasons which was significantly more
   than those rejecting general practice and trauma and orthopaedics
   :sup:`(n.d.z),(n.d.ab)`

-  25–50% of trainees leaving psychiatry
   :sup:`(n.d.z),(n.d.ac),(n.d.ab)` highlighted:

   a. lack of adequately supervised training

   b. lack of evidence base to diagnosis and treatment

   c. lack of improvement in patients

   d. work-life balance

   e. work not clinical enough

-  Physical risks involved in the job :sup:`(n.d.z)`

-  Sense of eroded professionalism :sup:`(n.d.ah),(n.d.ab)`

-  Too much paperwork and duplication :sup:`(n.d.t),(n.d.ah),(n.d.ab)`

-  Problems with rota and not enough time with patients :sup:`(n.d.ab)`

-  Trainees leaving the scheme felt frustrated with workplace-based
   assessments :sup:`(n.d.ab)`

-  Low morale among workforce :sup:`(n.d.o)`

-  Future role of psychiatrists being eroded :sup:`(n.d.o)`

.. _S14:

Discussion
==========

This is the first systematic review of literature which examined factors
that influence the choice of psychiatry as a career in the UK. The main
findings are that enrichment activities help to attract students more
towards psychiatry than just total time spent in the specialty. Job
satisfaction and family-friendly status of psychiatry was rated highly
by students who tend to choose psychiatry. Role models and encouragement
from consultants may increase the number of students who want to pursue
psychiatry as a career. The major factors that appeared to dissuade
medical students/trainees from pursuing psychiatry as a career included:
an apparent lack of scientific basis of psychiatry and work not being
clinical enough, perception that psychiatry is more concerned about
social issues, the bureaucracy, paperwork, apparent poor prognosis of
patients, stigma towards psychiatry as a specialty, low morale, and
onerous workloads as a consultant.

We are aware of one previous systematic review that examined medical
students' attitudes towards psychiatry internationally. :sup:`(n.d.al)`
In common with our study this systematic review alongside another survey
of psychiatrists :sup:`(n.d.ah)` highlighted the stigma towards mental
illness as a major barrier influencing negative medical views towards
psychiatry. :sup:`(n.d.al)` Stigma towards psychiatry as a specialty
arises from a variety of sources, notably from medical students
themselves. In addition, this stigma could arise from ward staff
attitudes towards patients and from other doctors in other specialties,
which detract students. :sup:`(n.d.aa),(n.d.t),(n.d.v)`

Other reviews have looked at one aspect such as the effect of clinical
experience of psychiatry on medical students' attitudes towards the
specialty. :sup:`(n.d.am)` Lyons :sup:`(n.d.al)` highlighted the impact
of poor-quality teaching leading to negative attitudes towards
psychiatry and highlighted the need to address psychiatry curricula and
introduce novel teaching strategies. :sup:`(n.d.al)` El-Sayeh *et al*
:sup:`(n.d.an)` have previously highlighted the importance of teaching
and the various methods which could be utilised to try to improve the
student experience and in turn help attract students towards psychiatry.
The recent survey by Korszun *et al* :sup:`(n.d.ah)` highlighted that
the number of clinicians compared with academics and trainees agreed
that they did not have time to teach medical students (*P* < 0.001).
Both clinicians (42%) and academics (47%) felt that teaching medical
students did not contribute to their future career prospects compared
with 21% of trainees (*P* < 0.001) :sup:`(n.d.ah)` Fewer clinicians
considered teaching to be a significant component of their appraisal
compared with trainees and academics. :sup:`(n.d.ah)` The combination of
poor teaching practices due to lack of resources or commitment and the
stigma reinforce the poor image of psychiatry.

We feel that the findings of our study support the recommendations made
by Mukherjee *et al* :sup:`(n.d.ao)` which identify a number of steps to
address the crisis in psychiatry recruitment at different nodal points
in a medical career, i.e. prior to entry to medical school, during
medical education and after graduation.

.. _S15:

Improving recruitment
---------------------

This study highlights the need to change the experience of psychiatry at
undergraduate and postgraduate level in keeping with work by Shah *et
al* :sup:`(n.d.ap)` who highlighted early medical experience, influence
of seniors and the aspects related to working environment as areas that
could be affected positively which in turn could have a positive effect
on choosing psychiatry as a career. Kelley *et al* :sup:`(n.d.aq)`
highlighted the impact of foundation programme experience in psychiatry,
with a significantly higher proportion of trainees pursuing a career in
psychiatry compared with those without any exposure to psychiatry (14.9%
*v.* 1.8%). This correlates with earlier findings by Shah *et al*
:sup:`(n.d.ap)` that found a significant correlation between those
Scottish students considering psychiatry as a career and having held a
psychiatry post. :sup:`(n.d.ao)` A recent survey by Denman *et al*
:sup:`(n.d.aj)` showed that 43% of psychiatry trainees made their
decision to specialise in psychiatry during the foundation years,
correlating with increased exposure to psychiatry during the foundation
years with 80% of trainees in this survey completing a post in
psychiatry during the foundation years. Specific enrichment activities
beyond standard teaching and clinical placements such as research
experience in psychiatry, university psychiatry clubs, summer schools,
:sup:`(n.d.ar)` psychiatry electives and psychiatry special study
modules appear to be a way in which medical students will gain
invaluable experiences and improve their attitudes to psychiatry. These
need to be adopted and evaluated in future programmes to enhance
recruitment in psychiatry Collier *et al* :sup:`(n.d.af)` found that
only 2.3% of teaching was dedicated to psychiatry compared with 44.1% to
medical and surgical topics, which does not help the poor image of
psychiatry. This and similar issues need to be addressed at
institutional level.

A number of studies found that psychiatry has a perception that it is
not a ‘scientific’ or ‘medical’ discipline.
:sup:`(n.d.z),(n.d.ah),(n.d.ab)` Medical students and trainees expressed
the views about the weakened medical identity of psychiatry. The erosion
of the role of the psychiatrist was cited by some psychiatry trainees as
a potential factor that would make them consider leaving psychiatry
training. :sup:`(n.d.ab)` This unfortunately is not helped by negative
comments or ‘bad-mouthing’ of psychiatry. :sup:`(n.d.ah),(n.d.as)`

Interventions such as anti-stigma films and Medfest :sup:`(n.d.at)` have
been shown to improve medical students' attitudes to psychiatrists,
serious mental illness and psychiatry, at least in the short term.
:sup:`(n.d.at),(n.d.au)` However, it appears that there is need to
reconsider the content of psychiatric training and the undergraduate
curriculum. It has been suggested that moving undergraduate teaching
from in-patient to general hospital settings such as liaison psychiatry
will allow students to see patients with problems that are relevant to
medical practice. :sup:`(n.d.as)` Setting up and evaluating such
programmes that have the potential to offer a different and enjoyable
experience for medical students and foundation doctors should be a
priority to improve the image of and recruitment into psychiatry.

.. _S16:

Limitations
-----------

A limitation of the study is that almost all data are based on surveys
and databases. This represents a cross-sectional view on the subject.
The lack of any comparisons with other specialties, which may have
similar recruitment rates, is particularly concerning. The focus on UK
studies is also a limitation but was necessary to understand the factors
affecting recruitment in this country We noted with some concern that
there are only a few studies that address the positive aspects of
psychiatry, :sup:`(n.d.u)–(n.d.w),(n.d.p)–(n.d.o)` which may attract
students and trainees towards psychiatry, and how these can be used for
improving the recruitment. Future studies need to address this gap in
the literature. Finally, we feel that the problems underlying the
recruitment in psychiatry perhaps also reflect the lack of parity of
esteem. Unless mental health is valued equally with physical health, the
misconceptions and distorted perceptions about psychiatry as a
discipline in which a medical career can be fruitfully pursued will
linger on and will hinder aspiring physicians from considering
psychiatry as a career option.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R29

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R31

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R32

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R33

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R34

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R35

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R36

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R37

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R38

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R39

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R40

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R41

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R42

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R43

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R44

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R45

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R46

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R47

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R48

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R49

      n.d.au.

.. [1]
   **Dr Abid Choudry**, ST5, Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust. **Dr
   Saeed Farooq**, Clinical Senior Lecturer, Research Institute for
   Primary Care and Health Sciences, Keele University, and South
   Staffordshire and Shropshire NHS Foundation Trust.
