=======================================================================================================================
An analysis of whether a working-age ward-based liaison psychiatry service requires the input of a liaison psychiatrist
=======================================================================================================================

Elspeth A. Guthrie
Aaron T. McMeekin
Sylvia Khan
Sally Makin
Ben Shaw
Damien LongsonCorrespondence to Aaron T. McMeekin
(aaronmcmeekin@nhs.net)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-6

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** This article presents a 12-month case series to
   determine the fraction of ward referrals of adults of working age who
   needed a liaison psychiatrist in a busy tertiary referral teaching
   hospital.

   **Results** The service received 344 referrals resulting in 1259
   face-to-face contacts. Depression accounted for the most face-to-face
   contacts. We deemed the involvement of a liaison psychiatrist
   necessary in 241 (70.1%) referrals, with medication management as the
   most common reason.

   **Clinical implications** A substantial amount of liaison ward work
   involves the treatment and management of severe and complex mental
   health problems. Our analysis suggests that in the majority of cases
   the input of a liaison psychiatrist is required.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Liaison psychiatry services in England have recently seen considerable
expansion, following the positive evaluation of the Rapid Assessment
Interface and Discharge Team (RAID) service in Birmingham.
:sup:`(n.d.a)` The independent evaluation suggested that this
well-staffed multidisciplinary liaison psychiatry service returned
considerable cost savings for people with mental health problems in that
general hospital and those attending the emergency department.

The 2015 annual survey of liaison psychiatry in England demonstrated
that many services are too poorly resourced to be delivering benefits to
patients as envisaged by the RAID study, :sup:`(n.d.b)` while the recent
*Guidance on Developing Models for Liaison Psychiatry Services* has
shown great variability in service provision. :sup:`(n.d.c)` The
relative lack of consultant psychiatric input suggests that the
specialist skills offered by consultant liaison psychiatrists may be
poorly understood. To examine the multidisciplinary liaison psychiatry
team, we aimed to determine the proportion of referrals to a ward-based
liaison service which required the involvement of a psychiatrist in a
busy tertiary teaching hospital in England. This project was carried out
as part of a registered audit (Audit Project 2125) with Manchester
Mental Health and Social Care Trust.

There are many descriptions of the activity of liaison services, but we
believe this is the first time the role of a psychiatrist has been
addressed in depth. We hope our findings will help inform decisions
regarding staffing and the configuration of multidisciplinary liaison
psychiatry teams. We focused on a ward-based liaison service for adults
of working age.

.. _S1:

Method
======

We carried out a case series of the electronic records of consecutive
referrals to a ward-based liaison service at a large teaching hospital
in Manchester, over a 12-month period from 18 June 2013 to 17 June 2014.
The hospital has approximately 750 beds, with a large renal and critical
care unit. There is also a maternity unit on site, with over 8500
deliveries per annum, and an eye hospital. Our liaison service reviews
referrals covering an age range of 16–65 by the next working day.
Routine alcohol referrals, covered by two specialist nurses, may also be
received by our service.

The following details were recorded for each referral: age, gender,
number of face-to-face contacts carried out by the team, amount of time
the team had ongoing contact with the patient (days), reason for
referral, referrer type, psychiatric diagnosis using clinical judgement
according to ICD-10 criteria, :sup:`(n.d.d)` employment of the Mental
Health Act 1983, and disposal.

.. _S2:

Involvement of a liaison psychiatrist
-------------------------------------

To determine the proportion of patients who required the input of a
psychiatrist, we developed criteria for contacts or interventions that
required medical input and could not be undertaken by a
non-psychiatrist. We deemed the involvement of a psychiatrist would be
necessary in any of the following scenarios: Mental Health Act employed,
rescinded or considered; medication management; treatment with
psychotropic medications commenced in the general hospital; complex
diagnostic matters; behavioural disturbance in physically unwell
patients where advice about appropriate sedation is required; complex
capacity assessments; and a specific request for a consultant
psychiatrist opinion. Each case was reviewed and rated by a member of
the team. `Box 1 <#box1>`__ provides detailed criteria for each of these
scenarios. We recognise that there are many other kinds of interventions
a psychiatrist may carry out as part of liaison work, but we wished to
focus solely on interventions which could not be carried out by someone
other than a psychiatrist. Many of the interventions therefore require
some kind of expertise involving medical knowledge or prescribing of
psychotropic medication in patients who are physically unwell.

Summary scores for normally distributed data are presented as means and
standard deviations (s.d.). The activity data were not normally
distributed, so summary scores are presented in the form of medians and
interquartile ranges (IQR). Comparisons of continuous activity data were
carried out using non-parametric statistical tests. Mann-Whitney
*U*-tests were used to compare continuous data. As in some cases we had
few activity data, with only one or two patients in each group, groups
with very small sizes (two patients or fewer) were not included in the
statistical analyses.

.. _S3:

Results
=======

The service received 344 referrals over the study period and carried out
1259 face-to-face contacts with patients. The average number of
‘face-to-face’ contacts per patient was 3.7 (s.d. = 5, range 1–33). The
median age of patients seen was 48 years (IQR 36–59), and 184 (53.4%)
were female. At any one time, between 8 and 15 patients were under
review by the team. The majority of referrals were from physicians (all
medical departments) (*n* = 227, 66.0%), 59 (17.2%) were from surgery,
31 (9%) from the maternity hospital and 23 (6.7%) from the critical care
unit. One referral came from the eye hospital and a further 3 were from
the liaison service for older adults, but these patients were best
managed by the adults of working age team.

Table DS1 in the online supplement provides a snapshot of the patients
under the care of the service on one day in May 2014, and is typical of
the kind of patients who are under review by the service at any given
time. Five patients had severe mental illness (four had schizophrenia
and one had bipolar disorder). Two had been treated under the Mental
Health Act and there was a possibility that one more person may have
needed treatment. One person was on a community treatment order (CTO).
Four patients had voiced recent suicidal ideas, two had complex organic
mental disorders, and three had psychological reactions to physical
illness or difficulties with their behaviour in an acute hospital
setting.

.. _S4:

Referrals which required the involvement of a psychiatrist
----------------------------------------------------------

`Table 1 <#T1>`__ illustrates the number of referrals which needed a
psychiatrist. Of the 344 referred patients who saw a psychiatrist, we
deemed on the basis of our criteria that a psychiatrist was required for
241 patients (70.1%). Patients who required a psychiatrist needed more
face-to-face contacts than those who did not require a psychiatrist
(median 2 (IQR 1–5) *v*. median 1 (IQR 1–2)), and were under the liaison
service for a greater period of time (median 7 days (IQR 1–14) *v*.
median 1 day (IQR 1–7)).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Referrals and service workload depending on whether patient
      required a psychiatrist or not

   +-------------+------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |            | F           | Days in     |             |
   |             |            | ace-to-face | contact     |             |
   |             |            | contacts    | with        |             |
   |             |            |             | service,    |             |
   |             |            |             | median      |             |
   |             |            |             | (IQR)       |             |
   +=============+============+=============+=============+=============+
   | Requires    | 241 (70.1) | 1039 (82.5) | 2           |   7         |
   | p           |            |             | (1          | (1–         |
   | sychiatrist |            |             | –5)\ `\**\* | 14)\ `\**\* |
   |             |            |             |  <#TFN2>`__ |  <#TFN2>`__ |
   +-------------+------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |            |             |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Does not    | 103 (29.9) |   220       | 1 (1–2)     |   1 (1–7)   |
   | require     |            | (17.5)      |             |             |
   | p           |            |             |             |             |
   | sychiatrist |            |             |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |            |             |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Total       | 344        | 1259        | 2 (1–5)     | 4 (1–13)    |
   +-------------+------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

   IQR, interquartile range.

   *P*\ < 0.001 (requires *v.* does not require a psychiatrist).

According to our criteria, the most common reason for psychiatric input
was medication management (`Table 2 <#T2>`__): 77 patients (32.0%)
required input regarding their current psychotropic medication use. Of
interest, 10 of these patients were referred for clozapine management
which required over 100 face-to-face contacts from the team. 56 patients
were started on treatment for their mental health problems while they
were in hospital (i.e. patient started on psychotropic medication).
There were complex diagnostic issues in 38 patients and the Mental
Health Act was considered in 23 patients, but only actually implemented
in 18. In 14 cases the patient required a complex capacity assessment,
10 patients presented with challenging behaviour requiring advice about
sedation, and a specific consultant opinion or involvement was requested
in 6 patients. The categories are not mutually exclusive.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      The number of patients who required a psychiatrist according to
      the categories in the study

   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   | Clinical categories          | *n* | Percentage of total          |
   |                              |     | requiring psychiatrist       |
   +==============================+=====+==============================+
   | Medication management        | 77  | 32.0%                        |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   |                              |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   | Treatment with psychotropic  | 56  | 23.2%                        |
   | drugs                        |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   |                              |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   | Complex diagnostic issues    | 38  | 15.8%                        |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   |                              |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   | Mental Health Act            | 23  | 9.5%                         |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   |                              |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   | Management of severe mental  | 17  | 7.1%                         |
   | illness                      |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   |                              |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   | Complex capacity assessments | 14  | 5.8%                         |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   |                              |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   | Management of behavioural    | 10  | 4.1%                         |
   | disturbance                  |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   |                              |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+
   | Specific liaison consultant  | 6   | 2.5%                         |
   | review                       |     |                              |
   +------------------------------+-----+------------------------------+

**Box 1** Definitions of categories used to determine whether the
involvement of a liaison psychiatrist was required

-  Mental Health Act: situations where the Mental Health Act has been
   applied or its potential use has been seriously considered

-  Medication management: consultation in which there was a specific
   issue about psychotropic medication the patient was taking due to a
   change in their physical health. This may involve stopping, switching
   or another action.

-  Management of behavioural disturbance in the general hospital:
   involving advice about medication, where a psychiatrist has provided
   assessment, advice and guidance about using sedating medication. The
   psychiatrist will have considered the patient's underlying physical
   health problems (e.g. renal failure) in making the decision regarding
   type and dosage of medication. Other non-pharmacological aspects for
   management of acute behavioural disturbance in physically unwell
   patients are not considered here, as they are not exclusively carried
   out by liaison psychiatrists

-  Complex diagnostic matters: diagnosis or understanding of a clinical
   problem which required knowledge of specific medical disorders

-  Capacity: requests for medically complex capacity assessments, where
   the patient has a history of a psychiatric condition which may be
   interfering with their judgement to give informed consent to
   potentially life-saving treatment

-  Treatment with psychotropic medications commenced in the general
   hospital: treatment with a psychotropic agent that was commenced in
   the general hospital by the liaison team, in a patient who had
   ongoing physical health concerns

-  Specific request for consultant liaison psychiatrist opinion: the
   referring consultant specifically requested a consultant psychiatric
   opinion or involvement

**Box 2** Categories of clinical scenarios where we judged a
psychiatrist was required (examples)

-  **Mental HealthAct**: Female (age range 50–60) with diagnosis of
   schizophrenia. Admitted with a ruptured oesophagus. Clozapine had
   been stopped prior to admission as she had refused to take it. Her
   psychosis had relapsed and she was floridly psychotic in hospital.
   Following repair of her oesophagus she required 6–8 weeks bed rest
   for the repair to heal. She was treated under Section 3 of the MHA
   with covert medication (clozapine). Her mental state returned to
   normal. She had a good physical and mental health recovery. She later
   agreed to continue to take clozapine on a voluntary basis.

-  **Medication management**: Female (age range 30–40) admitted
   following collapse and found to have very low sodium. Diagnosis of
   schizophrenia. In discussion with medical team, all psychotropic
   medication was stopped. Haloperidol started cautiously. Usual
   medications re-started after physical recovery. Discharged to CMHT.

-  **Management of behavioural disturbance**: Male (age range 40–50) who
   was admitted with delirium, barricaded himself and 3 other patients
   in a 4-bedded side room. History of hydrocephalus and other abnormal
   neurological signs. Input required sedation to manage the current
   situation and to facilitate medical investigations including brain
   MRI.

-  **Diagnosis**: Male (age range 50–60) admitted from nursing home with
   a history of severe weight loss. History of schizophrenia and
   extrapyramidal side-effects attributed to neuroleptics. Huntington's
   chorea diagnosed by consultant psychiatrist.

-  **Capacity**: Male (age range 50–60) with history of schizophrenia.
   Jumped off a bridge when 22 years of age, paraplegic following this.
   Psychosis treated well for years on clozapine. Developed bowel
   obstruction, multi-organ failure. Clozapine stopped. On regular
   haemodialysis. Chronically psychotic. Refusing dialysis. Complicating
   factors, low mood, chronic psychosis (at times he believes he is
   Christ and can be resurrected).

-  **Treatment with psychotropic drugs commenced in the general
   hospital**: Male (age 60–70) admitted after stabbing his wife in the
   back and then stabbing himself 4 times in the abdomen. Diagnosed with
   depressive disorder. Treatment started with antidepressants while
   receiving medical treatment on ward. Mood improved.

-  **Specific request for consultant liaison psychiatric opinion**: Male
   (age range 40–50) with a history of gastric problems and feeding
   difficulties. Had had gastrectomy and had been started on TPN. Had
   been in hospital for over a year. Staff suspected that reliance on
   TPN was far more than clinically indicated but all efforts to reduce
   it failed. Patient was aggressive on occasions with staff, made
   frequent complaints about staff and at times threatened self-harm.
   Consultant opinion was specifically sought regarding the risks of
   moving to home with TPN feeding.

CMHT, community mental health team; MHA, Mental Health Act; MRI,
magnetic resonance imaging; TPN, total parenteral nutrition.

`Table 2 <#T2>`__ shows the number of patients who required a
psychiatrist according to the categories developed for this study.

Clinical illustrations of actions or interventions which were judged to
require the involvement of a psychiatrist, according to each category,
are provided in `Box 2 <#box2>`__.

`Table 3 <#T3>`__ shows the number and percentage of patients who
required input from a liaison psychiatrist according to the most common
psychiatric diagnoses. Patients with bipolar affective disorder,
schizophrenia, Korsakoff's psychosis, amnesic syndrome and somatoform
disorder required the involvement of a psychiatrist in over 80% of all
cases, whereas for patients with anxiety/panic disorder, adjustment
disorder or dementia the requirement was much lower.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Patients who required input from a liaison psychiatrist according
      to diagnosis

   ========================================= =================
   Psychiatric diagnosis                     Required
                                             psychiatrist
                                             (% of total seen)
   ========================================= =================
   Somatoform disorders                      9 (100.0%)
   \                                         
   Bipolar affective disorder                23 (92.0%)
   \                                         
   Amnesic syndrome                          11 (91.7%)
   \                                         
   Korsakoff's psychosis                     11 (91.7%)
   \                                         
   Schizophrenia                             42 (82.4%)
   \                                         
   Depression                                100 (74.1%)
   \                                         
   Miscellaneous including eating disorders, 5 (71.4%)
   intellectual disability                   
   \                                         
   Personality disorder                      9 (69%)
   \                                         
   Substance misuse                          11 (68%)
   \                                         
   Delirium                                  15 (65.2%)
   \                                         
   Anxiety/panic disorder                    6 (50.0%)
   \                                         
   Dementia                                  2 (33.3%)
   \                                         
   No diagnosis                              8 (32.0%)
   \                                         
   Adjustment disorder                       2 (20.0%)
   ========================================= =================

.. _S5:

Discussion
==========

Our findings suggest that a ward-based liaison psychiatry service for
working-age adults in a large teaching hospital requires the input of
liaison psychiatrists. We deemed that a psychiatrist was essential in
the assessment or management of approximately 70% of all referrals to
the service, whereas approximately 30% could be reviewed by other
members of a liaison team. We based this judgement on clear, definable
actions or aspects of care that necessitated the involvement of a
psychiatrist. A consultant liaison psychiatrist would of course have
many other roles, but for the purposes of this study we limited our
focus to interventions or actions where the role of a psychiatrist was
unequivocal.

Many of the patients seen by the service had complex physical and mental
health needs. Table DS1 provides a snapshot of the work, and illustrates
that it is necessary to involve a psychiatrist in the management of a
large proportion of referrals. Out of the 12 patients under the care of
the team on one day in May 2014, 9 required the input of a psychiatrist.

Certain patients with diagnoses such as adjustment disorder and dementia
were unlikely to require psychiatric input, whereas high rates of
psychiatric involvement were required for patients with severe mental
illness and somatoform disorders. Psychiatric input was also needed in
the management of patients with Korsakoff's psychosis, because locally a
formal diagnosis from a psychiatrist is required in order to access
particular kinds of Social Services support.

This study has three major limitations. First, data were based on
routine clinical entries made using a National Health Service (NHS)
electronic record system. It is possible that this may have led to an
underestimation of the numbers of patients requiring psychiatric input
due to a lack of recording certain data (e.g. details about psychotropic
medication). It is very unlikely that it would have led to an
overestimate of our findings. Second, this study was undertaken in a
teaching hospital, with a large critical care unit, a large renal unit,
a very busy maternity hospital and other specialist centres. It may not
reflect the work of a liaison service in a district general hospital,
but it emphasises the need to take account of local variations in acute
hospital services when planning a liaison service. Third, this liaison
service is a ward-based service only. Approximately a third of liaison
services run out-patient clinics for complex cases requiring psychiatric
time. Clinics can take psychiatrists away from acute ward cover and
require different planning and staff resources compared with a
ward-based liaison service.

The methods we employed, however, can easily be used by other services
to estimate the requirement for input from a liaison psychiatrist, and
this is likely to vary depending on the setting and age range of
patients seen. As this research team consisted entirely of
psychiatrists, we may have overestimated the need for the skills of our
own discipline when creating the criteria and applying them. However, we
have provided clinical examples to illustrate our decision-making
process and thus expose it to critical examination.

Our results suggest that liaison psychiatrists have a pivotal role in
ward-based liaison services for adults of working age, and this may be
particularly important in a teaching hospital setting. Our work also
provides support for the recent commissioning guidance for liaison
psychiatry services in England developed by the Department of Health,
which suggests that liaison psychiatry services in a teaching
hospital/inner city setting may require additional consultant
psychiatric input. :sup:`(n.d.e)`

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.e.

.. [1]
   **Elspeth A. Guthrie** is a Consultant in Psychological Medicine at
   Manchester Mental Health and Social Care Trust and Honorary Professor
   in Psychological Medicine, University of Manchester. **Aaron T.
   McMeekin** is a Specialist Registrar in Liaison Psychiatry,
   Manchester Royal Infirmary. **Sylvia Khan** is a Consultant
   Psychiatrist in General Adult Psychiatry, Parkwood Hospital,
   Blackpool. **Sally Makin** is a Specialist Registrar in General Adult
   Psychiatry, Birch Hill Hospital, Rochdale. **Ben Shaw** is a
   Consultant Old Age Psychiatrist, Rivington Unit, Royal Bolton
   Hospital, Bolton. **Damien Longson** is a Consultant in Psychological
   Medicine at Manchester Mental Health and Social Care Trust.
