---
abstract: |
  A strong and growing evidence base exists for the use of
  mindfulness-based interventions to prevent relapse in major depression
  and for the self-management of chronic physical health conditions
  (e.g. pain), but the evidence in other domains of mental health work
  is still emerging. Much work is being conducted outside the evidence
  base and standardised protocols, and by individuals with varied levels
  of experience and training. The (mis)perception of mindfulness as a
  'simple technique' belies the complexity and skill needed to deliver a
  mindfulness training that has real therapeutic and transformative
  power. We propose a framework to help clinicians think through the
  suitability of mindfulness for their particular client group with the
  intention of providing guidance for thoughtful decision-making.
author:
- Tamara A. Russell
- Gerson SiegmundCorrespondence to Tamara Russell
  (<Tamara.Russell@kcl.ac.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-12
institute:
- 1Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King\'s College
  London, UK
- 2Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
- id: R37
- id: R38
- id: R39
- id: R40
- id: R41
- id: R42
- id: R43
- id: R44
- id: R45
- id: R46
- id: R47
- id: R48
- id: R49
- id: R50
- id: R51
- id: R52
- id: R53
- id: R54
- id: R55
- id: R56
- id: R57
- id: R58
- id: R59
- id: R60
title: What and who? Mindfulness in the mental health setting
---

Much of the current research on the clinical efficacy of
mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs) is based on two standardised
programmes: mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) and
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT). These facilitated, closed,
8-week group training programmes are delivered to those with chronic
physical health conditions (in the case of MBSR) and recurrent
depression (MBCT). Some studies have evaluated adaptations of these
protocols for other clinical populations,^1,2^ and a handful have tested
the feasibility of novel protocols.^3,4^ The existing meta-analyses for
both MBSR and MBCT^5-12^ report medium to large effect sizes across a
range of outcome measures (including clinical ratings, quality of life,
mindfulness and cognitive change), with good evidence that these MBIs
can reduce anxiety and depression.^8,9,13^ A UK Mindfulness All-Party
Parliamentary Group review^14^ has recently recommended that MBCT be
available within the National Health Service (NHS) for adults at risk of
recurrent depression and that it should be accessible to everyone with a
long-term physical health condition and recurrent depression.

In this article, we consider the evidence from meta-analyses relating to
MBIs in the mental health setting. The focus is on MBIs which have
mindfulness training and transformation of mind as their main intention
and activity, and therefore acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) and
dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT) have not been included. However,
both of these approaches have elements of mindfulness within their
multifaceted protocols, and the tight coupling to everyday goals, values
and activities makes them a variant of mindfulness training that is well
suited to working with clients who may find standardised MBIs difficult.
As such, ACT work is included in the meta-analysis detailed below in
relation to working with psychosis.

It is also beyond the scope of this article to consider the application
of mindfulness-based approaches in the physical health setting.^15^
While there is plenty of evidence that MBSR (and some emerging
protocols) can help alleviate a range of physical health conditions, it
has been suggested the efficacy may be even greater in psychological
disorders.^5,8^ We also make recommendations for best practice for those
offering mindfulness training outside the current evidence. The
overarching intention is to balance maintaining the integrity of
standardised MBIs for certain specific populations with the very real
explosion of interest in the area, and the multiple routes via which it
is now accessed by clients in our clinical care. Careful formulation,
based on a cognitive model, and clear intent are the guiding principles
for this work.

# The evidence base {#S1}

## Is MBCT effective? {#S2}

Within the NHS, MBCT is recommended as a relapse prevention training for
recurrent depression.^16^ Several controlled studies have shown that the
addition of MBCT to treatment as usual (TAU) can reduce the chance of
relapse by about 40-50% in participants who have experienced three or
more episodes.^17-19^ The efficacy of MBCT appears at least comparable
with maintenance antidepressant medication,^7,20^ making MBCT a viable
alternative for those wishing to explore psychosocial ways to manage
depressive illness. Early studies excluded individuals with a history of
suicidal ideation, although recent work has explored the possibility
that mindfulness training may also be helpful in these
circumstances.^21,22^ For individuals with fewer than two episodes, or
those whose depressive episodes are exogenously triggered (e.g. by
stressful life events), the evidence is less compelling.^7,17^ An early
onset of depressive illness and experience of childhood trauma or
adversity appear to be factors that increase the efficacy of
MBCT.^17,23^

From these studies, it is clear that the picture as it relates to
clinical efficacy (specifically, preventing depressive relapse) is more
complex than first thought and warrants caution in the indiscriminate
application of mindfulness training as a 'treatment' for depression *per
se*. Screening prior to group entry is a key part of the process of
mindfulness training.^24^

## Is MBCT more effective than other approaches for depression? {#S3}

One meta-analysis^5^ indicates the superiority of MBIs over relaxation,
psychoeducation, supportive therapy and imagery-based approaches, but no
additional benefit when compared with cognitive-behavioural therapy
(CBT). The findings were broadly similar at up to 3 months\' follow-up.
In a well-controlled randomised controlled trial (RCT),^23^ where MBCT
for depression was compared with a matched, active control condition
(cognitive psychoeducation; CPE), there was no significant impact on the
main outcome variable (relapse). However, for a sub-population of
individuals in the study who had recurrent depression and childhood
adversity, MBCT was superior in preventing relapse.^23^

Within the current literature, MBCT is indicated as an alternative
offering to complement psychological (e.g. CBT) and pharmacological
(antidepressant treatment) options, rather than necessarily being
superior.^25^ It may be particularly useful for those with a more
chronic presentation, whose early experiences perhaps did not include
the modelling needed to develop healthy emotional awareness and
management. Providing a choice for clients is also important, and
particularly so for those who have received CBT and found it ineffective
or those who do not easily fit into the CBT model. This might also
include those whose mental health difficulties prevent an active,
motivated engagement with a process aimed at challenging thought content
(as in CBT), so-called 'traditional psychiatric insight'.^2^ Working
with thought processes rather than thought content makes it less
necessary to have full insight. For example, in the work with psychosis,
it may be possible to reduce the distress of auditory hallucinations by
learning how to respond mindfully to a voice, while still maintaining a
belief that the voice belongs to another entity.

## Is MBCT effective in other categories of mental illness? {#S4}

Although large-scale, independently replicated RCTs are few and far
between in other areas of mental health, one of the larger randomised
studies comparing MBCT for bipolar disorder and TAU^26^ showed no
significant difference between interventions with respect to relapse,
mood symptoms or total number of episodes. However, there was a
significant reduction in state anxiety in the MBCT group, also reported
in Williams\' work.^22^ Given that inter-episode anxiety is a crippling,
often neglected feature of bipolar illness,^27,28^ ameliorating it could
make a big difference in quality of life and social/occupational
functioning. In this case, it is clear that MBCT is having an 'effect'
*per se*, but the mechanism of action may be different in bipolar
illness than in major (recurrent) depression. Two meta-analyses indicate
that MBIs are helpful in the management of clinical anxiety^5,29^ and
reductions in anxiety are also seen in non- or subclinical
populations.^9,13^ A recent RCT showed no short-term advantage for MBCT
over psychoeducation for generalised anxiety disorder (GAD).^30^

In the field of psychosis research, there has been a growing number of
studies looking at MBIs, including the more broadly defined third-wave
therapies that contain components of mindfulness such as ACT.^31,32^ Two
meta-analyses have demonstrated that mindfulness training shows moderate
short- and long-term benefits for positive symptoms and hospital
admissions when compared with TAU,^32^ that effects are similar to other
active interventions (such as CBT), and that there is lower
attrition.^31^ This may be linked to the mindfulness stance which does
not challenge the veracity of abnormal thinking and perceptions, but
works with the process of how these emerge and are managed.^2^

A number of pilot feasibility studies report results from standardised
(or modified) MBIs administered to different target populations, or MBIs
with novel protocols.^1-3^ These approaches target specific features of
a mental illness (e.g. auditory hallucinations or the impulse to binge
eat) or postulate alternative methods such as mindful movement as an
entry point to mindfulness.^33^

With these adaptations emerging, there is ongoing discussion in the
field about more cognitively formulated mindfulness training (e.g.
targeting specific mental processes such as rumination) *v*. more
generic mindfulness training that teaches 'techniques'.^34^ The latter
may have a different type of clinical value -- developing the ability to
manage 'stress' or anxiety is likely to have a positive effect on almost
any physical or mental health condition.

## Unexpected consequences {#S5}

The range of outcome measures described in the cited studies points to
the multiple routes through which mindfulness training may have its
effects. In MBIs, symptom reduction is rarely the target. Instead, the
training is about changing the relationship to symptoms and,
specifically, becoming more curious (in a compassionate way) about
mental habits.^35^ If the previous relationship to symptoms was one of
avoidance, then it is quite likely that mindfulness will make the
symptoms appear 'worse' as the individual is more aware of them,
relating to them in an engaged but relaxed manner. However, it is likely
that even those who experience 'more' symptoms will be less distressed
by them following mindfulness training.

There is ongoing discussion in the field and the popular press about
whether mindfulness training may be harmful for some people.^17,36^
There are concerns that individuals with certain difficulties (such as
depersonalisation and dissociative disorders, trauma, psychosis and
severe eating disorders) may struggle with standard MBI protocols.
However, Chadwick\'s^2^ elegant work with people with psychosis
indicates that with careful formulation, adaptations and a high degree
of compassion and skill, it is possible for clinicians to work mindfully
with these populations. In the case of delusional beliefs and auditory
hallucinations, it is not necessary to change the belief about the voice
in order to create a different relationship to it through mindfulness.
Working directly with the body as a starting point may not be
appropriate for certain of the eating disorders (e.g. anorexia) and
trauma. However, adaptations (e.g. using movement) may be an entry
point.

As this field progresses, it will be vital that those teaching and
training others in mindfulness are themselves open, non-reactive and
non-judgemental about instances where mindfulness 'has not worked'. Part
of best practice is sharing what went wrong in order for us to learn
more about cases where mindfulness training may need further adaptation
or may not be useful. Creating a culture of acceptance around unexpected
outcomes would be a good starting point for teams or clinics considering
any form of mindfulness training. Among professionals in the field,
modelling the principle of gentle, kind, open curiosity to whatever
happens (even if it is an 'unexpected effect' in a participant) is
vital. The stability of this stance is directly related to the personal
experience of the professional.

## The experience of the facilitator {#S6}

The facilitator\'s own experience of mindfulness is a central factor to
help work through (mindfully) any unusual or unexpected effects arising
from mindfulness practice. Less experienced facilitators may be working
on the edge of awareness of their own, more deeply embedded, habits or
emotional reactivity and thus may not yet have the requisite
steadfastness, non-reactivity and non-judgement when they meet this in
their clients. The ability to hold a curious, open and accepting stance,
even when things are not as we wish them to be, are qualities a
mindfulness practitioner and teacher develops over time. This eventually
leads to a position whereby it is possible to have a strong emotion or
experience a strong (usually 'negative') mental habit without getting
drawn into it or trying to make it be different or 'go away'. This
skill, developed through repeated practice, allows one to trust that it
is possible to not react or judge, even when we see we are being
unskilful in our actions or communications.

There may be moments when the client needs to see and trust that they
can maintain the observer position in such instances. Conversely, there
may be times when it is necessary to stop practising mindfulness. If
there are dramatic changes in either internal (mental) or external
(life) contexts that make the endeavour uncompassionate, forced or with
a sense of too much expectation, this may be time to pause and
reconsider intentions.

While personal experience of mindfulness is essential for those who wish
to deliver MBIs in the clinical setting, the ability to teach
mindfulness in a group setting requires further skills and training. How
mindfulness is taught seems to be as important as what is taught.^34^
The impact of the facilitator\'s own mindfulness experience and what is
referred to as the 'embodiment of mindfulness' in the teacher appears
critical to the observed clinical/therapeutic effects.^5,37^ The
MBI-Teacher Assessment of Competency (MBI-TAC)^37^ has been proposed as
a way to maximise the effectiveness of MBIs, and to ensure the quality
of teaching in these clinical settings. It considers six domains of
competence to teach MBIs: (1) coverage, pacing and organisation of
session curriculum; (2) relational skills; (3) embodiment of
mindfulness; (4) guiding mindfulness practices; (5) enquiry; and (6)
holding a group. [Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"} outlines the key
recommendations from the UK Network for Mindfulness-Based Teacher
Training Organisations and all healthcare workers considering using
mindfulness as a therapeutic intervention are advised to be familiar
with these.^24,37^

The reader is alerted to the therapeutic potential of therapist
mindfulness alone, which is an essential starting point for those who
wish to use mindfulness clinically but have yet to complete a formal
teacher training. Studies indicate that mindfulness training for
therapists enhances core therapeutic skills,^38-40^ and has a positive
impact on patient experience^41^ and on clinical outcomes.^42^ All this
before you have even 'done' any mindfulness to the client!

Therefore, standard MBIs appear effective for certain conditions and at
certain times. A number of outstanding challenges remain, including the
provision for wider implementation of MBCT in the NHS, the training of
therapists to deliver MBCT, ongoing discussion about the measurement of
mindfulness as a construct,^43^ and the exact mechanism of
change.^35,44-46^ There are unexpected effects that have to be
(mindfully) attended to, and the experience of the facilitator seems to
be a critical component. However, alternative MBIs -- targeting
different populations and using different methods -- appear promising,
and a huge variety of resources are now widely available in the public
domain. We will now explore a number of suggestions for those
considering working outside the evidence base.

**Box 1** Recommendations from the UK Network for Mindfulness-Based
Teacher Training Organisations

Mindfulness training should include: familiarity and personal experience
with the mindfulness practice they will teach;minimum duration of 12
months.

Background requirements: professional qualification in health, education
or social care (or equivalent life experience)knowledge and experience
of the target populations.

If delivering mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT): knowledge of
associated research, psychological processes and evidence-based
practiceappropriate clinical training (if delivering to a clinical
population).

Ongoing requirements: personal daily practice and annual meditation
retreatscontinuous development through contact with other
practitioners/teachers and through supervision (which includes
reflecting into personal experience and receiving feedback)commitment to
further training and updateadherence to appropriate ethical framework.

# Working outside the evidence base {#S7}

## The real-world clinical context {#S8}

Models of 'stepped' approaches, including 'low-dose' mindfulness, have
been suggested.^47^ These modified forms of MBI, which might be
considered more lifestyle oriented, informal, practice-based
approaches,^47^ appear beneficial for working adults,^48,49^ healthcare
workers^50^ and general practitioners.^51^ In one meta-analysis,
mindfulness and acceptance-based self-help (including books and online
courses, but not apps) reduced depression and anxiety with small to
moderate effect sizes, across a range of clinical and non-clinical adult
populations.^13^ Evaluation of mindfulness apps is ongoing, with
promising early results,^52^ but still in the early stages.^53^

Given the ever-widening opportunities to access various types of
mindfulness training, and the currently quite specific and limited
access to MBCT in the NHS setting, might clients benefit from more
generic mindfulness training skills? If so, what competencies are needed
to help support this endeavour? The intention will be necessarily
distinct from that of a closed, group MBCT for recurrent depression. But
what are the possible benefits and risks? An increasingly wide range of
mental health professionals (medical, allied health, third sector, peer
supporters, experts by experience) are sharing mindfulness in a variety
of ways and with varying levels of supervision.^54^ One of the main
challenges is to understand who needs what training to deliver (what
type) of mindfulness intervention, and with what intent. [Box
2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"} shows some scenarios that may be
familiar to the reader. While these may provide initial 'touch points'
with mindfulness, they are also instances where a lack of clear
intention and poor expectation management may lead to disappointment
and/or confusion.

It is necessary to manage the tension between allowing clients access to
methods of psychological development that may be helpful (and are
readily available to the general public), and upholding the professional
ethics of 'do no harm' and operating within professional
competencies.^55^ Having, and communicating, a clear and specific
intention is vital. Related to this, clarity around the language and a
deeper exploration of what is meant by 'mindfulness training' may be
helpful. If you are offering an informal-based mindfulness training
(drop-in sessions, apps, books etc.) the intentions, level of practice
and depth of work is likely to be different than during a closed, 8-week
training programme with regular 45 min practice sessions. Working
systemically with mindfulness will necessarily have a different type of
impact than working with the individual.

**Box 2** Clinical scenarios of mindfulness outside the standardised
mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs)

-   Clients asking clinicians to recommend apps, online training and/or
    self-help books

-   Clients and carers asking whether a mindfulness course is suitable
    for their situation (if not depression in remission)

-   Offering or suggesting to clients a mindfulness drop-in, peer-led or
    introductory session

-   Offering bespoke mindfulness for groups where there is sparse
    evidence and less theoretical rationale

-   Considering adapted mindfulness training courses (e.g.
    shorter-duration, low-dose variants of standardised MBIs)

-   Enthusiastic mental health workers, healthcare assistants etc. who
    wish to start up a mindfulness group on a ward or in a service

-   Adjunctive use of mindfulness tools in the context of another type
    of therapy

-   Augmenting what is currently offered in psychoeducation courses by
    introducing mindfulness exercises

-   Incorporating mindfulness into everyday staff activities (e.g.
    explicit reference to mindful principles as part of a referral
    meeting process or team debriefs)

## A proposed framework {#S9}

This article proposes a three-part framework ([Fig.
1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}) to guide thinking in this emerging area. The
overarching intention is to help those delivering new variants of
mindfulness training in the mental health setting to do so as mindfully
as possible. On this basis some preliminary recommendations are made
below. Clinicians might consider rating the evidence, experience or
client characteristics on a scale of 0-10. This will help guide
decisions and also indicate where it is necessary for more evidence,
supervision/training or thought to be given to a decision to implement
mindfulness in each case.

![Three areas to consider if you are working with mindfulness outside
the standard protocols: (a) the evidence base and intention of the work;
(b) the characteristics of the client group and context; and (c) the
facilitator\'s experience.](336f1){#F1}

# Recommendations {#S10}

## Recommendation 1: understand the evidence (or lack thereof) {#S11}

### Familiarisation with the evidence base {#S12}

Be aware of the evidence and stay up to date as the field is rapidly
expanding -- for example, sign up for the *Mindfulness Research Monthly*
from the American Mindfulness Research Association
(<https://goamra.org/publications/mindfulness-research-monthly/>). While
assessing the literature, pay close attention to adaptations for
particular groups, and understand the cognitive/emotional rationale for
the adaptation. Look at the specifics: type and duration of exercises,
number and duration of sessions; standard, adapted or novel protocol;
the physical/psychological context of the intervention, level of support
available; and teacher competencies. Take note of any unusual or
unexpected effects reported by the authors, or other areas highlighted
as warranting caution or specific expertise.

Check the intention of the interventions as you review them. Was
mindfulness offered as a targeted, formulated intervention to work with
specific symptoms or as a more general skills training (e.g. to manage
stress/anxiety)? How similar or different is this to your context and
proposed work? At what stage of illness was the intervention offered?
MBCT is offered during a period of remission from depression. This
provides a chance to develop skills during a period of (relative) mental
calm, so they are ready to be implemented when mental states start to
change. If clients are acutely unwell, there might be a case for working
systemically (see Singh\'s work with staff^56^ and carers^57^).

### Talk to experts by experience {#S13}

If possible, talk to those in your client group who have experience of
using mindfulness (e.g. recovery college workers, peer supporters, peers
working in third-sector organisations). This 'anecdotal' evidence can
offer unique insights or observations from individuals who have made
their own adaptations. Talk to other facilitators or teachers who have
either clinical or mindfulness expertise with a particular client group
to get their insights. Given the importance of personal practice and of
depth of understanding of the practice of mindfulness and its
application to the specific mental struggles associated with different
'psychopathologies', it may be that a so-called 'peer' expert, with both
personal experience of mental ill health and training in mindfulness, is
the most suitable person to learn mindfulness from. In our experience,
clients frequently ask facilitators 'Have you used mindfulness to work
with x or y mental states\'? If someone with direct, personal experience
of using mindfulness -- for example, to work with voices -- can support
someone in a similar situation, this may be an even more powerful way to
work. How to best support and train these peer teachers is an ongoing
discussion in the field. Clearly their personality experience is a
strength (but also a vulnerability). Teacher guidelines for
'professionals' as described in [Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}
are extremely valuable; however, it may be helpful in future to develop
guidelines for peer teachers of mindfulness (this work is ongoing at the
Mindfulness Centre of Excellence, London, and more information is
available from the authors on request).

### Evaluate your intervention {#S14}

Gather your own qualitative (e.g. feedback form) or quantitative (e.g.
pre-/post-ratings) evidence using measures ideally co-designed with your
client group. This might include self-rated 'stress bubbles' (as used in
Russell^3^), measures of mindfulness, or a more functional analysis,
recording whether practical tasks (such as getting out or on a bus) were
made easier or less distressing as a result of mindfulness training.
Allow space to mindfully evaluate any unusual or unexpected effects of
the intervention. Consider ways you can share your evaluation or
observation so others can benefit from your experience (blogs,
newsletters, short reports, conference abstract or paper).

## Recommendation 2: client characteristics {#S15}

Mindfulness requires the ability to become aware of mental and physical
sensations, as they unfold moment by moment. Necessarily, this requires:
(a) some form of paying attention; (b) an ability to engage with, yet
not react to, physical (including emotional) and mental experiences; and
(c) a mind oriented towards non-judging, acceptance and nurturing.
Clients in the clinical setting will have a range of capacities in these
attentional, emotion regulation and attachment domains. Low scores in
all three domains may indicate something other than mindfulness as more
appropriate. Some screening questions provided by Dobkin *et al*^36^
indicate groups where caution and adequate preparation for the group
would be helpful.

Adaptations to take into account reduced attentional capacities can be
found in the work exploring mindfulness with people who have
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),^58^ whereas Chadwick^2^
describes modifications to support those experiencing the symptoms of
psychosis. Use of external objects or mindful movements^3^ might
initially help individuals who struggle to sit still and look inwards.
Mindfulness skills for distress tolerance, as outlined in the DBT
model,^59^ may be more appropriate for those experiencing intense
affect.

### Managing expectations {#S16}

Managing expectations is essential and will be informed by your
knowledge of the evidence base and how this relates to what you are
offering. The different intent behind targeted *v*. generic training is
ideally shared, so there are realistic expectations about what is
involved (in terms of practice) and likely outcomes. Myth-busting around
mindfulness as 'relaxation' and the 'double-edged sword' of awareness
(e.g. increased 'symptoms') will further allow clients to enter into
mindfulness training with a better understanding of what is possible and
what is being asked.

### Management of unusual experiences {#S17}

Consider, based on the reported literature, your own experience, your
knowledge of the client group, and any possible unusual or unexpected
effects that might arise. Make a plan for how these might be recorded
and managed mindfully. Consider at what point you would suggest that
someone stop practising mindfulness.

## Recommendation 3: facilitator experience {#S18}

An emerging theme from the literature is that the embodiment of
mindfulness in the person facilitating the training is vital. We are
each at our own unique place in the development of our personal
mindfulness skills, but if we wish to teach or share mindfulness with
others, there needs to be an active commitment to self-reflection and
ongoing professional development. An initial reflection might be around
your own interest in, and path to, mindfulness. Was it through yoga
practice, a secular or a Buddhist group? How does this training affect
what you offer in the clinical setting? What might need modification or
dropping altogether? As a general rule, teach what you have personal
experience of, and do not ask anyone to do a practice you have not done
yourself, under a variety of conditions (ranging from calm to under
duress). What barriers do you come across? How can this learning be
appropriately shared or modelled in your work?

### Intentions and expectations {#S19}

Be clear in your own mind as to what type/level of mindfulness you are
confident to deliver. If you are working outside the evidence you are
likely delivering a more generic, technique-oriented mindfulness
training to reduce stress and reactivity. Have a good knowledge of what
you are *not* doing, and practise clear communication about your
intentions.

### Facilitator skills audit {#S20}

A mindful reflection on your own competence as someone teaching or
sharing mindfulness requires an ongoing compassionate acceptance of your
own limitations and growth areas. It requires the courage to continue to
develop personally as well as developing as a facilitator/teacher of
mindfulness. With this spirit in mind, one suggestion is to use the
competencies outlined in the MBI-TAC^9^ as a framework against which to
realistically (but gently) assess your current capabilities. Where
possible, ask an external observer (e.g. a co-facilitator) or your
participants to give you feedback. Consider the most pressing continuing
professional development (CPD) need for this work and create your own
package. This could include formal training, attending a course taught
by another teacher, retreats, exploring online learning, or listening to
different teachers via online resources. Ideally, ask for guidance from
a more senior teacher in your area if CPD is not available. Be clear
with your intention as you train -- is this development of your personal
mindfulness or development for teaching mindfulness? -- and look out for
the 'mindfulness teacher' mental habit when doing your personal work.
This is the often reported phenomenon where mindfulness teachers, during
their own training, get lost in thought about how they themselves will
teach or explain the concept they are currently learning about. Thus
they have left experiential learning and are in the conceptual mind
space.

### Support {#S21}

Consider what support or supervision is available to you, for both your
personal development and your teacher development. Are there colleagues,
mentors or more senior practitioners in your network with whom you can
discuss any challenges that arise? If not, how and where can you access
this (e.g. mindfulness practitioner/teacher networks, physical or online
meetings)? A protocol for mindfulness self-reflection, which can be done
at the group or individual level, is provided by Russell &
Tatton-Ramos.^60^

# Summary and conclusions {#S22}

When used as a clinical intervention for major depressive disorder,
there is good evidence that MBCT can prevent relapse to a degree that is
at least similar to currently available treatments. It may have
advantages for particular subgroups of depressed individuals with more
long-standing, recurrent depressive illness and childhood adversity.
Evidence for efficacy in other domains of mental ill health is less
convincing, but it is emerging. Although strong evidence exists for the
application of mindfulness in the management of anxiety (generalised),
this work does not seem as prevalent in the UK setting. This may be
because CBT approaches are very effective for anxiety disorders so there
is less of a driver to find alternatives.

The breadth of 'mindfulness interventions' continues to grow, from
standardised protocols to peer-led drop-ins, apps and self-help
materials. Navigating this growing landscape in a way that is true to
the transformational possibilities of mindfulness and that allows
clients to connect to mindfulness in a meaningful and healthy way
presents some challenges. Some recommendations have been made here to
help in this endeavour. Specifically, to know the state of the evidence,
to be aware of relevant client characteristics, and to know your own
limitations as a teacher or facilitator of mindfulness. Continuing
personal and professional development is essential and will have an
impact on efficacy. These are exciting times as the impact of
mindfulness training spreads throughout our health services, offering a
chance for both staff and clients to benefit and improve their mental
'wealth'. However, it is most important that this endeavour is conducted
in a mindful way -- paying attention, on purpose, moment by moment and
without judgement.

[^1]: **Tamara Anne Russell** is a Visiting Lecturer, Neuroimaging
    Department, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience,
    King\'s College London, London, UK. **Gerson Siegmund** is a PhD
    candidate, Department of Psychology and Personality Development,
    Institute of Psychology, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul,
    Porto Alegre, Brazil.
