========================================
Plans, hopes and ideas for mental health
========================================



John R. AshtonCorrespondence c/o BJPsych Bulletin (pb@rcpsych.ac.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2017-2

:Abstract:
   Mental health and the failings of the mental health services are in
   the spotlight as never before. Nowhere is this more apparent than in
   the often dire situation with regard to child and adolescent mental
   health. At the same time, there is a renewed interest in the scope
   for prevention of mental illness and distress, and in population
   approaches to mental well-being. It may come as a surprise to some
   that others have given such serious consideration to strategic
   approaches to public mental health as long ago as the 1950s. It
   appears that such consideration was squeezed out by the dominant
   concerns of serious and enduring mental illness and a prevailing
   biological view of psychiatry. The time is right to engage with this
   agenda in recognition of the importance of public mental health, not
   only for the individual and for families, but also for society as a
   whole and for the economy. The publication of a review of the subject
   by the Faculty of Public Health and the Mental Health Foundation is
   to be commended. Let us make sure it leads to action.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The recent announcement by UK Prime Minister David Cameron of a new
initiative for mental health, with a particular emphasis on parenting
classes, :sup:`1` is most welcome. It comes at the end of a year in
which there has been an increasing concern for the state of the nation's
mental health, with a flurry of documents and reports, a campaign led by
*The Times* newspaper :sup:`2` and an increasing demand for parity of
resourcing between mental and physical health. Interestingly, some of
the pressure to do something specifically about child and adolescent
mental health is coming from the independent schools sector. The schools
have been expressing increasing concern about the mental well-being of
the young people in their care, faced by an apparently steady increase
in the incidence of distress manifested by levels of general anxiety and
depression, and specifically the levels of eating disorder, self-harm
and other behavioural manifestations. Not for the first time in public
health, something that has long been a problem for the most
disadvantaged in society is being taken seriously once it becomes an
issue for the privileged. Nor should we ignore the opportunity presented
for progress by the mobilisation of enlightened self-interest by those
in positions of power and influence. After all, in Victorian times, the
fact that cholera knew no social boundaries led to sanitary reform which
was of benefit to rich and poor alike. More recently, once it became
apparent that HIV/AIDS was not only a disease of stigmatised minorities,
the research dollars rolled in.

As a public health physician who began his career as a psychiatrist and
family doctor and is finishing as President of the UK's Faculty of
Public Health, I find particular poignancy in returning to the theme of
public mental health for my swansong year, a theme which I have chosen
for the Faculty to focus on in 2015–2016. I appreciate and welcome this
opportunity to share some thoughts with clinical colleagues in
psychiatry based on 40 years of trying to make sense of some of the
questions raised within a public health paradigm.

My journey from psychiatric registrar in Newcastle in the 1970s offers
some perspective. As a student I was one of those medics whose interests
spanned the humanities as well as the sciences. History and politics
were always as interesting to me as biology, and when I came across the
prospectus for the public health masters course at the London School of
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine sometime in third year, it was clear to me
that sooner or later I would be signing up. For the next 10 years I
would religiously send for the latest edition. Fortunately, my interest
was nurtured and kept alive by the remarkable social orientation of the
Newcastle course, not just in family and community medicine but also in
such mainstream clinical areas as paediatrics, psychiatry and
obstetrics. The school was imbued with the spirit not just of the
pioneering, community-oriented paediatrician Sir James Spence, but also
that of Aberdonian obstetrician Dugald Baird through his Newcastle
disciples. The strong social and community base was reinforced by a
series of Deans of Medicine, who, while hard-nosed neurologists and
endocrinologists themselves, supported the work of those such as Donald
Irvine, who was centrally involved in establishing the country's first
general practice training programme and later oversaw the General
Medical Council. When I signed up for the psychiatric training rotation
under the formidable Sir Martin Roth, amazingly comprehensive and
intellectually stimulating as it turned out to be with placements in all
aspects of mental health services, I found myself frustrated at the
failure of those services to focus upstream to prevention and the
promotion of mental health.

While as a registrar in the heady years of the challenges posed to
orthodox practice by the likes of R.D. Laing and Thomas Szasz, I was
exposed to the whole spectrum of ideas, from Freud and Jung to
Kraepelin, Sargent and Eliot Slater. Although we had opportunities to
cut our teeth on individual, group and marital therapy, the broader
public health agenda remained elusive. I came to the conclusion that
what was on offer was all too little and too late, and as soon as I had
finished my training I moved into general practice in the hope of
finding more fertile soil for prevention.

My next move took me to Southampton, where the pioneering dean of the
new medical school, Donald Acheson, had created an exciting opportunity
which seemed tailor-made for somebody like myself. In a university-run
health centre in the local community, based on lines recommended by the
celebrated Birmingham professor of public health Thomas McKeown, there
were to be specialoid general practitioners – GP paediatricians, GP
mediatricians (caring for grown-ups), GP geriatricians and a GP
psychiatrist (me). Part of the time we would teach medical students, and
the remainder was spent providing a combination of general practice,
including out-of-hours services, and specialist expertise to the
practice patients as well as supporting each other. As far as possible,
we would look after the population of the Aldermoor estate (a public
health notion), and consume our own smoke.

It was a stimulating time, but there were problems reconciling the
competing claims of medical school and service as well as staffing
issues. Southampton was within spitting distance of the London School of
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, so it was time to make the logical step
into public health, and it was quite clear that I had made the right
move. Validation came from, among others, John Wing and Julian Leff from
the Maudsley, who also taught social psychiatry at the school, from
visiting teachers from the London School of Economics (LSE), such as
Bryan Abel Smith, who confirmed what students suspected, namely that
‘public health is the political wing of medicine’ and that ‘Parliament
is the dispensary of public health’, and others that placed population
health at the centre. It was one of those group learning experiences
which stays with you down the ensuing years as a highlight and a
transformational experience. Yet there was something missing.

In those days students on the public health masters courses at the
School had the enormous privilege of a 2-year course, 1 year spent in
the classroom and 1 year on a dissertation. The dissertation was a kind
of blank cheque that enabled you to pursue something of special interest
that would hopefully be built on in future years. And this is where my
problem reasserted itself. What would be a suitable dissertation that
majored on prevention and mental public health? I was already a member
of the social psychiatry section of the Royal College of Psychiatrists
and I took advice from as many people as I could find, including Sir
Martin Roth. I drew a blank. The nearest anybody could get was early
diagnosis and treatment in the community, what I now knew to be
secondary prevention in public health, tertiary prevention being
rehabilitation. Primary prevention was nowhere to be found.

And so in the end I hit on planned parenthood, something much better
understood in a holistic sense in global health circles, and I carried
out a series of studies into family planning and abortion at the
population level of Wessex. In my subsequent career as a public health
academic, as a regional and county director of public health, as an
adviser to the World Health Organization on the Healthy Cities project,
and most recently, as President of The UK's Faculty of Public Health, I
have reconciled my angst that as a generalist with a population and
environmental focus, all my work has ultimately to be judged by its
impact on mental health and well-being. So what have I learned and what
observations can I make faced with the promise that finally mental
health is to be taken seriously?

One of the problems with mental health, as with physical health, is that
the dominant approach is to work backwards, from a focus on treatment
towards an interest in prevention. The exception is when there is an
emergency, a disaster or a war, when needs must apply a public health
population-based triage model if harm is to be minimised.

In the 1980s I attended a short course at the School for would-be
volunteers to work in refugee camps in the Horn of Africa. One message
stays with me almost 40 years later. If a small group of volunteers
(doctors, nurses, engineers and so on) is deployed into a camp of 12 000
women and children in dire circumstances (the men are likely to be
either already dead or off fighting somewhere), the first thing to do is
not to start treating sick patients. Rather, it is to carry out a quick
census of who is there and what skills they have, and to set about
mobilising the expertise and supporting it.

This is not our traditional medical model, based as it is on putting up
your plate outside a consulting room and offering services to those who
can afford to pay, with no concern for the denominator of those with
unmet need. Take the example of child and adolescent psychiatry. The
large community surveys such as those on the Isle of Wight and in South
London found that around 10% of children and adolescents suffer from
such a level of emotional or conduct disorder as to require specialist
help. :sup:`3` In a borough of 500 000 population (about 70 000 children
and adolescents), this will equate to about 7000 potential patients. In
a fortunate district perhaps, optimistically, 1000 of those could be
adequately managed by a typical child and adolescent mental health
service (CAMHS). No district will ever have that kind of establishment.
At the risk of being written off as a loony baby boomer, I would quote
Mao Zedong: who is said to have claimed that ‘If the practice doesn't
work, the theory is wrong’. We are starting at the wrong end of the
telescope or focusing on the wrong part of the pyramid of needs. So what
would public health say and what is to be done?

In 1961 Gerald Caplan published a book titled *An Approach to Community
Mental Health*. Caplan was educated at Manchester medical school and
worked at the Tavistock Institute in London and the Hadassah Centre in
Jerusalem before moving to the USA, where his work was hugely
influential, not least with the programme of community mental health
centres under President Kennedy. I came across his book in the 1980s and
have carried it round with me ever since.

Reading it again now, it is as relevant and fresh today as it was when
it was written, and it is a mystery to me why it has not been a
blueprint for how we have approached mental health during the
intervening years. Perhaps it is because it includes a (very sensible)
chapter on ego psychology, when British psychiatry has for so long been
under the shadow of organic theorists and psychopharmacology? In
essence, what Caplan proposes is a comprehensive community approach to
preventive psychiatry and the provision of services which builds on
individual and community assets including those of what he calls
‘caretaking agents’ and those in special positions in everyday life. He
includes in this not just doctors and nurses but clergy, teachers,
policemen and so on, and advocates a system built on up-skilling those
in a position to play a protective and supportive role in everyday life
as a first line.

Caplan describes administrative actions that can protect and support
good mental health as well as personal and clinical interactions and
redefines the role of those with specialist psychiatric expertise in
building and supporting both capacity and capability for mental health
and well-being. For me, using the example of child and adolescent mental
health, this translates into a life cycle approach that starts with
planned parenthood, builds on it with the Prime Minister's parenting
classes, and ensures that all those in key interactions with parents and
children have adequate skills to promote mental health and respond
quickly to signs of distress. This extends to children themselves having
the opportunity at school to develop mental resilience and skills for
mutual mental health assistance with their peers. The administrative
part includes key action on wider determinants of health such as
economic and social security, housing and access to good educational and
work opportunities. If all this is implemented, the question then arises
as to what the formal system should be offering in primary care,
building on recent developments in Improving Access to Psychological
Therapies (IAPTS) and how serious breakdown and risk can be handled for
the whole population of patients for whom this becomes necessary.
:sup:`4`

One of the enemies of adopting this kind of comprehensive approach to
mental health is the prevailing narrow and reductionist model of
scientific evidence as illustrated by recent controversy over the
concept of mental well-being as a researchable paradigm. :sup:`5` For
Caplan, “‘Our lack of knowledge in regard to the significance of the
different factors has to be remedied by a continuation of existing
research into aetiology. But, meanwhile preventive psychiatrists have
been able to learn a lesson from public health colleagues in regard to
handling of the problem of the multifactorial nature of the picture …
The incidence of cases of clinical tuberculosis, for example, in any
community is no longer conceived of in public health circles as being
merely dependent upon the single factor of the presence or absence of
the tubercle bacillus. It is recognised that there are many complicated
issues that will determine whether a particular person exposed to the
germ will contract the clinical disease: issues involving virulence of
the germ, host susceptibility and various environmental factors’.
:sup:`6`” In public health we have learned to take a whole-systems
approach to whole and sub-populations and to use multiple interventions
acting on the health ‘field’.

The list of factors of interest to those concerned with protecting and
improving mental health, mental well-being and resilience, in addition
to the proximal factors of those aspects of personal security already
mentioned and the managed challenges that enable people to grow and
thrive, includes a set of constructs such as locus of control,
self-esteem and coherence. These can be difficult constructs to
operationalise for research purposes, especially when they interact in
complex systems, but tools can be developed, for example the Rosenberg
Self-Esteem Scale, :sup:`7` and in recent years mixed-methods and
compound outcomes such as those used in Social Return on Investment
:sup:`8` have paved the way for practical interventions based on
pragmatic considerations.

We must be careful to avoid the dangers of scientism. When John Snow
took the handle from the Broad Street pump during the 1854 cholera
epidemic in Soho, the cause of cholera was still believed to be the
miasma. This was 20 years before Pasteur's ground-breaking research. And
still nowadays a whole system of education based on the evidence-free
assumption that team sports are character forming underpins the British
public schools system.

Caplan's book concludes with a remarkably contemporary proposal for the
development of comprehensive community psychiatry based on 11 concepts
and assumptions that could well provide the starting point for a
consideration as to how any new government funds might be committed. For
myself, I have come to the conclusion that in addition to those things
which government can and should do through ‘the pharmacy of public
health’, there are three approaches, tried and tested in recent years,
that should be regarded as delivery systems.

#. ‘Total place’ and ‘defined population’ as developed through Healthy
   Cities, Healthy Schools, Healthy Prisons and other settings. :sup:`9`

#. Asset-based community development as proposed by John McKnight and
   colleagues in Chicago. :sup:`10,11,12,13` This approach maps and
   mobilises the gifts and talents of individuals, families and
   communities on the basis that:

   -  they are half-full, not half-empty

   -  it takes a village to raise a child

   -  90% of health and social care is lay care

   -  unless professional practice supports self-efficacy it can be part
      of the problem rather than part of the solution.

#. Community-oriented primary (and secondary) care based on an
   epidemiological understanding of populations and responsibility for
   them, as practised by Sidney Kark and his colleagues over many years
   at the Hadassah Medical School in Jerusalem. :sup:`14`

In conclusion, I am optimistic that we have an opportunity to re-launch
mental health in this country at the same time as developing parity and
integration with physical health. The Faculty of Public Health is
playing its part by launching a new public mental health report in June
to share best practice among public health practitioners. :sup:`15`

There is a particular opportunity to pursue this approach in England,
where NHS England's *Five Year Forward View* :sup:`16` with its
integrated ‘new care models’ is driving transformational change.
However, the paradigm shift to a public health model with co-production
at its heart is a precondition. More of the same just won't do.

.. [1]
   **Professor John R. Ashton** CBE, President of The UK's Faculty of
   Public Health, London, UK.
