---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** There is a drive to increase the number of
  psychiatry foundation placements to ensure that training keeps up with
  the changing health and social care landscape. This qualitative study
  aimed to explore, by interview, the experiences of 17 doctors who have
  completed a foundation placement in psychiatry.

  **Results** The study highlights the benefits of foundation psychiatry
  placements and some of their positive and negative aspects.

  **Clinical implications** Those developing foundation placements will
  need to ensure they are of high quality.
author:
- Ann Boyle
- Sophie Davies
- Nisha Dogra
- Jennifer Perry
- Hannah FoskerCorrespondence to Jennifer Perry
  (<jenperry@doctors.org.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-10
institute:
- 1Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust
- 2CAMHS Young Persons Team, Leicester
- 3Greenwood Institute of Child Health, University of Leicester
- 4South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
title: "The Foundation Programme in psychiatry: a qualitative study into
  the effects of a foundation placement"
---

*Broadening the Foundation Programme Report*^1^ describes how England\'s
health and social care landscape is changing. People are living for
longer and with complex, chronic health conditions. They are
increasingly experiencing longer periods of disability and there remains
a lack of parity of esteem between mental and physical healthcare. These
patterns demand changes in how healthcare is provided and the type of
doctors required.

The 2012 Foundation Programme curriculum,^2^ Professor John Collins\'
*Foundation for Excellence* report^3^ and the Shape of Training
report^4^ all anticipated these changing care needs for patients and
recommended that foundation doctors develop their capabilities across a
range of settings, including the community. Up until this point,
foundation placements had been dominated mainly by medicine and surgery.

The target set is that all foundation doctors should undertake a
community placement or an integrated placement from August 2017.
Community placements include all psychiatry placements as well as
placements in areas such as general practice and community paediatrics.
The target set by the psychiatry taskforce is to have 22.5% of all
foundation year 1 (FY1) and 22.5% of all foundation year 2 (FY2)
placements in psychiatry.

# Method {#S1}

## Aims {#S2}

This research aims to further understand the benefits of a foundation
placement in psychiatry and to lend further support to the planned
increase in psychiatry foundation jobs. Much of the literature so far
has looked at improving recruitment in psychiatry, however, we would
argue that there are many other potential benefits to the increase in
placements. This study will also look at some of the positive and
negative aspects of placements and how these can be overcome.

A qualitative study design with semi-structured interviews was chosen to
undertake exploratory work to further understand the perceived benefits
of psychiatry placements and the positive and negative experiences of
doctors who undertake them.^5^

## Sample {#S3}

All FY1 and FY2 doctors who had completed a foundation placement in
psychiatry in Leicestershire in two consecutive academic years were
invited to participate. There were no exclusion criteria. Recruitment of
participants was continued until thematic saturation was reached.

## The interview {#S4}

The interview schedule was developed to explore perceived benefits and
positive and negative experiences of psychiatry foundation placements.
It was hoped that an individual, private interview would facilitate
free, uninhibited expression by the participants.

## Procedure {#S5}

A list of all eligible foundation doctors was created by the
Leicestershire, Northamptonshire and Rutland (LNR) Foundation School. A
researcher contacted all potential participants by email and if a
positive response was received, a mutually convenient time was arranged
for the interview. To look for selection bias of only recruiting those
trainees who wanted to do psychiatry, we asked directly what their
career intentions had previously been and what they were at the time of
the interview. All interviews were taped or digitally recorded.

## Analysis {#S6}

All the interviews were transcribed verbatim and thematic analysis was
undertaken. Themes were identified independently by researchers before
discussion to reach agreement on those of relevance to the research
question. This procedure helped to ensure reliability. Themes were
compared across scripts to develop conceptual ideas beyond description
and these were then categorised.

# Results {#S7}

We interviewed 17 out of a potential 84 doctors. In relation to benefits
of psychiatry placements, the key themes identified were the opportunity
to acquire knowledge of mental health which can be used across
specialties, the opportunity to develop transferable skills, the
potential to overcome stigma, and improved recruitment. Doctors reported
that tasters, supervision, positive role models and work-life balance
were key positive factors in their placements. The key negative themes
were that some placements were perceived to be of poor quality and
concerns about the lack of medical exposure.

## Benefits of foundation psychiatry placements {#S8}

### Opportunities to develop knowledge and experience of psychiatry which will be useful across all specialties {#S9}

Participants spoke of how common psychiatric presentations were within
all specialties: "'You get patients with psychiatric problems in every
bit of medicine'.'Often I think patients presenting with a medical or
surgical problem have underlying psychopathology'."

One doctor highlighted how doctors in other specialties often 'don\'t
know how to deal with patients \[with psychiatric problems\]'. An
aspiring general practitioner described how in the future: "'I will be
so much more confident at managing psychiatric problems, presenting a
mental state, getting advice, assessing risk and all the other things'."

This supports the importance of psychiatric experience for all doctors,
regardless of their future career intentions.

### Opportunities to develop transferrable knowledge and skills {#S10}

Participants whose career intentions lay outside of psychiatry spoke
highly of the opportunity to develop 'transferrable' skills in a
psychiatry job, with 'communication skills' being commonly cited as an
area particularly developed. One doctor said: "'I think \[a psychiatry
foundation placement\] is good because it helps to develop communication
skills much better. You have to sit and talk to people and you kind of
get to know why things work for some people and not others \[...\]. \[I
valued\] being able to just go and talk to people and ask them personal
questions and being able to process that and make them feel at ease at
the same time'."

Placements also presented doctors with valuable opportunities to learn
about 'continuity of care', 'capacity' and 'the complexities of chronic
illness'.

### Overcoming stigma and negative attitudes towards mental health {#S11}

A number of negative aspects of psychiatry were described by
participants. Stigma from a wide range of sources including the media,
family, peers and doctors in other specialties was explicitly
identified. One doctor asked, 'Why do you want to do psychiatry? Because
you won\'t be able to defend yourself ... if a patient is aggressive'.
Another issue raised by doctors was that psychiatry did not achieve very
much for its service users. Finally, participants reported having the
impression that other doctors felt psychiatrists are 'not proper
doctors, they don\'t help anybody', and that somehow applying to
psychiatry implied 'a failure and \[that\] you have just given up on all
ambition'.

> 'The negative image came predominately from surgical consultants ...
> they seem to think it\'s a bit of a joke career'.

It seems a job in psychiatry can help to alter these misconceptions held
by doctors.

One aspiring surgeon reported: "'My attitude towards the psychiatric
patients has changed a lot. I remember when I had a patient before I did
the block and I really didn\'t know what to do. I just rang the
psychiatrist and said "Look, I\'m a surgeon, I don\'t know anything,
this guy\'s just unwell. Can you come and have a look at him?" Whereas
now I think I\'d have a bit more of a mature approach, try and get an
idea of what\'s going on and try and give a better, more informative
referral'."

Another said: "'As a med\[ical\] student I left my placement with a lot
of misconceptions about psychiatry and doing a psychiatry job as a
foundation doctor has dispelled a lot of those misconceptions'."

In reference to beliefs about psychiatry not having good patient
outcomes, one participant reported: 'You only know you can make a
difference when you see it in real life'. Another said: 'It\'s really
good to know what people can achieve in psychiatry'.

### Opportunities for improving recruitment {#S12}

Foundation placements can also provide opportunities for recruitment
into psychiatry. Before their psychiatry placement, four participants
had identified psychiatry as a potential career. After the placement
seven said psychiatry was the most likely career option, including the
initial four ([Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}).

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Participants\' career choices before and following a Foundation
Programme psychiatry placement
:::

| Career option      | Before | After |
|:-------------------|:------:|:-----:|
| Psychiatry         |   4    |   7   |
|                    |        |       |
| General practice   |   6    |   4   |
|                    |        |       |
| Surgery            |   2    |   2   |
|                    |        |       |
| Paediatrics        |   2    |   2   |
|                    |        |       |
| Emergency medicine |   1    |   1   |
|                    |        |       |
| General medicine   |   2    |   1   |
:::

The number expressing a preference for a career in psychiatry increased
slightly. The placement did not alter career intentions for those who
had already decided on a career in psychiatry. Most of those committed
to psychiatry commented that doing the placement had confirmed their
interest, and for some the experience introduced psychiatry as a career
option. One doctor said: 'I think if I hadn\'t done \[psychiatry\] I
wouldn\'t have thought of it as an option', and another admitted:
'Before I started psychiatry I would never have considered it'.

## Positive aspects of foundation placements {#S13}

Participants described a number of positive aspects of their psychiatry
placements.

### Tasters {#S14}

Trainees who reported that their consultants had arranged experiences
(tasters) in other areas, typically the crisis resolution team and
personality disorder service, reflected on these experiences positively.
This supports the importance of ensuring breadth in psychiatric
placements.

### Supervision and role models {#S15}

Almost all trainees were very positive about having 1 hour supervision
from a consultant every week and felt valued: 'My supervision has been
excellent really ... \[psychiatry consultants were\] more available than
any of the other supervisors I have had in the past'.

Trainees whose consultants or registrars showed an interest in them
reported positive experiences, which supports previous research stating
the importance of good role models in psychiatry. One trainee said that
in psychiatry, consultants 'know your name, which as an FY1 is a big
deal'. Another described how, "'We had a really good consultant ... he
was just interested in what we thought and talked to us and let us go
and talk to any of his patients. We got to go out with \[community
psychiatric nurses\] and things like that and go to his out-patient
clinics'."

Others commented that consultant psychiatrists were 'very approachable'
and stated that they felt 'well supported' in their jobs.

### Work-life balance {#S16}

Lifestyle was described as a positive factor in foundation placements:
"'It seems to be fairly nice hours; you don\'t get quite so many
patients who get acutely unwell in the middle of the night. Psychiatric
patients do seem to sleep.'"

Another doctor said: 'I think you have a good work/social, lifestyle
balance'.

Other positive factors noted were predictability of workload, the
ability to 'leave on time', and the flexibility or 'part-time work'. Not
needing to come in at night as a consultant and reduced working hours
were generally considered positive, although one participant noted that
consultants work harder than trainees.

## Negative aspects of placements {#S17}

Several trainees were critical of their placements, particularly those
who felt the placement lacked variety or a specific role for the
trainee. One doctor said: 'what I feel I have done here is more of a
lower-level geriatric job'.

Many of those who did not want a career in psychiatry focused on the
separation from acute hospitals and missing physical medicine. The lack
of practical procedures frequently came up with the phrases 'not medical
enough' and they 'would miss the medical side of things'.

# Discussion {#S18}

It is positive to find that working within the specialty can benefit
doctors regardless of their career aspirations. Doctors appreciated that
mental illness is encountered in almost every branch of medicine.
Psychiatry foundation training offers opportunities for trainees to
develop transferable skills that are appropriate for managing the
'whole' patient in any setting, as well as helping to nurture doctors
who are empathic, reflective and compassionate. The importance of
developing such qualities in our medical workforce was highlighted in
the Francis Report.^6^

The Foundation Programme curriculum^2^ delivers mental-health-specific
and transferable, generic competencies. These include team-working,
working across networks of care, relationships and communication with
patients, and managing patients with long-term conditions. This supports
the benefit of a foundation placement in psychiatry.

Psychiatry still appears to be heavily stigmatised, both from sources
within and external to the medical community. This finding comes as
little surprise, given the abundance of pre-existing research already
reporting this.^7,8^ Our study shows that exposure to psychiatry during
the early years of doctors\' training is important in decreasing stigma
and challenging misconceptions.

Our study found that before their psychiatry placement, four
participants had identified psychiatry as a potential career and after
the placement this number had risen to seven. This shows that foundation
placements can help to improve recruitment into psychiatry (although it
should be noted that the numbers who changed their career choice to
psychiatry in this study were quite small). These findings support the
literature. Kelley *et al*^9^ showed that 14.9% of those with a
foundation psychiatry placement later chose psychiatry as a career, in
contrast to only 1.8% of those who did not have psychiatry exposure.

Almost all of the participants interviewed were predominantly positive
about their experience within psychiatry. The views expressed about
supervising consultants were very positive in all but one interview, in
particular stressing that the consultants were available and
approachable. The importance of good role models in psychiatry has been
reported in other studies.^10^ The importance of regular supervision was
also highlighted by participants and this has been recognised in the
Collins report, which recommends including the responsibilities of
supervising foundation trainees in consultant job planning.^3^

Participants reported positive experiences of psychiatry tasters.
Tasters enable further insight into the specialty and have been
highlighted as a quality marker of excellent placements by the Royal
College of Psychiatrists.^11^ Trainees also noted that psychiatry
offered a good work-life balance, and this has been commented on in the
literature as a positive aspect of psychiatry.^12^

## Study limitations {#S19}

Ethics approval for the study was granted by the National Research
Ethics Service (NRES). However, regional employing trusts expected us to
complete their separate ethics approval process. As this was an unfunded
study, this was not feasible with the resources available. We were
therefore only able to sample doctors who had completed placements in
one mental health trust, therefore the results may not be generalisable
to other trusts in the country.

Since the research relied on participants responding to an invitation to
participate by consenting to the interview, self-selection bias is
likely to have occurred. It may be that those who consented were more
interested in psychiatry, or equally that those who participated had
particularly strong negative feelings about the placement that they were
keen to express.

## Clinical implications {#S20}

There is a real need to ensure that all psychiatry foundation placements
are of a high quality so that doctors have an excellent experience of
the specialty. Some trainees commented on poor-quality training
placements and raised concerns about a lack of medical exposure. Doctors
may have pre-conceived negative views about foundation psychiatry
placements, which include fears about a lack of exposure to acute care
or procedural experience relevant to the curriculum. Foundation doctors
should be able to find opportunities to undertake procedures such as
venepuncture and electrocardiograms (ECGs) during their psychiatry
placements, particularly if they are based on an in-patient ward.

In conclusion, this research suggests that experience within psychiatry
in the early postgraduate years can support the development of
well-rounded doctors. Foundation placements in psychiatry can also help
to improve recruitment to the specialty, although it should be noted
that the numbers from this study were small. Improving recruitment is
not the main aim of the programme but it is instead a desirable
by-product. The potential to improve generic transferrable capabilities,
reduce stigma and influence attitudes towards mental illness in newly
qualified doctors is of vital importance. It is critical that the
foundation placements are of high quality to ensure that their potential
is maximised.

[^1]: **Ann Boyle**, consultant old age psychiatrist, Glenfield
    Hospital, Leicester, and specialist advisor for the Foundation
    Programme, Royal College of Psychiatrists. **Sophie Davies**,
    specialist trainee child and adolescent psychiatry, CAMHS Young
    Persons Team, Westcotes House, Leicester. **Nisha Dogra**, professor
    of psychiatry education and honorary consultant in child and
    adolescent psychiatry, Greenwood Institute of Child Health,
    University of Leicester. **Jennifer Perry**, psychiatry specialist
    trainee, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust. **Hannah
    Fosker**, psychiatry core trainee, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester.
