===========================================================================================================================================
The access and waiting-time standard for first-episode psychosis: an opportunity for identification and treatment of psychosis risk states?
===========================================================================================================================================

Richard Whale
Andrew Thompson
Rick FraserCorrespondence to Richard Whale
(richard.whale@brighton.ac.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-2

:Abstract:
   Expansion of early intervention services to identify and clinically
   manage at-risk mental state for psychosis has been recently
   commissioned by NHS England. Although this is a welcome development
   for preventive psychiatry, further clarity is required on thresholds
   for definition of such risk states and their ability to predict
   subsequent outcomes. Intervention studies for these risk states have
   demonstrated that a variety of interventions, including those with
   fewer adverse effects than antipsychotic medication, may potentially
   be effective but they should be interpreted with caution.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

With the advent of the new access and waiting-time standard for
first-episode psychosis published by NHS England in February 2015,
:sup:`(n.d.a)` there is now a definite move to adopt service models
aimed at preventing transition to psychosis in vulnerable individuals,
as originally developed in 1994 by the Personal Assistance and Crisis
Evaluation clinic in Melbourne. :sup:`(n.d.b)` There is an expectation
that early intervention in psychosis services will now also offer
interventions for at-risk mental state for psychosis (ARMS), based on
our evolving understanding of best practice in this area.

This move is exciting for a number of reasons. It represents a
commitment from the Government to support mental health service
development and reform, especially preventive approaches, at a time when
many services are experiencing cuts. Cost-effectiveness of ARMS services
has been demonstrated. :sup:`(n.d.c)` Second, as a treatment paradigm
the preventive strategy represents a possibility that we can alter the
trajectory of a potentially serious condition and improve outcomes in
all domains, including symptoms and functioning. Third, we may be able
to use, at an earlier stage of illness, more benign treatments that are
potentially less costly, less stigmatising and better tolerated.
:sup:`(n.d.b)` This preventive model also represents an opportunity to
broaden treatment paradigms within mental health, not just for psychosis
but for other disorders, fitting perfectly with another current health
development strategy – low-stigma, accessible and responsive youth
mental health services. Debate continues as to whether such services are
appropriately placed within established early intervention for psychosis
or whether new, dedicated teams with a more public health emphasis
should be created. However, existing services have expertise in both
defining first-episode psychosis thresholds and offering relevant
clinical support packages for both ARMS and first-episode psychosis.
:sup:`(n.d.d)`

The criteria commonly used in the UK for ARMS depend on the presenting
clinical features, relative functional impairment and help-seeking.
:sup:`(n.d.b)` Consistent quantification of distress relating to these
features is currently lacking. It also remains unclear how these
clinical risk features differ from more widespread psychotic phenomena
in the general population. Psychotic experiences in non-help-seeking
populations appear relatively common, affecting about 5%, :sup:`(n.d.e)`
and higher in child and adolescent samples; :sup:`(n.d.f)` there is
apparent sharing of aetiological risk factors with schizophrenia.
Clinical outcomes of this non-help-seeking group are unknown. Psychosis
transition threshold is commonly defined by three Positive and Negative
Syndrome Scale items (delusions, hallucinations or conceptual
disorganisation) achieving adequate severity for at least 7 days,
:sup:`(n.d.g)` but such psychosis thresholds are not without
controversy. :sup:`(n.d.h)` The large majority of those identified as
ARMS do not cross this severity threshold within 3 years of follow-up,
although many remain functionally impaired or develop other disorders.
:sup:`(n.d.b)` Whether other transition criteria, or modifications of
existing criteria, are better able to predict longer-term outcome
remains to be established. The reliability of identifying such
thresholds in clinical practice is also less than in research settings,
:sup:`(n.d.i)` despite using widely available tools. :sup:`(n.d.b)` This
is further complicated by concurrent substance misuse, common in such
clinical populations. However, the definition and adoption of such
thresholds is clearly necessary to educate clinicians, decide when to
appropriately intervene and support research. The complexity of the
psychosis sub-syndrome groups (including individuals with a family
history of psychotic illness, those with schizotypal disorder or the
attenuated psychosis syndrome, those with brief limited intermittent
notable severity psychotic episodes and those help-seeking or not) and
their undetermined probable outcomes may lead to services primarily
adopting a more discrete threshold for inception, such as the DSM-5
research-appendix-defined attenuated psychosis syndrome, which has
marked clinical overlap with ARMS-defined populations. :sup:`(n.d.i)`

Without clear diagnostic robustness of a condition, and with a wide
variation in clinical outcome, interpretation of intervention studies is
problematic. Initially, randomised studies of diverse interventions for
operationally defined ARMS (termed ultra high risk for psychosis) seemed
to show similar beneficial effects *v.* control. Reviews pooling
outcomes of these studies clearly advocated intervention.
:sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.j)` More recent randomised studies have demonstrated
less clear benefits over control than earlier studies, as is often seen
in health research (arguably ‘active’ controls were used in many of
these studies). Primary intervention recommendations of supportive
counselling/case management for this clinical group have emerged, as
previously used as a control intervention. Several factors will need to
be considered, with future investigations including previous low sample
size due to recruitment problems, use of robust and consistent
thresholds for group inclusion, and transition to psychosis to reduce
heterogeneity of outcome, consistent inclusion of functional outcomes,
translation of findings to usual clinical care (away from research
clinics), ensuring timely publication of results and the importance of
replication of existing findings.

While considerable progress has been made in this area, we remain at the
early stages of defining a risk syndrome for psychosis. The currently
adopted clinical threshold for ARMS seems to be a valid construct to
identify clinical need but the heterogeneity of subsequent clinical
outcomes is wide. Specific interventions for ARMS are unclear, aside
from those for commonly identified comorbidities (such as anxiety,
depression and substance misuse). Intervention studies to date highlight
the importance of methodological rigour and consistency of diagnostic
thresholds used, to which end the DSM-5 attenuated psychosis syndrome
may be a positive step. :sup:`(n.d.i)` Biological models for psychosis
risk need replication, clinical validation and combining with clinical
markers in larger, longitudinal studies to enhance risk determination.
:sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.k),(n.d.l)`

Despite these caveats, this field of study represents an important
advance in the development of preventive psychiatry. The current move to
incorporate earlier psychosis states in more widespread clinical
services, with appropriate threshold definition and outcome monitoring,
may also have important societal impact.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

.. [1]
   **Richard Whale** is Principal Lecturer at Brighton and Sussex
   Medical School and a Consultant Psychiatrist with the Early
   Intervention Services at Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust.
   **Andrew Thompson** is Associate Clinical Professor in Psychiatry at
   the University of Warwick and a Consultant Psychiatrist in the North
   Warwickshire Early Intervention in Psychosis Service. **Rick Fraser**
   is Honorary Senior Lecturer at Brighton and Sussex Medical School and
   Lead Psychiatrist with the Early Intervention Services at Sussex
   Partnership NHS Foundation Trust.
