---
abstract: |
  Evolutionary science remains an overlooked area in psychiatry and
  medicine. The newly established Royal College of Psychiatrists\'
  Evolutionary Psychiatry Special Interest Group aims to reverse this
  trend by raising the profile of evolutionary thinking among College
  members and others further afield. Here we provide a brief outline of
  the importance of the evolutionary approach to both the theory and
  practice of psychiatry and for future research.
author:
- Riadh Abed
- Paul St John-SmithCorrespondence to Riadh Abed
  (<abedrt@btinternet.com>) [^1]
date: 2016-10
institute:
- 1Mental Health Tribunal Service, Sheffield, UK
- 2Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
title: "Evolutionary psychiatry: a new College special interest group"
---

The significance of evolutionary theory to the biomedical sciences
generally remains underappreciated among psychiatrists and medics.^1^
Evolutionary science does not currently feature in the undergraduate
curriculum of most medical schools in the UK, nor is it part of the
syllabus of the Royal College of Psychiatrists\' membership examinations
(MRCPsych). As a result, most psychiatrists remain largely unaware of
the relevance of evolution to mental disorder and dysfunction.

Unlike evolutionary psychology, which is a vibrant and thriving
sub-discipline of academic psychology with a strong and well-funded
research programme, evolutionary psychiatry remains the interest of a
small number of psychiatrists who are thinly scattered across the world.
Despite the publication of a number of excellent evolutionary psychiatry
and evolutionary medicine texts over the past two decades,^2--7^ as well
as numerous scholarly peer-reviewed articles, there is still neither a
university academic department nor an academic journal anywhere in the
world dedicated to researching and promoting the evolutionary approach
to psychiatry.

We are therefore greatly encouraged by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists\' Council\'s decision to support the formation of a new
evolutionary psychiatry special interest group and even more encouraged
that a significant number of members and fellows of the College voted in
favour of this initiative. This comes 2 years after the World
Psychiatric Association (WPA) approved the setting up of the WPA Section
on Evolutionary Psychiatry.

# What the evolutionary approach may offer {#S1}

Why is the evolutionary approach relevant to psychiatry? To date,
psychiatry has operated without an accepted unifying framework and has
been characterised by a plurality of approaches, some of which are
diametrically at odds with each other.^3^ This pluralism may be
presented by some as a sign of strength and vibrancy but it is more
likely in our view to be a sign of conceptual weakness. This weakness is
exemplified by the lack of the most rudimentary rules about the function
of the human mind. The consequences of this state of unconstrained
pluralism are that any theory, however irrational, can demand equal
attention.^8^

Evolutionary science helps resolve these issues as it recognises two
categories of causation: proximate (mechanism and ontogeny) and ultimate
or evolutionary (phylogenetic and function).^9^ These are reflected in
Tinbergen\'s four questions ([Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}).
Proximate causes are the answer to the 'how' question and are the
primary focus of non-evolutionary science, whereas ultimate causation is
the answer to the 'why' question. Ultimate or evolutionary causation is
a perspective which is unique to evolutionary science and theories of
ultimate causation will be compatible with a whole range of proximate
causes. Neuroscience has made significant advances in exploring the
proximate causes of psychopathology but relatively few studies have
addressed evolutionary or ultimate causes of traits or disorders.^10^
For example, the finding that familial adversity during early life leads
to early sexual maturity in females can be explained through studying
the hormonal, biochemical and other physiological mechanisms that bring
about early puberty (proximate causes). However, the evolutionary or
ultimate causation of this phenomenon that has been replicated across a
number of species and appears to be a widespread mammalian capacity^11^
suggests that this acceleration is likely to be an adaptive response to
the organism\'s 'prediction' of future adversity from current or
childhood adversity. Thus, those females who possessed the capacity for
phenotypic plasticity (the ability to vary their phenotype by maturing
early) were more reproductively successful than those who lacked this
capacity.^11,12^ This example illustrates the fallacy of considering
nature or nurture in isolation and shows that nurture clearly works via
nature,^13^ in this case -- adversity working through particular genes
that allow for phenotypic plasticity. It also highlights the importance
of 'life history strategy' (in this case, by switching to a fast life
history strategy) in shaping human behavioural patterns and in creating
vulnerabilities to certain mental disorders.^14^ More importantly,
however, this example demonstrates that considering biological phenomena
from an evolutionary perspective can give rise to insights and generate
hypotheses (testable and refutable) that would not otherwise be
possible. In other words, it shows that considering the ultimate
causation of a biological phenomenon can uncover areas of biological
enquiry that would have otherwise remained invisible.

**Box 1** Tinbergen\'s four questions

1.  What are the mechanisms that cause the biological phenomenon?

2.  How does that develop in an individual (ontogenesis)?

3.  How did it evolve (phylogenetic history)?

4.  What was the function and fitness value of the
    trait/system/behaviour?

Another illustration of the effectiveness of the evolutionary approach
was in the area of child abuse, by uncovering what Daly & Wilson have
termed the 'Cinderella effect'.^15,16^ As predicted by Hamilton\'s
theory of kin selection,^17^ they demonstrated that children were at
significantly greater risk of abuse when living with a step-parent
compared with two genetic parents. They also found that pre-school
stepchildren were 40--100 times at greater risk of homicide than when
they lived with two genetic parents. They concluded that step-parentage
was the single most important risk factor for child abuse in pre-school
children. It is notable that non-evolutionary researchers had not
thought to examine these questions and is an example of a hypothesis of
ultimate causation (that costly parental investment is unlikely to be
indiscriminate) guiding research.

Understanding how evolution operates helps clinicians realise that
evolution (selection) does not design disease or disorder but rather
creates the vulnerability to disorder.^5^ These vulnerabilities arise
from the very nature of the evolutionary process where selection
(natural, sexual, social, etc.) operates to benefit reproduction, not
health, where design involves significant trade-offs, and where
biological evolution always lags behind cultural evolution leading to
'mismatch'.^18^ Also, neglecting the evolutionary perspective often
leads to clinicians confusing an emotional defence with a disorder.^19^
For example, the aversive emotions of anxiety and depression are
designed by selection to act as defences that protect us from risks
that, when appropriately activated, can improve our chances of survival
and reproduction. Furthermore, these defences, like the experience of
pain, are designed to cause distress and discomfort to ensure that they
effectively prevent the risk of greater harm. Therefore, equating
distress with disorder is to fundamentally misunderstand the function of
our emotional defences.^20^

# Examples of the use of the evolutionary approach {#S2}

Nesse^21^ has proposed an influential evolutionary model to explain the
way that defences, designed by selection, can become (or be perceived
as) disorders. He calls this the 'smoke detector principle'. Many of the
body\'s adaptive responses, such as cough, pain, anxiety and depression,
are crucial defences that remain latent until they are aroused by cues
that indicate the presence of a threat. Natural selection has shaped the
species\' mechanisms to express these defences optimally in situations
where their benefits exceed their costs. However, they are designed in
such a way as to allow for many false alarms, as the cost of a failure
to activate can be catastrophic. The consequent oversensitivity, coupled
with the novel modern human environments where the level of risk is much
reduced compared with the ancestral environment, leads to many false
positive responses and thus much unnecessary suffering. This process is
analogous to the design of smoke detectors where the cost of a false
positive is trivial compared with a failure to detect a real fire. Given
that there are many more false alarms than real ones, it is usually
clinically safe to block the response. However, this is not invariably
the case and there will be situations where the individual (patient) is
facing real-life threats to their well-being. Hence, this perspective
can guide clinical decision-making as to when it would be safe to switch
off the defensive response. It can also guide research into anxiety and
depression, both in the general population and in clinical settings
where the proportion of those whose defences are appropriately activated
(as opposed to false alarms) is currently unknown.

We suggest that evolutionary psychiatry offers a number of definite
advantages to psychiatry.^22^ These include: asking new questions about
why evolution has left us all vulnerable to mental disorders^23^ ([Box
2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"})providing a way to think clearly about
development and the ways that early experiences influence later
characteristicsproviding a foundation for understanding emotions and
their regulationproviding a foundation for a scientific diagnostic
systemproviding a framework for incorporating multiple causal factors
that explain why some people get mental disorders while others do
not.^22^

**Box 2** Pathways that mediate the influence of evolutionary processes
on disease vulnerability

-   Mismatch: exposure to evolutionarily mismatched or novel environment

-   Life history factors

-   Excessive defence mechanisms

-   Co-evolutionary considerations: losing the arms race against
    pathogens

-   Constraints imposed by evolutionary history

-   Sexual selection and its consequences

-   Balancing selection: maintaining an allele that raises disease risk

-   Demographic history and its consequences

-   Selection favours reproductive success at the expense of health

Adapted from Gluckman *et al.*^6^

There are numerous examples for the application of the evolutionary
approach to mental disorder. These include the cortical dysconnectivity
theory of the social brain for schizophrenia,^24^ the social competition
theory for depression,^25^ the pleiotropic theory of human
senescence,^26^ and the sexual competition theory for eating
disorders,^27^ to mention just a few. In addition, evolutionary theory
can have direct benefits to patients. A prime example is
compassion-focused therapy,^28,29^ an evidence-based psychological
therapy that has its roots in Bowlby\'s attachment theory.
Compassion-focused therapy is based on a model of human emotions that
recognises that emotions have evolved to fulfil a function and that
human emotional systems have a phylogenetic (evolutionary) history as
well as developmental and contextual dimensions. The emotion of
compassion that has its origins in the human (and the more ancient,
mammalian) capacity to care for our young has been applied over human
history to other members of the kin group and subsequently to other
in-group members. The healing qualities of compassion that have such
profound effects on the emotional and personality development of humans
during early life are employed by the therapist in compassion-focused
therapy, with the aim of promoting recovery through helping patients
develop the capacity for self-compassion.

# Evolutionary science can help clarify the concept of mental disorder {#S3}

We would propose that evolution can be usefully viewed as a meta-theory
of psychiatry that provides a framework that helps define the role of
various proximate factors in the causation of mental disorder. Hence,
accepting the assumption that the human mind/brain has been shaped by
selection over thousands of generations to solve the recurring problems
of survival and reproduction can in itself provide a plausibility index
that renders a whole range of hypotheses unlikely while pointing towards
the possibility of others. We would suggest, therefore, that
evolutionary science has the capacity to provide psychiatry with a much
needed plausibility or reality check that can favour promising
hypotheses while providing an early warning regarding those that are
likely to lead to scientific blind alleys.

It was Lorenz who, in 1937, demonstrated that behavioural patterns can
be designed by evolutionary processes in exactly the same way as
anatomical structures,^30^ and yet many psychiatrists continue to equate
the biological exclusively with genetic and neurochemical processes. The
evolutionary approach can help to show that the molecular level of brain
functioning is no more or less biological than the macrobiological level
or the level of organismic behaviour.^31^ It is worth remembering that
the end products of the human mind/brain are behaviour patterns,
emotions and cognitions and therefore these are the phenotypic
characteristics of our brains that have been shaped by selection,
whereas the brain circuitry and neurotransmitters are subservient
systems that have evolved to generate those end products. It follows
therefore that human behavioural strategies are fundamentally biological
phenomena that can only be fully understood within their correct social
and environmental context. Hence, it becomes legitimate to speak of a
biology of human social behaviour, a biology of culture and so forth.

Wakefield^32,33^ proposed that a Darwinian concept of mental disorder
builds on two basic ideas. The first is impairment in the capacity of
the individual to achieve important biological goals and the second is
that an individual\'s functional capacity cannot be assessed without
consideration of the environment in which they live. Furthermore, he
suggested that mental disorder is a state of harmful dysfunction that is
caused by a failure of a biological mechanism to perform its evolved
function and that it causes harm or damage as judged by sociocultural
standards. Although Wakefield\'s concept of mental disorder raises
problems of its own, it represents a significant advance over the
current atheoretical definitions.

# The Evolutionary Psychiatry Special Interest Group and what it might offer {#S4}

We are hoping that the support that the establishment of the special
interest group has received from the College membership will translate
into support for its activities over the coming months and years. We are
hoping that this will encourage evolutionary inspired research, help
produce and distribute teaching material on evolutionary principles,
help advocate for the inclusion of evolution into the undergraduate
medical curriculum in the UK and elsewhere as well as into the MRCPsych
syllabus, in addition to organising workshops, symposia and conferences.

We are aware that evolutionary psychiatry has its vocal critics and
detractors. We do not believe that it is possible to convince those who
object to evolution on ideological or religious grounds. However, we
fully understand and even sympathise with the position of those whose
objections arise from concerns regarding the need to maintain high
standards of scientific rigour and the avoidance of 'just-so stories'.
We would suggest, however, that some of the most prevalent just-so
stories have nothing to do with evolution and include assertions such as
that all mental disorders are diseases or alternatively that mental
illness is a myth. We believe that evolutionary inspired theories and
hypotheses must ultimately be supported, refuted (and discarded) or
modified on the basis of empirical evidence and not through dogma or
appeal to authority.

We suggest that without a broad, interactionist, evolutionarily grounded
approach, psychiatric trainees are likely to feel bewildered by and
discouraged from exploring other modes of scientific investigation and
understanding, to the detriment of their patients and their own
professional satisfaction. However, although using the evolutionary
model encourages eclecticism and considers how brain/mind is influenced
by and influences a whole range of biopsychosocial-cultural issues, we
should not seek eclecticism at any evidential cost.

# Conclusions {#S5}

Among Darwin\'s lasting legacies is our knowledge that the human
brain/mind evolved through evolutionary processes. The human brain
consumes around 20% of the body\'s energy intake while constituting
merely 2% of its weight. Such an organ would not have evolved if it had
not performed some vital adaptive functions in our evolutionary past.
The challenge for evolutionary psychiatry is to move from general facts
to evidentially well-supported specifics about the adaptive processes
that shaped the mind and thus created the vulnerability to illness. It
may be that there are many things about the evolution of the human mind
that we will never know and about which we can only hypothesise. At its
very best, however, it can aid the discovery of knowledge of why all our
complex human psychological characteristics evolved, why we have
vulnerabilities to illness and ultimately, what we might do about that
in terms of prevention and treatment.

[^1]: **Riadh Abed** FRCPsych is a medical member of the Mental Health
    Tribunal Service, Sheffield, formerly consultant psychiatrist and
    medical director, Rotherham Doncaster and South Humber NHS
    Foundation Trust. **Paul St John-Smith** FRCPsych is a consultant
    psychiatrist, Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS Foundation
    Trust, St Albans.
