---
abstract: |
  Air travel is now a common feature of most of our elderly
  population\'s lives. There is little by way of warnings, rules or
  recommendations for our patients with psychiatric diagnoses, in
  particular dementia, who intend to travel by plane, in contrast to
  other specialties. In this article I highlight an adverse outcome of
  long-haul air travel as a result of delirium and resulting accelerated
  decline in overall cognitive function. I review literature related to
  the topic and suggest ways to minimise precipitating factors for
  stressors prior to and during flights. This article suggests that more
  thought should be given to the title question.
author:
- Thomas McCabeCorrespondence to Thomas McCabe (<thomas.mccabe@nhs.net>)
  [^1]
date: 2017-2
institute:
- 1NHS Lanarkshire, Scotland, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
title: "'Doc, can I fly to Australia?' A case report and review of
  delirium following long-haul flight"
---

-   [Case presentation](#S1){#toc-S1}
    -   [Outcome](#S2){#toc-S2}
-   [Discussion](#S3){#toc-S3}
-   [Recommendations](#S4){#toc-S4}

Short-haul and long-haul air travel are now commonplace among the
elderly population. Evidence suggests such travel is on the increase
from the late 1990s, with as many as 1 in 5 people above the age of 65
passing through the main UK international airports in 2014.
^[@R1],\ [@R2]^ Little thought is given to short weekend breaks abroad
or long-distance holidays with family with mental and physical
impairments. In-flight adverse events are difficult to ascertain from
information and figures produced by airlines, and apart from the
well-recognised morbidity they are not well reported. ^[@R3]^ Syncope,
respiratory problems and vomiting continue to provide the bulk of
in-flight emergencies, with around 1 medical emergency occurring in
every 600 flights. ^[@R4]^ There are no data focusing on the elderly
population or people with a diagnosis of mental illness, although one
recent source cited 'anxiety' as a reason for non-traumatic in-flight
complaints. ^[@R5]^

In this case report I highlight an incident where a delirium has had a
significant impact on an elderly patient, resulting in an accelerated
decrease in function, long-term impairment and associated symptomatic
control with medications that otherwise could have been avoided. I will
highlight ways of minimising chances of negative outcomes following air
travel in the elderly population.

# Case presentation {#S1}

A 73-year-old man was initially referred to the memory clinic in
December 2013 with a history of gradual deterioration of short-term
memory and increased dependence on family over an approximate 18-month
period. This was with a background of stable multiple sclerosis with no
other medical history of note. He was functioning well owing to a
supportive family and positive routine activities undertaken mostly with
his wife and had a strong academic background which could have
contributed to masking of cognitive defects. He was given a diagnosis of
a mild cognitive impairment based on impaired short-term memory, as
evidenced by clinical evaluation and formal cognitive testing. He scored
80/100 on the Addenbrooke\'s Cognitive Examination III; most points were
lost in the memory parts (where he scored 10/26) and less so in the
fluency part (scoring 10/14) of the test. He was referred to
neuropsychology, for brain imaging and was to be seen back in the clinic
in 6 months\' time. There were no treatable cardiovascular risk factors
at this point; however, the patient was counselled on exercise and diet
as well as basic activities to promote cognitive training in keeping
with present guidance. The patient and his wife were informed it was
difficult to give prognosis and although evidence is varied, a person
with amnesic (memory loss) mild cognitive impairment would be at around
1 in 5 risk of being diagnosed with dementia at a later stage. From this
presentation and clinical evaluation, it was thought that an
Alzheimer\'s dementia was the most likely future diagnosis.

The patient then travelled by plane from Scotland to Australia, which
involved a short connecting flight to London. On descent from the air to
Australia, he experienced an episode of agitation and bizarre,
nihilistic delusions about Nazis taking over the plane. After landing,
he was admitted to a large, well-known teaching hospital in Australia.
He continued to exhibit challenging behaviours such as agitation,
wandering and resistance to attempts at basic care from nursing staff.
The patient required assistance with feeding and one-to-one nursing care
for the majority of the in-patient stay.

The patient\'s medical investigations included a positron emission
tomography (PET) scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scan,
lumbar puncture, electrocardiogram (ECG), chest X-ray, urinalysis, basic
blood tests and whole-body computed tomography (CT) over the course of
admission without an obvious cause being found for such a dramatic
decline and previously unseen behaviours. Of note, any cerebrovascular
accident, pneumocephalus, acute kidney injury, external and middle-ear
disease and sepsis were ruled out on admission. It was noted that there
were no particular risk factors in terms of family history, smoking,
hypertension, dyslipidaemia and diabetes which could have increased the
risk of most of the proposed diagnoses. Basic observations, including
oxygen saturations, were largely unremarkable throughout his admission.
He was reviewed by both the neurology and neuropsychiatric teams who
came to a joint conclusion that he was experiencing a delirium and
previously undiagnosed Alzheimer\'s dementia.

He was treated with antipsychotics and given a short trial of
intravenous steroid given the history of multiple sclerosis (although
not indicated by way of imaging) without any improvement in clinical
state.

The patient stabilised enough for repatriation to the UK with a nurse
escort after approximately 4 months of in-patient care. At this stage he
showed significant deterioration in executive functioning from baseline
assessment, limited capacity for new learning, confabulation and
required assistance with all personal needs. On descent of the aircraft
the patient again deteriorated, with disorientation, agitation and
paranoid features once again predominant. Admission to hospital and
further investigations gave us no obvious clues to an ongoing acute
event. Brain imaging in both Australia and the UK remained unchanged
with CT showing generalised atrophy and MRI revealing a minor degree of
small vessel disease and smaller than expected hippocampal volume, and
suggested Alzheimer\'s as the only radiological explanation for the
presentation.

## Outcome {#S2}

The episode has had a significant effect on the patient\'s level of
functioning and a sizable knock-on effect on his family. He is now a
patient in a National Health Service (NHS) long-term care facility
requiring assistance with all basic activities of daily living and
without much by way of coherent or meaningful conversation. He continues
to be managed with antipsychotic medications and benzodiazepines which
allow him to be settled on the ward and nursing staff to assist with his
needs. It is difficult to ascertain whether there has been any further
deterioration in the patient\'s disease process, however, there has not
been any improvement seen. His family continue to harbour feelings of
guilt at the original decision to fly to Australia without consultation
with medical staff and disappointment at being unable to care for the
patient in their home.

My overall aim for writing this case is for the reader to acknowledge
the case of a patient with a likely dementia who has had a stark and
accelerated decline in function as a result of a change in environment
and residual delirium after going on two long-haul flights. Pinpointing
the precise mechanism for the delirium continues to be a challenge owing
to the number of medical staff involved and the difficulties with
communication between continents. Prolonged hypoxia or changes in cabin
pressure would seem to be the most obvious causative factors for the
delirium given the collateral history, with particular focus on symptoms
becoming pronounced on descent. However, this is without any firm
scientific basis and is not backed up by anything discovered on clinical
examination or investigation.

# Discussion {#S3}

Air travel has become a normal part of everyday life in the UK, with
Heathrow, the third-busiest airport in the world, estimated to see
approximately 1300 take offs and landings in an average day. ^[@R6]^ The
advent of 'no frills' airlines in the mid 1990s has seen a marked rise
in short-haul flights and regional airports have expanded as a result.
Combined with the total standardised prevalence of dementia syndrome in
the 65+ population, which is thought to be 7.1% at most recent
estimates, ^[@R7]^ air travel is now a common component for a sizable
amount of the older population.

From a literature search it would appear that air travel in the elderly
population is a safe practice, given that there is little evidence to
suggest otherwise. However, there have been a number of reports recently
of people with dementia getting lost in airports resulting in national
press- and social media-aided searches. ^[@R8],[@R9]^ Roberto
Castiglioni, an adviser to the UK Civil Aviation Authority, has
described the impact dementia could have on air travel as 'a ticking
time bomb that medical research and the travel industry are yet to
address'. ^[@R10]^

There is one reported case of an older man in Australia, a seasoned
traveller, who in 2009 developed delirium on a long-haul flight and
spent a long period of time as an in-patient as a result. ^[@R11]^ The
authors state that the patient\'s decline was precipitated by air
travel, but they do not expand on this. They propose that a brief
cognitive screening tool to be used prior to travel be developed.

A useful review, also from Australia, ^[@R12]^ summarises the physical
hazards associated with air travel and states that people with early
dementia may be more prone to developing delirium in flight. It sets out
practical ways to minimise this risk.

In contrast to the above there are strict criteria for air travel for
physical ailments which are well publicised and adhered to by all the
major airlines. For example, the Civil Aviation Authority suggest 14
days have passed prior to air travel following a coronary artery bypass
grafting (CABG) procedure and most airlines will not allow women with
single pregnancies beyond 36 weeks to travel with their companies.
Compare this with the less stringent statement that they would have
'concern' (rather than instruction not to travel) with patients who may
exhibit or develop 'disorganised and disruptive behaviours' in flight,
as set out in the Civil Aviation Authority\'s 'fitness to fly' guidance.
^[@R13]^ This is a likely reflection on the lack of morbidity and
mortality figures available on the topic combined with the unpredictable
course and variable stages of dementia and degree of severity of
delirium.

It should also be noted that not only this case described but the others
mentioned in the discussion involved movement to and from Australia. It
would seem unlikely that this alone is a causative factor and indeed it
is the length of flight or descent from high altitude that increases the
likelihood of deterioration, but it is worth bearing in mind if the
overall topic expands, as some have predicted.

# Recommendations {#S4}

[Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"} sets out practical ways to help
minimise any air travel-related situations which may potentially cause
upset to a patient. These can be addressed prior to travel by input from
general practitioners (GPs) and optimising control of pre-existing
conditions as well as assistance with travel insurance practicalities.
Contact with airports and airlines with the aim of reducing transit time
through airports and assistance getting on the plane as well as sensible
seating choice (i.e. more leg room, access to lavatory) may also aid in
reducing potential stressors.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

A summary of recommendations
:::

  ----------------------------------------------------------------
  Pre-flight                    In-flight
  ----------------------------- ----------------------------------
  Attend GP                     Stay well hydrated

                                

  Optimise chronic conditions   Comfortable clothing

                                

  Travel insurance              Familiar distractions

                                

  Consider group tours          Inform cabin crew

                                

  Assistance in airport         Assistance on/off flight

                                

  Extra leg room request        Avoidance of alcohol/unfamiliar\
                                foods

                                

  Minimise time through\        Aisle seating request
  security checks               
  ----------------------------------------------------------------

GP, general practitioner.
:::

I believe GPs and old age psychiatrists should consider more extensive
counselling when the title question is asked and indeed any questions
around travel could be pre-empted by medical staff. Patients and carers
should be made aware of the dangers posed by hypoxia, changes in
pressure environments and barotrauma and the potential for adverse
outcomes that these can have on mental state, particularly in those with
pre-existing respiratory and ear, nose and throat (ENT) conditions.
Little research has been carried out into the overall use, benefit or
otherwise of anxiolytics in elderly (or indeed anxious) flyers and this
should be explored. Informal discussions with colleagues in the
community would suggest the use of benzodiazepines is accepted and
relatively common.

[^1]: **Dr Thomas McCabe** is CT1 Psychiatry at NHS Lanarkshire,
    Lanarkshire, UK.
