---
author:
- Jennie Elizabeth Higgs[^1]
date: 2016-12
title: The Art of Being Normal
---

Recently there has been a wealth of creative work featuring transgender
people on stage, page and screen. Add to that stories of transition from
public figures and the rise in transgender people modelling for
well-known fashion houses, and it becomes clear that important
discussions about transgender issues are finding their place in the
public consciousness.

Lisa Williamson\'s excellent debut novel *The Art of Being Normal*
skilfully blends the difficulties of being a teenager with the social
challenges of identifying as transgender. In the opening pages we meet
David, a 14-year-old with a secret. He tells us that when he was 8 his
teacher asked the class to write what they wanted to be when they grew
up. David wrote 'I want to be a girl'. Six years later he is desperately
trying to find the courage to tell his parents, while conducting anxious
inspections of his body for the changes of puberty. School starts for
another year, bringing with it Leo, the new kid. Leo acts as the second
narrator. Leo has his own secret which has led to him moving school and
which, it seems, everyone at school is prepared to speculate on.

Having both David and Leo narrate the story works well as the characters
are in contrast with one another and the friendship that forms between
them manages to be simultaneously unlikely and utterly believable. Leo
is certainly the stronger, more richly developed character with a wry
sense of humour and plenty of wit. At times I felt David\'s
interactions, especially with his best friends, were a little
stereotypical and lacking in depth.

That said, there is plenty to like about all the characters and I
laughed aloud on more than one occasion.

David makes reference early on to the fact that his life refuses to
conform to the plot line of a 'perky teenage movie'. Williamson plays
with this familiar trope cleverly and manages to avoid delivering a
saccharine ending while still rewarding the reader. Williamson wants us
to realise that there is no art to being 'normal' because there is no
such thing. This warm and funny novel adds to the growing body of work
that tells us all that this is okay.

[^1]: **Jennie Elizabeth Higgs** is a core psychiatry trainee in South
    East Scotland, UK, email: <jenniehiggs@nhs.net>
