==========================================================================================
Perceptions and knowledge of antipsychotics among mental health professionals and patients
==========================================================================================



Lindah Cahling
Anders Berntsson
Gabriella Bröms
Lars ÖhrmalmCorrespondence to Lars Öhrmalm (lars.ohrmalm@prima.se)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-10

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To assess the patients' most influential concerns
   regarding long-acting injectable antipsychotics (LAIs) and mental
   health professionals' preconceptions about these concerns. For both
   groups, to assess the level of knowledge about LAIs. This
   cross-sectional study used semi-structured interviews of patients
   with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder (*n* = 164), nurses
   (*n* = 43) and physicians (*n* = 20).

   **Results** The mental health professionals overestimated many of the
   patients' fears of LAIs, and the expressed fears exceeded the actual
   experiences of patients already on LAIs. Acceptance to switch to LAIs
   was associated with shorter time from diagnosis. Nurses and patients
   disclosed limited knowledge of antipsychotics.

   **Clinical implications** Physicians and nurses should aim to
   identify the individual patient's concerns about LAIs in the
   discussion about choice of antipsychotic treatment early in the
   course of illness.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Adherence to antipsychotic treatment is a major challenge and an
important predictor of the outcome in patients with schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder.\ :sup:`1` The risks of relapse and admission
to hospital increase immediately after discontinuation, even with small
treatment gaps.\ :sup:`2–5` With oral antipsychotics, such gaps often go
undetected until relapse – an issue that can be overcome by use of
long-acting injectable antipsychotics (LAIs).\ :sup:`5` There is growing
evidence that, compared with oral treatment, LAIs reduce the risk of
discontinuation, relapse and hospital admission.\ :sup:`6` Furthermore,
owing to superior pharmacokinetics, the use of LAIs is considered to
increase the likelihood of finding the lowest effective dose, which
subsequently reduces the risk of side-effects.\ :sup:`7,8`

Despite the identified advantages, LAIs are not used as widely as might
be expected. The prescription frequency varies greatly between
countries,\ :sup:`9` indicating that factors other than the patient's
attitude influence the utilisation rate. While patients' attitudes
towards LAIs become more positive with increased knowledge and
experience of the treatment,\ :sup:`10` clinicians often overestimate
patients' resistance against LAIs, anticipating that they will be
concerned about the injection procedure.\ :sup:`10–12` This impedes
so-called shared decision-making, an approach with the potential to
increase adherence.\ :sup:`13` Patients are frequently excluded from the
discussion about the choice of antipsychotic formulation,\ :sup:`14` and
one reason may be resistance arising from mental health professionals'
preconceptions.

We aimed to investigate the specific concerns that affect patients'
perceptions of LAIs, and to what extent mental health professionals'
preconceptions agree with these perceptions. Furthermore, we aimed to
identify knowledge gaps about antipsychotic formulations among both
patients and mental health professionals.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Design
------

We conducted a cross-sectional study of mental health professionals' and
patients' perceptions and knowledge regarding antipsychotic treatment in
a psychiatry catchment area in Stockholm, Sweden, operated by PRIMA
Adult Psychiatry. Data were collected in semi-structured interviews
performed by a research nurse (L.C.) at the participant's home clinic
between January and October 2015. The participants were enrolled upon
giving written informed consent. The study was approved by the regional
ethical review board in Stockholm (ref. 2015/47-31).

.. _S3:

Participants and setting
------------------------

We studied three categories of participants: (a) patients on LAIs; (b)
patients on oral treatment; (c) mental health professionals, including
physicians and nurses.

We identified all patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective
disorder. Patients with no medical treatment or with previous but
discontinued LAIs, as well as patients who had been on LAIs >5 years
were excluded. Other exclusion criteria were language barriers (i.e.
need of interpreter in consultations), cognitive impairment and severe
autism spectrum disorders. We collected information on patients' age,
gender, years with diagnosis, marital status, number of children,
highest achieved academic degree and occupation. The patients on oral
medication were block randomised on diagnosis
(schizophrenia/schizoaffective disorder), gender and age to two separate
arms. The first group was included in this study to represent those on
oral medication, while the second group did not participate and will act
as controls in a future intervention study.

All physicians and nurses working in the psychosis sector of PRIMA were
asked to participate. We recorded age, gender and extent of experience
within the psychiatric field.

.. _S4:

Questionnaires
--------------

We conducted semi-structured interviews based on different
questionnaires specific to each participant category and designed for
the present study. Participants graded their potential concerns with a
mark on a continuous 100 mm scale ranging from 0 (‘Does not affect at
all’) to 100 (‘Decisive to decline LAIs’). Potential concerns included
in the questionnaire were pain at administration, possible observation
time of 3h, embarrassment at administration, restricted autonomy,
feeling of being controlled, being obliged to show up at the clinic
regularly, lack of ability to decide when medication is administered,
and stigmatisation. The questions were designed to address the
participant appropriately, for example, mental health professionals: ‘To
what extent do you think fear of pain affects the patients'
perception?’; patients on oral medication: ‘To what extent does fear of
pain affect your perception?’; and patients on LAIs: ‘To what extent
does pain affect your perception?’. The investigated concerns were
predefined based on a literature review and clinical
experience.\ :sup:`10,15,16`

Questions about knowledge of the differences between LAIs and oral
treatment regarding achieved plasma concentration, side-effects and risk
of readmission to hospital were identical for all participants and
included pre-specified nominal options. In questions regarding clinical
approach among mental health professionals, participants were asked to
state items freely Physicians stated their most common reasons for
prescribing LAIs, and their strategies to encourage patients to consider
LAIs. Furthermore, they were asked to speculate what the patients' key
reasons for accepting LAIs are. These answers were assessed using
thematic analysis after the study was complete.

Nurses were asked whether they tried to influence patients' and
physicians' choice of formulation (yes/no). Patients on oral medication
were asked whether they had previously been offered LAIs and whether
they knew of the features of being on LAIs. Finally, at the end of the
interview, all patients were asked about their perspective on switching
formulation (positive/negative).

.. _S5:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

Anonymised data were analysed using Prism 5.03 for Windows. Sample
comparisons were made using Fisher's exact test for categorical
variables (gender, positive/negative towards switching to LAI). The
Mann–Whitney [*U*-test or Wilcoxon matched-pairs test was used for
continuous variables (age, illness duration, mental health
professionals' experience and questionnaire responses on a 100 mm
scale), where appropriate.

.. _S6:

Results
=======

.. _S7:

Inclusion and exclusion of study participants
---------------------------------------------

We identified 875 patients in the catchment area with a diagnosis of
either schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder; 341 patients were
currently being treated with LAIs (39%). Of the 875 patients, 302 met
our inclusion criteria. Finally, 101 patients on oral treatment and 63
on LAIs participated in the study. The reasons for not participating are
presented in `Fig. 1 <#F1>`__. All 21 physicians and 46 nurses working
in the psychosis sector of PRIMA were asked to participate; 1 physician
and 3 nurses declined owing to lack of time.

.. figure:: 256f1
   :alt: Flow chart of inclusion in the study. LAI, long-acting
   injectable antipsychotic.
   a. As assessed at the time of interview, b. No longer a patient at
   the clinic, changed formulation before interview, deceased and
   cognitive impairment.
   :name: F1

   Flow chart of inclusion in the study. LAI, long-acting injectable
   antipsychotic.
   a. As assessed at the time of interview, b. No longer a patient at
   the clinic, changed formulation before interview, deceased and
   cognitive impairment.

.. _S8:

Participant characteristics
---------------------------

There were no statistical differences regarding characteristics between
patients on LAIs and patients on oral medication, except that patients
on oral medication were more likely to have achieved a higher academic
degree (`Table 1 <#T1>`__). The median age of the 20 physicians was 47
years (range 34–69) and 45% were women. The median number of completed
years in the psychiatric field was 6.5 years (range 0–20). The 43 nurses
had a median age of 51 years (range 27–67) and 81% were women. The
median length of experience in the psychiatric field was 12 years (range
0–36), and 51% were specialists in psychiatric care.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Characteristics of interviewed patients

   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   | Characteristics  | Patients on oral | Patients on LAIs | *P*    |
   |                  | treatment        | (*n* = 63)       |        |
   |                  | (*n* = 101)      |                  |        |
   +==================+==================+==================+========+
   | Females, *n* (%) | 46 (46)          | 26 (41)          | n.s.   |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |                  |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   | Age, years:      | 50 (21–84)       | 51 (24–74)       | n.s.   |
   | median (range)   |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |                  |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   | Diagnosis, *n*   |                  |                  |        |
   | (%)              |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |                  | 71 (70)          | 41 (65)          | n.s.   |
   |    Schizophrenia |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |                  | 30 (30)          | 22 (35)          | n.s.   |
   |  Schizoaffective |                  |                  |        |
   | disorder         |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |                  |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   | Duration of      | 21 (1–55)        | 18 (1–45)        | n.s.   |
   | illness, years:  |                  |                  |        |
   | median (range)   |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |                  |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   | Highest          |                  |                  |        |
   | education, *n*   |                  |                  |        |
   | (%)              |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |     Elementary   | 21 (21)          | 24 (38)          | 0.020  |
   | school           |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |     High school  | 49 (49)          | 31 (49)          | n.s.   |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |     University   | 31 (31)          |   8 (13)         | 0.0086 |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |                  |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   | Employed, *n*    | 19 (19)          |   7 (11)         | n.s.   |
   | (%)              |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |                  |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   | Marital status,  |                  |                  |        |
   | *n* (%)          |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |     Single       | 71 (70)          | 53 (84)          | n.s.   |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |     Living       |   8 (8)          |   2 (3)          | n.s.   |
   | independently    |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |     Ma           | 22 (22)          |   8 (13)         | n.s.   |
   | rried/cohabiting |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   |                  |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+
   | Underage         |   8 (8)          |   3 (5)          | n.s.   |
   | children living  |                  |                  |        |
   | at home, *n* (%) |                  |                  |        |
   +------------------+------------------+------------------+--------+

   LAIs, long-acting injectable antipsychotics; n.s., not significant.

.. _S9:

Perceptions of LAI antipsychotics
---------------------------------

Comparing patients on oral antipsychotics *v*. patients on LAIs, fears
exceeded the actual experiences for all factors examined (`Table
2 <#T2>`__, online Fig. DS1), but fear was only statistically
significant for the concerns of being tied to the clinic (62 *v*. 28,
*P* = 0.018) and loss of decision-making regarding when to take the
medicine (45 *v*. 8, *P* = 0.001). Overall, patients' results tended to
be polarised to either end of the 100 mm scale whereas the mental health
professionals' results were more centred in their distribution.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Estimated and actual fears as well as experienced factors
      affecting the decision to decline long-acting injectable
      antipsychotics (LAIs)

   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Factors  | Mental   | Patients | *P*      | Patients | *P       |
   |          | health   | on oral  |          | on LAIs  | *\ `a <# |
   |          | profe    | t        |          | (*n* =   | TFN3>`__ |
   |          | ssionals | reatment |          | 63)      |          |
   |          |     (*n* | (*n* =   |          |          |          |
   |          | = 63)    | 101)     |          |          |          |
   +==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+
   | Pain at  | 50.5     | 28       |   0.001  | 12       | 0.21     |
   | the      | (11–95)  | (0–100)  |          | (0–100)  |          |
   | i        |          |          |          |          |          |
   | njection |          |          |          |          |          |
   | site     |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Being    | 49       | 62       |   0.24   | 28       | 0.018    |
   | r        | (5–98)   | (0–100)  |          | (0–99)   |          |
   | egularly |          |          |          |          |          |
   | tied to  |          |          |          |          |          |
   | a clinic |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Obs      | 64       | 89       | <0.0001  | 67       | 0.23     |
   | ervation | (4–98)   | (0–100)  |          | (3–98)   |          |
   | time at  |          |          |          |          |          |
   | the      |          |          |          |          |          |
   | clinic   |          |          |          |          |          |
   | after    |          |          |          |          |          |
   | one      |          |          |          |          |          |
   | certain  |          |          |          |          |          |
   | type of  |          |          |          |          |          |
   | LA       |          |          |          |          |          |
   | I\ `b <# |          |          |          |          |          |
   | TFN4>`__ |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Embar    | 41       | 12       | <0.0001  |   7      | 0.11     |
   | rassment | (1–93)   | (0–98)   |          | (0–100)  |          |
   | of       |          |          |          |          |          |
   | having   |          |          |          |          |          |
   | an       |          |          |          |          |          |
   | i        |          |          |          |          |          |
   | njection |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | R        | 62       | 30       |   0.0025 | 10       | 0.18     |
   | eduction | (5–93)   | (0–98)   |          | (0–100)  |          |
   | in       |          |          |          |          |          |
   | autonomy |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Loss of  | 56       | 45       |   0.13   |   8      | 0.001    |
   | ability  | (4–95)   | (0–100)  |          | (0–98)   |          |
   | to       |          |          |          |          |          |
   | decide   |          |          |          |          |          |
   | when to  |          |          |          |          |          |
   | take the |          |          |          |          |          |
   | me       |          |          |          |          |          |
   | dication |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Feeling  | 56       | 25       |   0.013  | 13       | 0.58     |
   | of being | (3–94)   | (0–100)  |          | (0–100)  |          |
   | co       |          |          |          |          |          |
   | ntrolled |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Per      | 51       | 17       |   0.0004 | 11       | 0.63     |
   | ceptions | (4–88)   | (0–100)  |          | (0–100)  |          |
   | of       |          |          |          |          |          |
   | stigma   |          |          |          |          |          |
   | of being |          |          |          |          |          |
   | on LAI   |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+

   The questions were presented orally and adapted based on the
   participant category, i.e. mental health professionals, patients on
   oral treatment and patients on LAIs.

   Patients on oral treatment *v*. patients on LAIs.

   Only the 7 patients on long-acting injectable olanzapine who had
   experienced a 3 h observation time were included.

Patients on LAIs were asked to recall their fears before switching from
oral treatment. They graded their recalled fears higher than the actual
experiences regarding all factors except for observation time (online
Table DS1). The differences were small, but reached statistical
significance for pain (24 *v*. 12, *P* < 0.0001), embarrassment (9 *v*.
7, *P* = 0.0006), reduction in autonomy (13 *v*. 10, *P* = 0.0027) and
loss of ability to decide when to take the medicine (14 *v*. 8, *P* =
0.019). Finally, there were no statistically significant differences
between the graded fears of patients on oral treatment *v*. recalled
fears in patients on LAIs (data not shown).

Mental health professionals overestimated the concerns of orally treated
patients regarding feared pain (51 *v*. 28, *P* = 0.001), embarrassment
(41 *v*. 12, *P* < 0.0001), reduction in autonomy (62 *v*. 30, *P* =
0.0025), feeling of being controlled (56 *v*. 25, *P* = 0.013), and
stigma (51 *v*. 17, *P* = 0.0004; `Table 2 <#T2>`__, online Fig. DS1).
Conversely, they underestimated the patients' concerns regarding the 3h
observation time required after injection of LAI olanzapine (64 *v*. 89,
*P* < 0.0001).

.. _S10:

Knowledge of oral and LAI antipsychotics
----------------------------------------

All physicians (100%) claimed that LAIs are associated with a more
stable plasma concentration than oral treatment (`Table 3 <#T3>`__). For
nurses, patients on oral treatment and patients on LAIs, the
corresponding proportions were 56%, 16% and 22%, respectively.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Mental health professionals' and patients' knowledge about oral
      *v.* long-acting injectable antipsychotics (LAIs) regarding plasma
      concentration, side-effects and frequency of readmission to
      hospital

   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Topic       | Physicians | Nurses     | Patients on | Patients on |
   |             | (*n* = 20) | (*n* = 43) | oral        | LAIs        |
   |             |            |            | treatment   | (*n* = 63)  |
   |             |            |            | (*n* = 101) |             |
   +=============+============+============+=============+=============+
   | Plasma      |            |            |             |             |
   | con         |            |            |             |             |
   | centration, |            |            |             |             |
   | *n* (%)     |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             | 20 (100)   | 24 (56)    | 16 (16)     | 14 (22)     |
   |  Lower/more |            |            |             |             |
   | stable with |            |            |             |             |
   | LAIs        |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Equal   | 0 (0)      | 11 (26)    | 23 (23)     | 20 (32)     |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             | 0 (0)      | 4 (9)      | 41 (41)     | 20 (32)     |
   |  Lower/more |            |            |             |             |
   | stable with |            |            |             |             |
   | oral        |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Don't   | 0 (0)      | 4 (9)      | 21 (21)     | 9 (14)      |
   | know        |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Si          |            |            |             |             |
   | de-effects, |            |            |             |             |
   | *n* (%)     |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Less    | 15 (75)    | 12 (28)    | 18 (18)     | 27 (43)     |
   | with LAIs   |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Equal   | 3 (15)     | 17 (40)    | 25 (25)     | 19 (30)     |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Less    | 1 (5)      | 11 (26)    | 45 (45)     | 11 (17)     |
   | with oral   |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Don't   | 1 (5)      | 3 (7)      | 13 (13)     | 6 (10)      |
   | know        |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Risk of     |            |            |             |             |
   | rehospi     |            |            |             |             |
   | talisation, |            |            |             |             |
   | *n* (%)     |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Less    | 19 (95)    | 37 (86)    | 21 (21)     | 23 (36)     |
   | with LAIs   |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Equal   | 0 (0)      | 3 (7)      | 40 (40)     | 20 (32)     |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Less    | 1 (5)      | 2 (5)      | 15 (15)     | 5 (8)       |
   | with oral   |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Don't   | 0 (0)      | 1 (2)      | 25 (25)     | 15 (24)     |
   | know        |            |            |             |             |
   +-------------+------------+------------+-------------+-------------+

   Eligible answers were presented as pre-specified nominal options.

Of physicians, 90% stated that LAIs are superior or equal to oral
treatment concerning side-effects. For nurses, patients on oral
treatment and patients on LAIs, the corresponding proportions were 68%,
43% and 73%, respectively.

All physicians but one (95%) and 86% of nurses claimed that LAIs reduce
the risk of readmission to hospital, while 21% of patients with oral
treatment and 36% of patients on LAIs claimed LAIs to be superior in
this matter.

.. _S11:

Clinical approach to LAIs among mental health professionals
-----------------------------------------------------------

Poor adherence, limited insight and multiple relapses were the most
common reasons for prescribing LAIs, mentioned by 80% of physicians.
However, one-fourth considered LAIs an option even early in the disease
course. Their strategies to encourage patients to consider LAIs were to
inform them about the advantages of the formulation (65%) and about the
risks and consequences of treatment discontinuation (40%). Exploring
patients' fears was a strategy mentioned by 20% of physicians.

Half of physicians believed that not having to remember to take pills
was the key reason for patients to accept LAIs. Other factors mentioned
were good insight (40%) and that LAIs are associated with lower
frequency of relapse (20%).

Of nurses, 31 (72%) replied that they actively tried to influence the
patients' attitude towards one or the other formulation, and 29 (67%)
actively tried to influence the physician's decision.

.. _S12:

Patients' perspective on switching
----------------------------------

Almost half of the patients on oral treatment (41%) declared that they
had little or no knowledge of LAIs. At the end of the interview, they
were asked whether they would switch to LAIs if offered by their
treating physician. While 78 (77%) said no and three (3%) could not
decide, 20 (20%) declared that they would agree to switch if offered
such an option. The patients willing to switch had fewer years since
diagnosis than those who were reluctant (12 *v*. 24, *P* = 0.0013;
online Fig. DS2). Furthermore, the proportion of women was higher in the
positive group (75% *v*. 44%, odds ratio (OR) = 3.9, *P* = 0.023). They
considered pain (7 *v*. 40, *P* = 0.020), being tied to the clinic (26
*v*. 70, *P* = 0.017), reduction in autonomy (9 *v*. 30, *P* = 0.034)
and stigma (6 *v*. 27, *P* = 0.035) to be less important issues than did
the patients who were reluctant to switch to LAIs.

A total of 21 (33%) patients on LAIs would switch to oral treatment if
they were offered it, 1 (1.6%) could not decide and 41 (65%) preferred
to continue with LAIs. There were no statistically significant
differences between patients who were positive *v*. patients who were
negative about switching formulation with regard to age, number of years
with diagnosis or gender. Those who opted to stay on LAIs were less
concerned with the lack of autonomy (7 *v*. 40, *P* = 0.015) and the
feeling of being controlled (9 *v*. 50, *P* = 0.0011). They also gave
more correct answers regarding differences in side-effects between oral
formulations and LAIs (85% *v*. 52%, OR = 5.3, *P* = 0.012).

.. _S13:

Discussion
==========

In this study, we found that patients' concerns with LAIs were minor
except when considering observation time and being tied to the clinic,
and that there was a mismatch in the assessment of specific concerns
between the patients and the mental health professionals. We identified
important knowledge gaps among patients and nurses. As many as one-fifth
of the patients on oral medications were willing to switch to LAIs;
these potential switchers were more recently diagnosed than those who
were reluctant.

The patients on oral treatment were most concerned about observation
time post-injection and about being tied to the clinic when asked about
LAIs. This indicates that they valued their time and that practical
issues surpassed in significance emotional ones such as stigma, a
feeling of being controlled and embarrassment. All fears expressed by
patients on oral treatment exceeded the actual experiences of patients
on LAIs. This could be a result of selection bias, in that patients on
LAIs were less concerned even before accepting LAI treatment. However,
since patients on LAIs were speaking from experience, this difference
may also reflect that these issues had a lower impact than expected once
the patients had been started on LAIs. That the recalled concerns
pre-LAIs were similar to the levels of concern among those still on oral
treatment also supports this hypothesis.

Mental health professionals tended to answer questions by placing the
indicator centrally on the 100 mm scale, which may reflect uncertainty
as they were just estimating the patients' experiences. The patients'
answers, on the other hand, were polarised, indicating that their
opinions were more set. Patients also graded some factors distinctly low
and others distinctly high. In light of this, physicians should be
encouraged to learn more about the individual patient's concerns. Only
20% of physicians reported that they used this strategy when discussing
treatment regimens.

According to previous studies, physicians' knowledge regarding
antipsychotic formulations varies.\ :sup:`16,17` Physicians in the
current study showed very good knowledge. However, a significant
proportion of the interviewed nurses had knowledge gaps concerning some
of the advantages of LAIs. This could have a negative impact on the
patient's attitude towards LAIs, especially as the majority of nurses
claimed that they actively tried to influence both doctors and patients
in the discussion on treatment choices. Patients already on LAIs had
significantly better knowledge about the reduced side-effects with LAIs
than patients on oral treatment. This most likely reflects their own
experiences. It could also be an effect of information provided by
mental health professionals – information many patients on oral
treatment reported as lacking. This is of concern, as we know that
patients' attitudes towards LAIs are likely to become more positive with
increased knowledge and experience of the treatment.\ :sup:`10` The
physicians' observed reluctance to bring up the topic may be due to
their anticipation that the patients are unlikely to accept the offered
LAI. However, keeping the patients uninformed makes shared
decision-making impossible.\ :sup:`15`

The majority of the patients on LAIs chose to keep this formulation and
as many as 20% of the patients on oral treatment were willing to use
LAIs. This is in line with a previous study in which 16% were positive
towards a formulation switch.\ :sup:`14` This also supports the
hypothesis that the use of LAIs could be limited by factors other than
rejection by the patients.\ :sup:`12` Some physicians claimed that they
offered LAIs early in the disease course, but their most common reasons
for prescribing LAIs were poor adherence to oral medication and
recurring relapses. Previous studies also report
non-adherence\ :sup:`16,17` and multiple relapses\ :sup:`17` as key
criteria for prescribing LAIs. This may be unfortunate as longer illness
duration was associated with being reluctant to switch. Instead, this
motivates a discussion of LAIs early on in the course of illness,
especially as there is cumulative evidence that the use of LAIs as early
as after the first admission to hospital decreases the risk of treatment
discontinuation, relapse and readmission.\ :sup:`4,5,18`

.. _S14:

Limitations
-----------

Our study has several limitations. Not all patients in the targeted
study population were included, and some patients could not be reached
or were not present to complete the questionnaire. Some were only
scheduled for visits once per calendar year, while the study was limited
to 10 months. It is possible that patients were either too ill to
present themselves or were stable enough to postpone yearly visits. The
patients on LAIs were asked to declare their perceptions prior to
starting on LAIs, which introduced recall bias. However, we excluded all
patients on LAIs ⩾ 5 years, reducing the effect of this bias. Finally,
patients on LAIs are indisputably a selection of patients who have once
accepted that formulation. However, the lack of significant differences
between the graded fears of patients on oral treatment compared with
recalled fears in patients with LAIs may indicate that this selection
bias is of minor concern. A strength of this study was that all
interviews were performed by the same person (L.C.), securing
consistency across interviews.

.. _S15:

Clinical implications
---------------------

In conclusion, physicians should aim to set aside their own
preconceptions and instead make time to identify the individual's
specific fears regarding LAIs, preferably early in the course of the
illness. In addition, there is room for improvement regarding patients'
knowledge of antipsychotic formulations. Adequate education would be of
value to strengthen nurses' knowledge about LAIs. Finally, there is room
for improvement regarding patients' knowledge of antipsychotic
formulations.

.. [1]
   **Lindah Cahling** specialist nurse, and **Anders Berntsson**
   psychiatrist, head of clinic, PRIMA Child and Adult Psychiatry,
   Stockholm, Sweden; **Gabriella Bröms**, MD, PhD, Department of
   Medicine, Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; **Lars
   Öhrmalm**, MD, assistant professor, PRIMA Child and Adult Psychiatry,
   and Department of Medicine, Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
   Sweden.
