=====================================================================================================================================
The mini-PAT as a multi-source feedback tool for trainees in child and adolescent psychiatry: assessing whether it is fit for purpose
=====================================================================================================================================

Gill Salmon
Lesley PugsleyCorrespondence to Gill Salmon (Gill.Salmon@wales.nhs.uk)
 [1]_
:Date: 2017-4

:Abstract:
   This paper discusses the research supporting the use of multi-source
   feedback (MSF) for doctors and describes the mini-Peer Assessment
   Tool (mini-PAT), the MSF instrument currently used to assess trainees
   in child and adolescent psychiatry. The relevance of issues raised in
   the literature about MSF tools in general is examined in relation to
   trainees in child and adolescent psychiatry as well as the
   appropriateness of the mini-PAT for this group. Suggestions for
   change including modifications to existing MSF tools or the
   development of a specialty-specific MSF instrument are offered.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Multi-source feedback (MSF) can motivate doctors to improve and change
their practice.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` It gives doctors an overview of
how others see them and compares this with their own view as well as the
results of their peer group.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` MSF evolved in Canada and
the USA out of a public demand for accountability to patients as well as
an acceptance that assessments examining clinical decision-making and
medical expertise do not address other essential competencies, such as
interpersonal skills, professionalism and communication.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`
MSF tools were originally designed to be formative, that is, to lead to
awareness of and improvements in performance through feedback. More
recently, however, they are being used for summative purposes, namely to
provide information for revalidation and the annual review of competence
progression (ARCP) which determines whether a trainee is considered fit
to proceed with their training. As such, MSF tools need to be
sufficiently reliable and valid. Reliability refers to the
reproducibility of assessment measures or scores over repeated tests
under identical conditions, and validity refers to the degree of
confidence that an assessment measures what it is intended to measure.
An associated term, feasibility, is a measure of whether an assessment
instrument is practical, realistic and sensible given the circumstances
and context.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

.. _S1:

Research on the use of MSF for doctors
======================================

Ramsey *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` published a landmark study showing that
it was feasible for internal medicine physicians to obtain peer
assessments about their humanistic qualities, clinical practice and
communication skills. They also came to important conclusions about the
reliability of MSF – for example, that 11 peer ratings were needed to
ensure a reliability coefficient of 0.7 (the minimum acceptable for
workplace-based assessments (WPBAs)) and that the results were not
substantially affected by the relationship between the rater and the
person being rated nor by the method used to select the raters. The
findings of this study also suggested that a doctor's medical knowledge
(determined by examination marks) was not predictive of how peers
subsequently rated their interpersonal relationships or communication
skills.

The finding that reliable and valid MSF questionnaires can be developed
and be feasible to use for assessing doctors has been replicated across
settings and specialties.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.f)–(n.d.g)` A number of
systematic reviews have also been published, all of which conclude that
MSF as a method of assessing communication skills, collegiality,
humanism and professionalism in doctors has high reliability, validity
and feasibility.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)–(n.d.i)`

.. _S2:

The mini-PAT as an MSF tool
===========================

The mini-PAT is used by the Royal College of Psychiatrists as an MSF
instrument for trainees. It is well known because of its widespread use
in the Foundation Programme.\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.k)` The mini-PAT was
derived from the Sheffield Peer Review Assessment Tool (SPRAT) following
a mapping exercise against the foundation curriculum,\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`
thus ensuring its content validity. The SPRAT contains 24 questions
assessing a doctor's competencies and professional attributes, and it
maps directly on to General Medical Council (GMC) standards of good
medical practice,\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` again establishing its content
validity. These standards include good clinical care, maintaining good
medical practice, teaching and training, appraising and assessing,
relationships with patients and working with colleagues. The SPRAT was
the first MSF tool validated in the UK for use by paediatric consultants
as part of their appraisal.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` It has also been shown to be
reliable, needing as few as four raters to determine whether a doctor is
in difficulty or not (more in borderline situations), and feasible,
taking only 5–6 minutes to use with good return rates (more than
70%).\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` It can also discriminate between the more and less
experienced trainee.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`

In developing the mini-PAT, nine questions which did not map on to the
curriculum for the Foundation Programme were removed from the SPRAT.
These included questions relating to the management of complex patients
and leadership. One question about probity and health was added while
the free-text element and six-point scale (where 1 indicates ‘very poor’
and 6 indicates ‘very good’) remained unchanged.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` The
resulting mini-PAT was thought to reflect the importance for foundation
doctors of developing communication skills, team work and other
humanistic qualities in relation to patient care in addition to their
medical knowledge.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

In his critical analysis of the mini-PAT, while accepting its content
validity and feasibility, Abdulla stated that it ‘lacks sufficient field
evaluation and has not gone through any stringent criteria that are
required for the validation of an assessment tool’.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Data
on the reliability and validity of 693 mini-PAT assessments on 553
foundation year 1 and 2 (F1/F2) doctors have subsequently been
published.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` The mean scores of the two groups were found
to be significantly different when using the same criterion standard
(i.e. expectation for F2 completion), with 19.6% of F1s and 5.6% of F2s
being assessed as borderline or below the expectations for F2
completion. This was used as evidence of internal standardisation and
construct validity, as was the finding that the trainees scored higher
in the domains of working with colleagues and relationships with
patients compared with the clinical skills domains. Overall, 53% of F1
doctors and 74% of F2 doctors could have been assessed by no more than 8
assessors based on their mean scores. Factor analysis revealed that the
two main factors were humanistic qualities and clinical performance. The
authors concluded that the mini-PAT was a valid and reliable MSF tool
for assessing foundation doctors.

.. _S3:

Use of the mini-PAT in child and adolescent psychiatry training
===============================================================

In child and adolescent psychiatry, the process when using the mini-PAT
is as follows: twice a year, the trainee provides contact details of
between 8 and 12 co-workers who see them on a frequent basis in a range
of situations. These people and the trainee then complete the mini-PAT
online. Presumably based on the findings of Archer *et
al*,\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` it is suggested that at least 8 forms must be
completed to ensure the assessment is reliable. There is, however, no
research specifically related to the mini-PAT on the minimum number of
assessors required to give a valid result.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` The form uses
a 6-point Likert-type rating scale. Trainees are rated according to the
standard expected at each stage of training. A score of 4 corresponds to
the expected standard, with higher or lower scores suggesting the
trainee's performance is better or worse.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` The responses
are analysed centrally and a report is then sent to the trainee's
educational supervisor who delivers the feedback in
person.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`

.. _S4:

Potential issues with using MSF tools
=====================================

Several issues that have been identified in relation to the use of MSF
tools for medical practitioners in general are also relevant to their
use in child and adolescent psychiatry. One is the trainee's choice of
rater. Although several authors have found that MSF assessment is not
necessarily biased by allowing the doctor to select their own
raters,\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.r),(n.d.s)` others have found that factors
such as the seniority, gender and profession of raters can significantly
influence the assessment. For example, Archer *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`
found that consultant raters using the SPRAT gave significantly lower
mean scores to paediatric trainees than more junior doctors did;
similarly, Bullock *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` found that consultants and
senior nurses were more likely to give ‘concern’ ratings when assessing
junior doctors than were peers or administrators. Thus, there is a trend
for assessors to be more critical with increasing seniority. When
considering the mini-PAT, Archer *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` found that
assessors' scores were affected by their occupation, the length of time
the trainee had been working with them, and the working environment.
They suggested standardising the number of consultants used as raters by
each trainee. These findings support the need for more detailed guidance
in rater selection from the Royal College of Psychiatrists. Trainees are
currently only advised that raters be chosen from a broad range of
co-workers.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` In addition, Abdulla\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`
suggests that selection bias can be reduced if the list of raters is
discussed and agreed on beforehand with the trainee's supervisor.

Measurement errors, such as the central tendency and halo effect, can
also occur and are particularly likely when behaviours which cannot be
easily observed are being assessed.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` A particular issue
for non-doctor raters is knowing what standards they should expect for a
doctor at that stage in their training. In an attempt to reduce
measurement errors, Abdulla\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` suggests better education
for mini-PAT raters. This could be provided by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists as part of their online mini-PAT package.

It has been shown that doctors' self-assessments do not correlate well
with peer or patient ratings.\ :sup:`(n.d.v),(n.d.w)` Violato &
Lockyer\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` studied psychiatrists, internal medicine
physicians and paediatricians, and found that all were inaccurate in
assessing their own performance. Those psychiatrists who were rated by
peers to be in the bottom quartile saw themselves as ‘average’, whereas
the psychiatrists in the top quartile significantly underrated
themselves. This indicates that poorly performing doctors often lack
insight, not always accepting negative feedback from others and querying
its validity.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` Overeem *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` advise
that trained facilitators should encourage trainees to reflect on MSF
results and help them set concrete goals for improvement. Offering
coaching to help trainees identify their strengths and weaknesses may
help facilitate changes in performance.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` Making the
feedback highly structured can help trainees acknowledge feedback from
all sources rather than just the medical scores which they tend to value
more.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.ab)–(n.d.ac)` Although taking the mean of the
scores may be the most reliable approach,\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` attention
should also be given to the free-text comments which might highlight
specific performance issues and which may also make the feedback more
acceptable.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)` These findings highlight the importance of
the MSF feedback process, which should include the development of a
relevant action plan in collaboration with the doctor.

It has been proposed that a single, generic MSF tool be used in the
UK.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` Research supporting this includes Violato &
Lockyer's\ :sup:`(n.d.x),(n.d.af)` study of the use of one MSF tool for
internal medicine physicians, paediatricians and psychiatrists. Although
they found no specialty differences in response rates or reliability, it
is of note that of the items clustered into the same four factors across
the specialties, for psychiatry the most discriminating factor was
communication whereas for the other two specialties the most important
was patient management. By contrast, Mackillop *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)`
evaluated the use of a generic MSF tool across specialties and concluded
that, although the generic content was appropriate for most specialties,
some would benefit from specialty-specific content.

.. _S5:

Does the mini-PAT suit the needs of trainees in child and adolescent psychiatry?
================================================================================

In child and adolescent psychiatry, the mini-PAT is currently used to
assess trainees. Although the mini-PAT has content validity for
foundation doctors, having been mapped against their curriculum, this
does not necessarily mean it is also a valid tool for other grades or
for use across specialties. In the making of the mini-PAT, some
questions were removed from the SPRAT, namely those relating to
management of complex patients and leadership.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` However,
these items are highly relevant to trainees in child and adolescent
psychiatry. Davies *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)` modified the SPRAT for
trainees in histopathology following a blueprinting exercise against the
histopathology curriculum to establish content validity. They concluded
that specialty-specific MSF is feasible and achieves satisfactory
reliability. A similar approach blueprinting the SPRAT against the child
and adolescent psychiatry competency-based curriculum\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)`
could therefore be considered. The SPRAT also requires fewer raters than
the mini-PAT in order for the results to be sufficiently
reliable,\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` thus adding to its potential suitability for
child psychiatry trainees who often work in small teams.

Alternatively, a specialty-specific MSF instrument for child and
adolescent psychiatry trainees could be developed, to reflect the
differences in their practice compared with other specialties and the
greater importance placed on communication, interpersonal skills,
emotional intelligence and relationship building.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` Tools
taking these attributes into account have been developed for use with
consultant psychiatrists and have been found to be feasible to use as
well as being reliable and valid.\ :sup:`(n.d.aj),(n.d.ak)` The child
and adolescent psychiatry competency-based curriculum\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)`
gives details of intended learning outcomes (ILOs), which are either
mandatory or selective, some of which tap into these areas. The ILOs
range from those that are predominantly clinical (e.g. managing
emergencies (mandatory), paediatric psychopharmacology (mandatory) and
paediatric liaison (selective)) to those that focus on more humanistic
skills (e.g. professionalism (mandatory) and establishing and
maintaining therapeutic relationships with children, adolescents and
families (mandatory)). The ILO on professionalism includes: ‘practicing
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry in a professional and ethical manner;
child and family centred practice; understanding the impact of stigma
and other barriers to accessing mental health services and
inter-professional and multi-agency working’.\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)` Some of
the necessary associated skills which trainees are expected to attain
include: supervising junior psychiatric staff, working with colleagues
within the team and with other agencies to put the child's needs as
central, and acting as an advocate for the child. There is scope to
develop this area of the curriculum even further; the American Board of
Pediatrics (ABP) published guidelines for the teaching and evaluation of
professionalism in paediatric residency programmes\ :sup:`(n.d.al)` as
well as standards of professional behaviour against which
paediatricians, including those in training, can be
evaluated.\ :sup:`(n.d.am)` Both are of relevance to child and
adolescent psychiatrists.

If developed, a child and adolescent psychiatry specialty-specific MSF
instrument would need to map on to the relevant ILOs. It could also
include feedback from patients and families (which is not currently
routinely collected as part of the WPBAs) to reflect the need to balance
the views of the child (who is the patient) with those of their carers.

.. _S6:

Conclusions
===========

MSF tools such as the mini-PAT can provide reliable and valid
information on areas of a trainee's performance such as communication
skills and other humanistic qualities affecting patient care for which
other forms of assessment, such as written examinations, are unhelpful.
MSF tools have their predominant strength when used for formative
assessment and were generally designed for this purpose. They are most
appropriately used within a portfolio of other WPBAs and can help in
making decisions about a doctor's fitness to practice or to continue
training.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)` Rater bias and measurement error could be
reduced by offering more detailed guidance to trainees in their choice
of rater as well as to raters in the use of the tool. Measurement error
could also be reduced by encouraging trainees to obtain a larger number
of returns than the minimum of eight recommended by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` The quality of the feedback to the
trainee is also important and educational supervisors would benefit from
training in this area.

Although the mini-PAT is used widely across specialties, it has only
been properly evaluated for use with foundation doctors. Interested
researchers, clinicians or educationalists might now want to consider
developing a modified version of the SPRAT or a specialty-specific MSF
tool that is more appropriate for the needs of trainees in child and
adolescent psychiatry. This would reflect the differences in their
day-to-day practice compared with that of other trainees but would
obviously need to be mapped to the curriculum and evaluated in practice
to ensure content validity and reliability.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R29

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R31

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R32

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R33

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R35

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R36

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R37

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R38

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R39

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R40

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R41

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R42

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R43

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R44

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R45

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R46

      n.d.an.

.. [1]
   **Gill Salmon** is a consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist at
   the Fairfield Child and Family Clinic, Swansea. **Lesley Pugsley** is
   a senior lecturer in medical education in the School of Postgraduate
   Medical and Dental Education, Cardiff University.
