---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** A service evaluation was undertaken to examine
  outcomes in patients who were street homeless ('rough sleepers') and
  who were compulsorily admitted to hospital under the Mental Health Act
  1983. The data were collected from the patients\' case notes.

  **Results** At 1-year follow-up, patients had positive outcomes in
  areas such as accommodation status, registration with a general
  practitioner and engagement with the clinical team.

  **Clinical implications** The study shows that the intervention of a
  Mental Health Act assessment and compulsory hospital admission in
  homeless people on the street is associated with positive outcomes at
  1 year.
author:
- Philip Timms
- Jennifer PerryCorrespondence to Jennifer Perry
  (<jenperry@doctors.org.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-12
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
title: Sectioning on the street -- futility or utility?
---

Homelessness is known to be both a cause and a consequence of mental
illness,^1,2^ but schizophrenia is the only psychiatric disorder
explicitly associated with homelessness (referred to as 'vagrancy') in
the ICD-10 classification of diseases.^3^ Evidence from different
countries gathered over the past 5 decades supports this. Rates of
psychosis are 4--15 times higher among the homeless population,^4^ and
50--100 times higher among the street homeless (those who sleep outside:
on the street, in parks or in other open spaces),^5^ compared with the
general population. Such populations have been shown to also have unmet
physical healthcare needs,^6^ higher mortality rates^7^ and higher rates
of personality disorder, self-harm and drug and alcohol misuse.^5^

The background level of homelessness is increasing. Rough sleeping in
England has grown by over 50% since 2010, with an estimated 2744 people
sleeping out on any one night in 2014.^8^ The level of street sleeping
in London has more than doubled since 2009/2010, with 7581 sleeping out
at some point during the year 2014/2015.^9^

Assertive outreach has been shown to be an effective model for engaging
homeless people with mental health services.^10^ In areas with high
numbers of homeless people, specialist mental health outreach teams have
been established. These teams work closely with voluntary sector
accommodation and street outreach teams. In spite of the active efforts
of such services, a small proportion of people remain on the street
because, actively or passively, they refuse help. Their extreme degree
of isolation and self-neglect often suggests the presence of a mental
disorder and results in a request for an assessment for compulsory
admission to hospital. Such assessments are time-consuming, expensive
and potentially distressing for the person involved. To continue such an
intervention, we really need to be sure that we are doing more good than
harm.

# Method {#S1}

The aim of this study was to establish whether the intervention of a
Mental Health Act assessment leading to hospital admission is effective
in helping rough sleepers with mental illness.

We identified our study group from two patient lists belonging to the
South Thames Assessment Resource and Training (START) team, one of the
surviving specialist services for homeless people in London. The first
was a paper list of referrals to the START team, which covered all
patients referred between November 2010 and December 2012. The second
was a paper list of patients assessed under the Mental Health Act by the
team\'s approved mental health professionals (AMHPs) from 2007 to 2013.
To be included in the study, the person had to: be an established rough
sleeper (minimum of 1 month rough sleeping)have had a Mental Health Act
assessment leading to hospital admission under a section of the Mental
Health Acthave been discharged from hospitalhave left hospital for 1
year or more, or have been appropriately discharged to their general
practitioner (GP) within 1 year.

We then examined the case notes of those meeting the criteria to
establish their demographic data, duration of homelessness, diagnosis
and several proxy indicators of outcomes 1 year after they were
discharged from their index admission to hospital. One of these (fairly
crude) measures was of engagement, assessed by reviewing the notes over
the 1-year period/up until the point of discharge. 'Well engaged'
indicated there were no documented problems with attendance at community
team appointments, 'partially engaged' indicated there were some
documented problems, and 'no engagement' meant there was no documented
engagement of the patient at follow-up.

Medication adherence was also crudely assessed from the notes. 'Good'
indicated there were no documented problems with adherence, 'partial'
indicated there were some documented problems and 'none' indicated that
the patient had completely stopped taking their prescribed medication.

The Combined Homelessness and Information Network (CHAIN) database^9^ (a
London-wide database of hostel use and contact with street outreach
teams) was consulted to confirm information regarding the length of
homelessness history.

Positive outcomes at follow-up were considered if patients were housed,
registered with a GP, adherent to their medication, engaged in
employment and attending appointments either with the specialist mental
health outreach teams or local community mental health teams.

# Results {#S2}

We identified 32 individuals meeting the study criteria.

## Demographic data and background {#S3}

The gender ratio was 4:1 male to female, and a mean age was 44 years
(range 24--84). Half (50%) of the group were White, nearly a third (31%)
were Black and 41% were British nationals ([Fig.
1](#F1){ref-type="fig"}). Apart from one person with alcoholic dementia,
all had a diagnosis of psychosis and 44% had had a previous mental
health hospital admission.

![Patient ethnicity](303f1){#F1}

The duration of homelessness ranged from 4 weeks to 20 years ([Fig.
2](#F2){ref-type="fig"}). Evidence shows that homeless people are less
likely to access services^5^ and thus engage in the treatment they need
for their mental health conditions. As mental health problems increase,
evidence suggests that individuals may be even less likely to access
services.^11^ It is therefore reasonable to assume that, for most of
their period of homelessness, the participants had received no
consistent or effective treatment, and that many had long durations of
untreated psychosis.

![Duration of rough sleeping](303f2){#F2}

## Admission data {#S4}

All 32 patients were admitted under Section 2 of the Mental Health Act
1983 for assessment and 9 (28%) were then transferred to Section 3 to
allow longer-term treatment. The median length of hospital admission was
60 days (range 6--360).

### Repeat admissions {#S5}

A third of the study group (*n* = 11, 34%) had a subsequent hospital
admission during the following year and 2 patients were in hospital 1
year after discharge. Nearly half of this group (45%) were discharged
directly to the street after their first admission, but of the 21 with
no subsequent admission, only 2 were discharged to the street. Seven
patients with repeat admission (64%) were discharged without medication,
in contrast to only 4 out of the group without a further admission
(19%). Four patients (36%) in the repeat admission group were not given
a diagnosis by the in-patient team. On repeat hospital admission, three
of these patients were diagnosed with psychosis, treated and given
accommodation. One patient was not treated or given accommodation, but
the START team continued to feel that she had a mental illness that
warranted treatment.

## Outcomes at 1 year/point of appropriate discharge to GP {#S6}

### Engagement with CMHT {#S7}

Two patients were discharged to their GP at 11 months as they were
stable and doing well. Two patients were lost to follow-up: one patient
went AWOL from his accommodation and the team lost contact with him at 6
months, and one patient was discharged to their GP at 8 months as they
refused to engage. At 1 year follow-up, two patients were back in
hospital.

We assessed subsequent engagement with community teams by using the
crude measure of attendance at appointments over the 1 year period after
discharge: 50% were well engaged, 44% were partially engaged and 6% were
not engaged with the team over the 1 year period/at the point of
discharge.

The two patients who were lost to follow-up have been included in our
analyses and their outcomes at point of loss to follow-up have been
used.

### Accommodation {#S8}

The majority of patients in the study (*n* = 26, 81%) were living in
accommodation at follow-up, mostly supported accommodation ([Table
1](#T1){ref-type="table"}).

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Types of accommodation at 1-year follow-up
:::

| Type                             |           Patients, *n*            |
|:---------------------------------|:----------------------------------:|
| Supported accommodation          |                 18                 |
| Shared accommodation, no support |                 1                  |
| Residential care home            |                 1                  |
| Flat                             | 6^[a](#TFN1){ref-type="table-fn"}^ |
| Homeless                         |                 6                  |

Two flats were funded by the No Recourse to Public Funds Panel, a local
panel
:::

### GP registration {#S9}

Before admission to hospital, 38% of the group (*n* = 12) were
registered with a GP, but this increased to 78% (*n* = 25) at follow-up.

### Employment {#S10}

At the point of hospital admission, one patient was employed in
voluntary work. At follow-up, four patients were doing voluntary work
but none were in paid employment.

### Medication adherence {#S11}

Patients\' adherence to medication was assessed over the 1-year period:
22% (*n* = 7) had good adherence, 41% (*n* = 13) had partial adherence,
22% (*n* = 7) were non-adherent and 16% (*n* = 5) were not prescribed
medication.

# Discussion {#S12}

This retrospective study suggests that compulsory hospital admissions of
patients with mental illness who are rough sleepers can have broadly
positive outcomes at 1 year. There seem to be clear gains in
accommodation status, GP registration, attendance at appointments and
medication adherence. The benefits in terms of employment are marginal
(4 patients were in voluntary employment and the remaining 81% (*n* =
26) remained unemployed at follow-up), however, this is in line with
literature which shows that the employment rate of patients with mental
illness, regardless of their accommodation status, is low.^12^

Eleven patients had repeat hospital admissions; 4 of these patients were
initially discharged to the streets without medication and without a
diagnosis. The majority of this group (*n* = 3) were re-admitted fairly
quickly (again using the Mental Health Act to compel admission) and then
subsequently treated. This may reflect our clinical experience that ward
teams can sometimes have difficulty in recognising the functional
severity of disorders where the patient is not violent, overtly
distressed or agitated. This does perhaps suggest an argument that
homeless teams should have their own hospital beds, or at least a single
ward for such admissions. This would enable a body of shared experience
and expertise to be built up in dealing with this group of patients.

Despite this small study showing positive outcomes, some dilemmas and
difficulties remain.^13,14^ Ethical dilemmas arise with the
uncomfortable notion of forcing a service upon a person who does not
want it when they are not in immediate danger. In normal practice, such
invasion of an individual\'s autonomy is justified by the context of a
detailed long-term knowledge of their psychiatric history, but such
background knowledge is often absent in those seen on the street.

The experience of the authors is that these assessments are
uncomfortable. For the patient, the interruption of their established
*modus vivendi* can be very distressing. They will often have isolated
themselves in response to threatening psychotic symptoms, or may
experience an ill-articulated but profound discomfort with other people.
It is also difficult for the assessors. The police do have powers to
apprehend a person who seems to be unwell in a public place, however
these are usually only exercised if the person seems to be an immediate
risk to themselves or others. As a result, the person cannot be moved to
a safer, more contained space and so the assessment is done *in situ*:
in the street, in the park, in the stairwell or doorway. There is little
sense of privacy or containment, particularly as the proceedings are
sometimes in full view of passers by, who may or may not take an
interest in what is happening. It is often physically uncomfortable: one
is not sitting down but bending or squatting and, according to the
season or time of day, can be cold, windy and wet. Within the UK legal
framework, formal Mental Health Act assessments are time consuming and
costly. Two independent doctors, an AMHP, the ambulance service and
(usually) the police all have to attend simultaneously. Coordinating
five different agencies is fraught with difficulties and it is not
uncommon for one participant to cancel at the last minute, resulting in
the cancellation of the whole assessment.

Statistics show that the majority of people sleeping rough in London are
male (86%) and White (69%); 57% are aged between 26 and 45 years, 12%
are under 25 and 10% are over 55. Where nationality was recorded, 43%
(3212) of those sleeping rough were UK nationals and 36% were from
Central and Eastern European countries.^9^ These data show that our
sample was representative of the age, gender and ethnicity of those who
sleep rough in London.

There were several limitations to this study. The sample size was small
and the outcome measures were crude and did not reflect the patient
experience of this intervention. It is difficult to say how complete the
AMHP\'s paper list of patients assessed under the Mental Health Act was,
as it relied on all of the team\'s AMHPs regularly updating it. Another
limitation was that there was no comparison group with a domiciled
population.

This group of entrenched rough sleepers with psychosis, and (by
implication) often long duration of untreated psychosis, were generally
well or partially engaged with services at 1 year. These findings are
consistent with those of a small London study in 1999, which looked at
12 people with psychosis who were sleeping out.^15^ After compulsory
admission to a mental health ward from the street, 11 were still
accommodated and in touch with mental health services at follow up
(median of 21 months).

Even with their limitations, these findings should go some way to
counter a therapeutic nihilism that we have sometimes encountered
towards both homeless people and people with long duration of untreated
psychosis.

In terms of future study, we plan to undertake a further evaluation to
look at a larger group of individuals over a 2-year period, using
validated outcome measures (such as the routinely collected Health of
the Nation Outcome Scales). We hope also to conduct a qualitative study
to elicit the patients\' view of this intervention.

The authors would like to thank the START team for their help with this
project and for their continuing efforts to serve a neglected and
socially excluded group of people.

[^1]: **Philip Timms** is a consultant psychiatrist and **Jennifer
    Perry** is a specialist trainee in general adult psychiatry at the
    South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
