=======================================
James Patrick Watson MD, FRCP, FRCPsych
=======================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: Formerly Professor of Psychiatry, King's College London and Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist, South London and Maudsley NHS Trust
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tom K. J. Craig
Nick Bouras
:Date: 2017-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 123f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

James (Jim) Watson, who died after a stroke on 3 August 2016 aged 80,
was among a small band of British psychiatrists who trained in the 1960s
and 70s to take psychiatry out of the asylums and establish robust
services in general hospital and community settings. They were also
responsible for developing a wide range of specialist mental health
services. Jim was deeply committed to improving the standards of
clinical care, from early implementation of behavioural therapy through
in-patient group therapies and the understanding and management of
behaviour on hospital wards. He championed the relationship between
staff and patient as key to recovery in psychiatry, deploring the move
to ever fewer acute beds, reductions in staffing levels and
organisational changes that resulted in fractured continuity of care and
consequent erosion of the essence of good mental healthcare.

His clinical interest was reflected in his research, which included
evaluations of community mental health, telemedicine and treatments for
psychosexual disorders, for which he established one of the earliest
specialist multidisciplinary clinics and training programmes in Britain.
With his personal style, he led a vibrant, outward-facing, creative and
very happy department, in which a serious commitment to excellence went
along with a refreshing lack of pomposity and a keen sense of work being
enjoyable. This was in no small part due to Jim's dedication to
improving the quality of psychiatric services, not least by ensuring
excellence in the education and training of psychiatrists and by making
sure that medical students had a varied and stimulating exposure to
psychiatry.

Under his leadership, Guy's Hospital Medical School had the enviable
reputation of having the highest proportion of medical students opting
for a career in psychiatry. In the postgraduate field, he was an
inspirational leader of the South East of England training scheme for
psychiatry, chairman of the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Specialist
Training Committee and chairman of the Association of University
Teachers of Psychiatry. In the mid-1990s he launched an MSc in mental
health studies – a programme directed at professionals from all
disciplines involved in delivering mental health services. This course
was extraordinarily successful: consistently oversubscribed, with
unprecedented numbers of applicants. Its success spawned further
collaborations with university departments overseas, notably in Egypt
and the Middle East, where he worked with colleagues to develop a
diploma in psychiatric practice for wider dissemination across the
region. His determination to improve mental healthcare led him to a
lengthy involvement with mental healthcare in Pakistan. From the early
1990s, he collaborated with colleagues there, visiting regularly and
helping to train staff for mental health clinics in rural settings that
have now expanded to more than 15 centres, some of which are co-located
with a mosque and madrasa. Jim was also connected with several other
international projects involving, among other countries, Greece and the
former Yugoslavia.

Jim was the eldest of three sons. His father was a teacher and his
mother a doctor. He attended the Roan School for Boys in Greenwich,
where he excelled academically and in sport. He studied medicine at
Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was a senior scholar. In 1957 he
transferred to King's College Hospital Medical School for clinical
studies, qualifying in April 1960. It was there that he met his fellow
student and future wife Christine Colley – they were married in April
1962.

After training in psychiatry at the Bethlem Royal and Maudsley Hospitals
and Institute of Psychiatry, he was appointed as consultant and senior
lecturer in psychiatry at St George's Hospital London in May 1971. He
was appointed to the Chair of Psychiatry at Guy's Hospital Medical
School in September 1974, steering his department through the union with
St Thomas's Hospital in 1982 and onward to the final merger with King's
College in 2000. In addition, he served as honorary consultant
psychiatrist to the British Army from 1980 to 2000 and was the
vice-president of the Royal College of Psychiatrists from 1998 to his
retirement.

After retirement, Jim continued to contribute actively to the field,
providing teaching and mentorship to psychiatrists in the Sussex
Partnership NHS Foundation Trust. He maintained his collaboration with
colleagues in Pakistan, advising on setting up a new School of Nursing
as well as the development of a service and training resource for
children with learning disabilities and autism. He took part in
continuing education meetings with colleagues in Cheltenham, chaired a
patient support group in a local general practitioner practice and was
trustee of the Soundwell Music Therapy Trust which provides music
therapy for people suffering from mental ill health.

Jim enjoyed a very happy family life, having four sons whose diverse
careers in music, international school teaching, hospital medicine and
clinical psychology were a great source of pride and affection. In 2002,
he and Christine exchanged London life for a Cotswold home where he
could indulge his enthusiasm for vegetable gardening – a throwback to
his maternal ancestors who had traded as market gardeners, supplying
mustard and cress to Queen Victoria.

Jim's passing will be felt as a great loss to psychiatry and by the many
clinical and academic colleagues who had the privilege of knowing and
working with him.
