---
abstract: |
  The move to a digital health service may improve some components of
  health systems: information, communication and documentation of care.
  This article gives a brief definition and history of what is meant by
  an electronic health record (EHR). There is some evidence of benefits
  in a number of areas, including legibility, accuracy and the secondary
  use of information, but there is a need for further research, which
  may need to use different methodologies to analyse the impact an EHR
  has on patients, professionals and providers.
author:
- Jonathan Richardson
- Joe McDonaldCorrespondence to Jonathan Richardson
  (<jonathan.richardson@ntw.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-10
institute:
- 1Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
title: "Digitally enabled patients, professionals and providers: making
  the case for an electronic health record in mental health services"
---

Imagine a digitally enabled health service. The general practitioner
(GP) emails the provider a referral letter and copies in the patient,
including a link to a website. The patient clicks the link, which takes
them to their chosen healthcare provider\'s landing page. The website
contains information about the outcomes of the service from both a
patient\'s and a clinician\'s perspective and a set of choices about how
the patient would like to communicate: by telephone, email, second class
post etc. The patient opens an account with their provider, enters all
their demographic data (age, ethnic background etc.) and completes
whatever screening assessment the service requires. They can also
pre-populate their record with some detail about their condition. A
digitally enabled professional, working remotely on their
telehealth-enabled laptop, has a view of the GP\'s referral letter and
the patient-entered history, and they can then make a decision about
what options to offer the patient: a telephone assessment, a telehealth
consultation, a face-to-face consultation, an automated online
therapeutic intervention, or a referral to an online self-help
community.

Many industries have been transformed by computers, but healthcare has
not. We have not yet fully enabled self-care for patients; we do not
routinely communicate with patients or carers via email but instead rely
on insecure and expensive post. We have transferred our paper processes
into an electronic format, but are digitally handicapping clinicians.
Taking away a highly efficient clinical technology, hand-writing, and
replacing it with typing caused the previously administrative tasks to
shift on to clinical staff, causing great inefficiency.

However, there are healthcare services that are moving toward a
digitally enabled model. For example, the Lloyds Pharmacy Online Doctor
(formerly, Dr Thom), a primary care organization, provides a general
practice service using existing technologies: the internet, email, text
messages and Skype.^1^ Mental health providers should aim to do the same
by promoting digitally enabled clinicians.

While developing digitally enabled services we have to be mindful,
however, that not every patient and professional has the same digital
abilities; part of the general public have limited real-time access to
the internet and are new to the use of information technology -- they
are the so-called 'digital immigrants'.^2^ This group of patients may
lose out if we are not careful. The technological advances such as the
internet, social media and smartphones may result in a perceptual change
in our patients of what it means to be a healthcare professional in the
21st century,^3^ so we have to be aware of what could be gained (and
lost) during the transition to a fully digitally enabled health service.

# Patient health record {#S1}

The vision of digitally enabled health services is built on the use of
information, its documentation and subsequent communication; an
individual electronic health record (EHR) is a prerequisite to this
vision.

Hippocrates gave a description of a health record, which should serve
two functions: 'A medical record should accurately reflect the course of
disease. \[It\] should indicate the probable cause of disease'.^4^ These
two general principles have been built upon over the years. To ensure
that an accurate course of a patient\'s illness is recorded, what is
required is not only a documented narrative but also something which
will identify the patient as unique. The standardisation of the
composition of the record can help to ensure a systematic approach to
diagnosis.

The first set of individual case notes is traced back to the US Mayo
Clinic\'s 'unit medical record' from 1907.^5^ A standardised set of
records for psychiatric in-patients was being used in the Maudsley
Hospital in the 1920s, with the secondary purpose of helping to train
junior doctors and informing research.^6^ The standardisation of records
was unpopular among clinicians in the 1920s, as they felt that they
should decide what should be included in the written record, in a fluid
and organic manner, akin to the process of the actual examination of the
patient.^5^ More recently, the UK\'s Academy of Medical Royal Colleges
(AoMRC) released a set of standards for the structure of the clinical
record.^7^ Thus, patient record should contain: information taken at
admission to hospitalinformation taken on discharge from
hospitalinformation on handover between clinical teams within the
hospital.

The AoMRC standards are now being implemented within the health service
and a number of professional bodies have used them as a basis for
profession-specific documents, such as the Royal College of
Psychiatrists\' Mental Heath Discharge Summary (MHDS).^8^ The MHDS has
been found to be a useful set of standards.^9^

To summarise, the patient record, and good record-keeping, are vital to
inform, record and communicate patient care.^10^ The importance of, and
need for, a patient record has been highlighted as a prerequisite for
clinicians to perform their duties; it should encompass a clinical
narrative, standard items and, more recently, coded information.^10^ The
clinical narrative is a requirement to ensure that clinicians present a
holistic account of patients\' problems. Standardisation can help to
ensure semantic consistency within and between different clinical groups
and areas of work, for example between primary and secondary care. The
use of coded information enables specific, anonymous parts of the record
for secondary use, for example health research and the revalidation of
health professionals.

# Drivers for change {#S2}

The use of computers and computing in health has grown exponentially,
with a central feature being the patient or health record. A definition
of a personal health record (PHR), as described by Pagliari, is: 'a
collection of important information about your health or the health of
someone you are caring for, such as a parent or child, that you actively
maintain and update. The information comes from your healthcare
provider, and from you.'^11^

The EHR, which has a broader definition than a PHR, is being used in
most Western countries, with governmental policies to promote its
implementation.^12^ The US Centers for Medicare & Medicaid notes that
the EHR 'allows healthcare providers to record patient information
electronically instead of using paper records'.^12^ This practice has
been echoed by broader political, economic, social and technological
changes in the UK. The passing of the Health and Social Care Act 2012 is
leading to unprecedented changes in the National Health Service
(NHS),^13^ whereas the publication of the UK government\'s information
strategy, the *Power of Information*,^14^ and more recently, of
*Personalised Health and Care 2020: A Framework for Action*^15^
reaffirms the view that the use of information enabled by EHRs is a
central driver to the future direction of healthcare delivery in the UK.

A 'good doctor' has been described as a health professional who can
synthesise incomplete information, deal with uncertainty, manage risk,
constantly adapt to change and take responsibility for their
actions.^16^ The documentation of these critical factors within an
individual\'s health record can only serve to improve their care.

The EHR system is still in its early phases within the NHS. The policy
drivers are only at the point of being implemented, but at the same time
most organisations are being asked to improve the value of the services
they provide by enhancing the quality of care with resources that at
best stay the same and at worst are reduced.

# Benefits and barriers of e-health {#S3}

The interplay between health and technology has also been described as
e-health.^17^ In a systematic overview conducted by Black *et al*,^18^
e-health is categorised into three areas: storage, managing and
transmission of dataclinical decision supportfacilitating care from a
distance.

The findings of Black *et al*^18^ are comparable with the initial
conclusion drawn by Eysenbach,^17^ namely that there is some evidence
that an EHR can lead to improved efficiency, which in turn could improve
a Darzi quality measure: clinical effectiveness. There are compelling
suggestions that the potential of the EHR lies more within the realm of
its secondary use, especially in terms of research linkages, for
instance the potential for data prediction and stratification.^19^

The potential to empower patients to make choices would hopefully be
enhanced by digital access to their own health information;^15^ however,
we need to take into account the current evidence base and 'lack of
clarity' on how EHRs are supposed to achieve that.^20^

It would seem that the limited evidence of the main constraint of an
EHR, increasing the time it takes for clinicians to document
information,^21^ could have an adverse impact on the
patient--professional interaction, and consequently, on another Darzi
quality measure: patient experience. The increased time to document that
clinicians report may be due to the numerous NHS regulatory requirements
as much as the process of using an EHR, both of which contribute to the
data burden experienced by organisations and clinicians.^22^ If the data
burden could be reduced it should ultimately improve patient care by
freeing up time for clinicians, which they can then spent with patients.
Conversely, if EHR data quality is to be of a high enough standard for
its secondary research use, what may be required is more time to train
clinicians to use an EHR correctly.^23^ This means that there will be a
constant balancing, framing and reframing^24^ of the primary and
secondary uses of EHRs within health services, a process that needs to
be benefits led, with benefits that are clear for patients,
professionals and organisations at the outset.

# Use of EHR in health research: examples {#S4}

A review by Jensen describes a number of potential benefits of using an
EHR in secondary research, for example in the field of genetics:^19^
knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) methods by correlating clinical
features, predictions from the EHR data, and patient stratification. EHR
data could then be linked to the molecular level, such as in
pharmacogenomics and gene network-based decision support.^19^

An example of good practice in this area in mental health services is
the Clinical Record Interactive Search (CRIS)^20^ system used by a
number of mental health trusts that provides access to anonymised
clinical data for researchers in a robustly governed manner.

The use of records to create linkage within the EHR data has also been
recognised and led to the establishment of the Centre for Health Service
and Academic Partnership in Translational E-Health Research. This is one
of four e-health informatics research centres, and one of the central
strands to the UK government\'s Life Sciences Strategy.^25^

Future research should take account of the 'political, pragmatic and
commercial drivers of the decision-making in the commissioning of
e-health',^18^ which in turn need to inform a paradigm shift in the
approach to research, for example, changing the focus toward a value-
and outcome-based approach.^26^

# Implications for the future {#S5}

If one considers the implications of adopting any scientific or
technical system, in this case information management and technology, in
a social system, in this case medicine, and the benefits and barriers
which may characterise both systems, then a fuller understanding of a
'socio-technical' approach to the EHR implementation may emerge.^27,28^

The socio-technical approach is already starting to take root in the NHS
and will affect practice; one major premise is that there is no such
thing as an IT project and we should articulate that any change needs to
be care quality led and clinically based; IT should enable the change
and not drive it. One example is assessing how usable systems are; the
mental health informatics community has been an advocate of usability
testing and working in partnership with EHR suppliers.^29^ If working
with industry and the use of industry standard usability scales^30^
become the norm, this may lead to a new approach in future
implementations. For example, we could see joint ventures between NHS
trusts and EHR vendors, with EHRs implemented at a local level using
national, professionally agreed standards.

The national research programme to evaluate the effect of IT on patient
care has produced a summary report evaluating the results of the
National Programme for IT.^31^ This was a substantially funded and
ambitious research programme that recognised that traditional methods of
evaluation may not be appropriate for the evaluation of health
informatics. Seeing that an EHR has a complicated research base, a
meta-narrative approach was suggested as it can systemically make sense
of 'complex, heterogeneous and conflicting bodies of literature'.^32^ It
does so by attempting to deconstruct the research according to
underlying philosophical positions (positivist, interpretivisit,
critical and recursive) and linking this to the historical roots of EHR
research. The latter are evidence-based medicine, human--computer
interaction, workplace design, symbolic interactionism, safety-critical
systems, social practice view of knowledge, complexity theory and the
philosophy of science. Greenhalgh *et al*^32^ describe a number of areas
where further research is needed: theory-building, collaborative
clinical work, how EHR systems should be co-designed, differences
between 'off the shelf' and 'home-grown' EHRs, the ethics of
data-sharing, reviews of implementation within organisations, and
knowledge translation between what is known and assumed. The authors
also suggested three areas where research apparently is not needed:
simplified experimental designs, surveys of staff attitudes which are
not contextualised, and under-theorised qualitative research of failed
implementations.

Information, communication and documentation are vital components of a
future vision of digitally enabled patients, professionals and
providers. We need to move from imagining a digitally enabled health
service to implementing it; some organizations are already using digital
enablers such as mobile working and digital dictation with their
clinicians.^33^ The Health Foundation has looked at the implications of
Learning Healthcare Systems and Foley & Fairmichael suggest that
'structured electronic health records, rigorous outcome measurement and
alternative research methodologies offer the possibility of a healthcare
system that learns from each patient who is treated'.^34^

One of the most important drivers for a digitally enabled health service
will be the patients themselves. Patients are the experts in their own
health issues. The technology that patient groups are already adopting,
such as online patient communities (e.g. [ACOR.org](ACOR.org)),^35^ to
help them better understand, manage and deal with their health issues,
may in turn inform the understanding of how, where and why digital
services are used. Attempts have been made to ensure that health and
wellness apps are designed to recognised standards.^36^ The next step is
to 'let patients help steer our decisions, strategic and practical. Let
patients define what value is',^35^ so that we can delineate the true
purpose, and recognise the challenge, of the NHS developing meaningful
digitally enabled services for patients, professionals and providers.

[^1]: **Jonathan Richardson** is Chair of the Royal College of
    Psychiatrists\' Informatics Committee and Group Medical Director and
    **Joe McDonald** is Chief Clinical Information Officer,
    Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon
    Tyne, UK.
