==============================================================
A Clinician's Brief Guide to the Mental Capacity Act (2nd edn)
==============================================================



Martin Curtice [1]_

:date: 2017-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

This book aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the Mental
Capacity Act 2005 (MCA) – which applies specifically to England and
Wales – and its implementation in practice.

The authors are all practising psychiatrists and although the style and
content is tailored for a medical readership, the guide is suitable for
all grades of doctors and all specialties, not just psychiatry. It is
also ideal for medical and nursing students. With a punchy and concise
writing style, the book has copious amounts of practical advice for
clinicians throughout, and at times uses a common sense
question-and-answer format with questions that clinicians are likely to
pose, which reflects real-life practice.

Importantly, this work sought to translate lengthy and wordy court
judgments into concise and simplified reviews outlining key basic
principles for clinicians to use in daily practice. Possibly the most
interesting chapter was that regarding the role of the Court of
Protection. This busy court – which according to the authors hears
approximately 23 000 cases annually, a figure that will surely
inevitably rise – is often referred to in the media as the secretive
court. However, this excellent chapter goes a long way in debunking
various perceptions. It also explains the court process and is infused
with sage, detailed and practical advice, from how to handle requests
for assessments, writing reports and interviewing patients to giving
evidence in court and even finding your way there if you need to! The
authors suggest that Court of Protection proceedings tend to be more
‘informal and inquisitorial than formal and adversarial’ but that they
can still be stressful, which is why they wish readers ‘good luck’. But
despite the suggestion that a degree of luck might be needed, anyone new
to such court proceedings will be far more prepared having read this
chapter than not.

Needless to say, the thorny issue of implementing Deprivation of Liberty
Safeguards (DoLS) was discussed at length in a chapter that provided
important context by describing the evolution of this legislation and
case law. Notwithstanding, owing to a glut of more recent key DoLS
judgments, the book is already a little out of date as DoLS case law and
guidance have evolved rapidly. It seems likely that an update will be
needed soon to keep readers informed of key developments. Nevertheless,
there was a good description of practical issues in using and applying
DoLS since the *Cheshire West* case in 2014, a case which triggered an
upsurge in the use of this legislation. The authors aptly summed up the
state of DoLS understanding from further case law since *Cheshire West*
by saying it did ‘little to ease the quandaries of health and social
care staff in their decision-making in relation to deprivation of
liberty’.

Another notable chapter was the one on the assessment of capacity, which
provided comprehensive and practical advice, breaking the process down
into its components and getting into its minutiae, thus challenging the
reader to re-evaluate their own methods for assessing capacity. Other
useful sections included advice on how to resolve conflict emanating
from complex best-interests meetings and on seeking consent. Although
not concluded at the time of publication, the latter resonates with the
2015 seminal Supreme Court case of *Montgomery v Lanarkshire* which has
redefined the rules of seeking consent and has implications for how
clinical negligence will hence be assessed.

All in all, this is an excellent guide which would aid those involved in
care touching upon the use of the MCA.

.. [1]
   **Dr Martin Curtice**, consultant in old age psychiatry,
   Worcestershire Health and Care NHS Trust, New Haven, Princess of
   Wales Community Hospital, Bromsgrove, UK; email:
   mjrc68@doctors.org.uk
