===============================================
Women in Academic Psychiatry: A Mind to Succeed
===============================================

Linda Gask [1]_
:Date: 2017-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

As a female academic psychiatrist I asked two questions of myself about
this book. Did I identify with the problems described here? And second,
would I have found it valuable to read at an earlier stage in my career?
The answer to both of these is a (qualified) yes.

The book is in two parts. The first consists of 16 interviews with
eminent female psychiatrists and psychologists, which were almost
certainly conducted by email. The questions are standardised, the
responses polished and there is no in-depth probing of replies – which
as a qualitative researcher I would have found more revealing. The
second part of the book is a series of rather brief chapters which
provide a helpful template for recognising the barriers and considering
how to overcome them. These include putting yourself first, projecting
confidence even if you don't feel it, being memorable, persistent and
something I've found to be particularly important – networking.

The problems described are all too familiar – I've been subjected to
mansplaining, *‘a man compelled to explain, especially to a woman,
something that she already knows better than him.’* I've held back in
conversation, fearful of asking questions. I've been the only woman in a
committee room except for the person taking the minutes. Yet, all of
these very talented women demonstrate how a combination of real passion
for what you are interested in and the ambition to push yourself
forwards, even when times are challenging, has resulted in outstanding
academic success.

Almost all the interviewees are now at the pinnacle of their careers.
Many came from similar professional families and more than a few
acknowledge the role played by a supportive partner with the kind of job
that made it easier to be both an academic clinician and a mother. There
is no one still ‘finding their way’ that a younger me might have
identified with and the majority work in biological psychiatry – the
editors' own field – in the USA. I might have found it helpful to read
their stories when I was younger, but on the other hand, I might have
been more than a little intimidated too.

.. [1]
   **Linda Gask**, Emerita Professor in Primary Care Psychiatry,
   University of Manchester, UK; email: linda.gask@manchester.ac.uk
