---
abstract: |
  Leros became infamous worldwide in the 1980s because of a scandal in
  its mental institution, the Leros asylum. The scandal provoked
  universal outrage and the international pressure triggered the Greek
  mental health reform. Under the reform projects Leros I and Leros II
  (1990--1994), numerous interventions took place in the Leros asylum as
  part of deinstitutionalisation. Following that, the Psychargos
  programme advanced developments for community-based services.
  Deinstitutionalisation and development of community mental health
  services have advanced significantly since the 1980s. However, this
  reform is still incomplete, given that sectorisation, adequate primary
  care policies, inter-sectoral coordination and specialised services
  are under-developed. This problematic situation is further complicated
  by the severe impact of the current financial crisis.
author:
- George Giannakopoulos
- Dimitris C. AnagnostopoulosCorrespondence to George Giannakopoulos
  (<ggiannak@med.uoa.gr>) [^1]
date: 2016-12
institute:
- 1Department of Child Psychiatry, School of Medicine, National and
  Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
title: "Psychiatric reform in Greece: an overview"
---

Leros, one of the Greek islands in the Aegean Sea, has become infamous
worldwide because of its mental institution, which provoked universal
outrage in the 1980s. The Leros asylum was established in 1958, taking
the official name Colony for Psychopaths, in order to disperse residents
of other psychiatric asylums in Greece. In a country that was
experiencing the disastrous aftermath of World War II and the Civil War,
socioeconomic and political circumstances created conditions for the
reinforcement of the asylum structure and a dramatic increase in the
number of institutionalised patients in public mental hospitals. The
asylum grounds had been used as Italian naval and air force bases during
the 1920s and 1930s and later they were used by the Greek state as
military camps, boarding schools for orphaned children and offspring of
Greek Civil War refugees, and political prisoner camps. Most patients
were transferred to Leros *en masse* from other asylums without prior
notice. In total, 4000 psychiatric patients were moved, with the most
substantial transfer of 900 people in 1965. The referrals to Leros were
either with the consent of mental health professionals or covered up.
The number of patients institutionalised in Leros increased
disproportionately to the available infrastructure and medical, nursing
and ward staff. In 1982 all referrals to Leros stopped.^1,2^

The post-dictatorship political situation following the Greek military
junta rule of 1967--1974 signalled innovative democratising changes in
tertiary education and in medical and psychiatric training as well as
the healthcare system overall. During that time prevention-focused
medical specialties, such as social medicine and child and adolescent
psychiatry, emerged. At the same time, progressively thinking medical
doctors struggled towards establishing a public national health system
in Greece. These factors made a substantial contribution to the shift
from a biomedical to a biopsychosocial approach to health and the need
for community-based healthcare.^3^ The National Health System Law 1397
passed in 1983 laid the basis for a new model of psychiatric service
provision. The imperative need for change in psychiatry was reflected in
the Greek psychiatric reform introduced in 1984 with the European
Community Regulation 815. The reform aimed at training mental health
professionals, creating a decentralised community network of preventive,
specialised treatment and rehabilitation services, deinstitutionalising
psychiatric patients with chronic conditions and reducing admissions to
mental hospitals. However, until the 1990s the reform process was mainly
characterised by non-absorption of European Union (EU) funds and
stagnation.^4^ In 1989, the UK *Observer* published an article on Leros,
presenting the appalling conditions in which the patients lived there.
Residents suffered severe deprivation, extreme institutionalisation and
violation of basic human rights. International pressure on the asylum
then escalated and mental health professionals called for immediate
action. Eventually, it was the Leros case that triggered the process of
reform of Greek mental health institutions.^5^

Under the two reform projects, Leros I and Leros II (1990--1994),
numerous interventions took place. In 1990, 19 community hostels were
established on Leros. The majority of patients were discharged from the
asylum in 1994 and by 1999 a total of 103 ex-patients had been rehoused
in these community hostels. This effort was facilitated by the extension
of the psychiatric reform programme and the community interventions for
the acceptance of ex-patients by the islanders. Accommodation and living
conditions were then upgraded and the buildings were repaired. A number
of psychosocial interventions addressed the crucial issues of patients\'
rights, relationships and social roles. The interventions applied to all
patients without exception and also involved patients\' families, care
staff, the institution and the local community. The evaluation study of
a 3-year pilot intervention implemented at Leros Patriot Institution for
Social Care and Welfare, the so-called Leros PIKPA, for people with
severe intellectual disabilities reported improved resident care and
adaptive behaviour, increased communication between residents and
families, and positive changes in resident-management practices and
attitudes towards people with disabilities post-intervention.^6^
Additionally, asylum administration and the local community were
sensitised to residents\' needs. In a study examining the quality of
life of ex-patients residing in community hostels on Leros, the majority
showed a very low level of psychopathology, but poor levels of social
activity and community skills.^7^ Also, they displayed institutional
behaviour and had largely lost the skills necessary for living
independently in society. However, they reported high levels of
satisfaction for their present living situation in the community
hostels, their work, and the feeling of safety in the community, but low
levels of satisfaction for their relationships with family members.
During the developmental phase of the first psychiatric reform
programme, Leros I, several positive outcomes were achieved via the
implementation of time-limited projects, new policies and substantial
financial and technical assistance from the EU. These outcomes included
reduction of the number of psychiatric beds, development of 250 new
services and programmes, such as community mental health services
(mental health centres, day centres and supported residential services),
reduction of the average length of stay in mental hospitals, and
increase in staff numbers.^8^

It was, however, the Psychargos programme that advanced developments for
community-based services.^9,10^ The programme, with funding of 700
million euro, started initially as a 10-year project (from 1997 to
2006). Its aims included: (a) completing the psychiatric reforms, with
the deinstitutionalisation of the remaining long-term psychiatric
patients in the eight mental hospitals and their closure; (b) the
resettlement of ex-patients into the newly established psychosocial
rehabilitation and housing services; and (c) further development of the
network of community mental health services. In 1999, the most
progressive Mental Health Law 2716 was passed.^11^ It set the basic
principles of mental health practice in Greece, identified the 'units of
mental health' and introduced the concept of 'social cooperative units',
which would provide people with mental illness the opportunity to work
and ideally live off this work. Unfortunately, in 1999 the strong Athens
earthquake seriously damaged a big part of the existing long-stay
psychiatric hospital. The initial plan of the Psychargos programme was
then reviewed and eventually implemented in two phases.

The first phase (Psychargos I) lasted from 1997 to 2001 and included
training of mental health professionals, improving infrastructure and
residents\' daily living, and preparing patients for community living
through employment skills training. The second phase (Psychargos II
revised) lasted from 2001 to 2010 with the continued aim of
deinstitutionalisation and the development of community-based mental
health services.^9,12--16^ The closure of mental health hospitals, the
establishment of psychiatric services in general hospitals, and the
development or expansion of specialist services were some of its main
targets ([Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}). The sectorisation of mental
health services, with care coordination and delivery in relatively
small, discrete geographical areas across the country, was another main
target of the reform.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Mental health services developed under the Psychargos programme
:::

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;">Type of service</th>
<th style="text-align: right;"><em>N</em></th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Beds/places</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Community mental health<br />
centres</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">43</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Day centres</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">57</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">855–900 places</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Mobile units</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">25</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Out-patient psychiatric clinics</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">37</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Psychiatric departments in<br />
general hospitals</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">28</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">650 beds</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Hostels and sheltered<br />
apartments</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">343</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3100 beds and 2000<br />
places in rehabilitation<br />
services</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
:::

Until now, four mental health hospitals have been closed down, retaining
only administrative facilities to serve the hostels, out-patient units
and rehabilitation services in their area. The remaining hospitals
provide services to the several hostels, out-patient facilities and
social rehabilitation units in their areas, and the numbers of patients
with chronic illness has substantially decreased. Also, a number of
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) were set up for the completion of
the Psychargos projects. In 2012, 65 NGOs were involved with 220 units
(30% of the total mental health units) covering 50% of the
deinstitutionalisation beds and a total budget of 45 million euro in
2010. With respect to the private sector, there were 4207 in-patient
beds in 2007.^8,11^ The last revision of the programme covers the period
of 2011--2020.

In an *ex post* evaluation, focus groups of service providers and
service users reported several positive elements of the Psychargos
programme reforms, including a widespread reduction of hospital-based
long-stay accommodation, a complete closure of some mental hospitals,
and a large number of community services established in many parts of
the country.^10^ Moreover, they acknowledged that local communities
became gradually more accepting of people with mental illness and that
there were also positive changes in the attitudes of staff towards
person-centred care. However, both focus groups commented on the
fragmented nature of the reforms. The main concerns included: a marked
lack of coordination; inadequate provision on the ground; lack of
thoughtful planning and implementation; inequity in the development of
services between different areas around the country; lack of information
about locally available services and poor information flow between
different services; no quality assurance mechanisms or systems for
clinical governance; and a paucity of monitoring systems. The focus
groups also identified important gaps in specialist mental health
services, such as those for children and adolescents.

Indeed, a major target of the psychiatric reform in Greece was the
closure of the huge Child Psychiatric Hospital of Attica, which had been
operating since 1960. Its patients, mainly children with severe
intellectual disabilities, were moved to community facilities. The
development of psychiatric services for children has followed a
different course than that for adults as only 30% of the scheduled child
guidance clinics have been created.^11,17^ Also, the distribution of
child psychiatry services has been uneven in favour of the Athens area,
with some great geographical areas lacking a single child psychiatry
service. At the same time, the Greek financial crisis in recent years
has had a very negative impact on the provision of child psychiatric
services. The existing child and adolescent mental health services in
the national healthcare system now operate with 10--40% fewer employees,
whose salaries have been cut by 40% and who are not paid regularly. A
large portion of the more experienced personnel has been forced into
retirement. The demand for public services has increased considerably,
since psychopathology of children and adolescents has risen as an effect
of the crisis on the family as a whole, and family finances do not allow
continuation of treatment in the private sector. A recent survey in both
public and private child psychiatric institutions compared data from
2007 and 2011 (2 years before and 2 years after the implementation of
austerity measures). Findings revealed a 39.8% increase in new cases in
public out-patient services for children and 25.5% for adolescents,
while percentages have dropped by a total of 35.4% in the private
sector. As a result, in most public child and adolescent mental health
services the waiting time for ordinary cases has tripled and is now
longer than a month, while in special cases it can be up to 1
year.^18,19^

To summarise, deinstitutionalisation and development of community mental
health services have advanced significantly since the 1980s, when
psychiatric reform started in Greece. However, this reform is still
incomplete, given that sectorisation, adequate primary care policies,
inter-sectoral coordination and specialised services -- such as those
for children and adolescents, and for people with autism and
intellectual disabilities, and geriatric and forensic services -- are
under-developed. This problematic situation is further complicated by
the severe impact of the current financial crisis that has led to
increased demand for services, funding difficulties and staff shortages.
For instance, according to the Ministry of Health Directorate for Mental
Health, patient visits to emergency units, outpatient departments and
mental health clinics in the national healthcare general hospitals have
increased by 120% during 2011--2013.^18^ Unemployment and low income
were found to be significantly correlated with visits to outpatient
departments and emergency units.^20^ Preserving the existing services,
optimal usage of the available limited resources and linking funding to
service performance are essential prerequisites to the completion of the
psychiatric reform in Greece.

[^1]: **George Giannakopoulos** is Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist and
    **Dimitris C. Anagnostopoulos** is Associate Professor of Child and
    Adolescent Psychiatry, both at Department of Child Psychiatry,
    National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
