====================================================================================
Falls in Scottish homicide: lessons for homicide reduction in mental health patients
====================================================================================



John H. M. CrichtonCorrespondence to John H. M. Crichton
(j.crichton@nhs.net)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-8

:Abstract:
   The sustained fall in Scottish homicide rates follows crime reduction
   measures informed by the epidemiology of suicide. The violence
   reduction unit targeted young men carrying knives in public. The
   restriction of weapons immediately to hand appears to have caused an
   absolute fall in homicide just as suicide reduction was observed
   following changes to domestic gas supply. Further homicide reduction
   may be accomplished in the domestic setting with targeted changes in
   kitchen knife design in home safety planning for high-risk
   households. Most commonly homicides involving those in recent contact
   with mental health services in the UK have domestic characteristics
   and similar safety planning may be targeted at those with mental
   disorder and a history of violence.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The sustained fall in Scottish homicide rates to 10.65 per million in
2015–2016 marks a 60% fall in the homicide rate since the peak of 26.3
per million in 2005. :sup:`1, 2` The greatest fall in homicide involves
encounters between young men in public places. The Violence Reduction
Unit, formed in 2005, utilised a public health approach to target young
men with educational programmes and stiff penalties aimed at achieving
reduction in knife carrying outside the home. :sup:`3` From 2005 to 2016
police in Scotland recorded a 69% fall in cases of offensive weapon
carrying. :sup:`4` From 2008 to 2015, Scottish hospitals saw a 63% fall
in admissions and a 50% reduction in deaths arising from assaults with a
sharp object. :sup:`5` Limiting the availability of a lethal weapon
immediately to hand outside the home has been associated with a dramatic
decline in homicide and serious injury.

The targeting of knife carrying in Scotland is an example of situational
crime reduction, a highly successful approach inspired by the fall in
suicide following changes to domestic gas supply. :sup:`6` The model,
aimed at increasing the difficulty of accomplishing a criminal act,
arose from observing the marked decline in the UK suicide rate
associated with the change from coal gas to natural gas. :sup:`7` A
major means of suicide – placing one's head in an unlit oven and
breathing in the gas – abruptly disappeared. Not only was there a
dramatic fall in carbon monoxide suicides but a fall in the number of
suicides overall. It can be inferred then that there are a group of
individuals who, while apparently committed to dying by suicide, can be
deviated from a life-ending course of action by a seemingly trivial
inconvenience.

Despite the fall in overall Scottish homicides, this has not been
observed in homicides associated with those in recent contact with
mental health services. :sup:`8` The stereotype of homicides associated
with mental disorder involving stranger victims and unusual weapons in
public places is false. In a 10-year review of 870 UK homicides carried
out by current or recent users of mental health services, the homicide
victim was a spouse or ex-spouse in 21% of cases, another family member
in 18% and other acquaintances 46%; 15% were stranger victims, as
opposed to 24% stranger victims for all homicides. :sup:`8` Similar
findings were observed in a 15-year series of 271 homicides carried out
by mental health patients in England, where 42% occurred in the shared
home of the victim and perpetrator, 25% at the victim's home and 4% in
the perpetrator's home. :sup:`9` To test the hypothesis that ordinary
objects were used in such homicides, this cohort was re-examined: 45%
overall involved a knife and of those knives that could be identified
85% were kitchen knives. :sup:`10` Homicides associated with mental
disorder typically have domestic characteristics, involving family or
acquaintances in a domestic setting, not the homicide type targeted in
the Scottish campaign.

The evidence would suggest that limiting weapon carrying in public
reduces homicides outside the domestic setting, but how can this be
achieved within the home where kitchen knives are required? Long
sharp-tipped knives have limited specific culinary utility and
alternative designs are available. :sup:`11` One design has an ‘r’
shaped tip and has been demonstrated as being as effective as wearing an
anti-stab vest in a thrust to the torso (details available from the
author on request), although similar benefits to safety may be achieved
with a rounded or square tips.

Perhaps murder mythology in fiction and in the news media, with its
emphasis on the exceptional and planned murder, obscures the possible
benefits to changes to knife design, which may reduce the injury of
unplanned acts of impulsive violence within the home. :sup:`12` Yet
there is media bias for reporting the unusual, stranger homicide
involving those with mental disorder. :sup:`13` This obscures the role
of promoting home safety measures utilised in domestic violence
reduction for those with mental disorder and a history of violence and
weapon use. Such a public health approach could be criticised for
restricting freedom and would not stop a planned act of violence.
Conversely, this may provide a way of generalising the benefits observed
in Scotland to a domestic situation. The role of simple barriers to
immediate weapon use in homicide reduction may also indicate strategies
for violence reduction in other contexts.

The author gratefully acknowledges colleagues at The Orchard Clinic,
Edinburgh, for their constructive comments and support.

.. [1]
   **John H. M. Crichton**, Honorary Fellow, University of Edinburgh
   School of Law, Old College, South Bridge, Edinburgh, UK
