---
author:
- Lindsay Thomson[^1]
date: 2017-12
title: Handbook of Secure Care
---

The *Handbook of Secure Care* is a useful book for those new to the
field of forensic mental health and is most relevant to those practising
in England and Wales. It examines the relationship between mental
disorder and offending, with individual chapters on personality
disorder, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder and acquired
brain injury. Strangely, there is little on psychosis which is the
fundamental diagnosis within secure care.

The work considers the needs of specific populations such as women,
young and older people, and outlines the provision of secure psychiatric
services for these groups. It focuses on the basic components of secure
care and includes information on risk assessment and management, and on
recovery. The latter chapter is of particular use in defining the
challenges we face in secure care and ways to redefine our conventional
thinking. The fundamentals of psychological treatment in secure care are
clearly set out and there is a helpful description of the role of
nursing within that setting.

There is discussion in the first chapter on the evolution of secure and
forensic mental healthcare, as well as information on the number of
secure beds, but I would have welcomed an analysis of the overall
estate, the needs for planning and the methods of provision. Similarly,
details on pathways into or out of secure care, or on the legislation
that allows us to detain people within these settings would have been
valuable.

Notably, there is a good chapter by Penny & Exworthy on human rights in
secure psychiatric care -- the Human Rights Act 1998 underpins much of
what we do in secure care, making this especially relevant. It is
followed by a chapter on quality assurance and clinical audit. It is my
view that the human rights considerations and the quality improvement
agenda are so crucial to our work that it would have been beneficial to
place these chapters near the beginning of the book to emphasise their
importance.

[^1]: **Lindsay Thomson**, Professor of Forensic Psychiatry, University
    of Edinburgh, UK; email: <l.d.g.thomson@ed.ac.uk>
