---
abstract: |
  **Aims and Method** Suicidal acts on underground railway networks are
  an area of public health concern. Our aim was to review recent
  epidemiological patterns of suicidal acts on the London Underground to
  inform future preventive interventions. Data from 2000 to 2010 were
  obtained from the British Transport Police via a Freedom of
  Information request.

  **Results** The mean annual rate of suicidal acts from 2000 to 2010
  was 5.8 per 100 million passenger journey stages. Of those who died by
  suicide, 77.3% were of White Northern European ethnicity. A fifth had
  a history of mental illness.

  **Clinical implications** The widening gap between the number of
  recorded suicide attempts and completed suicides is encouraging.
  Further research is required regarding the role of drug and alcohol
  use, psychiatric history and area of residence. Installation of
  platform screen doors should be considered in future railway network
  expansion.
author:
- Susanna Martin
- Muffazal RawalaCorrespondence to Susanna Martin
  (<smartin1@doctors.org.uk>) [^1]
date: 2017-10
institute:
- 1Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust
- 2Luton Mental Health and Wellbeing Service, East London NHS Foundation
  Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
- id: R24
- id: R25
- id: R26
- id: R27
- id: R28
- id: R29
- id: R30
- id: R31
- id: R32
- id: R33
- id: R34
- id: R35
- id: R36
title: Suicide patterns on the London Underground railway system,
  2000--2010
---

-   [Method](#S1){#toc-S1}
-   [Results](#S2){#toc-S2}
-   [Discussion](#S3){#toc-S3}
    -   [Suicide patterns over time](#S4){#toc-S4}
    -   [Demographics](#S5){#toc-S5}
    -   [Additional risk factors](#S6){#toc-S6}
    -   [Use of preventive measures](#S7){#toc-S7}
    -   [Strengths and limitations](#S8){#toc-S8}
    -   [Conclusions](#S9){#toc-S9}

The London Underground was built in 1863 End was the world\'s first
underground railway system.^[@R1]^ Today it comprises 11 train lines
serving a total of 270 stations across 402 km.^[@R1]^ In 2015/16 it saw
the completion of 1.34 billion journeys across its network.^[@R1]^
Suicide on underground railway systems is a major cause for public
health concern. Railway suicide can have a traumatic impact on both
train drivers^[@R2]^ and witnesses, and can lead to significant train
delays, with substantial economic consequences.^[@R3]^

Between 1940--49 and 1980--89 the mean number of suicidal acts per year
on the London Underground rose from 36.1 to 94.1.^[@R4]^ Previous
studies have suggested an association between the rising number of
suicidal acts across the national railway and increasing volumes of
passengers across railway networks;^[@R5],[@R6]^ however, this finding
has been inconsistent across studies.^[@R7]^ Use of preventive measures
to stop suicidal acts on railways has been the focus of several studies,
for example, concentrating on changes to the immediate environment,
media reporting and interagency collaborations.^[@R8]^

Our aim was to review recent epidemiological patterns of suicidal acts
on the London Underground to better inform future preventive
interventions.

# Method {#S1}

Data covering deaths by suicide between 2004 and 2010 and 'person under
train' incidents between 2000 and 2010 were obtained by one of the
authors (M.R.) on 7 October 2011 through a Freedom of Information
request to the British Transport Police. Data covering completed
suicides between 2000 and 2003 could not be provided owing to changes in
coding. No further information in relation to this was provided by the
British Transport Police.

The data provided by the British Transport Police included demographic
information (age, gender, ethnicity) of suicide victims between 2004 and
2010. Age was categorised as: \<15 years, 15--44 years, 45--74 years and
\> 75 years. The authors also received figures pertaining to all suicide
attempts (which included incidents where individuals were prevented from
jumping in front of a train or accessing the tracks) and all 'person
under train' incidents (intentional and accidental) between 2000 and
2010.

Information regarding the total number of journeys completed on the
London Underground was obtained from the publicly accessible Transport
for London (TfL) 2011 *Travel in London* report.^[@R9]^ Passenger
journeys were recorded as 'journey stages', where a journey stage
represents a segment of a trip made on a particular mode of transport.
For example, a journey made up of two stages could include a walking
stage to the Underground station followed by a second stage on the
Underground network.^[@R10]^

# Results {#S2}

Between 2000 and 2010 there were 644 recorded suicide attempts on the
London Underground. The mean annual rate of suicide attempts during this
period was 5.8 per 100 million journey stages (95% CI 5.0--6.5). Between
2004 and 2010 there were 132 deaths by suicide. The mean annual rate of
individuals who died by suicide during this period was 1.8 per 100
million journey stages (95% CI 1.4--2.2). In addition, there were 38
deaths in which the coroner recorded an open verdict and 9 deaths in
which the inquest had not yet taken place or in which the British
Transport Police did not have access to the outcome of the verdict. The
total number of 'person under train' incidents between 2000 and 2010,
which included both intentional and accidental acts, was 433. The mean
annual rate of 'person under train' incidents during this period was 3.9
per 100 million journey stages (95% CI 3.6--4.2).

[Figure 1](#F1){ref-type="fig"} shows an increase in the number of
suicide attempts from 2004 to 2009, which is more marked than the
increase in the number of incidents of death by suicide. The number of
'person under train' incidents, however, remained relatively constant.
Our data revealed a small increase in the number of suicide attempts and
'person under train' incidents during May--August, with a peak in June,
as illustrated in [Fig. 2](#F2){ref-type="fig"}.

![Suicide attempts *v*. deaths by suicide, 2000--2010.](277f1){#F1}

![Suicide attempts and 'person under train' incidents by month,
2000--2010.](277f2){#F2}

Tables [1](#T1){ref-type="table"} and [2](#T2){ref-type="table"} display
the age and ethnicity distribution for males and females in incidents of
deaths by suicide 2004--2010. Age at death was not available for two
male individuals, and ethnicity data were not available for one male
individual. Of the deaths by suicide, two-thirds (*n* = 88) were male
and a third (*n* = 44) were female. The average age at death was 40.7
years in males and 45.5 years in females.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

Age and ethnicity in incidents of death by suicide in males,
2004--2010^[a](#TFN1){ref-type="table-fn"}^
:::

           Age, years: *n* (%)                Ethnicity, *n* (%)                                                                        
  ------- --------------------- ----------- -------------------- ---------- ---- ----------- --------- ---------- ----------- --------- ----
  2004           0 (0.0)           8 (66.7)             4 (33.3) 0 (0.0)      12    6 (50.0)  0 (0.0)  3 (25.0)   3 (25.0)     0 (0.0)    12
                                                                                                                                        
  2005           0 (0.0)           4 (66.7)             1 (16.7) 1 (16.7)      6    5 (71.4)  0 (0.0)  0 (0.0)    2 (28.6)     0 (0.0)     7
                                                                                                                                        
  2006           0 (0.0)           9 (69.2)             4 (30.8) 0 (0.0)      13   11 (84.6)  0 (0.0)  1 (7.7)    0 (0.0)      1 (7.7)    13
                                                                                                                                        
  2007           0 (0.0)          10 (76.9)             2 (15.4) 1 (7.7)      13   12 (92.3)  0 (0.0)  1 (7.7)    0 (0.0)      0 (0.0)    13
                                                                                                                                        
  2008           0 (0.0)          10 (76.9)             3 (23.1) 0 (0.0)      13    9 (69.2)  0 (0.0)  1 (7.7)    3 (23.1)     0 (0.0)    13
                                                                                                                                        
  2009           0 (0.0)          10 (62.5)             5 (31.3) 1 (6.3)      16   12 (75.0)  0 (0.0)  3 (18.8)   1 (6.3)      0 (0.0)    16
                                                                                                                                        
  2010           0 (0.0)           6 (46.2)             7 (53.8) 0 (0.0)      13   10 (76.9)  0 (0.0)  0 (0.0)    3 (23.1)     0 (0.0)    13
                                                                                                                                        
  Total          0 (0.0)          57 (66.3)            26 (30.2) 3 (3.5)      86   65 (74.7)  0 (0.0)  9 (10.3)   12 (13.8)    1 (1.1)    87

Age not available for one individual; ethnicity data not available for
two individuals.
:::

::: {#T2 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

Age and ethnicity in incidents of death by suicide in females,
2004--2010
:::

           Age, years: *n* (%)                Ethnicity, *n* (%)                                                                         
  ------- --------------------- ----------- -------------------- ----------- ---- ----------- ---------- ---------- ---------- --------- ----
  2004           0 (0.0)            0 (0.0)              0 (0.0) 1 (100.0)      1  1 (100.0)  0 (0.0)    0 (0.0)    0 (0.0)     0 (0.0)     1
                                                                                                                                         
  2005           0 (0.0)           6 (54.5)             5 (45.5) 0 (0.0)       11  10 (90.9)  0 (0.0)    0 (0.0)    1 (0.1)     0 (0.0)    11
                                                                                                                                         
  2006           0 (0.0)           1 (25.0)             2 (50.0) 1 (25.0)       4  4 (100.0)  0 (0.0)    0 (0.0)    0 (0.0)     0 (0.0)     4
                                                                                                                                         
  2007           0 (0.0)           1 (33.3)             2 (66.7) 0 (0.0)        3  3 (100.0)  0 (0.0)    0 (0.0)    0 (0.0)     0 (0.0)     3
                                                                                                                                         
  2008           0 (0.0)           4 (80.0)             1 (20.0) 0 (0.0)        5  3 (60.0)   0 (0.0)    1 (20.0)   1 (20.0)    0 (0.0)     5
                                                                                                                                         
  2009           0 (0.0)           5 (41.7)             7 (58.3) 0 (0.0)       12  9 (75.0)   0 (0.0)    1 (8.3)    2 (16.7)    0 (0.0)    12
                                                                                                                                         
  2010           0 (0.0)           5 (62.5)             2 (25.0) 1 (12.5)       8  7 (87.5)   1 (12.5)   0 (0.0)    0 (0.0)     0 (0.0)     8
                                                                                                                                         
  Total          0 (0.0)          20 (50.0)            19 (43.2) 3 (6.8)       44  37 (84.1)  1 (2.3)    2 (4.5)    4 (9.1)     0 (0.0)    44
:::

Of the 132 individuals who completed suicide on the London Underground,
110 (83.3%) were resident in London at the time of the event.
Information was unavailable for one individual. A history of mental
illness was confirmed in 20.5% of individuals (*n* = 27).

The Northern Line had the greatest number of recorded suicide attempts
(*n* = 145) between 2000 and 2010, followed by the Central Line (*n* =
99) and Piccadilly Line (*n* = 92). The lowest numbers of suicide
attempts during that period were recorded on the Jubilee Line (*n* = 27)
and Bakerloo Line (*n* = 33).

King\'s Cross St Pancras station saw the highest number of suicide
attempts between 2000 and 2010 (*n* = 18), followed by Mile End (*n* =
17), Victoria (*n* = 16), Camden Town (*n* = 15), Archway (*n* = 13),
Liverpool Street (*n* = 13), Oxford Circus (*n* = 12), Green Park (*n* =
12) and Earl\'s Court (*n* = 11). Suicide attempts led to delays in
underground railway services; between 2000 and 2010 the Northern Line
and Piccadilly Line experienced the greatest total delays (8484 min and
5521 min, respectively). The Jubilee Line recorded total delays of 2396
min and the Bakerloo Line 1911 min over the same period ([Fig.
3](#F3){ref-type="fig"}).

![Total number of suicide attempts per line and delays (in hours),
2000--2010,](277f3){#F3}

# Discussion {#S3}

## Suicide patterns over time {#S4}

There was a marked increase in the number of suicide attempts across the
London Underground from 2004 onwards, although this trend was beginning
to reverse in 2009. Although there was also a rise in deaths by suicide
during that period, this was of a lesser degree. In their 2016 paper
looking at suicide trends across the entire England and Wales railway
system, Taylor *et al* found that male suicide rates had increased from
6 to 8.4 per million from 2000 to 2013, with the greatest increase
observed between 2010 and 2013, from 6.4 to 8.4 per million.^[@R11]^ By
contrast, female suicide rates remained relatively constant. Although
previous studies looking at suicide attempts on underground railway
systems have suggested a case fatality rate of 43 to
55%^[@R4],[@R12],[@R13]^ (compared with 90% on overground
railways^[@R14]^), this does not fully explain the extent of the
difference observed. Increased reporting of suicide attempts by London
Underground staff may be a factor, as well as the introduction of
preventive interventions allowing for the early identification of
persons at risk.

TfL has worked towards suicide prevention since the 1990s.^[@R15]^ This
has included strategically placed Samaritans campaign posters and
telephones within stations. More recently there has been further
collaborative work with the Samaritans to train staff in identifying
persons at risk, and giving them the confidence to intervene.^[@R16]^
Additional interventions have included platform-edge barriers on the
Jubilee Line and gates to prevent passengers from entering tunnels at
existing stations, as well as use of video surveillance and
markings/warning signs to prevent individuals from approaching the
platform edge.^[@R15]^ Presence of staff on platforms during rush-hour
periods may also be helpful. The increase in the number of suicide
attempts and deaths by suicide in 2008 and 2009 may in part be explained
by the financial crisis of 2008.^[@R17]^

The number of journey stages made on the London Underground increased
from 0.976 million in 2004 to 1.065 million in 2009.^[@R9]^ There have
been several studies exploring a potential link between higher numbers
of passenger journeys and the incidence of suicide, with variable
findings. Sonneck *et al* found no such association on the Viennese
subway,^[@R7]^ whereas in Stockholm, Sweden, and The Netherlands,
authors noted a positive association.^[@R5],[@R6]^ Although Waterloo
station is the busiest in terms of passenger flow,^[@R18]^ it does not
feature in the top 20 stations for suicide attempts on the London
Underground in 2000--2010.

Our data did not reveal any marked variation in suicide attempts across
the year, although there was a small increase in events during May to
August, with a peak in June. Findings in other studies have been
variable. Although Dinkel *et al* found no association between seasons
of the year and suicide events,^[@R19]^ others have noted a small
increase in suicide events during the summer months^[@R4]^ or during the
months of April and September.^[@R20]^ Even though summer months are
associated with higher numbers of tourists in London, it is unclear
whether this has had an effect on the number of suicide attempts during
those months. Although a majority of those who died by suicide on the
London Underground were mostly resident in the city, the time of year of
their death was not available, nor was the proportion of London
residents represented among those individuals who attempted suicide.

## Demographics {#S5}

The stark overrepresentation of men in the 15- to 44-year age group
(61.4%, *n* = 57) among those who died by suicide was in keeping with
national figures (England), where the proportion of males is
approximately two-thirds.^[@R21]^ The overall gender distribution of
suicide victims on the London Underground was very similar to that
recorded nationally during the same period (2004--2010), with 66.9% of
cases being male and 33.1% female. By contrast, the proportion of
females aged over 75 years was almost double that of males (6.8% and
3.5% respectively), although the numbers were very small and therefore
need to be interpreted with caution.

This is the first study looking at the ethnic distribution of suicide
victims on the London Underground. The predominance of individuals of
White Northern European background (\>75%) is significant in a place
like London where people of White ethnic background make up less than
60% of the total population,^[@R22]^ in particular since 83.3% of
individuals who died by suicide on the London Underground were resident
in the city. Moreover, use of the London Underground is evenly
distributed across different ethnicities.^[@R23]^ There are currently no
data available on the ethnicity of individuals who die by suicide
nationally, hence we do not know whether individuals of White Northern
European ethnicity are also overrepresented relative to other ethnic
groups. Similarly, we do not know whether individuals of White Northern
European ethnicity are overrepresented in suicide incidents occurring
across the rest of the national railway network or involving violent
suicide methods.

In our sample a fifth of individuals had a history of mental illness.
Unfortunately, no further data were available regarding their diagnosis,
level of psychiatric care at the time of suicide or whether they were
current or recent in-patients of a psychiatric unit. Proximity of
stations or railway suicide 'hot spots' to psychiatric hospitals has
been highlighted as a risk factor for suicide in several
studies,^[@R4],[@R5],[@R12],[@R24],[@R25]^ although the result was not
found to be significant across the Stockholm railway system.^[@R5]^ In
their 1987 study of 100 individuals who had attempted suicide on the
London Underground, Cocks found that 13 were current psychiatric
in-patients, and 2 had been discharged within 48 h of the event.^[@R26]^
Fifteen individuals had expressed suicidal ideation in the 24 h
preceding the event. Although proximity to a psychiatric hospital was
not taken into account in this paper, the presence of a history of
mental illness in a fifth of those who died by suicide highlights the
need for staff working in psychiatric hospitals to be aware of the
proximity of any nearby Underground stations in their assessment of risk
in patients.

## Additional risk factors {#S6}

In Stockholm, authors found that the stations with the highest suicide
rates were associated with higher levels of surrounding drug-related
crime.^[@R27]^ Previous studies have shown that consumption of alcohol
or drugs was a characteristic of about 10 to 20% of individuals who had
attempted or died by suicide on an underground railway
system.^[@R12],[@R28],[@R29]^ In the UK National Confidential Inquiry
into Suicide and Homicide by People with Mental Illness, the authors
noted that 54% of those who died by suicide and had been in contact with
mental health services over the past year had a history of alcohol
and/or drug misuse.^[@R30]^ Intoxication with drugs or alcohol can
increase the risk of impulsive and risk-taking behaviour and may have
been a contributing factor in the incidents observed on the London
Underground, including 'person under train' incidents of accidental
cause. Unfortunately, the British Transport Police do not currently
collect this information. Consumption of alcohol on the London
Underground is forbidden; however, consideration must be given as to how
to manage the risk of suicidal behaviour or accidental injury in
intoxicated individuals.

## Use of preventive measures {#S7}

Several recent studies looking at suicide attempts on underground and
overground railway systems have focused on the use of preventive
measures. Diminishing ease of access to the track through barrier
methods is suggested as an effective intervention, although Cox *et al*
noted a lack of studies demonstrating this.^[@R31]^ In Seoul, the
presence of platform screen doors (PSDs) reduced suicides on the
underground network by 89%.^[@R32]^ PSDs are continuous panels that
separate the platform from the train, only opening when the train is in
the station. Half-length PSDs (1.6 m) were less effective than
full-length PSDs; however, full-length PSDs were 120--150% more
expensive to install.^[@R32]^ The effectiveness of PSDs was also noted
in Hong Kong.^[@R33]^ Portions of the Jubilee Line include the presence
of PSDs, which may be a contributory factor to the lower number of
suicide attempts observed on this line relative to the rest of the
network. The presence of PSDs would also reduce the risk of accidental
falls on to the railway tracks, thus reducing the number of 'person
under train' incidents. Although the cost of installing these doors
makes their presence across the railway network unlikely in the near
future, their potential for significantly reducing the number of
injuries or deaths on the tracks should be considered when planning
future network renovation or expansion.

Other proposed interventions include increasing the presence of drainage
pits, as mortality at London Underground stations that have a drainage
pit was 44% *v*. 76% at those stations without, in incidents of
individuals falling or jumping in front of trains.^[@R34]^ These
drainage pits were originally constructed to drain water between the
tracks in deep-tunnel stations. Installation of blue lights at platforms
was put forward as an effective measure by Matsubayashi *et al* in
2013^[@R35]^ but this benefit was minimised by Ichikawa *et al* the
following year.^[@R36]^ Another suggested measure is reducing the
average speed of trains entering the station at peak times.^[@R29]^ In
Vienna, changing the way in which media reported suicides on the
underground by making it less dramatic was followed by a reduction in
suicide.^[@R7]^

## Strengths and limitations {#S8}

This is the most recent study looking at patterns of suicide on the
London Underground since 1994. It is also the first study looking at
ethnicity within incidents of death by suicide on the Underground, and
the findings raise new and important dimensions when seeking to
introduce preventive measures.

There were several limitations to the study: no data were available for
deaths by suicide between 2000 and 2003 owing to changes in coding, and
death by suicide could not be confirmed in 47 cases owing to the
recording of an open verdict or the outcome of the inquest not being
available. Because of the relatively rare occurrence of deaths by
suicide on the London Underground the numbers used in the study were
small, leading to possible sample size bias. The limited breadth of
information collected by the British Transport Police meant that certain
risk factors (e.g. use of drugs/alcohol or whether individuals were
psychiatric in-patients at the time of the event) could not be
adequately explored in our sample. The study is further limited by the
absence of data beyond 2010.

## Conclusions {#S9}

Suicide on the London Underground railway system continues to be an
important public health issue. The widening gap between the number of
recorded suicide attempts and deaths by suicide is encouraging and may
reflect the introduction of preventive measures. Use of PSDs has been
proven to be effective for both suicidal acts and accidental 'person
under train' incidents and needs to be considered when planning railway
renovation or construction projects. The overrepresentation of people of
White Northern European ethnicity among those who attempted suicide
requires further exploration, as does the proportion of non-residents
involved in suicide attempts on the London Underground across the year
to better target preventive interventions. Finally, the collection of
data on alcohol and drug use, as well as a more detailed psychiatric
history, would help to inform further research and implementation of
preventive measures for suicidal acts on the London Underground.

We thank Dr Neel Halder for his invaluable guidance and support as a
mentor under the *BJPsych Bulletin* author mentoring scheme.

[^1]: **Susanna Martin**, Specialty Trainee in Forensic Psychiatry,
    Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust. **Muffazal Rawala**, Consultant Liaison
    Psychiatrist, Luton Mental Health and Wellbeing Service, East London
    NHS Foundation Trust.
