========================================================================
Patient safety and quality of care in mental health: a world of its own?
========================================================================



Danielle D'Lima
Mike J. Crawford
Ara Darzi
Stephanie ArcherCorrespondence to Danielle D'Lima (d.d'lima@ucl.ac.uk)
 [1]_
:Date: 2017-10

:Abstract:
   Quality and safety in healthcare, as an academic discipline, has made
   significant progress over recent decades, and there is now an active
   and established community of researchers and practitioners. However,
   work has predominantly focused on physical health, despite broader
   controversy regarding the attention paid to, and significance
   attributed to, mental health. Work from both communities is required
   in order to ensure that quality and safety is actively embedded
   within mental health research and practice and that the academic
   discipline of quality and safety accurately represents the scientific
   knowledge that has been accumulated within the mental health
   community.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

With repeated examples of failure across the healthcare
system,\ :sup:`1,2` there has long been a need to understand how we can
better uphold and improve on the quality and safety of care that is
being provided to our patients. There is a gap between the policy and
guidelines generated from research evidence and the practice of medical,
nursing and allied health professionals. This gap is at risk of
increasing, owing to an under-appreciation of heterogeneity in local
context\ :sup:`3–5` and the ever-growing demands on the healthcare
system, with fewer resources provided to manage them. As a result,
quality and safety in healthcare, a discipline which aims to integrate
scientific understanding with applied practice, has made significant
progress over recent decades and is now regarded as an active and
established community of researchers and practitioners alongside the
fields of improvement and implementation science.\ :sup:`6–8`

Such growth has been reflected in the establishment of
discipline-specific journals. For example, the BMJ launched *BMJ Quality
and Safety* in 1992, and in 2006 a journal devoted purely to
implementation science was introduced – *Implementation Science.* The
evolution of the discipline has also included the development and
refinement of a number of methodological tools, such as Plan, Do, Study,
Act (PDSA) cycles and Driver Diagrams, which draw on the manufacturing
industry to support individuals in applying continuous quality
improvement (CQI) principles in healthcare practice.\ :sup:`9`

Despite the growing international interest in quality and safety in
healthcare, its application to a mental health context has not been
explored.\ :sup:`10` It cannot be assumed that findings based on
physical health in acute care hospitals can be automatically applied to
mental health. This is because of the different challenges presented by
patients and settings in this specialised area of care, including a
greater emphasis on community-based care, greater use of Mental Health
Act legislation and increased risk of self-harm.\ :sup:`10` Mental
health in general has been viewed as a neglected area and one in which
patients may be less likely to have a voice when it comes to their care
and safety.\ :sup:`11` It has also been suggested that the stigma
surrounding mental health issues has the potential in itself to
contribute to staff neglecting patient safety and quality of
care.\ :sup:`10` In order to deliver high-quality care to patients, it
is essential that a firmer understanding of patient safety and quality
of care in mental health is not only developed, but also disseminated
appropriately to ensure that it has the greatest impact.

Key literature searches of high-profile quality and safety journals
reveal that there is a lack of published literature under the umbrella
term of mental health. For example, a high-level search conducted in
*BMJ Quality and Safety* in July 2016 based on the search term ‘mental
health’ appearing in the title or abstract returns just 56 hits across
all archives. When restricted to ‘mental health’ appearing in the title
only (and therefore indicating that it is the primary focus of the
article), the search returns just 17 results. This is disappointing,
especially when compared with similar searches on key search terms for
other medical specialties, for example paediatrics (94 hits for title
and abstract) and surgery (237 hits for title and abstract). These
findings are also reflected in other notable quality and safety journals
such as *Implementation Science* (30 hits for ‘mental health’ in a
title-only search) and the *International Journal for Quality in Health
Care* (15 hits for ‘mental health’ in a title-only search). We recognise
that there are inherent challenges in these comparisons, including
selection of terminology and disciplines; however, these searches are
intended to be illustrative rather than exhaustive.

Even the small number of studies that are returned from these searches
do not consistently focus on mental health as the primary setting of
interest. Instead, mental health tends to form one component of a
system-level study often associated with high-level quality improvement
and quality of care structures in the healthcare system.\ :sup:`12–14`
In other instances, mental health is positioned as just one example or
context alongside physical health settings and is therefore not the sole
focus of the article or its key messages.\ :sup:`15–17` Generally, the
work being published in these quality and safety journals does not focus
on aspects of safe care that may be of specific importance to a mental
health setting or explore how established quality and safety metrics
apply and translate to this unique context. However, searches do
identify a systematic review on medication errors in mental
health\ :sup:`18` and some work around continuity of care and
communication between in-patient and out-patient mental health settings,
for example.\ :sup:`19`

Contrary to these findings, searches run across the broader medical and
social science literature reveal that much has been published on the
topic of quality and safety in mental health in other, more
specialty-specific areas (e.g. psychiatric nursing journals). For
example, academic teams in mental health led by Louis Appleby, Len
Bowers and Joy Duxbury contributed a significant amount of work.
Therefore, it seems that the issue is not necessarily a lack of work on
quality and safety within a mental health context, but instead a lack of
its representation as part of the stand-alone quality and safety
discipline.

The specialty-specific literature succeeds at providing a significant
amount of research into patient safety incidents that are more precisely
related to a mental health setting. These include violence and
aggression, patient victimisation, suicide and self-harm, seclusion and
restraint, and absconding and missing patients.\ :sup:`10` Other key
areas that apply more broadly across all settings are falls and other
patient accidents, adverse medication events and adverse diagnostic
events such as misdiagnosis. This literature is not without its faults,
however, as there is a tendency for it to focus on areas of safety that
may be of greatest concern to the public rather than areas of quality
that may contribute most to patient experience and clinical outcome
effectiveness. It may also not be fully reflective of the vast
developments that have been made in understanding quality and safety in
healthcare more broadly.

There is a clear disparity between the two bodies of literature (i.e.
work around mental health within the established quality and safety
discipline and work around quality and safety of care within the broader
and less defined mental health discipline). In recent years there has
been a call for ‘parity of esteem’ between physical and mental health
(i.e. recognition of mental health as an equally important discipline
within medicine).\ :sup:`20,21` The data that we have presented
certainly suggest that there is no parity in the attention being paid to
quality and safety, and this is an area that requires attention. The
structure of the National Health Service (NHS) is guilty of fostering
this separation, to some extent, through commissioning different
organisations to provide physical and mental healthcare.\ :sup:`22`
However, Academic Health Science Networks are aiming to help break down
historical barriers between acute care and mental health trusts.

Furthermore, the two bodies of literature appear to exist in silos and
do not explicitly refer to or build on one another as a matter of
course. Therefore, the core integration of the quality and safety
discipline with the mental health setting is currently lacking and not
fully reflective of the scientific understanding that has been
incrementally built up via the specialty-specific journals. The
opportunity has also been missed for the two bodies of work to
effectively communicate, learn from each other's limitations and
strengthen one another. For example, a more thorough integration could
ensure that quality and safety is explored across the board within the
mental health setting in a way that is appropriately sensitive to the
local context without being restrictive. This approach is likely to have
the greatest direct benefit to mental health patients when such research
translates into clinical practice.

It is important to discuss and reflect on the potential reasons for this
disparity in order to understand how it might be rectified in the
future. It is possible that academics focusing specifically on quality
and safety as a research area (i.e. not wedded to any particular
specialty) are not conducting a sufficient amount of research in a
mental health context. Assuming that academics of this type are more
likely to submit to quality and safety rather than specialty-specific
journals, it is possible that the issue centres on a lack of work being
completed in these settings by patient safety and quality improvement
researchers.

A recent independent report into the quality of in-patient mental health
services highlighted the need for further training and use of quality
improvement in mental health services.\ :sup:`23` The Royal College of
Psychiatrists also recognise this issue and have set up a working group
to steer progress. The Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) is
working with a number of mental health trusts in the UK to build
capacity and capability to implement quality improvement programming at
scale. It is important to recognise the challenges in applying
improvement science in different healthcare delivery models, targeting
different health conditions that follow very different courses. For
example, the challenge of adapting quality improvement methodology for
long-term conditions (which is often the case in a mental health
setting) as opposed to interventional healthcare where it is simpler to
measure impact and change pre- and post-implementation.

We must also consider what drives authors to publish in
specialty-specific rather than quality and safety journals. It may be
the case that mental health professionals and academics are more
motivated to do so. For example, they may have concerns about ensuring
that their work has the greatest impact or be unaware of the alternative
journals that are appropriate. If this is the case, then raising
awareness across the scientific community will be vital for ensuring
that authors submit their work to the most suitable outlet in terms of
target audience and opportunities for translation. On a separate note,
it is possible that work is already being submitted to quality and
safety journals but is not being accepted. There may be factors around
quality of work and acceptance processes that need to be considered.
This could be due to differences in academic approach and levels of
rigour across the disciplines.

These dilemmas have a number of potential implications for both research
and practice, and recommendations for the future are required in order
to increase and support integration between the two bodies of work. Both
the quality and safety and mental health disciplines should be concerned
by the clear disparities between their bodies of work. Existing in silos
automatically forms a barrier to effective quality improvement and safer
patient care. Mental health should form a core part of the quality and
safety agenda and influence the ways in which it grows and develops as a
discipline over time. The disparity may also prevent the academic
expansion of the discipline as a science owing to a lack of incremental
growth that is fully reflective of all relevant research on this complex
topic area. It is also likely that the mental health community will miss
out on full access to the knowledge that has been accumulated within the
quality and safety discipline, which will therefore prevent optimal
patient care.

Quality and safety journals should explicitly invite submissions from
the mental health community in order to demonstrate their openness to
work based in this setting. Simultaneously, mental health professionals
and academics should be made aware of the different disciplines with
which they could be integrating their work, and should not be penalised
for publishing their work in quality and safety rather than
specialty-specific journals. The long-term goal should be to normalise
that quality and safety journals are a viable option for mental health
professionals' academic work. This would involve incorporating and
building on the present understanding of quality and safety that has
already been developed more broadly, rather than scoping out a separate
area of quality and safety that applies solely to the mental health
setting. Patient safety and quality of care in mental health should not
be existing in a world of its own but instead be a fully integrated
component of the broader scientific discipline. It is the responsibility
of members of both communities to ensure that this happens.

.. [1]
   **Danielle D'Lima**, Research Associate, Department of Applied Health
   Research, University College London; **Mike J. Crawford**, Professor,
   Centre for Mental Health, **Ara Darzi**, Professor, Department of
   Surgery and Cancer, and **Stephanie Archer**, Research Fellow,
   Patient Safety Translational Research Centre, Imperial College
   London.
