==================================================
Newspaper depictions of mental and physical health
==================================================

Marian Chen
Stephen LawrieCorrespondence to Stephen Lawrie (s.lawrie@ed.ac.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** Media portrayals of mental illness have long been
   recognised as being misleading and stigmatising. Following the
   campaigns of several advocacy groups to address this issue, we aimed
   to evaluate the impact on mental health reporting over time. We
   repeated a survey we did 15 years ago using the same methods. Nine UK
   daily newspapers were surveyed over a 4-week period and coded with a
   schema to analyse the reporting of mental health compared with
   physical health.

   **Results** In total, 963 articles – 200 on mental health and 763 on
   physical health – were identified. Over half of the articles on
   mental health were negative in tone: 18.5% indicated an association
   with violence compared with 0.3% of articles on physical health.
   However, there were more quotes from patients with mental disorders
   than physical disorders (22.5% *v.* 19.7%) and an equal mention of
   treatment and rehabilitation.

   **Clinical implications** Mental health in print media remains
   tainted by themes of violence, however some improvement in reporting
   in recent years is evident, in particular by providing a voice for
   people with mental illness.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Newspapers and other forms of mass media are influential in transmitting
key information and ideas, including social
commentary.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` Consequently, their role in
reporting on mental illness is seen as one of the main conduits through
which the public, especially those without personal exposure to mental
illness, learn and come into contact with issues surrounding mental
health.\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.d)`

For many years it has been recognised that media reporting of mental
illness is heavily biased in representing a misleading link between
mental illness and violence, with preferential reporting for
sensationalist stories depicting individuals with mental disorders as
being aggressive, dangerous and
unpredictable.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.d)–(n.d.e)` Such widespread negative
portrayals have reinforced the continued stigmatisation and lack of
acceptance among those with psychiatric diagnoses, possibly increasing
social distance and contributing to morbidity and distress. Of
particular concern is the potential ‘internalisation’ of prejudices
portrayed by the media, such that people with mental illnesses also
begin to take on the view that they are dangerous and
unstable.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` Furthermore, there is a corresponding lack of
voice for people of mental illness,\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.f)` with few
personal accounts of their burden of disease and similarly little
representation from qualified healthcare
professionals.\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.h)` All of this contributes to
creating a stereotyped, isolated group without social status and
acceptance.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`

In a similar vein, there is a disappointing lack of coverage of stories
on recovery and rehabilitation following mental
illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.g)` This potentially leads both the public
and policy makers to erroneously believe that recovery is rare. We
highlighted this in a newspaper survey 15 years ago in which we found
that the reporting of mental illness and people with mental illness
tended to be negative, whereas that of physical illness was much more
likely to be positive in tone.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` This may even influence
health resource allocations to conditions that have a higher perceived
chance of cure.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

As far back as the 1960s, Nunally noted that mental health
representations in media were few and distorted, limited to ‘neurotic
behaviour’ in evening dramas where ‘the afflicted person often enters
the scene staring glassy-eyed, with his mouth widely agape, mumbling
incoherent phrases or laughing uncontrollably’.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Steadman
& Cocozza\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` also showed that media depictions are often
skewed towards extremes. Their findings on public perception of the
‘criminally insane’ (mentally disordered offenders) are salient, with
61% of the public surveyed responding that they feared former mentally
disordered offenders ‘a lot’.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` However, as the authors
noted, the mentally disordered offenders named by the public following
intensive coverage tend not to have any legal claim to be ‘criminally
insane’, and are merely assumed to be as such by the media.

Although those with mental illness are reportedly 2–6 times more likely
to commit violence than matched controls,\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.n)` the
National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide by People with
Mental Illness\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` found that only 5% of the homicides
carried out in the general population between 2001 and 2011 were by
those with an abnormal mental state (*n* = 52). However, an additional
14% had been in contact with mental health services in the preceding 12
months. Therefore, the vast majority of perpetrators of homicide do not
have a mental illness at the time of the offence (*n* = 951). Contrast
this with the statistics for suicide in the same report: 30% of all
completed suicides in the 10-year period analysed were by patients
already known to mental health services (*n* = 2678). The figures
identified are 14 times higher than for homicide. From this, it is
reasonable to infer that an individual with a mental health disorder is
far more likely to self-harm than harm others. This important point is
also often missing from media reports seeking to capitalise on the
sensationalist angle and, by doing so, dehumanise the patient to the
extent that they are defined by their illness. Similarly, it is clear
that people with mental illness are much more likely to be ‘victims’ of
crime than perpetrators.\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.q)` This discrepancy in
public perception between perpetrator and victim among those with mental
illness has also been highlighted in other
studies,\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.s)` acknowledging the need to shift
attention away from the perceived threat to the public, to providing
support and protection for the truly vulnerable. In this regard, the
media has been counterproductive in reinforcing misleading stereotypes
about public safety while simultaneously underreporting key statistics
on mental health.

Although viral campaigns such as Rethink Mental Illness’ ‘Find
Mike’\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` have been highly successful in bringing mental
illness to some public attention, it is difficult to assess their
impact. Based on our previous survey,\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` we hypothesised
that: mental health reporting would still be consistently more negative
in tone compared with reporting of physical health issues, and patients
would be consistently underrepresented in media depictions compared with
physical health reports. Additionally, regarding the link with violence
and criminality, we further hypothesised that the association between
mental illness and violence would continue to pervade mental health
reporting.

.. _S1:

Method
======

The method followed that of Lawrie.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` Nine weekday UK
daily newspapers (Scottish editions) were surveyed over a period of 4
weeks between 4 March and 4 April 2014. The papers chosen represent a
selection of popular broadsheet (*The Times, The Telegraph, The
Independent, The Guardian, The Scotsman, The Herald*) and tabloid
(*Daily Mail, The Sun, Daily Record*) publications in the UK, with a
reported range in circulation of between 64 279 (*The Independent*) and
2 048 977 (*The Sun*) in February 2014\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` Only national
newspapers were included in this analysis, as they have the widest
distribution.

Print copies of the newspapers were obtained from the Reference Library
of Edinburgh on the day of publication and manually screened for
headlines relating to mental health or psychiatry and general health
issues. Two tabloids, *The Sun* and *Daily Record*, were purchased each
day, as they were not subscribed to by library services, yet have the
highest circulation figures in the UK.

Articles relating to mental health and physical health were identified
initially through headline screening. The main body of text was then
read and coded as positive, negative or neutral, if the article was
mainly stating facts or had mixed elements. As such, it is possible to
have a disparity between tone of headline and article. Each article was
then analysed and coded to a schema with eight variables, which noted
key themes (`Table 1 <#T1>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Coding schema for newspaper articles

   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   | Variable          | Description                                     |
   +===================+=================================================+
   | Quote from        | Direct or paraphrased quote from a patient      |
   | patient, relative | with the illness in question, relative or       |
   | or charity        | advocacy organisation                           |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   |                   |                                                 |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   | Quote from        | Quote from a healthcare professional in         |
   | professional      | charge of the patient's care or spokesperson    |
   |                   | for government organisations, etc.              |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   |                   |                                                 |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   | Association with  | Any article where a person portrayed as         |
   | violence          | having a mental illness or under the            |
   |                   | influence of drugs/alcohol engages in           |
   |                   | criminal or dangerous activity where others     |
   |                   | are put at risk or harmed. Suicide or self-harm |
   |                   | is not included in this category                |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   |                   |                                                 |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   | Mention of        | Either specific (e.g. Prozac), general          |
   | treatment/        | (anti-depressants,                              |
   | rehabilitation    | cognitive–behavioural therapy),                 |
   |                   | alternative (mindfulness, yoga) or relating     |
   |                   | to the Mental Health Act 1983 where             |
   |                   | treatment is noted under a compulsory           |
   |                   | treatment order                                 |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   |                   |                                                 |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   | Substance misuse  | Articles relating to addiction, overdose or     |
   |                   | psychiatric effects of substance misuse were    |
   |                   | classified as relating to mental health.        |
   |                   | Physical effects of drug usage, including       |
   |                   | side-effects, were classified under physical    |
   |                   | health                                          |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   |                   |                                                 |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   | System failure/   | Any article where substandard care is           |
   | negligence        | delivered by a single person or on an           |
   |                   | organisational level, resulting in adverse      |
   |                   | outcomes. Shortcomings range from IT            |
   |                   | failures and changes in social policy to        |
   |                   | deliberate mistreatment                         |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   |                   |                                                 |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   | Innovations       | Articles where a new diagnostic method,         |
   | in research       | treatment or better understanding of a          |
   |                   | named disease is reached                        |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   |                   |                                                 |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
   | Medical           | Where the primary purpose of the article        |
   | advocacy/raising  | is to transmit information about a particular   |
   | awareness         | disease profile or set of symptoms or           |
   |                   | charity efforts. For example Autism             |
   |                   | Awareness Week, United Nations World            |
   |                   | Down Syndrome Day, ‘Check ’Em Tuesday’          |
   |                   | – a campaign run by *The Sun* to increase       |
   |                   | uptake of self-screening for breast cancer      |
   +-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+

.. _S2:

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
--------------------------------

The sports and business sections were surveyed, however property and
automobile inserts were excluded due to likely lack of relevance.
Primary newspaper articles, editorials and opinion pieces were included
in the data collection. Advertisements, letters to the editor, film and
entertainment reviews and obituaries were omitted. Articles with only a
passing or chance reference to mental or physical health were also
omitted.

All articles concerning mental disorders recognised by the
DSM-5,\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` psychiatry or psychiatrists were included, as
well as generic, undefined mental conditions with the exception of
paedophilia and the paraphilias, as their classification as a mental
illness in DSM-5 is controversial. For physical health, all articles
relating to other general medical issues were collected. Articles
concerning the National Health Service (NHS) or other organisational
bodies were included only if there was a demonstrable mention of impact
on patient health and safety.

.. _S3:

Results
=======

In total, 963 health-related articles were collected during the 4-week
period. Of these, 763 (79.2%) concerned physical health, whereas 200
(20.8%) were about mental health. Although there was a slight
preponderance towards neutral pieces (38.0%) in the physical health
category, compared with positive (28.6%) and negative (32.9%) reporting,
the majority of articles concerning mental health were negative in tone
(50.5%), with only a small number of positive (22.0%) or neutral
articles (27.5%) (`Box 1 <#box1>`__). This striking disparity between
mental and physical health reporting underscores a key finding that
mental health reporting remains consistently more negative than physical
health, which is in line with the results from Lawrie's\ :sup:`(n.d.k)`
study over a decade previously (ratio of positive to negative articles
for physical health: 218/251; and for mental health: 44/101; odds ratio
(OR) 1.99, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.34–2.97). In addition, we
found a prominent and stigmatising association between mental illness
and violence as 18.5% of mental health articles featured violence as a
major theme, compared with 0.3% of physical health articles (OR = 86.37,
95% CI 20.60–362.1) (`Table 2 <#T2>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Comparison of variables between physical and mental health
      reporting

   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Variable             | Physical health, *n* | Mental health, *n*   |
   |                      | (%)                  | (%)                  |
   +======================+======================+======================+
   | Total number of      | 763                  | 200                  |
   | articles             |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Positive             | 218 (28.6)           |   44 (22.0)          |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Negative             | 251 (32.9)           | 101 (50.5)           |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Neutral              | 290 (38.0)           |   55 (27.5)          |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Quote from           | 150 (19.7)           |   45 (22.5)          |
   | patient/charity      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Quote from           | 285 (37.4)           |   58 (29.0)          |
   | professional         |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Association with     |     2 (0.3)          |   37 (18.5)          |
   | violence             |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Mention of           | 217 (28.4)           |   48 (24.0)          |
   | trea                 |                      |                      |
   | tment/rehabilitation |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Substance misuse     |   31 (4.1)           |   22 (11.0)          |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Medical              | 131 (17.2)           |   26 (13.0)          |
   | advocacy/raising     |                      |                      |
   | awareness            |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | System               | 118 (15.5)           |   25 (12.5)          |
   | failure/negligence   |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Innovations in       | 184 (24.1)           |   22 (11.0)          |
   | research             |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

Although previous studies have shown that patients with mental illness
are underrepresented in newspaper articles,\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.f)` we
found this not to be the case, with a higher proportion of quotes from
patients with mental illness, their relatives or mental health charities
(22.5%) compared with physical health (19.7%) (ratio of quotes in
physical health: 150/613; mental health: 45/155; OR=0.84, 95% CI
0.58–1.23). There appears to be comparatively fewer quotes from
professionals in relation to mental health however, highlighting the
need of the psychiatric profession to make a conscious effort to engage
with the media, and vice versa.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` Interestingly, whereas
previous studies have highlighted a lack of reporting on treatment and
rehabilitation for mental health,\ :sup:`(n.d.d)–(n.d.g)` here we found
the rates to be comparable to that of physical health articles (24.0%
*v.* 28.4% respectively) and previous reports.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

**Box 1** Examples of positive, negative and neutral headlines for
mental and physical health

.. _S4:

Physical health
---------------

.. _S5:

Positive
~~~~~~~~

‘US Aids baby may be cured’

‘Cholesterol drugs may slow MS, study shows’

.. _S6:

Negative
~~~~~~~~

‘Three-year old died after hospital delay’

‘ “Sickness culture” claim as 1 in 3 has long-term illness’

.. _S7:

Neutral
~~~~~~~

‘Statins have no side-effects, study finds’

‘Smoking link to breast cancer in older women’

.. _S8:

Mental health
-------------

.. _S9:

Positive
~~~~~~~~

‘Depression and self-harming are taboo … that's why I'm determined to
speak out’

‘Ketamine trial provides fresh hope for long-term depressed’

.. _S10:

Negative
~~~~~~~~

‘Mentally ill man in bus knife attack’

‘School accused of excluding girl with anorexia to avoid copycats’

.. _S11:

Neutral
~~~~~~~

‘Give dementia patients trial drugs en masse’

‘Depression must be seen as a societal disorder’

The disorders most commonly associated with violence were personality
disorders as well as undefined ‘mental illnesses’ and post-traumatic
stress disorder, which make up 13.5% of all articles pertaining to
mental health. Surprisingly, sensationalist stories about schizophrenia
were minimal and comparable to reporting on other mental disorders,
whereas dementia and eating disorders were least likely to be reported
as associated with violence (`Table 3 <#T3>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      A breakdown of newspaper articles according to diagnosis and
      association with violence

   ======================= ========= =================
   Diagnosis               Articles  Association with
                           *n* (%)   violence, *n* (%)
   ======================= ========= =================
   Suicide                 31 (15.5)   0
   \                                 
   Mood disorder           26 (13)     2 (1.0)
   \                                 
   Dementia                32 (16)     0
   \                                 
   Eating disorder         12 (6)      0
   \                                 
   Developmental disorder  17 (8.5)    3 (1.5)
   \                                 
   Substance misuse        13 (6.5)    2 (1.0)
   \                                 
   Personality disorder    11 (5.5)  14 (7.0)
   \                                 
   Schizophrenia/psychosis 10 (5)      3 (1.5)
   \                                 
   Other\ `a <#TFN1>`__    49 (24.5) 13 (6.5)
   ======================= ========= =================

   Includes multiple disorders, undefined and post-traumatic stress
   disorder.

Based on the previous data that show people with mental illnesses are
more likely to be victims of crime rather than perpetrators, we were
interested to see whether this correlated with media reports. We found
that people with mental illness are twice as likely to be portrayed as a
perpetrator (34/200) compared with a victim (17/200), in direct contrast
to the available data.\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.r),(n.d.s),(n.d.x)`

Given that 18.5% of articles on mental health concern violent acts and
are seen as a threat to the public, we asked what made up the rest of
the negative reporting. On further analysis, it appears that a
significant proportion of the negative articles pertain to the
stigmatisation and abuse of people with mental health within society, as
well as lack of funding and adequate care provision. Examples include
headlines such as: ‘The great mental health betrayal’ (*The
Independent*, 13 March 2014), an article about the unlawful detaining of
people with mental health illnesses in care homes and hospitals, and
‘Mental health and race – the blight of dual discrimination’ (*The
Guardian*, 26 March 2014), which highlights the additional burden of
being an ethnic minority with mental illness. The remainder of the
negative articles are reports on suicide (15.5%).

Overall, there was no significant difference between mental health
reporting in broadsheets compared with tabloids.

.. _S12:

Discussion
==========

We found that mental health reporting makes up a fifth of all articles
concerning health in a selection of UK print media over the course of a
month. This is lower than found in a similar study by Pieters *et
al*\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` in Belgium but comparable to the figures obtained by
Lawrie in the UK\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` over a decade ago, reflecting little
change in the frequency of reporting on mental health. Half of all
articles on mental health are negative in tone, which is a much greater
proportion than for physical health, but nonetheless represents a small
reduction compared with Lawrie's study. On the other hand, the
association with violence remains prominent, with 18.5% of articles
carrying a theme of danger or criminality.

In the intervening 15 years, several campaigns by mental health
charities both in the UK and abroad have sought to lessen the stigma
attached to mental illness and encourage open dialogue about mental
health. Media coverage is important to the success of such campaigns in
influencing public opinion and increasing exposure. In light of this, we
asked whether there is any evidence that media reporting on mental
illness is improving (see below). Although previous studies have
commented on the lack of voice for people with mental illness, we have
found this not to be the case with a higher proportion of quotes from
patients with mental illnesses compared with physical health. Although
there are fewer representations of healthcare professionals in
psychiatry, this may reflect reluctance among the profession as a whole
to engage with the media, as psychiatrists too are affected by
stigma.\ :sup:`(n.d.z),(n.d.aa)`

.. _S13:

Mental illness and violence
---------------------------

The link between mental illness and violence is unfortunately still
pervasively reported – being part of about a fifth of all articles on
mental health. The figure obtained in this study (18.5%) is lower than
previous reports of association with violence.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` However,
other studies have utilised more restricted search criteria, only using
specific keywords such as ‘schizo’, ‘mental’, ‘deranged’ and ‘psycho’,
which does not encompass the whole spectrum of mental
illnesses.\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.g),(n.d.ab),(n.d.ac)` As most studies
also used a computerised database programme (such as the LexisNexis) to
generate articles, limiting the search criteria to only the above
keywords will bias the results to find articles on schizophrenia or
those that include derogatory terms such as ‘psycho’ or ‘deranged’,
which are inherently stigmatic and more likely to be associated with
violence.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)` In contrast, mental illnesses not usually
considered violent, such as eating and mood disorders, would be excluded
from the analysis.

In our study we found that schizophrenia and psychotic disorders make up
a minority (5%) of reporting on mental illness and only 1.5% of these
articles featured violence. Although there is little contention that
mental disorders are disproportionately associated with violence in the
media, one possible explanation for the strength of the association
between the two is that it is an artefact created by selective searching
among newspaper databases. We suggest the effect would be diluted if all
articles on psychiatry, including conditions such as mood and anxiety
disorders, were incorporated in the analysis.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad),(n.d.ae)`

In this study, we also found that people with mental disorders are twice
as likely to be portrayed as a perpetrator of crime compared with a
victim. This is another illustration of how the media can be misleading
on key facts. Education for journalists and guidance on the reporting of
mental health issues is central to bringing about a change in reporting
trends. However, this may be easier said than done. One study attempted
to correct journalists' erroneous views about mental illness with a
short presentation on schizophrenia prior to a press conference
regarding a high-profile assault carried out by a man with a serious
mental illness. Although they found that journalists had a good recall
for the details several weeks later, the presentation did not ultimately
affect the writing of the article.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` This suggests that
collaborations with the media will have a greater chance of success and
change in reporting if they are mutually beneficial and desired. One
example of this is UK mental health charity, Mind, which has set up a
series of media awards for responsible and ethical reporting of mental
health issues
(`www.mind.org.uk/news-campaigns/mind-media-awards <www.mind.org.uk/news-campaigns/mind-media-awards>`__),
as well as reporting guidelines for different
conditions.\ :sup:`(n.d.ag),(n.d.ah)`

.. _S14:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

The main strength of the study is that all papers were hand-searched
according to the criteria set out in the Method. This abolishes the need
to search based on keywords, potentially increasing the yield of
articles. Similarly, the scope and definition of ‘mental illness’ is
wider than in previous studies, allowing for a greater overview of the
subject in media. In the current study, the use of one investigator to
locate and rate the articles, is both a potential advantage – in
reducing interrater variability – but also a disadvantage in that no
interrater reliability could be established (although we did discuss and
resolve any uncertainties between the authors). The main limitation is
that the coding schema used is a relatively blunt tool and cannot convey
the complexity or depth of a newspaper story. Second, the categorisation
of articles into mental and physical health does not allow for overlap
in coverage, although that only occurred in a small minority of
articles. Furthermore, the short time frame of the study means it can
only provide a snapshot of mental health reporting in the UK. Last,
there were two mental health stories that garnered a considerable amount
of media attention in this time period and subsequently have the ability
to bias the data. One was the suicide of a famous fashion designer and
another, the death of a woman who had murdered her three children and
was subsequently labelled as having a personality disorder. Both stories
were extensively reported on over multiple days. However, they were
included in the analysis as this study was designed to encompass all the
news on mental health over 4 consecutive weeks, rather than the sampling
of random time points, and different reports had different foci as new
information about the cases came to light.

.. _S15:

Conclusions
-----------

Despite several prominent government-led and charity campaigns, mental
illness and individuals with mental illness continue to experience
stigmatisation and stereotyping. Although it is encouraging that people
with mental disorders are being increasingly represented in print media,
and there appears to be an overall increase in non-stigmatising
articles,\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)` much remains to be done to address the
inaccurate and stigmatising association with violence, and raise the
profile of mental illness as a whole.

The particular reasons for the ongoing negative headlines about mental
illness, and what could or should be done about them, are beyond the
scope of this study. Our results do however indicate that that there is
a clear need for more reporting about mental health in general, and for
more accurate reporting about violence and for more accounts of
innovative research developments in particular. We therefore suggest
that there is much to be gained from further ongoing engagement between
patients and psychiatrists and the media, with an emphasis on realistic
depictions of the lives patients lead and of recent research advances.

Many thanks to the staff at the Reference Library of Edinburgh for
meticulously collating the newspapers used each day.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R29

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R31

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R32

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R33

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R34

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R35

      n.d.ai.

.. [1]
   **Marian Chen** is a Foundation Year doctor at the Royal Infirmary of
   Edinburgh. **Stephen Lawrie** is a Professor of Psychiatry in the
   Division of Psychiatry, University of Edinburgh.
