============================================================================================
Assessing the second-hand effects of a new no-smoking policy in an acute mental health trust
============================================================================================



Benjamin Ian Perry
Katherine Meehan
Ashok Kumar Jainer
:Correspondence: Benjamin Ian Perry
(benjamin.perry@covwarkpt.nhs.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To examine whether a new no-smoking policy in an
   in-patient mental health setting had any effects outside of smoking
   cessation. Our hypothesis stated that a forced smoking ban for
   in-patients may result in an increased susceptibility for clinical
   incidents, aggression and lower admission rates. All patients
   admitted to adult in-patient mental health services in Coventry and
   Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust were included in the analysis.
   Data 6 months post-implementation of the smoking policy (1 July 2015
   to 1 January 2016) were compared with the same period 1 year prior (1
   July 2014 to 1 January 2015). Patient demographics, admission rates,
   ward occupancy, average lengths of stay, numbers of reported
   incidents and use of the Mental Health Act 1983 (MHA) were compared.

   **Results** We analysed 4223 admissions. We found a significantly
   increased number of admissions under the MHA (*P* = 0.007), a
   significantly greater number of reported smoking-related incidents
   (*P* < 0.001) and aggression-related incidents in the psychiatric
   intensive care unit (*P* < 0.001). However, we found no significant
   difference in capacity of in-patient wards (*P* = 0.39), admission
   length (*P* = 0.34) or total aggression-related incidents (*P* =
   0.86).

   **Clinical implications** Although further comparisons over longer
   time periods are necessary, our results suggest that enforced smoking
   cessation on acutely unwell psychiatric patients admitted to the most
   restricted environments may have some negative effects. Nicotine
   replacement therapy should be offered to all patients to minimise the
   risk of clinical incident.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Smoking rates among those with a mental illness are 70% higher than in
the general population. :sup:`1` In fact, although the prevalence of
smoking in the general population has decreased, this has not occurred
for those with a mental illness. :sup:`2` In particular, the highest
smoking rates are found in those acutely unwell with a psychiatric
illness, in in-patient units. :sup:`3–6`

Multiple explanations for such high smoking rates within the mental
health sector have been put forward, including symptom control and
amelioration, :sup:`7` boredom or loneliness, :sup:`8,9` an increased
propensity to experience more severe nicotine withdrawal symptoms than
the general population, :sup:`10,11` for relaxation in a stressful
environment, :sup:`9,12` a common genetic vulnerability :sup:`5` or that
people with a mental illness are less susceptible to anti-smoking
messages. :sup:`13`

As a result of relatively higher smoking rates, people with a mental
illness also have higher mortality rates than the general population.
Tobacco use contributes significantly to causes of ill health and
mortality in those with mental health disorders. :sup:`11` Individuals
at particular risk are patients with schizophrenia, who have a life
expectancy 20% shorter than the general population. :sup:`14,15` Tobacco
use can also affect the effectiveness of some psychiatric medication,
necessitating increased dosages and therefore purporting a higher chance
of side-effects. :sup:`16`

The UK government implemented its smoke-free policy in July 2007, which
extended to all ‘substantially enclosed’ public and work places. This
included hospitals, with the aim of reducing the impact of second-hand
smoke on patients and staff :sup:`17` This was extended to all types of
in-patient units from 2008.

Guidance from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE), published in 2013, aims to support smoking cessation, temporary
abstinence from smoking and smoke-free policies in all secondary care
settings. :sup:`18` In this guidance, ‘secondary care’ refers to all
publicly funded secondary and tertiary care facilities, including
buildings, grounds and vehicles. It covers in-patient, residential and
long-term care for severe mental illness in hospitals, psychiatric
settings, specialist and secure units.

Prior to the introduction of the legislation, a relatively large survey
of National Health Service (NHS) staff found that a third of psychiatric
staff disagreed with smoke-free legislation compared with only one in
ten of general staff. :sup:`19` A survey of mental health units in
England in January 2007 found that the vast majority (91%) believed
mental health premises faced particular challenges due to the high
smoking prevalence among patients, associated safety risks, and
potential interactions with antipsychotic medication. :sup:`20` However,
despite the challenges, the smoke-free policy has been rated positive
overall. Cited advantages include a reduced exposure of patients and
staff to second-hand smoke, an enhancement and support in patients'
motivation to stop smoking, improved sleeping patterns among patients,
and the conversion of former smoking rooms into new recreational spaces.
:sup:`20`

Since the development of non-smoking policies within the NHS, debate has
evolved around any potential infringement this might have on a patient's
human rights. A patient at one of Scotland's high-security forensic
hospitals recently won a court ruling that a blanket ban on smoking
breached his human rights. :sup:`21` According to Article 8 of the Human
Rights Act 1998, everyone has the right to respect for his private life
and his home. With regard to mental health units, lengthy hospital
admissions may qualify as breach of one's private and home life.

The introduction of a non-smoking policy to mental health services
remains a relatively novel practice. We are yet to fully appreciate its
impact on in-patient services. Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS
Trust in the UK introduced a no-smoking policy within its mental health
units on 1 July 2015. The Trust is one of the first to implement this
policy following the growing evidence of high smoking rates and adverse
health implications within the mental health population. Although the
benefits of smoking cessation are widely acknowledged, there exists an
assumption that enforcing smoking cessation on unwilling patients
results in increased stress levels and therefore higher rates of
aggression-related incidents.

Voluntary admission to an in-patient mental health ward requires the
patient to agree to certain ward policies and procedures explained by
the clinician. Within the Trust it is standard procedure to explain the
non-smoking policy for both voluntary and involuntary admissions. The
impacts outside of smoking cessation caused by a forced no-smoking
policy has previously been analysed in a medium secure unit, finding no
significant difficulties and that the widely anticipated problems did
not materialise. :sup:`22` We have been unable to find another study
analysing similar changes in a typical psychiatric unit (mixed voluntary
and involuntary patients).

.. _S1:

Aims and objectives
===================

The aim of the study was to examine whether a newly implemented
no-smoking policy for patients in a typical in-patient mental health
setting had any effects outside of smoking cessation. The objectives
were first to compare admission rates and bed occupancy/capacity levels
at comparable time periods pre- and post-implementation of the new
no-smoking policy in a specified mental health trust. We also sought to
compare the numbers of reported incidents occurring on the wards at
comparable time periods pre- and post-implementation, focusing
particularly on aggression-related and smoking-related incidents. In
addition, we wanted to ascertain whether there was any significant
difference in the use of the Mental Health Act 1983 at comparable time
periods pre- and post-implementation of the new policy, and whether this
was related to the change in smoking policy.

.. _S2:

Method
======

.. _S3:

Study location and Trust smoking policy
---------------------------------------

Data were collected from all patients admitted to mental health beds in
Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust during the 12 months
before and 6 months after implementation of the smoking ban. The change
in policy was implemented on 1 July 2015, therefore data were collected
between 1 July 2014 and 1 January 2016. The Trust smoking ban states
that ‘all staff, patients and visitors are not able to smoke tobacco
products in Trust buildings or on Trust land.’ :sup:`23` The Trust
maintains a policy of offering nicotine replacement therapy to admitted
patients, comprising of either an e-cigarette or nicotine transdermal
patch.

Adult in-patient mental health services in the Trust comprise of three
acute psychiatric units: the Caludon Centre in Coventry (112 beds), St
Michael's Hospital in Warwick (41 beds) and the Pembleton Unit in
Nuneaton (12 beds), with adult rehabilitation services provided at
multiple sites (40 beds), for a catchment area of around 850 000 people.

.. _S4:

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
--------------------------------

All patients admitted to adult in-patient mental health services, both
acute and rehabilitation, in Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS
Trust were included in analysis. To account for seasonal variation, data
6 months post-implementation of the smoking policy (1 July 2015 to 1
January 2016) were compared with the same 6 months the year prior to
implementation of the smoking policy (1 July 2014 to 1 January 2015).
There were no specific inclusion criteria for diagnosis or length of
admission to help prevent selection bias. All sites within the Trust
were included in the analysis.

.. _S5:

Ethics
------

The study was approved by Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS
Trust as a service evaluation and as such did not need formal ethical
approval from an NHS research ethics committee. Data were collated in an
anonymised format from routine clinical records, by the authors.

.. _S6:

Data collection
---------------

First, basic demographic data such as mean age and gender were obtained.
Second, monthly admission rates and ward occupancy levels between the
dates were collected. Third, monthly total numbers of reported incidents
were obtained. All data were collected by data analysts within the
Trust.

.. _S7:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

For the count data (number of admissions under the MELA, total
incidents, aggression-related incidents, psychiatric intensive care unit
(PICU) incidents and smoking incidents), Poisson regression was used to
generate a significance value. Where data were provided as percentages
(i.e. capacity), we converted to mean *n* based on the total Trust
capacity (*n* = 205). The Shapiro-Wilk test for normality allowed a
decision as to whether to use parametric or non-parametric statistical
comparisons. All statistical comparisons were made using IBM SPSS
Statistics 24.

Since we were are measuring six outcomes in our analysis, a Bonferroni
correction was applied. The α-value (0.05) was therefore adjusted to a
significance value of *P* = 0.008.

.. _S8:

Results
=======

.. _S9:

Demographic data
----------------

`Table 1 <#T1>`__ outlines the demographic data comparisons during our
two selected periods of analysis. `Table 2 <#T2>`__ outlines the
findings from our other objectives.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Demographic differences

   ================ ================== ===================
   \                Pre-implementation Post-implementation
   ================ ================== ===================
   *n*              2124               2099
   \                                   
   Male, %          60.2               59.9
   \                                   
   Age, years: mean 29.56              29.39
   ================ ================== ===================

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Data outlining differences before/after implementation of
      no-smoking policy

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | Jul   | Aug   | Sep   | Oct   | Nov   | Dec   | Mean  |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
   | N     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | umber |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | of    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | admis |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | sions |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | under |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | M     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ental |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | H     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ealth |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | Act   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 1983, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     B | 143   | 144   | 145   | 171   | 169   | 173   | 157.5 |
   | efore |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 207   | 184   | 141   | 174   | 188   | 169   | 177.2 |
   | After |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | In-pa |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | tient |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ward  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | capa  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | city, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | %     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     B | 101   | 102   | 100   | 101   | 104   | 104   | 102.0 |
   | efore |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 104   | 101   | 102   | 104   |   98  | 101   | 101.7 |
   | After |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | In-pa |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | tient |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ward  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | capa  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | city, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | mean  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     B | 207.5 | 209.1 | 205   | 207.5 | 213.2 | 213.2 | 209.3 |
   | efore |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 217.2 | 207.5 | 209.1 | 213.2 | 200.9 | 207.5 | 209.2 |
   | After |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Mean  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | dur   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ation |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | of    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | stay, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | days  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     B |       |       |       |       |       |       | 42.4  |
   | efore |  38.1 |  38.8 |  40.6 |  44.3 |  55.7 |  36.6 |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | 45.4  |
   | After |  44.7 |  37.0 |  37.2 |  37.8 |  41.9 |  36.3 |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Total |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | agg   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ressi |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | on-re |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | lated |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | incid |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ents, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     B | 105   |   87  |   59  |   48  |   82  |   88  | 78.2  |
   | efore |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |   76  |   92  |   51  |   93  |   79  |   90  | 80.2  |
   | After |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Agg   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ressi |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | on-re |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | lated |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | inci  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | dents |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | on    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | PICU, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     B |   24  |   16  |   16  |   22  |   21  |   13  | 18.6  |
   | efore |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |   32  |   20  |   35  |   25  |   37  |   29  | 29.6  |
   | After |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Smoki |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ng-re |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | lated |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | incid |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ents, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     B |     9 |     7 |     9 |     7 |     2 |     5 | 6.5   |
   | efore |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |   38  |   19  |   17  |   12  |     9 |   26  | 20.2  |
   | After |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

   PICU, psychiatric intensive care unit.

.. _S10:

Number of patients admitted under the Mental Health Act 1983
------------------------------------------------------------

Poisson regression found that the number of admissions under the MHA
increased (1.13, 95% CI 1.03–1.23) at the boundary of our corrected
α-value, *P* = 0.007, in the same 6 months the year following the
introduction of the new smoking policy.

.. _S11:

In-patient ward capacity
------------------------

Our findings show that the bed capacity was at maximum or over-maximum
at each month studied. Using the data adjusted into mean capacity, the
Shapiro-Wilk test for normality (*P* = 0.306) allowed us to proceed with
an unpaired *t*-test, which showed no significant difference (*P* =
0.99).

.. _S12:

Average duration of in-patient admission in days
------------------------------------------------

The Shapiro-Wilk test for normality (*P* = 0.068) allowed us to proceed
with an unpaired *t*-test, which showed no significant difference (*P* =
0.34).

.. _S13:

Total number of in-patient aggression-related incidents
-------------------------------------------------------

Poisson regression revealed no significant difference in total
aggression-related incidents following the introduction of the new
smoking policy (1.02, 95% CI 0.90–1.12; *P* = 0.70).

.. _S14:

Aggression-related incidents (PICU only)
----------------------------------------

Poisson regression revealed a significant increase in aggression-related
incidents in PICU following the introduction of the new smoking policy
(1.59, 95% CI 1.26–2.01; *P* < 0.001).

.. _S15:

Smoking-related incidents
-------------------------

Poisson regression revealed a significant increase in smoking-related
incidents following the introduction of the new smoking policy (3.10,
95% CI 2.55–4.46; *P* < 0.001).

.. _S16:

Discussion
==========

.. _S17:

Main findings
-------------

We aimed to ascertain whether a new no-smoking policy for in-patients at
a specified mental health trust might result in any less favourable
effects outside of smoking cessation. We found a statistically
significant increase in the number of admissions under the MHA, total
number of reported aggression-related incidents on PICU, and a
statistically significant increase in the number of reported
smoking-related incidents. The majority of these findings may be
expected. In consideration with our finding that in-patient bed capacity
was at or over 100% for each of the months studied (potentially due to
patients being ‘on leave’ from hospital but still named in beds), one
might argue that the acutely stressed state necessary to be granted an
admission into bedspace at a premium would have been of considerable
severity. Such patients may also have been admitted against their will,
further heightening stress levels. One may therefore consider that
immediately and forcefully removing the right to smoking, a past-time
that can bring comfort, reduce stress, ameliorate psychiatric symptoms
and help to fight boredom, may be poorly timed.

Perhaps a more surprising finding is the statistically significant
increase in patients admitted under the MHA This was included as an
outcome measure as it was hypothesised that patients may refuse informal
admission based on the no-smoking policy. Although patient refusal for
informal admission may have contributed to the effect, it is likely not
the whole story, as that hypothesis relies on the provision of adequate
information to patients, i.e. the new smoking policy is explained prior
to admission. Other work :sup:`24` has shown that this is not always the
case. It is also well known that detentions under the MHA have been on
the rise across the UK over the past 10 years, :sup:`25` due to a
multitude of factors (not smoking related) which we were unable to
analyse in this study. In-depth case-note analysis may have allowed us
to qualitatively ascertain whether the smoking policy played a part in
this significant finding, and future research analysing this perhaps
legitimate question could take this into account.

We found no significant difference in the total number of reported
aggression-related incidents. At face value, this finding suggests that
in an open-ward environment, the new smoking policy did not cause an
increase in agitation or aggression, which contradicts the finding we
obtained from PICU only There are several possible explanations for
this. First, the patients that are admitted to PICU are likely to be
more acutely stressed than those admitted to an open ward and therefore
the potential to cause an ‘incident’ might be increased. Second, the
more strictly controlled environment in PICU may lend itself to better
adherence of the smoking policy than for informal patients on an open
ward (who may be allowed out for ‘grounds leave’ each hour, or more),
thus the new smoking policy may be felt more among patients on PICU
Third, there is the very likely possibility that not all incidents are
reported. Incident reporting can sometimes be viewed as an arduous
process, especially for staff with busy in-patient ward roles. Although
this could affect the results both in the open-ward environment and on
PICU, one could suggest that staff on PICU might be more familiar with
and better trained to deal with incidents, thus incident reporting might
be better adhered to.

We also found no significant difference in patients' length of
admission, suggesting that the new no-smoking policy did not positively
or negatively affect the patient journey through mental health services.
This might be an expected finding as the benefits of smoking cessation
are known for long-term rather than short-term health. However, it is
useful to address this result in light of our findings of increased
smoking-related and aggression-related incidents, as it suggests that
the new policy's potential to predispose to aggression or agitation does
not necessarily result in prolonged in-patient stay. We also found no
significant difference in in-patient ward capacity, which could be
expected considering capacity was at maximum or above maximum for each
month studied.

.. _S18:

Strategies and limitations
--------------------------

We believe this study is one of the first to assess the effects of a new
no-smoking policy of psychiatric in-patients in the UK, in an age where
the importance of physical health in psychiatric patients is becoming
increasingly recognised, such that many more healthcare trusts may in
future choose to adopt a similar policy. In using the entire sampling
frame over a 6-month period, we have ensured a large sample size which
may help to reduce the potential for type I or II statistical errors. We
have reduced the impact of seasonal variation by comparing the same 6
months both in the year of introduction of the new no-smoking policy and
the year preceding it. In comparing data across time, we can demonstrate
a temporal association with the positive findings. Furthermore,
regarding the new no-smoking policy being more strictly enforced on
PICU, a dose-response relationship may be observed when comparing the
non-significant open ward aggression-related findings with those
obtained from PICU In addition, we have included a range of measures
that were chosen prior to commencing data collection.

There are however a number of limiting factors that should be taken into
consideration. First and most importantly, we cannot show that the new
no-smoking policy is causal to the positive findings. There could be
many other causes for increased aggression-related incidents on PICU and
it is therefore not clear how much (if at all) the change in smoking
policy contributed. It is however less probable to consider reverse
causality as a factor in this study, as it is unlikely that the
no-smoking policy was enacted because of significant aggression-related
incidents.

In addition, we are unable to determine the effect of any poor reporting
practice on our findings. We have mentioned that reporting might be
better in certain areas of in-patient psychiatric care than others which
may skew our results and invalidate comparisons. Despite our efforts, we
were unable to obtain a comparison of total number of reported incidents
between the two time periods. This would have better highlighted the
reporting practices in the Trust across the two time periods and may be
useful for future work.

It may also be possible that the timing of our data collection may have
affected the validity of our results. We chose to measure the 6 months
immediately following the introduction of the new no-smoking policy. It
is likely that group practice takes time to adapt and this may be an
explanation for some of the negative findings in our results. It may
have been more appropriate to choose a length of inclusion greater than
6 months to better visualise this, however we were limited by time and
resources. Both adherence to the Trust smoking policy and the reporting
of incidents (if common) may improve over time, and it therefore may be
useful to repeat this study in the future to compare the results.

Finally, since our study only measured outcomes during in-patient stay,
we were unable to ascertain any longer-term effects of the new smoking
policy, such as the increased achievement of smoking cessation among
patients admitted under the new no-smoking policy. Further work might
seek to establish the longer-term effects of such a policy.

Other research has been carried out on this topic internationally, which
correlates partially with our results. A 2002 systematic review
:sup:`26` including studies from several countries found no significant
behavioural effects when smoking bans were enacted in psychiatric units,
although the review also notes that in the included studies, smoking
bans were not associated with long-term smoking cessation among
patients. More recently, a 2005 study :sup:`27` from the USA found no
significant increase in aggression with the introduction of a new
smoking ban. Furthermore, a survey :sup:`28` of mental health staff
working at an Australian healthcare trust in 2013 found that although
most staff preferred to work in a smoke-free environment, around half of
survey respondents found the smoking ban to be detrimental to acute
patient care, which may give the impression of increased agitation or
behavioural problems among patients involved.

Our results are therefore broadly in line with the findings of others.
However, it is notable that we have shown a potential difference in the
effects of a smoking ban on different patient groups across different
settings. Further work might seek to clarify and further examine the
reasons behind this finding.

Overall, the reasoning behind a smoke-free hospital environment is
clear. The long-term health benefits of smoking cessation are numerous
and well documented, and other work has shown staff to prefer a
smoke-free working environment. However, there is the legitimate debate
as to whether the acutely stressed state is the right time to impose
this lifestyle change, and whether it is even ethical to do so. Our
results show that, in general, a new smoke-free policy did not result in
significant changes of reported aggressive behaviour or incidents, and
did not affect the patient journey through mental health services.
However, we found significantly increased smoking- and
aggression-related incidents in more restricted environments. It is
possible that the most highly agitated psychiatric patients are most
susceptible to cause incidents with this enforced lifestyle change. Our
finding of significantly increased use of the MHA may be explained by
other factors, but also may warrant further research. Therefore, to
reduce the impact this may have on both patients and staff tasked with
dealing with any resultant incident, nicotine replacement therapy should
be considered for all relevant patients.

The authors would like to extend their thanks to the data analysts of
Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust for their support in
obtaining the data used in this study, and to Pascal Perry-Cheung for
his kind assistance.

.. [1]
   **Benjamin Ian Perry** MBBS BSc, Division of Mental Health and
   Wellbeing, University of Warwick, UK, and Coventry and Warwickshire
   Partnership NHS Trust, UK. **Katherine Meehan** MBChB BSc, Coventry
   and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust, UK. **Ashok Kumar Jainer**,
   Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust, UK.
