---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** To assess the compliance of contemporary online
  media output with guidelines for the responsible reporting of suicidal
  acts. A search engine was used to identify online media reports of
  suicide from UK sources over the course of 1 month. Each article was
  assessed against guidelines for the responsible reporting of suicide
  produced by the Samaritans, a UK mental health charity.

  **Results** We identified 229 articles, of which 199 failed to comply
  with at least one of the Samaritans\' guidelines. Failure to mention
  support sources, excessive detail about the method used and undue
  speculation about the trigger for suicide were the most commonly
  breached guidelines. Significant differences were found between the
  quality of local and national media sources, with local media sources
  being broadly more compliant with guidelines.

  **Clinical implications** This study highlights the urgent need for
  the implementation of responsible reporting guidelines in online media
  articles as a component of suicide prevention efforts.
author:
- Michael Utterson
- Jason Daoud
- Rina DuttaCorrespondence to Michael Utterson
  (<michael.utterson@doctors.org.uk>) [^1]
date: 2017-4
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
- 2King\'s College London
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
- id: R13
- id: R14
- id: R15
- id: R16
- id: R17
- id: R18
- id: R19
- id: R20
- id: R21
- id: R22
- id: R23
title: "Online media reporting of suicides: analysis of adherence to
  existing guidelines"
---

-   [Method](#S1){#toc-S1}
-   [Results](#S2){#toc-S2}
    -   [Compliance with the responsible reporting
        guidelines](#S3){#toc-S3}
    -   [Additional features of online media](#S4){#toc-S4}
-   [Discussion](#S5){#toc-S5}
    -   [Local *v.* national media sources](#S6){#toc-S6}
    -   [Additional features of online media](#S7){#toc-S7}
    -   [Policy considerations](#S8){#toc-S8}
    -   [Limitations](#S9){#toc-S9}
    -   [Next steps](#S10){#toc-S10}

Responsible media reporting of suicide is considered to be key to
current international suicide prevention efforts. ^[@R1]^ Previous
studies suggest that media reports of completed suicide can influence
the rate of future suicidal acts and the method chosen. ^[@R2]--[@R6]^

Guidelines to promote responsible reporting practices exist in a number
of countries. ^[@R7]^ Studies suggest that they can alter the content of
media reports, ^[@R8]^ although the general awareness and use of the
guidelines has been found to be poor. ^[@R9]^ In the UK, the 2012
Editors\' Code of Practice from the Press Complaints Commission
prohibits the reporting of suicide with excessive detail about the
method used, ^[@R10]^ but established responsible reporting guidelines
tend to include additional features in an attempt to prevent copycat
behaviour. ^[@R11]^

After a detailed literature review, no studies could be found comparing
a significant number of contemporary UK media reports of suicide against
responsible reporting guidelines, despite the fact that the media have
been implicated in the phenomenon of 'suicide clustering' observed in
the UK. ^[@R12]^ Other studies have focused on newspaper and television
reports, and scant attention has been paid to online media sources,
despite the fact that 84% of households in the UK have access to the
internet and 55% of adults use the internet to access news. ^[@R13]^
This is the most rapidly growing method of accessing news media,
particularly for younger individuals, ^[@R13]^ who may be more
vulnerable to the content of media reporting. ^[@R14],[@R15]^

This study sought to evaluate the compliance of online media reports of
suicidal acts from UK-based sources with responsible reporting
guidelines, and to identify the prevalence of the inclusion of other
potentially harmful features of online media, namely comments sections
and links to other internet features, for example pro-suicide websites.

# Method {#S1}

A search was performed on the Google News UK search engine using the
keyword 'suicide' with the location filter set to include articles of UK
provenance only. The analysis included reports which made reference to
an attempted or completed suicide published by local and national media
sources during 28 consecutive days in November 2014. Articles about
suicide bombing and euthanasia were excluded, as were those behind a
media paywall.

Each report meeting the inclusion criteria was assessed against an
adapted version of the 'Ten things to remember when reporting suicide'
contained in the document issued by the Samaritans. ^[@R16]^ This is one
of the more prominent and widely used sets of guidelines for journalists
in the UK. ^[@R17]^ As a direct search for articles was undertaken, it
was not possible to assess whether each article was given undue
prominence, for instance a homepage splash, so this criterion from the
Samaritans\' guidelines was not used, leaving nine criteria for article
comparison ([Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}).

Data were collected on compliance with each section of the guidelines
and those meeting all criteria were considered to be compliant with
responsible reporting of suicide. Analysis was undertaken to determine
the overall compliance with guidelines, the frequency with which each
guideline was breached, and whether there were any differences based on
whether articles originated from a local or a national media source.
Differences between local and national media sources in the proportion
of articles breaching any guidelines were calculated using the
chi-squared test. Data analysis was performed in STATA 11 for Windows
XP.

**Box 1** Guidelines for the reporting of suicide assessed in the study.
Adapted from the Samaritans ^[@R16]^

1.  Leave out technical details about the method of suicide, such as
    describing the type of ligature used or the number and types of
    pills taken in an overdose. Never suggest that a method is quick,
    easy, painless or certain to result in death.

2.  Language matters. Avoid dramatic headlines and terms such as
    'suicide epidemic' or 'hot spot'.

3.  Include references to support groups and places where suicidal
    people can find help.

4.  Treat social media with particular caution and refrain from
    mentioning websites or networks that promote or glamorise suicide.

5.  Avoid dramatic or sensationalist pictures or video. Refrain from
    including content from suicide notes.

6.  Do not give undue prominence to photographs of a young person who
    has died and avoid repeated use of images such as galleries.

7.  Do not brush over the complex realities of suicide and its impact on
    those left behind.

8.  Speculation about the 'trigger' for a suicide, even if provided by a
    close family member, should be avoided.

9.  Use statistics with caution. Make sure you have the most recent data
    and are comparing like with like.

In addition to comparison against the Samaritans\' guidelines, the
inclusion of user-generated comments, threads and internet links to
other articles was noted.

# Results {#S2}

Overall, 229 articles met the inclusion criteria: 68 articles from local
media sources and 161 articles from national media sources. The majority
(214 articles) came from media organisations which offer both a print
and online platform, with national publications such as the *Guardian*,
the *Telegraph* and the *Daily Mail* making up the bulk of national
media output, and an array of smaller local outlets each contributing a
smaller number of articles to the total. Fifteen articles were found in
a range of online-only outlets such as the International Business Times,
Yahoo UK, The Huffington Post and Wales Online. Ten articles were found
on the websites of media network providers such as the BBC, ITV and STV.

## Compliance with the responsible reporting guidelines {#S3}

Of the 229 online articles included for analysis, 199 (86.9%) breached
at least one of the Samaritans\' guidelines. The mean number of
guideline breaches per article was 2.2, with only a small variation
between local and national media sources (2.1 *v.* 2.2 breaches per
article, respectively; *P* = 0.08).

The most commonly breached aspects of the guidelines were a failure to
include reference to sources of support for those considering suicide
(69.4%), the inclusion of excessive technical detail about the method
used (31%) and undue speculation about the reasons for suicide (30.1%)
([Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}). The other guidelines were breached
in less than 25% of articles, with just 2 articles mentioning
organisations that promote suicide and 1 article using statistics
irresponsibly, telling readers the proportion of people completing
suicide after jumping from a well-known landmark.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

Compliance with reporting guidelines
:::

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   All sources     Local         National        Difference between\
                                                                                                                 local and national\
                                                                                                                 *P*
  ---------------------------------------------------------------- --------------- ------------- --------------- -----------------------------------------
  Articles, *n*                                                    229             68            161             --

                                                                                                                 

      ⩾1 breach, *n* (%)                                           199 (86.9)      55 (80.9)     144 (89.4)      0.08

                                                                                                                 

      Breaches per article, mean                                         2.2           2.1             2.2       --

                                                                                                                 

  Specific guideline breaches, *n* (%)                                                                           

                                                                                                                 

      1. Excessive technical detail about the method                   71 (31.0)   25 (36.8)         46 (28.6)   0.22

                                                                                                                 

      2. Sensationalist or irresponsible language                      38 (16.6)   20 (14.7)         28 (17.4)   0.04[\*](#TFN1){ref-type="table-fn"}

                                                                                                                 

      3. No sources of support                                     159 (69.4)      48 (70.6)     111 (68.9)      0.81

                                                                                                                 

      4. Mentioning places that promote or glamorise suicide             2 (0.9)       0 (0)           2 (1.2)   0.36

                                                                                                                 

      5. Dramatic pictures, videos, content of suicide notes           41 (17.9)       6 (8.8)       35 (21.7)   0.02[\*](#TFN1){ref-type="table-fn"}

                                                                                                                 

      6. Picture galleries                                             30 (13.1)       1 (1.5)       30 (18.6)   0.001[\*\*](#TFN2){ref-type="table-fn"}

                                                                                                                 

      7. Narrative brushes over the complex realities of suicide       20 (8.7)        5 (7.4)       15 (9.3)    0.63

                                                                                                                 

      8. Undue speculation about the triggers                          69 (30.1)   18 (26.4)         51 (31.7)   0.43

                                                                                                                 

      9. Irresponsible use of statistics                                 1 (0.4)       0 (0)           1 (0.6)   0.52
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*P* \< 0.05,

*P* \< 0.01.
:::

## Additional features of online media {#S4}

Sixty-four articles included additional features which could contribute
to readers encountering unsuitable material, such as the inclusion of
user-generated comments sections and links to other articles which may
similarly be poorly adherent to reporting guidelines ([Table
2](#T2){ref-type="table"}).

::: {#T2 .table-wrap}
::: caption
###### 

Articles with additional adverse features
:::

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              All sources\     Local\     National\                                     *P*
                                              *n* (%)          *n* (%)     *n* (%)   
  ------------------------------------------- -------------- ----------- ----------- --------------------------------------
  Articles with additional adverse features   64 (27.9)       11 (16.2)   53 (32.9)    [\*](#TFN3){ref-type="table-fn"}0.01

                                                                                     

  Links to other articles about suicide       37 (16.2)        5 (7.4)    32 (19.9)    [\*](#TFN3){ref-type="table-fn"}0.02

                                                                                     

  User-generated comment threads              39 (17)         7 (10.3)    32 (19.9)                                    0.08
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*P* \< 0.05.
:::

# Discussion {#S5}

This study evaluated the compliance of 229 online reports of suicide
with the guidelines issued by the Samaritans. To our knowledge, this is
the first study looking at the content of online media reports of
suicide and the first in the UK looking at a selection of contemporary
media output. Of note, the majority of articles included in the study
failed to meet the Samaritans\' guidelines for the responsible reporting
of suicide. The results support findings from the limited number of
studies undertaken elsewhere in the world that suggest media reporting
of suicide is poorly compliant with available guidelines.
^[@R18]--[@R21]^

Of particular concern is the finding that 69.4% of reports failed to
include a reference to a potential source of support for those readers
who may be experiencing suicidal thoughts themselves; this was
consistent across local and national sources. Lack of responsible
information awareness and signposting support undermines suicide
prevention efforts and fails to provide an alternative perspective to
the often distressing narrative of articles. The finding that most
articles omit references to support groups has been replicated in other
studies from around the world: just 1% of Indian newspaper sources,
^[@R19]^ 3% of US sources ^[@R21]^ and 8.6% of Chinese sources ^[@R8]^
included a reference to a support group.

Our finding that 31% of articles contained an excessive level of detail
about methods used to complete a suicide is a significant cause for
concern. The experience in other countries supports the idea that
publication of suicide methods can perpetuate attempts and trends in
methods chosen by others in 'copycat suicides'. ^[@R2]--[@R5],[@R22]^ In
the course of assessing media reports for this study, the inclusion of
details about the blood concentration of cyanide to achieve death, and
the exact location and time of suicides by train, as well as details of
places where suicides by jumping were completed, were all noted.

The finding that 30.1% of articles engaged in speculation about the
reason for suicide was also a cause for concern. The journalistic
tendency to simplify the reasons behind a suicidal act or engage in
undue speculation about the surrounding circumstances can have a
damaging impact on the bereaved family ^[@R17]^ as well as readers who
may over-identify with the person mentioned in the article, potentially
increasing the deleterious impact for vulnerable individuals. This
tendency to make articles more 'readable' may also be reflected in the
fact that 8.7% of articles brushed over the complex realities of
suicide, often failing to mention the family left behind or the impact
of the suicidal act on others.

That being said, only one report included the irresponsible use of
statistics and only two reports directed readers towards pro-suicide
websites.

A qualitative observation was that where a particular fact about a
suicide attempt is known, it will usually feature in other articles from
other outlets about the same act. For example, very specific details
about a method used were usually re-reported in all articles discussing
the same event without due regard for the reporting guidelines.

## Local *v.* national media sources {#S6}

When comparing reporting by national and local media sources, local
sources were overall more compliant with guidelines, with significant
differences in the use of sensationalist language, dramatic pictures,
videos or the content of suicide notes and the use of galleries, as well
as the use of additional features of online media. The exact reason for
the broadly better compliance with guidelines among local sources is not
fully understood, but it may be because local media sources are closer
to the subject of the article and local reporters may be more sensitive
to the feelings of the bereaved family and local community.

## Additional features of online media {#S7}

The unique additional features of online media (compared, for example,
with newspaper articles or television reports) could also compound their
negative impact on readers; 16% of articles included links to other
reports of suicide. Our finding that a majority of articles about
suicide fail to meet responsible reporting guidelines and that the mean
number of guideline breaches is 2.2 per article raises the possibility
that the negative impact of irresponsible reporting is likely to be
amplified by the inclusion of links to other potentially non-compliant
reports.

Previous findings that discussion forums can increase suicidality among
younger users ^[@R23]^ suggest that the addition of comments sections
which can facilitate discussion should be avoided with online reports of
suicide. Despite this, 17% of analysed reports had a comments section
for user-generated content, and concerning comments such as the deceased
person being 'brave' or 'at peace now' were frequently a feature of
these.

## Policy considerations {#S8}

There is an evident need to evaluate the reasons for journalistic
non-compliance with the existing guidelines of suicide reporting in the
UK. Given the increasing use of online media and the apparent poor
quality of reporting, there is a need to focus efforts on increasing the
compliance of reports with responsible reporting guidelines. Suitable
measures should also be established for non-compliant and potentially
harmful articles to be flagged for urgent review.

## Limitations {#S9}

Although a standardised tool was used to identify breaches of media
guidelines, judgements about breaches were not cross-checked between
researchers. In addition, although the search sought to capture
publications over a period of time, this work cannot account for
potential seasonal changes in data.

## Next steps {#S10}

The present study uncovers an urgent need to address the fact that the
majority of online articles assessed do not comply with existing
guidelines on the responsible reporting of suicide. It highlights a
significant public health concern because potentially vulnerable people
have access to material which may provoke suicidal behaviours and which
does not signpost them to support resources. Given the increasing weight
of evidence that media reporting can affect suicide rates, there is an
urgent need for the implementation of responsible reporting guidelines
in online media articles. We propose that work be done to clarify and
publicise the guidelines, and to train and encourage journalists to use
them, and that a strong consideration be given to the role of more
formal regulation and monitoring.

[^1]: **Michael Utterson**, core psychiatry trainee, South London and
    Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London; **Jason Daoud**, medical
    student, King\'s College London School of Medicine; **Rina Dutta**,
    clinical senior lecturer/consultant psychiatrist, Academic
    Department of Psychological Medicine, King\'s College London.
