=======================================
MCQs in Psychiatry for Medical Students
=======================================



Suzanne Dash [1]_
:Date: 2017-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Love them or loathe them, most medical student written examinations now
take the form of multiple choice questions (MCQs). Some medical
educators dislike this assessment style, suggesting it encourages
students to learn isolated facts in a superficial way. Yet, undeniably,
MCQs provide an objective, time-efficient manner of evaluation.

*MCQs in Psychiatry for Medical Students* is a valuable resource for
medical students undertaking their psychiatry rotations. It includes
MCQs and extended matching items grouped into chapters concerned either
with a type of disorder – for example, psychotic disorders and alcohol
and substance misuse disorders – or another important aspect of
psychiatry, such as physical health, pharmacological treatments,
psychology and psychotherapy.

Each MCQ is accompanied by a paragraph or two explaining the correct
answer. More information is provided than is strictly necessary to
understand the answer, but this is illuminating rather than turgid. The
400-plus contemporary references encourage the reader to consider issues
in more depth than the superficial learning style many associate with
MCQs, making the scope of this book potentially greater than is obvious
from its title. In contrast, the three extended matching item questions
in each chapter are not followed by explanations, making them far less
informative.

Writing good MCQ distractor items is a challenge, and in a few places –
especially questions on risk factors and protective factors – it is
possible to guess the answer by eliminating answers simply based on
whether they describe something positive or negative.

This is a must-have title for all medical students; it will pique the
interest of many students and may even assist in recruiting future
psychiatrists to the profession.

.. [1]
   **Suzanne Dash**, graduate-entry medical student, University of
   Oxford, Oxford, UK; email: suzanne.dash@medschool.ox.ac.uk
