---
abstract: |
  **Aims and method** To examine how often referring community mental
  health teams (CMHTs) utilised treatment recommendations made by the
  national highly specialised service for patients with severe
  obsessive--compulsive disorder (OCD) and body dysmorphic disorder
  (BDD). We analysed all patient notes for admissions to the unit
  (August 2012--August 2014) and recorded how many treatment
  recommendations were implemented by CMHTs prior to admission and at 6
  months post-discharge.

  **Results** Overall, 66% of our recommendations were met by CMHTs
  prior to admission and 74% after discharge. Most recommendations
  concerned medication and the continued need for care coordination by
  the CMHT.

  **Clinical implications** A significant proportion of patients in our
  audit did not receive optimum treatment in the community as
  recommended by our service. As highly specialised services are a
  limited resource and these patients have not responded to previous
  treatment, this has implications for the use of such resources.
author:
- Paul M. Harris
- Lynne M. DrummondCorrespondence to Paul M. Harris
  (<pmharris@doctors.org.uk>) [^1]
date: 2016-10
institute:
- 1South West London and St George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
title: Compliance of community teams with specialist service
  recommendations for obsessive--compulsive and body dysmorphic
  disorders
---

The current guidelines from the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) for treatment of obsessive--compulsive disorder (OCD)
and body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) in England and Wales outline a
stepped six-stage care model approach, with each step related to the
severity of the individual\'s illness.^1^ The sixth stage of this care
model, for the most unwell patients, advocates the utilisation of
specialist intensive treatment or in-patient services, and states that
these services should be provided by multidisciplinary teams with
specific expertise in this area. Patients who require in-patient
treatment may be at risk of death or severe personal neglect.

In recent years community mental health teams (CMHTs) have faced
increasing and widening pressures. The provision of community
psychiatric services has been subject to reorganisation and change; for
example, specialist assessment and recovery teams have replaced previous
models of working. This restructuring has had an impact on continuity of
care. Indeed, it has been argued that the adoption of new models of
psychiatric care in the community, and the growing number of specialist
teams, has led to the fragmentation of services and a poorer experience
for both patients and professionals.^2^ In some instances these new
systems have been associated with reduced continuity of care, with
patients encountering a greater number of health professionals who are
unable to develop meaningful and prolonged relationships with them owing
to brief and changing contact.^3^

The recent cut in in-patient beds has also placed increasing pressure on
community teams. Indeed, there were concerns within our service that
local teams are finding it increasingly difficult to implement our
advice for their severely unwell patients and those whose illness is
treatment refractory. Members of our team felt this was occurring both
prior to the patients\' planned admission and after discharge. In light
of these concerns, and being mindful of recent changes in service
provision, we chose to examine the number of treatment recommendations
made by our team that had been implemented by CMHTs prior to admission
and then again at 6 months post-discharge from the ward.

# Method {#S1}

## Setting {#S2}

There are currently only a few centres in the UK that provide specialist
intensive care of severe and treatment-refractory OCD and BDD and all of
these are based in the south-east of England.^4^ There is only one
24-h-staffed in-patient service, based at South West London and St
George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust. This in-patient service, funded by
NHS England Highly Specialised Services Commissioners (NHS England HSS),
is a 14-bed unit (it has been described by Boschen *et al*^5^). Highly
specialised services are funded directly by NHS England and the expected
demand is fewer than 500 patients per annum. Examples of other services
include liver transplantation, enzyme replacement therapy, secure
forensic mental health services for young people as well as services for
profound, refractory OCD and BDD. The specialist unit in London
comprises psychiatrists (from training grade to consultant level),
specialist cognitive--behavioural therapy (CBT) therapists, nursing
staff, healthcare assistants, occupational therapists and allied therapy
staff. It is the only 24-h-staffed unit for OCD/BDD in the NHS, and thus
concentrates on treating those who not only have failed all previous
treatments, but who could not be safely treated in less intensive
services. The unit accepts referrals from local CMHTs throughout England
when the referral criteria have been met (see the Discussion section).
Patients who meet these criteria are invited to have an initial
assessment by a member of the specialist team to evaluate whether they
are suitable for treatment under the auspices of NHS England HSS OCD/BDD
Services. If this is ascertained then a decision is made as to the most
suitable service to be offered. These range from out-patient and
intensive home-based treatments through to the 24-h-staffed unit.
Consequently, only those patients with the most profound disorders who
are unable to manage in any less supported environments are admitted.
Patients from Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland are still referred via
their CMHTs but in these cases funding needs to be secured via their
local arrangements. Common reasons for recommending 24-h-staffed
in-patient treatment include: the patient is a danger to themselves --
this is most commonly owing to extreme self-neglect resulting in, for
example, extreme dehydrationthe patient is unable to carry out
activities of daily living without interventions from others -- for
example, almost a half of patients admitted to the service are
incontinent of urine or faeces on admissionthere is a an additional
diagnosis as well as OCD or BDD requiring 24-h observation -- for
example, a recent history of unstable eating disorder or recent history
of substance misusethey have failed to respond to treatment in other
less intensive, highly specialised services.

Patients that meet our referral criteria are offered an initial
assessment. The findings of this assessment are discussed at a meeting
of the multidisciplinary team (MDT), and a care plan, with specific
treatment recommendations, is developed. The plan is sent to the patient
and their general practitioner (GP), as well as to the referring team.
If the patient is suitable for an in-patient admission it is requested
that the treatment recommendations are put in place by their local team
before they are admitted to the unit.

An in-patient admission typically lasts for 4 to 6 months, and on
discharge another care plan, with individual recommendations, is sent to
the patient, their GP and referring team. The patient is then followed
up by the national service at 1 week, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months and 1
year. The responsibility for continuity of care, and ongoing
rehabilitation, is dependent on the active involvement of the CMHT.

## Analysis {#S3}

We scrutinised the case notes of all patients who were admitted to our
in-patient ward between August 2012 and August 2014.

First, using the initial assessment report sent to the referring CMHT,
we recorded how many separate care plan recommendations our team had
made. These were recorded by type: medication related, care
coordination, physical health intervention, and other. We then examined
the notes from when the patient was first admitted to our ward
(admission clerking, GP records, and other correspondence) to establish
how many of our recommendations had been met. Second, using the
discharge care plan sent to the local CMHT, we again recorded how many
recommendations our team had made by type. We then analysed the notes
from our follow-up appointments to see how many of these recommendations
had been met. Only patients who had a minimum of 6 months\' follow-up
were included in this analysis.

# Results {#S4}

A total of 52 patients were included in the study, of whom 32 (62%) were
male and 20 (38%) were female. The mean age was 42.4 years (s.d. =
12.8). The mean Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (YBOCS) score
pre-admission was 36.19 (s.d. = 3.08) and at the end of admission 24.73
(s.d. = 8.92). The mean age at onset of OCD symptoms was 22.04 years
(s.d. = 9.93).

After the initial out-patient assessment of the sample of 52 patients, a
total of 99 care plan recommendations were made, 65 (66%) of which had
been met prior to admission to our ward. Most of the recommendations
focused on the need for continued review by the CMHT with allocation of
a care coordinator. This recommendation was made 50 times and was met 39
times (78%). Our team also made 41 medication-related recommendations
(substitutions, adjuncts, increases or decreases in dose in line with
NICE guidelines), but only 25 (61%) of these changes were made prior to
admission. For most patients (*n* = 40) medication-related and care
coordination-/increased CMHT involvement-related recommendations were
made together. All recommendations by type can be seen in [Table
1](#T1){ref-type="table"}.

::: {#T1 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Treatment recommendations made to CMHT by the specialised unit
:::

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;"></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Prior to admission<sup><a href="#TFN2"
data-ref-type="table-fn">a</a></sup></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">After discharge<br />
min. 6 months follow-up<sup><a href="#TFN3"
data-ref-type="table-fn">b</a></sup></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Medication-related</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">41</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">25 (61)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">36</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">28 (78)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Care coordination/increased CMHT
involvement</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">50</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">39 (78)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">40</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">31 (78)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Physical health intervention</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0(0)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1 (25)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Other specialist referral<br />
(e.g. drug and alcohol services)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1 (33)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5(63)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">Total</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">99</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">65 (66)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">88</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">65 (74)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

CMHT, community mental health team.

*n* = 52 admissions.

*n* = 39 patients.

*n* = 10 patients.
:::

After discharge 39 of the 52 admissions (71%) had at least 6 months of
recorded follow-up from our team. For these patients, we made a total of
88 treatment recommendations at discharge and there was evidence that 65
(74%) of these were met by the local CMHT at 6 months. The types of
recommendations can be seen in [Table 1](#T1){ref-type="table"}. Ten
patients had follow-up of 3 months only, and our team made a total of 27
recommendations for them; only 10 of these were met (37%) ([Table
1](#T1){ref-type="table"}). Of note, our team requested that all of
these patients have a care coordinator.

Patients were grouped by response to treatment. Those demonstrating a
greater than 35% improvement in YBOCS score were categorised as
responders, those showing improvement of between 25 and 35% were grouped
as partial responders, and those demonstrating a less than 25%
improvement were categorised as non-responders ([Table
2](#T2){ref-type="table"}).

::: {#T2 .table-wrap}
::: {.caption}
###### 

Responders, partial responders and non-responders to treatment
:::

|                   | *n* (%) |
|:------------------|:-------:|
| Responder         | 25 (48) |
|                   |         |
| Partial responder | 6 (12)  |
|                   |         |
| Non-responder     | 21 (40) |
:::

Analysis of these groups showed no relationship between patients who did
well in treatment ([Table 2](#T2){ref-type="table"}) at the national
OCD/BDD unit and whether or not the CMHT was more or less compliant with
our treatment recommendations (Pearson correlation coefficient 0.147,
*P* = 0.299). Pearson correlation coefficient was used to analyse these
data as the variables were normally distributed.

# Discussion {#S5}

It has been estimated that approximately 1% of the European population
has clinically relevant OCD.^6^ Modern treatment of this disorder can be
very effective, with improvement in symptoms following graded exposure
therapy seen in an estimated 75% of patients^7^ and 60% responding to
SSRI medication.^8^ However, in a proportion of patients the OCD remains
treatment refractory and such patients may need more specialist and
intensive input.

In 2007, it was decided that, owing to the lack of highly specialised
services for OCD/BDD nationally, these should be funded centrally. After
various reorganisations in healthcare provision and commissioning, this
is currently funded by NHS England HSS. When this commissioning group
was established it was agreed to operationalise the criteria for
defining a patient as falling into the stage six (most severe disorder)
category as: YBOCS score \>30/40 (or equivalent on the YBOCS-BDD
scale)failure to respond to two previous trials of serotonin reuptake
inhibiting (SRI) drugs in maximum *British National Formulary*
(BNF)-approved dosages for a minimum of 3 months eachfailure to respond
to further recognised psychopharmacological interventions for refractory
OCD (e.g. addition of a dopamine-blocking agent to the SRI)failure to
respond to two courses of CBT involving graded exposure and self-imposed
response prevention (one of these courses should normally have taken
place in the home environment or wherever the symptoms are maximal).

In recent years there have been increasing pressures on both local CMHTs
and in-patient services, including a reduced number of in-patient beds
and service reorganisations. With these considerations in mind, our
evaluation provides some interesting findings.

After initial assessment, just over two-thirds of all recommendations
(66%) made by our team were met. However, recommendations related to
care coordination were met on just over three-quarters of occasions
(78%), whereas medication-related recommendations were met less
frequently (61%). Interestingly, after discharge adherence to
medication-related recommendations was higher (78%), possibly as
patients experienced the benefits of prolonged consistent medication at
suitable dosages.

Patients who are eventually referred to highly specialised services on
average have waited 20 years from initial diagnosis to accessing these
services.^4,5,9--11^ Although they generally improve with our
intervention, they are likely to have ongoing difficulties in some
areas. This appears to be best managed through ongoing help from local
mental health services as such patients are likely to need continuing
support in various aspects of their lives in addition to ongoing
medication and support for their OCD or BDD. Key to enabling earlier
access, and continued adherence, to treatment is care coordination,
which facilitates continuity of care and the development of trust and
understanding between patients and their care team. The findings from
our analysis, although encouraging, show that almost a quarter of all
patients were not receiving care coordination. It is possible that this
finding could be linked to changes in local services, and the increased
pressures they face in the current financial climate.

In view of the delay for patients in accessing specialised services, it
is important to note that treatment of even the most severely affected
patients with OCD is remarkably successful, with improvements in YBOCS
scores of up to 33% from baseline in this sample.^4,5,9--11^ After the
initial assessment, local teams appear reluctant to implement
medication-related recommendations. This could perhaps reflect
confidence issues around prescribing high-dose SSRIs or augmenting SSRIs
with low-dose antipsychotics. However, after discharge the continuation
of prescribed medications was more likely to be met by community teams
despite a significant proportion of patients being prescribed SSRIs at
above the BNF-recommended maximum dose.

It is difficult to know how highly specialised services can help with
improving confidence. CMHTs are advised that the service is happy to
discuss any problems they may have with patients at any time and that
the team\'s consultant psychiatrist is available for advice concerning
medication. We also provide leaflets outlining psychopharmacological
treatments for these conditions.

It is also interesting to note that the compliance by CMHTs with our
treatment recommendations after discharge was not affected by patient
response to in-patient treatment ([Table 2](#T2){ref-type="table"}).
This emphasises the importance of continued CMHT care as all of the
patients in our audit had comparable compliance rates regardless of the
severity of their OCD symptoms at discharge. CMHT compliance rates
post-discharge cannot be predicted by patient treatment response on the
unit. Despite our expectation that it may be high-dose SSRI prescribing
which would be a cause of concern for the CMHTs, in fact the majority
(78%) complied with these recommendations.

# Conclusions {#S6}

Although the results of the audit were better than might be expected,
there is still much room for improvement, particularly as our service
represents such a scarce resource. The question whether these rates have
been negatively affected by recent changes to care is one that cannot be
answered directly by this evaluation. However, the results do show that
a large proportion of profoundly unwell patients are still not receiving
what could be considered optimal treatment when in the community. This
may be because of many factors, perhaps not least the fact that those
with the greatest need are often most difficult to engage with. However,
in an attempt to improve outcomes and collaborative working between our
service and CMHTs, we encourage local care coordinators to play an
active part in the treatment process, both at initial assessment and
before discharge. For example, CMHT members are invited to attend
discharge meetings at our unit.

We welcome debate and discussion as to how our service can help and
support the CMHTs to ensure the ongoing support necessary for these
patients.

[^1]: **Paul M. Harris** is a core trainee 3 and **Lynne M. Drummond**
    is a consultant psychiatrist and Clinical Lead, National and
    Trustwide Services for OCD/BDD, Springfield Hospital, South West
    London and St George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust, London.
