====================================================================================================================
The impact of transforming care on the care and safety of patients with intellectual disabilities and forensic needs
====================================================================================================================

John L. Taylor
Iain McKinnon
Ian Thorpe
Bruce T. GillmerCorrespondence to John L. Taylor
(john2.taylor@northumbria.ac.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-8

:Abstract:
   NHS England recently published a national plan to develop community
   services for people with intellectual disabilities and autism who
   display challenging behaviour by using resources from the closure of
   a large number of hospital beds. An ambitious timescale has been set
   to implement this plan. The bed closure programme is moving ahead
   rapidly, but there has been little progress in developing community
   services to support it. This paper discusses the impact of the gap
   between policy and practice on the care and safety of patients with
   intellectual disabilities and forensic needs who form a distinct
   subgroup of the target population and are being disproportionately
   affected by this government policy.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _S1:

The policy context
==================

*Building the Right Support,* a national plan to develop community
services and close hospital beds for people with intellectual
disabilities and autism who ‘display behaviour that challenges’ (p. 4),
was published last October by NHS England and its local authority
partners.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` The genesis of this plan was the Winterbourne
View scandal in 2011, which involved the systematic abuse of people with
intellectual disabilities in an independent sector hospital unit run by
Castlebeck Care in Bristol, England.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` This led to a
concordat that committed the Department of Health to a rapid reduction
in the number of people with intellectual disabilities and challenging
behaviour in hospital beds by mid-2014.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Under pressure
from politicians and stakeholder groups, who claimed that the government
had failed to deliver on its concordat promises and that the situation
had worsened,\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` the chief executive of the National Health
Service (NHS) committed to a 2-year intellectual disability hospital
closure programme during a parliamentary select committee hearing on
services for people with intellectual disabilities and challenging
behaviour in early 2015.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`

The ensuing national plan includes the closure of 45–65% of local
clinical commissioning group (CCG)-commissioned and 25–40% of NHS
England national specialist-commissioned in-patient beds by 2018. This
is a ‘starting point’ and commissioners are encouraged to be ‘ambitious
in thinking about how much further they can go’ (p. 6; unless stated
otherwise, all quotations in this commentary are from *Building the
Right Support* document\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`). The rationale for these
numbers and timescale is unclear beyond what NHS commissioners and local
authorities have told the plan's authors ‘they believe is possible’,
which was then ‘sense-checked’ against geographical variations in
current in-patient service usage (p. 27). The money saved from these bed
closures is to be reinvested in the development of community services
(p. 6). The national plan is clear that this transition will involve
significant costs. It is stated that commissioners ‘will need to invest
in new community support *before* closing inpatient provision’ (p. 7,
italics added). Also required is the ‘temporary double running of
services as inpatient facilities continue to be funded whilst new
community services are established’ (p. 44). Local Transforming Care
partnerships were tasked with drawing up implementation plans to support
a new model of care and to start delivering against these plans by 1
April 2016.

.. _S2:

Lack of investment in community services
========================================

Unfortunately, little progress appears to have been made in agreeing,
let alone implementing, new community service models to support the bed
closure plans as envisaged in the national plan. The current authors
work clinically with patients with intellectual and developmental
disabilities who display offending and offending-type behaviours in
in-patient and community services across six CCG areas in the north-east
of England. As a group we have been closely involved in initiatives to
increase hospital discharge rates and reduce readmissions, bed numbers
and lengths of stay as well as to support and strengthen community
services for people with intellectual disabilities who are at risk of
offending. These innovations pre-date the Transforming Care programme
and have already led to the closure of two in-patient units and a number
of satellite beds in our services (40 beds in total). Despite our
engagement and commitment to this transformation process we are
concerned about the impact of the national plan, and the manner in which
it is being implemented locally on patient care, patient safety and the
safety of others.

The North East and Cumbria is one of six ‘fast-track areas’ in the
national plan, set up with £2.06 million support from the NHS England
Transforming Care programme to ‘help fund transitional costs and speed
up implementation’ (p. 12). Fast-track areas aim to reduce in-patient
bed usage by around 50% within 3 years, thereby ‘freeing up tens of
millions of pounds which will be invested in community-based support to
prevent hospital admissions’ (p. 13). The North East and Cumbria service
model, which aims to deliver a 50% reduction in in-patient admissions,
is currently in draft form and the ‘new community model’ embedded within
the overall service model is not due to be considered by the North East
and Cumbria Transforming Care Board until September 2016 at the
earliest. Once the model is agreed, implementation plans will need to be
developed, and resources including people and funds will need to be
identified to enable it to be initiated. Judging by the pace of progress
to date, this is likely to take considerable time. In the meantime,
plans for in-patient bed closures are progressing rapidly, with 31 out
of 112 beds (35%) across our medium- and low-secure and locked
rehabilitation services currently empty as part of the closure
programme.

.. _S3:

The effects of Transforming Care
================================

The impact on patient care and safety of the drive to close in-patient
beds without first having developed or strengthened community services
is already beginning to show locally. The population served by these
in-patient services, in contrast to the intended target population, is
relatively high functioning intellectually (that is, mild/borderline in
intellectual disability terms),\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` shows high levels of
psychiatric comorbidity\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` and personality disorder
characteristics,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` and generally does not display
‘behaviour that challenges’, but outwardly directed high-impact
offending behaviour that has resulted in criminal convictions and/or
detention under the Mental Health Act 1983 on the basis of ‘abnormally
aggressive’ and/or ‘seriously irresponsible’ behaviour. Chief among the
behaviours that bring these patients into these services are serious
violence and aggression, sex offences, damage to property and
firesetting.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` The most recent national census data
reflect this offending behaviour profile, in that 33% of patients with
intellectual disabilities detained under the Mental Health Act in
England are subject to Part III criminal sections, and 21% of that group
are subject to Ministry of Justice restrictions, meaning that they
cannot be discharged without the approval of the Secretary of State or a
mental health tribunal.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` Just 17% of in-patients with
intellectual disabilities in the census were informal – that is, not
detained under the Act.

The imperative to empty and then close in-patient beds has resulted in
pressure being applied on clinical teams through commissioner-led ‘care
and treatment reviews’\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` to provide discharge dates for
some forensic patients who continue to present levels of risk that local
service providers and community teams are not adequately resourced to
manage, or to consider transfers from NHS to independent hospital beds.
Some evidence for the movement of patients around the in-patient system
– possibly to create the illusion of progress – comes from a recent
update from the NHS England Director of Transformation – Learning
Disabilities,\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` who reported that in April 2016, 20 of the
net 100 recorded discharges were in fact transfers to other hospitals,
and the destination of a further 20 discharged patients was unknown.

There is also concern that owing to the pressure to discharge as quickly
as possible to meet the national plan targets, patients' rehabilitation
is being hurried and/or truncated, resulting in some people being
discharged before they are ready to take on the challenges of living in
the wider community, or without the receiving community services being
properly prepared to manage the risks these patients continue to
present. The high level of clinical complexity and associated forensic
risk in this population can require a significant period of assessment,
formulation and specialist treatment to help patients develop thinking
styles and attitudes, emotional control strategies and lifestyles less
compatible with offending behaviour. A carefully considered and planned
period of pre-discharge preparation is an important component of the
treatment pathway and is essential to facilitating a successful
transition from hospital to community care.

Another consequence of the current rapid bed closure policy is that
people with intellectual disabilities and forensic needs who require
urgent hospital treatment are being admitted to generic psychiatric
services. This includes patients who have been previously detained in
hospital under the Mental Health Act 1983 and discharged on community
treatment orders, and who have been subsequently formally recalled to
hospital owing to escalating risks of harm to themselves or others.
Admission to acute psychiatry units can result in these patients being
targeted and exploited by more able patients. In addition, they are
unable to access appropriate assessment and treatment as the staff teams
in these services have little or no experience of working with this
population and lack the specialist skills required.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` This
will result in longer periods of in-patient admission for these patients
as access to suitable interventions aimed at reducing forensic risks is
delayed.

One aim of the Transforming Care programme is to prevent people with
intellectual disabilities and challenging behaviours from undergoing
unnecessary admissions to intellectual disability and mental health
in-patient services. Whether an admission is necessary or not is
inevitably a matter of judgement. With the requirement for commissioner
agreement to admission, there is a real risk of the judgement of
clinicians being circumvented. Efforts to prevent admission to hospital
by increasing supervision and support to people in community settings to
manage emerging risks have paradoxically resulted in situations
amounting to *de facto* deprivation of liberty in some cases, where a
short informal hospital admission to allow the risks to be assessed and
required amendments made to care plans would have been a less
restrictive and more clinically effective option.

.. _S4:

Discussion and conclusions
==========================

People with intellectual disabilities who require treatment in hospital
for behavioural, psychiatric and forensic problems should have access to
the best evidence-based interventions available, delivered by caring
staff with positive attitudes and person-centred values, in
good-quality, safe environments. It is clear that a disproportionate
number of people with intellectual disabilities are detained in hospital
under the Mental Health Act\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` and, once detained, they
have on average longer lengths of stay than detained patients who do not
have intellectual disability.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` The *Building the Right
Support* national plan aims to address these inequities, albeit based on
uncertain evidence and questionable assumptions.

There is no credible evidence or analysis presented to support the
proposed bed reduction numbers. Between 1988 and 2015 the number of
intellectual disability beds in the NHS reduced dramatically, from
approximately 33 000 to about 2500.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` It is debatable
whether this 90%-plus reduction over the past 30 years has been caused
by centrally driven government policy initiatives, for example *Valuing
People*,\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` or the impact of human services theories, such
as social role valorisation,\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` on the
deinstitutionalisation and community care movements in the 1980s and
90s.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` Either way, looking at the most recent census of
in-patient services for people with intellectual disabilities in
England,\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` 83% were legally detained under the Mental
Health Act 1983, with all of the scrutiny and protections this affords
via mental health tribunals, hospital managers' hearings and Care
Quality Commission inspections. It could be argued therefore that the
majority of the remaining intellectual disability in-patient beds
represent equipoise in the system and, as such, the current huge
diversion of resources into forcing the closure of these remaining beds
is unlikely to be successful in the long term.

The national plan starts from the supposition that all people with
intellectual disabilities ‘should have a home within their community’
(p. 4). Seemingly underpinning this position is a belief that families
and the community are always better for people with intellectual
disabilities and that hospital services do not provide safety and
sanctuary for some people. For many of our patients with forensic needs,
their histories indicate that families and the community can be part of
the problem rather than the solution. Putting to one side the fact that
communities are generally not keen to embrace people who might have
violently or sexually assaulted people in their midst, or set fire to
their buildings, people with disabilities frequently experience abuse,
aggression and violence in and by the community.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` There
are many examples of people like Brent Martin, who was brutally murdered
in 2007 by his more able ‘friends’ in Sunderland 3 months after being
discharged from hospital.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)`

A further assumption underpinning the national plan is that hospital
admissions should be as short as possible. There is an apparent lack of
understanding that the population managed and treated by in-patient
forensic intellectual disability services is distinct from the
population envisaged within the Transforming Care programme. Patients
with significant forensic histories have frequently experienced high
levels of abuse, neglect and deprivation. They require time to develop
insight into their difficulties in relating to others, acquire skills in
regulating their emotions and acknowledge their future support needs.
The application of a bed closure policy and as yet unclear community
service model that is designed for a very different population carries
significant risks of harm for patients with intellectual disabilities
and forensic needs, as well as for others. The implementation of that
policy without the required and promised investment in and development
of community services is especially concerning. Some of the unintended
consequences of this approach might include more vulnerable offenders
with intellectual disabilities being sent to prison rather than diverted
to hospital for appropriate treatment as recommended in the Bradley
Report\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` While imprisoned, such offenders will likely be
targeted by other prisoners because of their disabilities and will
remain at risk of re-offending, as they will be unable to access prison
offending behaviour programmes :sup:`(n.d.v)` Finally, it is perhaps
ironic that this policy will possibly lead to an increase in the use of
independent sector hospital beds for people with intellectual
disabilities – exactly where this all started.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.v.

.. [1]
   **John L. Taylor** is Professor of Clinical Psychology at Northumbria
   University, UK; **Iain McKinnon** is Honorary Senior Clinical
   Lecturer at Newcastle University, UK; **Ian Thorpe** is Nurse
   Consultant, and **Bruce T. Gillmer** is Consultant Clinical
   Psychologist, Northumberland, Tyne & Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
