=================================================================================
Should compulsory admission to hospital be part of suicide prevention strategies?
=================================================================================



Daniel Wei L. Wang
Erminia Colucci
:Correspondence: Daniel Wei L. Wang
(daniel.wang@qmul.ac.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2017-6

:Abstract:
   The World Health Organization report *Preventing Suicide: A Global
   Imperative* provides governments with guidance for comprehensive
   suicide prevention strategies. However, it does not mention the role
   that compulsory admission to hospital of psychiatric patients should
   have in policies for suicide prevention. This was a missed
   opportunity for international discussion and guidance about a measure
   that, although widely used, is becoming increasingly controversial in
   light of the existing evidence and human rights norms.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Legal and policy approaches to suicide have been changing significantly
in the past decades. Notably, the decriminalisation of suicide attempts
in many countries has been followed by an increasing recognition that
the stigma around suicide must be grappled with and that adequate social
and healthcare policies can reduce the rate of suicide in the
population. In other words, the focus has shifted from criminal
punishment and moral condemnation to awareness, support and prevention.
:sup:`1`

The 2014 World Health Organization (WHO) report *Preventing Suicide: A
Global Imperative* :sup:`1` is an important step in this direction. It
draws attention to the discrepancy between the magnitude of suicide as a
health problem worldwide and the low priority it is given by national
governments. The report also describes the risk and protective factors
in suicide prevention based on state of the art research and offers
guidance for comprehensive strategies for suicide prevention. The
central message in the document is that suicides are preventable but
this requires actions such as restricting access to the means of
suicide, reducing excessive use of alcohol, collecting and collating
good-quality data about suicide and suicide attempts, providing training
for gatekeepers, improving the quality of mental healthcare services,
and promoting responsible reporting of suicide by the media. The report
is also clear that taboo, stigma, shame, guilt and discrimination
surrounding suicide hamper effective suicide prevention policies as they
discourage vulnerable people from seeking help.

However, despite its emphasis on the need for comprehensive strategies
for suicide prevention, the compulsory admission to hospital of people
at risk of suicide was not discussed in the WHO report. This should not
come completely as a surprise given that compulsory admission to
hospital was also ignored in the previous United Nations (UN) and WHO
documents on which this report was built. :sup:`2–4` Moreover, the
literature on suicide prevention rarely lists compulsory admission to
hospital among the measures for suicide prevention, and those who do
normally do not distinguish between voluntary and compulsory admission.
:sup:`5–7`

This gap in international guidelines and in the scholarly literature
needs to be addressed. Compulsory admission to hospital is widely used
as a measure for suicide prevention, but the trade-offs involved and the
human rights implications make it a topic in which guidance and further
discussion are urgently needed.

.. _S1:

Compulsory admission to hospital for suicide prevention
=======================================================

Compulsory admission to psychiatric hospitals or psychiatric wards is
allowed in many countries as a measure to prevent self-harm. :sup:`8` In
England and Wales, for instance, the Mental Health Act 1983 (MHA)
provides the legal framework for the compulsory admission and treatment
of patients with mental disorders of a nature or degree that warrants
their detention in a hospital and who ought to be so detained in the
interests of their own health or safety or with a view to the protection
of other persons. Whether the patient has capacity to decide on their
stay in hospital and has objected to it will not affect the legality of
a detention under the MHA. A recent publication shows that there were
over 63 000 detentions under the MHA in the period from 1 April 2015 to
31 March 2016. :sup:`9` Considering the body of literature associating
suicide with mental disorders :sup:`6,10` (see, however, Hjelmeland *et
al* :sup:`11` ) and that statistically people with mental disorders are
at a higher risk to themselves than to others, :sup:`12` it is plausible
to assume that prevention of self-harm is a common reason for compulsory
admission to hospital.

Some would interpret this authorisation to detain as actually a duty to
detain when there is a high and immediate risk of a person taking their
own life. A failure to do so can be considered medical negligence and
may also be a breach of human rights. In the case of *Rabone & Anor v
Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust* [2012], :sup:`13` the Supreme Court
unanimously held that the failure of the hospital staff to detain
Melanie, a voluntary psychiatric patient who hanged herself from a tree
after being allowed to spend the weekend with her family, was a breach
of her right to life under Article 2 of the European Convention on Human
Rights. According to the Court, given her history of depression and
self-harm, including a previous suicide attempt, the hospital staff
should have used their powers to detain Melanie under the MHA to protect
her from the ‘real and immediate risk of suicide’ when she demanded to
leave the hospital.

Even though this precedent applies to the UK only, it shows that a
national strategy for suicide prevention may be incomplete without a
policy for compulsory admission to hospital. In hindsight, it is clear
that the deaths of people like Melanie could have been avoided were they
admitted to hospital and put under close observation, treated, managed
and prevented from having access to the means to take their own life.

.. _S2:

Compulsory admission to hospital: trade-offs and human rights
=============================================================

When looking at individual cases of suicide and at the data from
population-based studies there is evidence that compulsory admission to
hospital saves lives. :sup:`14,15` However, this does not answer the
question of how, when or whether it should be used to prevent suicide.
Compulsory admission to hospital involves trade-offs and has human
rights implications that need to be considered in clinical, policy and
legal decisions about its role in strategies for the prevention of
suicide.

There is now compelling evidence that suicide, being a low-frequency
event, is very difficult to predict. The clinical methods for predicting
suicide among patients have a very poor predictive capacity.
:sup:`16–20` A recent meta-analysis revealed that, over an average
follow-up of 5 years, almost half of all suicides are likely to occur in
patients considered at low risk, and that 95% of high-risk patients will
not die by suicide. :sup:`21` This creates a trade-off between the need
to be sensitive to the risk of suicide to reduce the chance of false
negatives and the need to be specific to avoid false positives that may
lead to unnecessary detentions. Assuming that it is impossible to
predict whether a person is going to take their own life and that the
best we can do is to estimate that 1 out of *X* people in a certain
cohort will die by suicide, then a society that allows compulsory
detention of people at risk of suicide has to admit that to save one
person it will have to unnecessarily detain (*X* − 1) people.

There are also concerns about whether compulsory detention may increase
the risk of suicide in some cases. First, some people may not seek
treatment because they are fearful of being forced to accept treatments
not of their choice or of being detained for prolonged periods.
:sup:`22` This would go against the WHO recommendation that a national
effort to prevent suicide should encourage people to seek help. Second,
there is an association between suicide and psychiatric admission to
hospital, as suicide risk peaks in the period immediately after
admission to hospital and shortly after discharge. :sup:`5,6,14,23,24`
This association can be explained in part by the fact that individuals
with higher risk of suicide are more likely to be admitted to hospital,
:sup:`25` but some argue that admission to psychiatric in-patient care
might actually increase the risk of suicide. The stigma, discrimination,
impact on employability, trauma, isolation and the feeling of
dehumanisation caused or augmented by compulsory admission to hospital
may contribute to the extremely high risk of suicide in the first few
days of admission and after discharge. :sup:`17,22,26,27` Although
further research is necessary, this hypothesis does not seem farfetched
given that people who are detained, disconnected from their social
circle and experience trauma, abuse and emotional distress are at a
higher risk of suicide. :sup:`1` Hence, it is possible that some of the
(*X*\ −1) people unnecessarily detained will in fact die by suicide as a
result of compulsory admission.

The trade-offs and tragic choices in compulsory admission to hospital
have clear human rights implications. Health systems and professionals
who are under pressure to be sensitive to the risk of suicide to avoid
breaching a patient's right to life will do so at the expense of
specificity. This leads to an increase in unnecessary detentions, which
interferes with the right to freedom of movement, autonomy, bodily
integrity and private life of those detained. It may also affect the
right to life of those whose risk of suicide increased as a result of
their stay in hospital. Therefore, the rules and practices regarding the
compulsory admission to hospital of people with mental disorders to
prevent suicide are always choices between different rights and
rights-holders.

There are also concerns about whether compulsory admission to hospital
is inherently discriminatory against people with mental disorders as it
denies them the right to decide about their own treatment. This concern
is reflected in the discussions about whether compulsory admission to
hospital is compatible with the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities (CRPD), in particular Article 14, which establishes
that ‘the existence of a disability shall in no case justify a
deprivation of liberty’. The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, :sup:`28` for instance, affirms in its guidelines on
Article 14 of the CRPD that the ‘legislation of several States parties,
including mental health laws, still provide instances in which persons
may be detained on the grounds of their actual or perceived impairment,
provided there are other reasons for their detention, including that
they are deemed dangerous to themselves or others. This practice is
incompatible with Article 14 […]’. Others, however, worry about how the
prohibition of compulsory detention and treatment for people with mental
disorders will affect the protection of other rights of people with
disabilities, such as their rights to health and to life. :sup:`29`

.. _S3:

The need for guidance
=====================

In conclusion, four things can be said about compulsory admission to
hospital as a measure for suicide prevention. First, it can save the
lives of those who, without the care, treatment and management received
in hospital, would have taken their own life. Second, owing to the poor
suicide predictive capacity of the existing methods, false positives
will occur and this results in unnecessary hospital admissions, which
can be aggravated if legal accountability encourages defensive clinical
practice. Third, there is the possibility that compulsory admission to
hospital is partially responsible for the suicides of those who failed
to seek help owing to the fear of involuntary detention or for whom the
experience of being admitted to hospital contributed to the decision to
take their own life. Fourth, it is still unclear how and if compulsory
admission to hospital of people on the basis of their mental impairment
and the risk of danger to themselves can be reconciled with the CRPD.

The trade-offs involved and the need for measures for the prevention of
suicide to be compliant with human rights make the creation of
guidelines concerning their use challenging, but necessary. The WHO is a
forum in which an evidence-informed, international, multi-stakeholder
discussion can shed light on the role (if any) that compulsory admission
to hospital should have in a national policy for the prevention of
suicide. It is unfortunate that the otherwise commendable 2014 report
missed this opportunity. It may be uncomfortable for those advocating
policies to prevent suicide to discuss compulsory admission to hospital
as this is a measure in which the line that separates protection and
harm can be very thin, and there is controversy about where it lies.
However, as those working in the area of suicide prevention already
know, avoiding a difficult issue is never the best way to deal with it.

.. [1]
   **Daniel Wei L. Wang**, Lecturer, School of Law, Queen Mary
   University of London. **Erminia Colucci**, Lecturer, Wolfson
   Institute, Queen Mary University of London.
