===================================================================================================================
Are men under-treated and women over-treated with antidepressants? Findings from a cross-sectional survey in Sweden
===================================================================================================================



Lena Thunander Sundbom
Kerstin Bingefors
Kerstin Hedborg
Dag IsacsonCorresponding author: Lena Thunander Sundbom (lts@hig.se)
 [1]_

:date: 2017-6

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To examine gender differences in self-reported
   depression and prescribed antidepressants (ADs). The Hospital Anxiety
   and Depression Scale was used to assess depression, and information
   on prescribed ADs was obtained from the Swedish Prescribed Drug
   Register.

   **Results** Depression was reported by 11.7% of the participants
   (12.3% men and 11.2% women). ADs were prescribed for 7.6% of the
   participants (5.3% men, 9.8% women). Among men, 1.8% reported
   depression and used ADs, 10.5% reported depression but did not use
   ADs, and 3.6% used ADs but did not report depression. The
   corresponding figures for women were 2.6%, 8.6% and 7.2%.

   **Clinical implications** Men report depression to a greater extent
   than women but are prescribed ADs to a lesser extent, possibly a sign
   of under-treatment. Women are prescribed ADs without reporting
   depression more often than men, possibly a sign of over-treatment.
   Although the causes remain unclear, diagnostic and treatment
   guidelines should benefit from considering gender differences in
   these respects.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Depression is currently considered one of the largest and fastest
growing health hazards.\ :sup:`1` Although only a small percentage of
all those with mental health problems contact healthcare professionals
and obtain a diagnosis, depression is one of the most common causes of
sick leave and disability.\ :sup:`2–5` Diagnosed depression was
relatively unusual 20 years ago, but the incidence has increased
remarkably with the introduction of new diagnostic guidelines and
antidepressant drugs. What was previously considered psychological
distress was then interpreted as a disease, with the risk of
over-diagnosis and over-treatment.\ :sup:`6–10` The point prevalence of
depression in the general population is now estimated as
3–9%.\ :sup:`1,11,12` There is an explicit gender impact on diagnosed
depression, with a 2:1 ratio of women/men; about one in four women and
one in ten men will develop depression severe enough to require
treatment at some time in their lives.\ :sup:`1,2,11,12` Moreover,
depression may present differently in women and men. Women may be more
prone to somatic symptoms of depression, whereas men appear to have more
melancholic symptoms and to be more susceptible to drug misuse and
aggressive behaviour.\ :sup:`13–17` To date, however, there is no clear
understanding of what causes these gender disparities in depression.
They are considered likely to be a combination of several factors:
biological, social and behavioural.\ :sup:`18,19`

Depression is a long-lasting and, if left untreated, often chronic
condition. Treatment usually lasts at least 6–12 months, and includes
pharmacological therapy with antidepressants (ADs).\ :sup:`20` The use
of ADs has increased dramatically in recent years.\ :sup:`21` According
to the national Swedish Prescribed Drug Register (SPDR), almost 9% of
the Swedish population was prescribed ADs in 2014, and 65% of these ADs
were prescribed for women.\ :sup:`22` Similar patterns have been found
in other countries.\ :sup:`23–25` The explanation for this escalation,
especially seen in women, remains unclear, but has sometimes been
interpreted as a sign of inappropriate use.\ :sup:`8,9` Nevertheless,
despite the widespread use of ADs, depression has repeatedly been shown
to be inadequately treated in the general population. Some studies have
found that fewer than one in four patients with depression are
prescribed ADs and that the duration of treatment is often shorter than
recommended.\ :sup:`26,27`

The ADs prescribed are primarily selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), although others, for example serotonin–noradrenaline reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), are also used depending on illness severity,
the patient's age and various adverse drug reactions.\ :sup:`20,28,29`
Gender impact has been observed not only on the number of ADs prescribed
but also on their type. For example, women are prescribed SSRIs more
often than men.\ :sup:`30`

We examined gender differences in the relationship between self-reported
depression and prescribed ADs, in the prevalence of self-reported
depression, and in the number and type of prescribed ADs.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Participants
------------

A questionnaire was sent to a random sample (*n* = 16 000, aged 18–84
years) of the Swedish population (totaling 9.5 million); responses were
received from 7725 people (48.3%), as presented in `Fig. 1 <#F1>`__. The
study complies with ethical research requirements, as approved by the
Regional Ethical Review Board in Uppsala, Sweden (Dnr 2012/073).
Participation in the study was voluntary and information about its
purpose was sent out with the questionnaire. Filling in and returning
the questionnaire was considered to be equivalent to the respondent
giving their agreement to participate in the study.

.. figure:: 146f1
   :alt: Study population, responders and non-responders, Sweden
   2012/2013.
   :name: F1

   Study population, responders and non-responders, Sweden 2012/2013.

.. _S3:

Assessment of depression and prescribed antidepressants
-------------------------------------------------------

Self-reported depression was assessed using the Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scale (HADS).\ :sup:`31` Of the 7725 available participants,
7618 (3435 men, 4183 women) filled in the HADS form (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__)
and all analyses were based only on these participants. The HADS was
developed to detect patients with high levels of psychological distress
and does not include assessment of somatic symptoms. It contains two
subscales, one each for anxiety and depression, each consisting of 7
items (score range 0–21) capable of distinguishing between these
diagnoses. Higher scores indicate higher levels of psychological
distress. Each subscale has three categories based on the score: 0–7
(normal), 8–10 (borderline) and 11–21 (abnormal). In this study, a
cut-off level of +8 was used on the depression scale; this level
indicates at least mild depression and provides an optimal balance
between sensitivity and specificity.\ :sup:`32`

Information on depression obtained from the HADS was linked (through the
participants' identification number, a unique lifetime personal
identifier given to all Swedish citizens) to prescription data.
Prescribed ADs were obtained from the SPDR, a national register held by
the National Board of Health and Welfare, which gathers data on all
dispensed prescriptions for patients in ambulatory care from the entire
Swedish population.\ :sup:`22,33` We collected information on ADs 0–6
months prior to the HADS evaluation. SPDR drugs are classified according
to the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification
system.\ :sup:`34` The ADs (N06A) were categorised as TCAs (N06AA, e.g.
amitriptyline, imipramine), SSRIs (N06AB, e.g. citalopram, fluoxetine),
‘others’ (N06AX, including SNRIs (e.g. venlafaxine) and tetracyclic
antidepressants (TeCAs, e.g. mirtazapine)), and monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs; N06AF, N06AG, e.g. moclobemide). The MAOIs were
excluded due to few users.

.. _S4:

Analyses
--------

The Statistical Analysis System software (SAS9.2, Cary, North Carolina,
USA) was used to perform chi-squared tests (χ\ :sup:`2`, *P*) to examine
gender differences in the relationship between self-reported depression
and prescribed ADs, and in prevalence of self-reported depression,
prescribed ADs, and type of ADs prescribed. Logistic regression analysis
(odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals) was used to examine
gender differences in self-reported depression, controlling for age.

.. _S5:

Results
=======

In total, 11.7% of the study population (12.3% men, 11.2% women;
χ\ :sup:`2`, n.s.) was classified as having self-reported depression.
Logistic regression analysis showed that the difference between men and
women was statistically significant, i.e. men reported depression more
often than women (OR 1.226 (CI 1.062–1.414)). According to the SPDR,
7.6% of the study population had been prescribed at least one AD during
the 6 months prior to the HADS evaluation. Significantly more women than
men were prescribed ADs: 5.3% of the men and 9.8% of the women were
prescribed at least one AD (*P*\ <0.0001).

`Table 1 <#T1>`__ presents gender differences in the relation between
prescribed ADs and self-reported depression in the study population.
Among the men, 1.8% reported depression and used ADs, 10.5% reported
depression but did not use ADs, and 3.6% used ADs but did not report
current depression, while 84.1% were neither depressed nor used ADs. The
corresponding figures for women were 2.6%, 8.6%, 7.2% and 81.6%. The
gender difference was statistically significant (χ\ :sup:`2`
*P*\ <0.001) in all age groups except the youngest, and was most marked
in the groups aged 45–64 and 65–74 years.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Relation between self-reported depression (assessed using the
      HADS) and prescribed antidepressants (ADs) in the study population
      (*n* = 7618), Sweden 2012/2013

   ===== ==== ===== ==== === ==== ==== === === === ==== ======
   \     Men  Women                                     
   ===== ==== ===== ==== === ==== ==== === === === ==== ======
   18–34 593  1.7   8.9  2.0 87.4 831  1.8 9.8 3.6 84.8   N.S.
   \                                                    
   35–44 475  1.9   11.8 2.3 84.0 576  3.1 8.7 6.8 81.4 <0.01
   \                                                    
   45–64 1277 1.8   10.6 4.6 82.9 1537 3.3 9.0 8.3 79.4 <0.001
   \                                                    
   65–74 740  1.5   9.9  3.6 85.0 811  2.1 6.8 9.2 81.9 <0.001
   \                                                    
   75–84 350  2.3   12.6 3.7 81.4 428  1.9 7.9 7.0 83.2 <0.05
   \                                                    
   Total 3435 1.8   10.5 3.6 84.1 4183 2.6 8.6 7.2 81.6 <0.001
   ===== ==== ===== ==== === ==== ==== === === === ==== ======

   χ\ :sup:`2` analyses comparing men and women.

The participants who had received at least one prescribed AD during the
6 months studied (*n* = 592: men *n* = 182, women *n* = 410) were
analysed with respect to the type of AD prescribed (`Table 2 <#T2>`__).
SSRIs were the most commonly prescribed ADs for both men (62.8%) and
women (71.0%), although women were prescribed them more often than men,
particularly in the age group 45–64 years (χ\ :sup:`2` *P*\ <0.05). By
contrast, there was no statistically significant gender difference for
the TCAs (men 14.8%, women 10.2%), except for in the age group 45–64
years. Further, men were prescribed ‘other’ ADs (e.g. SNRIs and TeCAs)
significantly more often than women (men 39.3%, women 28.1%; χ\ :sup:`2`
*P*\ <0.01).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Types of antidepressant (ATC classification) among participants
      prescribed at least one antidepressant (*n* = 592), by age and
      gender, Sweden 2012/2013

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+-------+------+------+-------+------+------+-------+
   |       | U     | SSRIs | TCAs  | O     |      |       |      |      |       |      |      |       |
   |       | sers, | (N    | (N    | thers |      |       |      |      |       |      |      |       |
   |       | *n*   | 06AB) | 06AA) | (N    |      |       |      |      |       |      |      |       |
   |       |       |       |       | 06AX) |      |       |      |      |       |      |      |       |
   |       |       |       |       | \ `a  |      |       |      |      |       |      |      |       |
   |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |      |       |      |      |       |      |      |       |
   |       |       |       |       | 3>`__ |      |       |      |      |       |      |      |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+======+=======+======+======+=======+======+======+=======+
   | 18–44 | 144   | 42    | 102   | 69.1  | 73.5 | NS    | 9.5  | 5.9  | NS    | 38.1 | 29.4 | NS    |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+-------+------+------+-------+------+------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |      |       |      |      |       |      |      |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+-------+------+------+-------+------+------+-------+
   | 45–64 | 260   | 82    | 178   | 58.5  | 71.3 | <0.05 | 20.7 | 12.4 | <0.05 | 37.8 | 25.8 | <0.05 |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+-------+------+------+-------+------+------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |      |       |      |      |       |      |      |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+-------+------+------+-------+------+------+-------+
   | 65–84 | 188   | 58    | 130   | 64.4  | 68.5 | NS    | 10.2 | 10.8 | NS    | 42.4 | 30.0 | <0.05 |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+-------+------+------+-------+------+------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |      |       |      |      |       |      |      |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+-------+------+------+-------+------+------+-------+
   | Total | 592   | 182   | 410   | 62.8  | 71.0 | <0.05 | 14.8 | 10.2 | NS    | 39.3 | 28.1 | <0.01 |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+-------+------+------+-------+------+------+-------+

   ATC, Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical; NS, not significant; SSRIs,
   selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; TCAs, tricyclic
   antidepressants.

   For example, serotonin–noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, tetracyclic
   antidepressants.

   χ\ :sup:`2` analyses comparing men and women.

.. _S6:

Discussion
==========

The present study found that the relationship between self-reported
depression and prescribed ADs differs by gender. As in several other
studies,\ :sup:`26,27` the majority of those who reported depression in
our study did not use ADs, and overall, men used ADs to a lesser extent
than did women, although they reported depression to a greater extent.
This could have been caused by several factors. Many people, especially
men, prefer not to seek healthcare.\ :sup:`35` Women are clinically
diagnosed with depression far more often than men, probably not only
because they are more depressed but also because they are more likely to
seek healthcare, thus increasing the chance that their depression will
be detected.\ :sup:`36` Also, diagnostic criteria for depression
originate from a female norm and symptoms provided by women, leading to
an increased likelihood that depression in women will be
diagnosed.\ :sup:`15` Depression in men has a different presentation
than the classic depressive symptoms more often than in women, and this
could lead to men's mental health problems not being recognised and
therefore being under-treated.\ :sup:`13,35`

In contrast to diagnosed depression, previous studies using HADS to
assess depression have mostly found no gender differences or, like our
study, found a higher prevalence of depression in men.\ :sup:`37,38`
Since men experience more melancholic symptoms and women more somatic
symptoms (e.g. increased appetite and weight, and
hypersomnia),\ :sup:`13–17` the reversed gender differences in
depression assessed with HADS compared with clinically diagnosed
depression could be due to the fact that HADS's focus is more on
melancholic rather than somatic symptoms. Whether the HADS might be more
sensitive than other scales in detecting depression in men is as yet
unclear.

Other factors that could explain the relatively low use of ADs in our
study among the sample with depression might be that the depressed
participants may have been reluctant to accept treatment with ADs, a
choice that is possibly more common among men; they may not have needed
drug treatment, perhaps because other treatments were used (in mild
depression psychotherapy is considered as effective as drugs); or they
may not have had the prescribed drug dispensed. Many patients do not
adhere to treatment instructions, for example do not even obtain their
prescribed drugs (primary non-adherence), and prior studies have
suggested that both gender and illness severity affect
adherence.\ :sup:`39–42`

In our study, it was twice as common for women as for men to use ADs
when not currently depressed. This could indicate that their depression
was in remission, but it could also mean that women are being
over-treated with ADs. Several studies have found AD use to be higher
among women, and the increased prescription of ADs in recent decades is
especially notable among women.\ :sup:`23–25,30,43` The higher level of
AD prescribing to women may in part be attributed to the greater
consumption of healthcare among women in general.\ :sup:`36,44` Apropos
of this, there are studies that show that women are more likely than men
to receive a prescription during their medical visits.\ :sup:`45` The
lower threshold for prescribing ADs has led to a debate about the
possibility of over-prescription or of ADs being sometimes prescribed
where alternatives would be better.\ :sup:`7–9` It seems that even mild
symptoms are now considered indicative of disease and treated with
medications, although the efficacy is often limited in mild to moderate
depression.\ :sup:`7,46,47` Further, an expanding number of indications
(e.g. neuropathic pain, anxiety disorders, eating disorders and sleep
disorders) seen more often in women than in men are contributors to the
increasing trend to prescribe ADs, and this could explain some of the AD
use without depression seen in our study.\ :sup:`9,48`

As in other studies, the SSRIs were the main drugs in our
study.\ :sup:`28,30` Because of gender differences in the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of ADs, and because depression may
present differently in women and men, it has been suggested that men and
women could differ in their response to treatment and that
pharmacological treatments should therefore be chosen by
gender.\ :sup:`49–51` The women in our study used SSRIs more often than
the men. It could be that somatic symptoms respond better to SSRIs than
to TCAs. Another cause might be gender differences in adverse drug
reactions. However, supporting data are limited and sometimes
conflicting, and current treatment guidelines do not take gender into
account.\ :sup:`49,50,52` Regardless, it is important to continue to
examine any differences between men and women concerning
pharmacotherapeutic efficacy and adverse drug reactions.

.. _S7:

Limitations
-----------

The SPDR offers complete data on all dispensed drugs; however, it does
not give information on actual usage. Also, ADs during the 6-month
period were analysed without distinguishing whether the drugs had been
used for a long or a short time. Moreover, ADs are sometimes prescribed
for indications other than depression, which we could not control for.
However, previous studies have reported that depression remains the main
indication for AD use.\ :sup:`53` Participation in the study was
voluntary and there may have been selection biases. For example,
non-responders were more likely to be men than women. It is also
possible that people with current symptoms of depression would be less
likely to respond, introducing further bias to participant selection.
Depression assessed using the HADS (in the previous week) was not
directly linked to prescribed ADs via the SPDR (0–6 months prior to the
HADS evaluation). However, depression is often a prolonged state, and
problems in this respect that were encountered in the previous week were
probably not temporary. Finally, it is important to emphasise that a
cross-sectional design does not permit evaluation of causality to be
derived from the results.

.. _S8:

Summary of findings
-------------------

The relationship between self-reported depression and use of ADs
differed by gender. Overall, men were prescribed ADs to a lesser extent
than women, although they reported depression to a greater extent. By
contrast, women were prescribed ADs without reporting depression more
often than men. This may be a sign for under-treatment among men and
over-treatment among women. Further, men and women were prescribed
different types of ADs, possibly because of gender differences in
treatment outcomes and adverse drug reactions. Although the causes of
these findings remain unclear, diagnostic and treatment guidelines
should benefit from considering gender in these respects.

.. [1]
   **Lena Thunander Sundbom**, Pharm.Lic, Pharmacoepidemiology and
   Pharmacoeconomics, Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University,
   Uppsala, Sweden, and Faculty of Health and Occupational Studies,
   Department of Health and Caring Sciences, University of Gävle, Gävle,
   Sweden; **Kerstin Bingefors**, Associate Professor,
   Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Department of Pharmacy,
   Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; **Kerstin Hedborg**, Med.Dr,
   Faculty of Health and Occupational Studies, Department of Health and
   Caring Sciences, University of Gävle, Gävle, Sweden; **Dag Isacson**,
   Professor, Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Department of
   Pharmacy, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
