============================================================================
Spirituality and Narrative in Psychiatric Practice: Stories of Mind and Soul
============================================================================



Paramabandhu Groves [1]_
:Date: 2017-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Telling stories is probably as old as human culture. Our ancestors used
storytelling to entertain, instruct and make sense of their experience.
A psychiatric history, when well taken, should be more than a
fact-finding mission to provide a diagnosis and treatment plan. To be
effective in providing treatment, helping with healing and promoting
recovery, we need to know what matters to our patients. This includes
the realm of belief and practice encompassed by the broad term
spirituality. A book then that explores both spirituality and narrative
is welcome.

*Spirituality and Narrative in Psychiatric Practice*, like the term
spirituality, is broad in its scope. On the one hand, we have agnostic
atheist Jeremy Holmes describing in his chapter “Meaning without
‘believing’ ” the spiritual nature of mentalising. As he puts it, ‘an
intensely practical and loving pathway to spiritual aliveness’. On the
other hand, there are writers from a theistic background, such as mental
health chaplain Beaumont Stevenson, who considers how God or a higher
power may manifest in the everyday stories of patients, providing a
greater frame of reference than the story of self that often limits a
human's potential. The early chapters give a range of perspectives on
narrative. With characteristic clarity Andrew Sims indicates how through
careful psychopathological appraisal from attending to the patient's
story, it is possible to distinguish between spiritual experiences and
psychiatric symptoms. Later chapters explore narrative and spirituality
in a wide variety of themes such as affective disorders, offending
behaviour, psychosis and the end of life.

The subtitle of the book is *Stories of Mind and Soul* and it is the
stories that really shine. To preserve anonymity some are composite –
made up from several people's histories or typical examples – and
therefore feel somewhat artificial; nevertheless, they engage the reader
and serve didactic purposes well. Others are the words of individuals
who have been willing to share their stories, and these have a greater
ring of authenticity. In particular, the chapter by Jo Barber stands out
as an honest and moving account of someone who has struggled with mental
health problems and for whom spirituality has been important – at times
problematic but often a resource that has supported her ongoing journey
of recovery.

As the editors note in their concluding chapter, pressures on service
delivery may get in the way of the time and space to listen well to
patients' narratives. However, for good psychiatric practice, not taking
a good history is a short-cut we can ill afford. This work is a timely
reminder of the importance of the fundamental tool of psychiatry and a
welcome enjoinder to attend to what is significant to our patients.

.. [1]
   **Dr Paramabandhu Groves**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Camden &
   Islington NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; email:
   paramabandhu.groves@candi.nhs.uk
