---
author:
- Kenneth Davison
- Hamish McClelland
- Alan Kerr
- Martin Schapira
date: 2017-10
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
subtitle: ": Formerly Consultant Psychiatrist, Newcastle Health
  Authority, Honorary Lecturer in Psychiatry, University of Newcastle"
title: Kurt Schapira MD FRCP FRCPsych DPM
---

![](303f1){#F1}

Shortly after completing his house officer posts and national service in
the Royal Army Medical Corps, Kurt Schapira, who died recently aged 87,
was appointed a research fellow to the eminent neurologist Henry Miller.
More than 1150 patients with multiple sclerosis resident in
Northumberland and Durham on 1 January 1958 were reviewed by Dr
Schapira. Using this material, he jointly wrote 16 scientific articles
on various aspects of multiple sclerosis -- including its epidemiology
and clinical features -- many of which are still cited today. The study
made a major contribution to knowledge of this condition.^1^
Subsequently, fascinated by the emotional effects of multiple sclerosis
on the patients, Dr Schapira decided to switch to psychiatry. He
participated in Martin Roth\'s landmark studies on anxiety and
depression and undertook his own research into suicide and attempted
suicide, as well as on the treatment of anorexia nervosa. His
longitudinal studies relating suicide rates to social factors and the
availability of lethal methods were influential in demonstrating the
importance of a public health preventive approach to suicide.^2^ He
published several articles on these and other topics, including, with
others, a much-quoted paper on the influence of tablet colour in the
treatment of anxiety and depressive states.^3^

Born in Vienna to orthodox Jewish parents, Kurt\'s childhood was
disrupted by the death of his mother when he was aged 7 years. This was
followed by the incarceration of his father by the Nazis in Dachau and
then Buchenwald concentration camps. Fortunately, his father was
released from Buchenwald and allowed to travel to England before the
Second World War. Kurt lived in Berlin with a maternal aunt until the
age of 10, when he obtained a place on a Kindertransport train to
England. Having successfully negotiated a path through the British
educational system, Kurt was admitted to medical school in Newcastle --
then part of the University of Durham -- and qualified as a doctor in
1952.

He trained in psychiatry in the university department of psychiatry in
Newcastle, headed at that time by Martin Roth and James Gibbons. Within
the department he was promoted to first assistant and then senior
lecturer. In 1974 he became consultant psychiatrist to the Newcastle
Health Authority while retaining his university connection as an
honorary lecturer. He continued in this position until his retirement
from the NHS in 1989.

He lectured widely both in the UK and abroad, as far afield as Brisbane,
Minnesota, Montreal and Jerusalem. During his retirement he remained
active in research, especially into factors influencing the incidence of
suicide in Newcastle over three decades. His last published article on
the subject^4^ -- in collaboration with others, including his son Martin
-- appeared as recently as June 2016.

He undertook many responsibilities in both National Health Service and
university administration and was a member of several university
committees. Within the Royal College of Psychiatrists, he was a member
of Council (1979--82), the Education Committee (1979--82) and the Board
of Assessors of the *British Journal of Psychiatry* (1970--75), as well
as examiner for the membership and various other psychiatry-related
degrees at home and abroad. He was also elected President of the Section
of Psychiatry, Royal Society of Medicine (1980) and President of the
North of England Medico-Legal Society (1982).

Kurt enjoyed teaching and regularly topped the students\' ratings for
the quality of his lectures, which were notable for their combination of
wit and erudition. These attributes rendered him a popular speaker to
non-medical audiences, especially on the art of Chagall, Salvador Dali
and Van Gogh, and the artistic portrayal of doctors and lawyers. He was
a connoisseur of opera and classical music, particularly Verdi and
Mozart.

He was generous with his time in acceding to invitations to speak about
his childhood experiences to a variety of audiences, from schoolchildren
to prisoners, and was proud to meet Prince Charles recently at a
reception for Kindertransport survivors. A genial extrovert and renowned
raconteur, whose personality raised the spirits of his friends and
colleagues, he had a fund of humorous anecdotes, enhanced in the telling
by a trace of a Viennese accent. He often expressed his indebtedness to
England for accepting him as a refugee. Considering his many
contributions to the sum of human health and happiness, any debt has
been more than repaid.

He leaves Eva, his wife of 51 years, 3 children, 5 grandchildren, 4
great grandchildren and an older sister.
