======================================================================================
Adherence to NICE guidance on lifestyle advice for people with schizophrenia: a survey
======================================================================================

Lizzie Swaby
Daniel Hind
Rebecca Gossage-Worrall
David Shiers
Jonathan Mitchell
Richard I. G. HoltCorrespondence to Lizzie Swaby
(e.a.swaby@sheffield.ac.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-6

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** The STEPWISE trial (STructured lifestyle
   Education for People WIth SchizophrEnia, schizoaffective disorder and
   first episode psychosis) is currently evaluating a lifestyle
   education programme in addition to usual care. However, it is
   difficult to define what constitutes ‘usual care’. We aimed to define
   ‘usual care’ for lifestyle management in people with schizophrenia,
   schizoaffective disorder and first-episode psychosis in STEPWISE
   study sites. Ten National Health Service (NHS) mental health trusts
   participated in a bespoke survey based on the National Institute for
   Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance.

   **Results** Eight trusts reported offering lifestyle education
   programmes and nine offered smoking cessation support. Reported
   recording of biomedical measures varied.

   **Clinical implications** Although recommended by NICE, lifestyle
   education programmes are not consistently offered across UK NHS
   mental health trusts. This highlights missed opportunities to improve
   the physical health of people with psychotic illness. Our survey
   benchmarks ‘usual care’ for the STEPWISE study, against which changes
   can be measured. Furthermore, future studies will be able to identify
   whether any progress in clinical practice has been made towards
   achieving the NICE recommendations.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The prevalence of overweight (body mass index (BMI) >25 kg/m\ :sup:`2`)
and obesity (BMI>30 kg/m\ :sup:`2`) in adults with schizophrenia is
approximately twice that in the general population and while it has
increased in both groups in the past 30 years, the rate of increase is
greater in people with schizophrenia.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Weight gain often
occurs after initiation of antipsychotic treatment: over 50% of
individuals gain more than 7% of their initial body weight within the
first 12 months of treatment, with up to 86% gaining weight with some
types of antipsychotic.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Compared with the general
population, people with schizophrenia consume more fat and refined
carbohydrates and fewer vegetables,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)–(n.d.d)` are less
physically active and experience higher levels of
deprivation,\ :sup:`(n.d.e)–(n.d.f)` all of which are associated with
obesity. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
recommends that people with psychosis or schizophrenia, particularly
those taking antipsychotics, should be offered access to a combined
healthy eating and physical activity programme to aid in the prevention
of weight gain and its related comorbidities, leading to improved
quality of life.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` They should be supported by clinicians
to make choices about antipsychotic medication, informed by discussions
of likely benefits, possible side-effects, such as weight gain and
metabolic disturbance, and impact on other aspects of their physical
health. For those who smoke, help should be offered to stop
smoking.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

The STEPWISE study (STructured lifestyle Education for People WIth
SchizophrEnia, schizoaffective disorder and first episode psychosis;
ISRCTN19447796) was commissioned to evaluate the extent to which a
structured lifestyle education programme can support weight loss,
compared with usual care, when delivered to adults with schizophrenia,
including those with schizoaffective disorder or first-episode
psychosis, in a community mental health setting. In pragmatic trials,
practitioners are often allowed ‘considerable leeway in deciding how to
formulate and apply’ the treatment in a control arm defined as ‘usual
care’.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` While the result may be reflective of the care
received by patients outside the trial, there is often variation in care
in an active control arm, which may be difficult to
document.\ :sup:`(n.d.i),(n.d.j)` For this reason, study teams often try
to capture the active content of the control arm of their
trials.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` In this paper we describe a survey of ‘usual
care’ for the management of weight and other lifestyle factors in people
with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder and first-episode psychosis
in the ten participating study sites.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Research tool
-------------

The survey instrument consisted of 14 questions, which were a
combination of closed and open design, with the aim of eliciting
information about the implementation of the recent NICE guidance on
psychosis and schizophrenia at National Health Service (NHS) mental
health trusts in the UK, and consequently what is offered as ‘usual
care’. The survey was developed for the research study, based on the
physical health aspects of the NICE recommendations in clinical
guideline 178.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Questions followed the baseline
assessment tool published alongside the NICE guidance. The instrument
was piloted with one study site investigator (J.M.) on two occasions,
and each led to substantial changes to the tool. For instance, the
second iteration revised questions to ascertain proportions of patients
to whom certain criteria apply, rather than closed questions such as
‘Are patients referred to a healthy eating programme?’ The final version
of the tool also clarified which questions related to all patients with
schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder and first-episode psychosis, and
which questions related to patients with first-episode psychosis only
(the questionnaire is included in the `Appendix <#APP1>`__). This is in
line with the additional recommendations specified in the NICE guidance
for patients with first-episode psychosis who have recently been
prescribed antipsychotic medication; these additional questions were not
applicable to the management of patients with established mental
illnesses.

.. _S3:

Survey structure
----------------

Trusts were initially asked whether they offered a healthy eating and
physical activity programme. Subsequent questions asked for more
information about these programmes, including whether they were combined
or separate for healthy eating and physical activity; how patients
accessed them; and how often patients were referred to such services.
Additional information was sought on the availability of smoking
cessation services in this population and whether discussions took place
between patients and clinicians prior to antipsychotic treatment
initiation, including benefits of treatment, interactions with other
substances and other possible side-effects.

In addition, NICE recommend that a number of physiological measures
should be recorded both prior to the patient starting antipsychotic
medication and annually thereafter. Respondents were asked to comment on
how likely it was that each measure would be recorded at both of these
time points in their trust and how often patients on antipsychotic
medication have their weight recorded.

.. _S4:

Sample selection
----------------

The STEPWISE trial has ten centres in a variety of urban, suburban and
rural locations across England: Sheffield Health and Social Care NHS
Foundation Trust, Leeds and York Partnership NHS Foundation Trust,
Bradford District Care NHS Foundation Trust, Greater Manchester West
Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust, South London and Maudsley NHS
Foundation Trust, Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, Southern
Health NHS Foundation Trust, Devon Partnership NHS Trust, Somerset
Partnership NHS Foundation Trust and Cornwall Partnership NHS Foundation
Trust. A representative from each centre was invited to complete the
survey.

.. _S5:

Respondents
-----------

The principal investigators at each of the ten centres for the STEPWISE
trial were initially approached. Some of them completed the survey
themselves, while others delegated to trust physical health leads or
equivalent as they were better placed to answer the questions. Contact
was made via email in the first instance, with an invitation to attend a
teleconference with the STEPWISE research assistant (L.S.) to complete
the survey. Those who did not provide a response to the invitation
within 4 weeks were contacted again by reminder emails and/or by
telephone. Six of the ten sites' surveys were completed through
discussion via teleconference. The remaining four sites' surveys were
completed independently by a trust representative and written responses
were provided to the STEPWISE research assistant.

No sites required more than one reminder email/telephone call in order
to arrange completion of the survey. As the survey information was
requested from members of a research team, a favourable ethical opinion
from an NHS Research Ethics Committee was not sought and consent was
unnecessary. Responses provided organisational data only and did not
include any personal data. Responses from all sites were received
between 22 May and 28 October 2015.

.. _S6:

Analysis
--------

Descriptive statistics in the form of counts were produced for
quantitative variables. Supporting information provided by respondents
and information yielded from qualitative questions was summarised in
narrative form.

.. _S7:

Results
=======

.. _S8:

Healthy eating and physical activity programmes
-----------------------------------------------

Eight respondents reported that their trust offered programmes on
healthy eating and physical activity, which were mostly separate
programmes. Supplementary information indicated that provision was *ad
hoc* and interventions were rarely standardised. Most respondents
reported routinely inviting patients to access services such as
discounted local gym memberships, cooking groups and activity groups
delivered by local authorities and third-sector organisations. Two
trusts reported offering one-on-one advice sessions with healthy living
advisors or health trainers, but the sessions were usually advice-giving
and often more clinically focused rather than looking at the patient's
physical well-being.

Those trusts that offered trust-led programmes reported that these were
available in principle to all of their patients rather than specific
groups based on diagnosis. However, interventions were often accessed
only by certain groups of patients, usually through particular
clinicians or clinics. One trust estimated that 70% of their eligible
patients are referred to such services by mental health professionals,
based on recent Commissioning for Quality and Innovation (CQUIN)
results; other respondents were unaware of routine data from which they
could quantify referrals. Six trusts reported offering lifestyle advice
through open-ended group courses, three through courses delivered over a
fixed period and four through drop-in sessions.

.. _S9:

Smoking cessation advice
------------------------

Six respondents indicated that patients who smoke were offered help to
stop some of the time, three reported help was offered all of the time,
and one said this was not offered at all. Respondents who selected ‘some
of the time’ were unable to quantify this, but felt that this occurred
most of the time. Although it varied whether smoking cessation services
were offered by the trusts or external services, most offered a
combination of the two. Seven trusts reported offering trust-led smoking
cessation services, while others had trained smoking cessation advisors
but had no formal trust-offered service. Most trusts reported
signposting outpatients to external services, some of which were managed
by primary care, with advice leaflets available within the trust.

.. _S10:

Antipsychotic treatment initiation
----------------------------------

`Table 1 <#T1>`__ shows the reported levels of discussion about likely
benefits of treatment, as well as potential weight gain, diabetes and
metabolic side-effects and any other possible side-effects, across all
respondents. Most trusts who reported that the recommended discussions
took place ‘some of the time’ felt that this would be most of the time,
but there was a lack of evidence to support this. One site reported that
discussions would be dependent on the clinician, but that resources were
available to clinicians to support the discussions. Another site
suggested that such discussions may be part of an ongoing process rather
than all happening in one session, depending on the patient's level of
capacity.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Discussions with patients when deciding on antipsychotic treatment
      (*n* = 10 NHS trusts)

   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |                 | All of the time | Some of the     | Not at all |
   |                 |                 | time            |            |
   +=================+=================+=================+============+
   | Topic           |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |     Likely      | 7               | 3               | 0          |
   | benefits        |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |     Weight gain | 5               | 5               | 0          |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |     Diabetes    | 3               | 7               | 0          |
   | and metabolic   |                 |                 |            |
   | side-effects    |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |     Other       | 5               | 5               | 0          |
   | possible        |                 |                 |            |
   | side-effects    |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |                 |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   | Other           |                 |                 |            |
   | substances      |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |     Alcohol     | 5               | 5               | 0          |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |     Tobacco     | 2               | 8               | 0          |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |     Other       | 3               | 7               | 0          |
   | prescribed      |                 |                 |            |
   | medications     |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |                 | 0               | 10              | 0          |
   |  Non-prescribed |                 |                 |            |
   | medications     |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |     Illicit     | 3               | 7               | 0          |
   | drugs           |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+

`Table 1 <#T1>`__ also shows how often respondents reported discussions
taking place regarding the use of alcohol, tobacco, prescribed and
non-prescribed medications and illicit drugs, at the time of
antipsychotic treatment initiation.

`Table 2 <#T2>`__ shows how likely trusts considered that physiological
measures would be recorded prior to treatment initiation.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Recording of physiological measures prior to antipsychotic
      treatment initiation (*n* = 10 NHS trusts)

   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           | Very   | Likely | Neither   | Unlikely | Very     |
   |           | likely |        | likely    |          | unlikely |
   |           |        |        | nor       |          |          |
   |           |        |        | unlikely  |          |          |
   +===========+========+========+===========+==========+==========+
   | Weight    | 3      | 4      | 1         | 2        | 0        |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Weight    | 1      | 3      | 1         | 3        | 2        |
   | plotted   |        |        |           |          |          |
   | on a      |        |        |           |          |          |
   | chart     |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Waist     | 0      | 2      | 3         | 3        | 2        |
   | circ      |        |        |           |          |          |
   | umference |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Pulse     | 3      | 4      | 1         | 1        | 1        |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Blood     | 4      | 2      | 1         | 2        | 1        |
   | pressure  |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Fasting   | 0      | 5      | 1         | 2        | 2        |
   | blood     |        |        |           |          |          |
   | glucose   |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Random    | 2      | 4      | 0         | 3        | 1        |
   | blood     |        |        |           |          |          |
   | glucose   |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | HbA1c     | 2      | 2      | 1         | 2        | 3        |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Blood     | 2      | 4      | 0         | 2        | 2        |
   | lipid     |        |        |           |          |          |
   | profile   |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | A         | 2      | 4      | 2         | 0        | 2        |
   | ssessment |        |        |           |          |          |
   | of any    |        |        |           |          |          |
   | movement  |        |        |           |          |          |
   | disorders |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | A         | 3      | 3      | 1         | 3        | 0        |
   | ssessment |        |        |           |          |          |
   | of        |        |        |           |          |          |
   | nu        |        |        |           |          |          |
   | tritional |        |        |           |          |          |
   | status,   |        |        |           |          |          |
   | diet and  |        |        |           |          |          |
   | level of  |        |        |           |          |          |
   | physical  |        |        |           |          |          |
   | activity  |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+

.. _S11:

Ongoing monitoring of weight and other physiological measures
-------------------------------------------------------------

It was clear from the responses that there were variations in recording
patients' weight at the time points recommended by NICE (first at 6
weeks post-treatment initiation, then at 12 weeks, at 1 year and
annually thereafter), both between trusts and within trust services.
Some confusion exists regarding responsibility for annual patient
reviews in the community and whether these should be completed by the
general practitioner (GP) or the trust. Half of those surveyed reported
that it was neither likely nor unlikely that patients would have their
weight recorded weekly for the first 6 weeks, with three other trusts
reporting that this was very unlikely. There was an even spread across
all response categories as to whether weight was recorded at 12 weeks,
but at 1 year four of those surveyed reported that patients were very
likely to have their weight recorded. Six respondents reported that
weight was likely or very likely to be recorded annually thereafter,
although this was where the confusion arose regarding responsibility for
these reviews.

`Table 3 <#T3>`__ shows trusts' consideration as to how likely it was
that physiological measures would be recorded at least annually in
patients taking antipsychotic medication. One site felt they were unable
to answer this question, so we present data reflecting responses from
nine trusts.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Recording of physiological measures at least annually for patients
      on antipsychotic medication (*n* = 9 NHS trusts)

   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           | Very   | Likely | Neither   | Unlikely | Very     |
   |           | likely |        | likely    |          | unlikely |
   |           |        |        | or        |          |          |
   |           |        |        | unlikely  |          |          |
   +===========+========+========+===========+==========+==========+
   | Weight    | 3      | 4      | 0         | 2        | 0        |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Weight    | 0      | 3      | 3         | 2        | 1        |
   | plotted   |        |        |           |          |          |
   | on a      |        |        |           |          |          |
   | chart     |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Waist     | 0      | 2      | 2         | 3        | 2        |
   | circ      |        |        |           |          |          |
   | umference |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Pulse     | 2      | 4      | 1         | 1        | 1        |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Blood     | 3      | 4      | 1         | 1        | 0        |
   | pressure  |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Fasting   | 1      | 2      | 5         | 1        | 0        |
   | blood     |        |        |           |          |          |
   | glucose   |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | HbA1c     | 2      | 2      | 4         | 1        | 0        |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | Blood     | 2      | 1      | 4         | 2        | 0        |
   | lipid     |        |        |           |          |          |
   | profile   |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | A         | 1      | 4      | 3         | 1        | 0        |
   | ssessment |        |        |           |          |          |
   | of any    |        |        |           |          |          |
   | movement  |        |        |           |          |          |
   | disorders |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   |           |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+
   | A         | 3      | 1      | 3         | 2        | 0        |
   | ssessment |        |        |           |          |          |
   | of        |        |        |           |          |          |
   | nu        |        |        |           |          |          |
   | tritional |        |        |           |          |          |
   | status,   |        |        |           |          |          |
   | diet and  |        |        |           |          |          |
   | level of  |        |        |           |          |          |
   | physical  |        |        |           |          |          |
   | activity  |        |        |           |          |          |
   +-----------+--------+--------+-----------+----------+----------+

There was no correlation between which of the recommended physiological
measures were recorded by trusts prior to antipsychotic treatment
initiation or annually thereafter, although generally those trusts who
were likely to record particular measures prior to treatment initiation
were also likely to record the same measures at least annually
thereafter.

.. _S12:

Discussion
==========

.. _S13:

Principal findings
------------------

It was clear from this survey that there was great variation between
different NHS mental health trusts in the provision of healthy eating
and physical activity interventions routinely offered to patients, as
well as variation between clinicians within the same trust, with
interventions often accessed only through particular clinicians or
clinics. Commonly, trusts reported signposting or referring patients to
programmes offered by external services, such as gym memberships and
activity classes.

Most patients had access to a smoking cessation service should they
require it, and referrals to such services were reported to occur most
if not all of the time at nine out of the ten trusts surveyed,
regardless of whether the service was offered within the trust or run
externally.

When deciding on antipsychotic medication with newly diagnosed patients,
there was also variability in the reported discussions that took place
across trusts. All trusts reported that the likely benefits, weight
gain, diabetes and metabolic and other possible side-effects were
discussed with the patient at least some of the time; the possible
interference of other substances with prescribed antipsychotic
medication was also discussed.

Although at the early stages in the course of antipsychotic treatment it
was reported unlikely that trusts would record a patient's weight, as
recommended by NICE, by 1 year after treatment initiation a larger
proportion of trusts reported weight recording, with an increase for
annual reviews thereafter, despite the uncertainties regarding
responsibility for undertaking annual reviews in the community.

.. _S14:

Study strengths and limitations
-------------------------------

A strength of this survey was that its design was based on the NICE
guidelines to which mental health trusts should be adhering. This meant
that trusts' compliance with these recommendations could be assessed,
allowing us to elicit information on what programmes (if any) trusts
were offering in usual practice and how these compared with what is
recommended by NICE. This also allowed us to try to define ‘usual care’
in relation to the STEPWISE study, using a standard approach across all
trusts.

The survey was, in principle, a suitable method to elicit the same
information from all respondents; however, it was clear from the
responses that owing to the variability of services offered it was often
difficult to provide a succinct account using this survey tool. The
narrative information provided by the respondents proved more useful in
gaining a fuller picture of their usual care than the descriptive
statistics, which in some cases were a best guess, as clear data were
not always available.

Furthermore, responses were based on one member of staff's knowledge of
usual care in practice, and although this person was usually best placed
to answer the questions, from the survey responses received knowledge
may have been limited, especially as some interventions offered were
particular to a specific clinic or clinician and usual care may vary
within and between community mental health teams in any given NHS
organisation. In addition, how representative ‘usual care’ is in
comparison with NHS trusts not taking part in the STEPWISE study remains
unknown.

The levels of detail regarding the content of available services also
varied, perhaps indicating that the respondent had more involvement with
some programmes than others. Therefore, it was considered likely that
additional interventions may have been offered within trusts of which
the survey respondent was unaware.

In relation to implementation, a weakness in the survey was highlighted
when some responses were received through telephone discussion while
others were completed by the respondent and returned to the researcher.
No systematic differences between telephone and paper copy responses
were identified, although more supporting information was often provided
through telephone responses, as these were elicited through more of a
conversational discussion. This difference in response methods may have
caused questions to be perceived differently, although all telephone
participants had a copy of the questionnaire available to them at the
time of completion. Perceptions of appropriate levels of detail can
change with different methods of completion, which may lead to variation
in results. However, as such variation was evident between practices
offered as ‘usual care’ in the ten trusts surveyed, the impact of these
differences in completion method is considered likely to be small.

The variability in the information elicited has not allowed for a common
picture across all sites, as although a type of programme is recommended
by NICE, a particular standardised programme is not available across all
trusts. However, the survey did provide sufficient baseline information
to allow any changes in usual practice during the course of the STEPWISE
study to be monitored at a trust level, rather than across all study
sites as a whole. This will enable assessing at the end of the STEPWISE
study the extent of potential contamination between the intervention and
control arms of the trial, based on changes in practice reported in the
survey.

.. _S15:

Context
-------

Although there may be an increased awareness of the potential benefits
of some treatments, this does not ensure that such treatments are
implemented effectively. Evaluations and methods of improving the
implementation of NICE guidelines often have limited
attention.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` A systematic review undertaken by Berry &
Haddock\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` noted that the research around the
implementation of NICE guidelines on schizophrenia is relatively
limited, suggesting that these patients have poor access to
psychological interventions such as cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT).
Some barriers to implementation of NICE guidelines were reported, such
as insufficient support from trust management and the needs of
organisations. The paper also highlights that whereas NICE considers
randomised controlled trials (RCTs) to be the gold standard when
developing an evidence base for its guidelines, RCTs have also been
criticised for their poor ability to reflect the ‘real world’. The
authors suggest that targeting these barriers is key to facilitating
successful implementation of the guidelines.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`

It is therefore important to identify which aspects of the guidance are
not currently being followed, in order to target these areas for
implementation and improve clinical care. Not only is it important to
consider the implementation of guidance relating to monitoring of
biomedical measures, but there is also likely to be a limited effect
unless this is combined with sufficient intervention in behaviour or
treatment. Similarly, the mere fact of guidance or a trial does not
necessarily lead to substantive changes or better outcomes. Repeating
the survey annually will allow identification of any substantive,
systematic changes within the organisations, both since the introduction
of the NICE guidelines and throughout the duration of the STEPWISE
trial.

From a research perspective, the reported variation also has
implications for our study when defining ‘usual care’. If all trusts
adhered to all recommendations in the NICE guidelines, we could be
sufficiently confident that contamination between trial arms would be
minimal. However, as different levels of compliance with different
recommendations were evident, this does not allow for standardised
‘usual care’ across the study. This does mean that usual practice can be
compared over time within each trust individually, in order to assess
how much ‘usual care’ has changed throughout the course of their
participation in the STEPWISE study.

The Royal College of Psychiatrists' National Audit of Schizophrenia
includes standards on the monitoring of physical health in patients with
schizophrenia. The audit report in 2014 noted that the provision of
interventions is poor when there is evidence of physical health
risks.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` It highlighted barriers to intervention, such as
availability of staff time, facilities and equipment, the need for
formal systems to conduct annual reviews, and the need for more formal
arrangements regarding responsibility for physical health between
primary and secondary care.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` Standard 5 in the audit
specifically looks at interventions offered for particular physical
health risks. The overall results show that intervention for BMI>25
kg/m\ :sup:`2` was evident in 71% of patients, while interventions for
smoking were reported in 59% of patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`

For the ten trusts surveyed, the audit reported a range of 47–83% of
patients receiving intervention for elevated BMI, and 33–67% receiving
intervention for smoking. Overall, the audit also showed wide variation
in the monitoring of physical health risk factors. For example, the
range across all participating trusts for monitoring of BMI was 5–92% of
patients and 16–99% for the monitoring of glucose control. This is
supportive of the information yielded from the study survey and
highlights variability in services offered across
trusts.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`

.. _S16:

Implications for stakeholders
-----------------------------

This survey indicates that the ten sites surveyed are not fully
compliant with NICE physical health recommendations on the management of
patients with schizophrenia. However, as the guidelines were published
in March 2014, this is not surprising, because services require time to
commission and set up. In some respects, this alleviates the concerns
that the ‘usual care’ arm of the STEPWISE trial may converge with the
intervention arm, as there are no reported standardised programmes
offered across any of the trusts surveyed. However, there is such
variability observed that it becomes clear that ‘usual care’ is not the
same for all participants in the trial or in the wider population group.

We have not tried to assess the success or potential effect of any one
aspect of the physical health programme in comparison with others.
Although it may be argued that smoking cessation could have a greater
effect on physical health than healthy eating or physical activity
programmes, despite the lower compliance with NICE guidance, any
discussion is likely to be subjective. Furthermore, NICE does not
prioritise any one element, coming from an understanding that all
aspects are important and contribute to improved physical health.

As a future direction, it may be useful to try to identify patients at
higher risk of cardiovascular events, using recording of cardiovascular
disease risk factors in combination with risk engines to calculate risk
accurately. This identification process could then drive intervention.
This may be of interest to trusts as a method of offering a physical
health intervention to those patients who are likely to receive the most
benefit clinically. A suitable risk engine to calculate this would be
the PRIMROSE cardiovascular disease algorithm,\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` as this
has been developed specifically for people with severe mental illness.
The PRIMROSE model includes additional variables for psychiatric
diagnosis, psychotropic medication, harmful use of alcohol,
antidepressants and social deprivation score, unlike similar prediction
models used in the general population. This is perhaps why PRIMROSE
performed better than some other available published risk models, which
may overpredict the risk of cardiovascular disease in this
population.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)`

.. _S17:

Further research
----------------

The survey will be repeated with the same ten NHS trust representatives
at 12 and 24 months after the first iteration. This will allow the
STEPWISE study team to consider how trusts are implementing the NICE
guidelines and, consequently, whether convergence has occurred between
the two arms of the STEPWISE trial at an individual trust level. As
STEPWISE progresses, the participating NHS organisations may become more
aware of the need to undertake physical health interventions and so
‘usual care’ may improve, potentially diminishing the effect of the
STEPWISE intervention.

We acknowledge the STEPWISE research group: Katharine Barnard,
University of Southampton; Michael Bradburn, University of Sheffield;
Marian Carey, University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust; Heather Daly,
University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust; Melanie Davies, University
of Leicester; Christopher M. Dickens, University of Exeter; Angela
Etherington, PPI representative; Paul French, Greater Manchester West
Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust; Fiona Gaughran, South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; Tim Kendall, Royal College of
Psychiatrists; Kamlesh Khunti, University of Leicester; Richard
Laugharne, Cornwall Partnership NHS Foundation Trust; Paul McCrone,
King's College London; John Pendlebury, Greater Manchester West Mental
Health NHS Foundation Trust; Shanaya Rathod, Southern Health NHS
Foundation Trust; Stephen Wright, Leeds and York Partnership NHS
Foundation Trust; Thomas Yates, University of Leicester; Kathy
Greenwood, Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust; Sridevi Kalidindi,
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; Najma Siddiqi, Bradford
District Care NHS Foundation Trust; Glenn Waller, University of
Sheffield. We would also like to acknowledge those individuals who
contributed to and coordinated the survey responses at each trust.

.. container:: fig
   :name: F1

   .. image:: 137fig1a

   .. image:: 137fig1b

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.n.

.. [1]
   **Lizzie Swaby** is a Research Assistant, **Daniel Hind** is a Senior
   Research Fellow and Assistant Director, and **Rebecca
   Gossage-Worrall** is a Research Associate, all at Sheffield Clinical
   Trials Research Unit, University of Sheffield. **David Shiers** is
   Honorary Reader in Early Psychosis, Division of Psychology and Mental
   Health, University of Manchester. **Jonathan Mitchell** is a
   Consultant Psychiatrist, Sheffield Health and Social Care NHS
   Foundation Trust, Fulwood House, Sheffield. **RichardI. G. Holt** is
   Professor in Diabetes and Endocrinology, Human Development and Health
   Academic Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, and
   Honorary Consultant Physician at University Hospital Southampton NHS
   Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.
