============================================================================================
Teaching provision for old age psychiatry in medical schools in the UK and Ireland: a survey
============================================================================================



Sophia Bennett
Poppy Ilderton
John T. O'Brien
John-Paul Taylor
Andrew Teodorczuk
:Correspondence: Sophia Bennett
(sophia.bennett@nhs.net)  [1]_ [2]_

:date: 2017-10

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** This work builds on a survey first done in 1999
   to understand how old age psychiatry teaching is embedded in
   undergraduate medical schools in the UK and Ireland and the influence
   of academic old age psychiatrists on teaching processes. We invited
   deans of 31 medical schools in the UK and Ireland in 2015 to complete
   an online survey to reassess the situation 16 years later.

   **Results** Response rate was 74%. As found in the original survey,
   there was variation across medical schools in how old age psychiatry
   is taught. Half of schools stated there was not enough space in the
   curriculum dedicated to old age psychiatry, and not all medical
   school curricula offered a clinical attachment. Medical schools that
   involved academic old age psychiatrists in teaching (59%) showed a
   greater diversity of teaching methods.

   **Clinical implications** There is a need to recognise the importance
   of old age psychiatry teaching, with the consensus of opinion
   continuing to be that more curriculum space needs to be given to old
   age psychiatry. To achieve this we advocate increasing the number of
   old age psychiatrists with teaching roles, as relying on academics to
   teach and lead on curriculum development is challenging given their
   greater research pressures.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

With the ageing population and high prevalence of mental health burden
in the UK, it is becoming increasingly important that medical school
undergraduate curricula for old age psychiatry advance in line with
future demographic needs. This has been recognised by the General
Medical Council (GMC) in *Tomorrow's Doctors*,\ :sup:`1` which stresses
the importance of students learning about the special problems
associated with older people's health. The Royal College of
Psychiatrists has subsequently mapped the core undergraduate psychiatry
curriculum outcomes\ :sup:`2` on to the competencies listed in
*Tomorrow's Doctors.* Other UK national drivers, including the National
Health Service (NHS) Outcomes Framework\ :sup:`3` and the prime
minister's dementia strategy,\ :sup:`4` have highlighted the need for
the future workforce to be competent in caring for the needs of the
older person.

More broadly, there is also an increasing recognition that there is a
shortage of old age psychiatrists, and recruitment of trainees is less
than for other specialties (fill rate is 67% for training posts compared
with 80% in psychiatry as a whole). The Centre for Workforce
Intelligence (CfWI) in their in-depth review of the psychiatry
workforce\ :sup:`5` highlighted old age psychiatry as a particular
concern, with the strongest risk of a larger demandâ€“supply shortfall due
to weak workforce growth. Currently, there are 1.1 full-time old age
psychiatry certificate of completion of training (CCT) post holders per
100 000 population, but the workforce growth is not proportional to the
growth in the older population, and baseline demand and supply
projections anticipate a shortage of around 315 CCT holders in old age
psychiatry by 2033.

In 2012, the Royal College of Psychiatrists published its recruitment
strategy,\ :sup:`6` with the primary aim of increasing recruitment into
core psychiatry training, but the recommendations can be extended to old
age psychiatry specialty training. Arguably, the concept of increased
exposure to old age psychiatry and looking at the undergraduate
experience could be key to understanding why medical school graduates
may or may not consider this specialty as an appealing career choice.

This study builds on a previous survey, carried out in 1999, which found
that schools with established old age psychiatry academic departments
devoted more time to undergraduate teaching of old age psychiatry,
covered more topics and used a wider range of teaching
methods.\ :sup:`7` The aim of the current study was to determine how old
age psychiatry teaching is embedded in undergraduate medical schools in
the UK and Ireland. More than 15 years on from the original survey, we
sought to demonstrate how undergraduate provision of old age psychiatry
teaching has changed nationally and identify any ongoing gaps. Similar
surveys have been carried out by other non-psychiatric specialties
facing similar recruitment concerns, in particular geriatric
medicine.\ :sup:`8,9`

.. _S1:

Method
======

The study took place between January and November 2015. A questionnaire
(available in the `appendix <#APP1>`__) was developed and published in
electronic format using the Survey Monkey software
(`www.surveymonkey.com <www.surveymonkey.com>`__). It enquired about the
teaching provision of undergraduate old age psychiatry, covering whether
or not the curriculum included teaching of old age psychiatry; where in
the curriculum this teaching took place; whether academic old age
psychiatrists (i.e. person(s) working in old age psychiatry but with a
significant aspect of their job plan including research and/or medical
education) were involved in the organisation of teaching; the duration
of attachment to the specialty; the form and content of the teaching;
and the nature of the student assessment. There were free-text spaces
for respondents to qualify their answers if necessary. The questionnaire
was reviewed and the study endorsed by the Faculty of Old Age Psychiatry
of the Royal College of Psychiatrists.

The deans of all 31 UK medical schools were contacted by email and
letter, asking them to identify a respondent with sufficient awareness
of the undergraduate curriculum to allow completion of the survey, and
requesting that the letter or email be forwarded to them. Where initial
approaches and reminders were unsuccessful, members of the undergraduate
leads forum were contacted through the Faculty of Old Age Psychiatry and
invited to identify a respondent. As this was a survey requesting
information already in the public domain, no formal consent procedure
was undertaken and implied consent was assumed through participation.

The project met the Newcastle University preliminary ethical assessment
guidelines, indicating that a full university ethics committee review
was not required.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

Responses were received from 23 (74%) medical schools. No schools
responded that they did not wish to participate but 8 did not respond to
any form of communication (written, electronic and/or telephone). One
(4%) response was from a dean, 9 (40%) from a senior lecturer, 5 (22%)
from a consultant psychiatrist or programme director, 3 (13%) from a
reader in old age psychiatry, 4 (17%) from a professor and 1 (4%) from a
consultant physician.

Overall, 50% of respondents felt that there was not sufficient
curriculum space designated to old age psychiatry; however, many
appreciated the overlap with other specialties, including adult
psychiatry, neurology and care of the elderly.

.. _S3:

Staffing establishment of academic old age psychiatry
-----------------------------------------------------

`Figure 1 <#F1>`__ shows the current staffing establishment of academic
old age psychiatry. More than half of schools (59%) reported that
academic old age psychiatrists were involved in the organisation and
delivery of undergraduate teaching, compared with 40% in the original
survey. We found that 41% of schools have an academic old age
psychiatrist represented on the board of studies or equivalent.

.. figure:: 288f1
   :alt: Staffing establishment of academic old age psychiatrists.
   :name: F1

   Staffing establishment of academic old age psychiatrists.

.. _S4:

Organisation and delivery of teaching
-------------------------------------

A designated clinical attachment in old age psychiatry was present in
86% of schools. Of those, in 13% the duration of the clinical attachment
was dependent on individual student choice and in 41% there was the
opportunity to spend more time in old age psychiatry. All respondents
indicated that the majority of the teaching on cognitive assessment and
dementia was delivered by an old age psychiatrist. There was no
consistency between schools on when these topics were first covered,
with 14% covering them in the first year, 23% in the second year, 36% in
the third year, 23% in the fourth year and 5% in the fifth year.

With regard to time spent teaching old age psychiatry in the
undergraduate curriculum, again there was no consistent standard, and
reports ranged from a 1 h formal lecture to 25 days if the teaching on
dementia/delirium covered by other specialties was included. This amount
of time overlaps with that found in the original survey, in which time
ranged from 1 to 40 days. Both the present and previous survey\ :sup:`7`
found that other, more informal/unstructured teaching was also given,
but there was difficulty in quantifying the amount as this tends to
depend on the clinical attachment. Some schools also offered
self-directed teaching through podcasts or e-lectures (lectures
delivered online), which depended on student interest and motivation.

A variety of teaching methods were used (`Table 1 <#T1>`__), but with a
large proportion primarily using lectures and tutorials as the main
format of teaching (82% and 86%, respectively, *v*. 73% and 55% in the
original survey). As with the original survey, schools where academic
old age psychiatrists were involved in the organisation and delivery of
teaching showed greater teaching method diversity and more use of
innovative methods of teaching, such as interprofessional learning,
e-learning and simulation, than those schools where there was no
academic involvement. However, the overall figures were low (`Table
1 <#T1>`__) and significance was only reached for simulation (*P* =
0.03) and home visits (*P* = 0.02). Of all schools, 50% responded that
they involved carers or patients when delivering organised teaching
sessions.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Method of teaching delivery

   =========================== ======== ====== ====================
   \                           *n* (%)         
   =========================== ======== ====== ====================
   Lectures                    12 (92)  6 (60) 0.13
   \                                           
   Tutorials                   11 (85)  8 (80) 0.57
   \                                           
   Bedside teaching            10 (77)  7 (70) 1.00
   \                                           
   Problem-based learning      5 (38)   4 (40) 1.00
   \                                           
   Interprofessional education 7 (54)   3 (30) 0.40
   \                                           
   e-learning                  8 (62)   2 (20) 0.09
   \                                           
   Simulation                  5 (38)   0 (0)  0.03\ `\* <#TFN2>`__
   \                                           
   Home visits                 13 (100) 6 (60) 0.02\ `\* <#TFN2>`__
   \                                           
   Joint teaching              6 (46)   2 (20) 0.38
   \                                           
   Other                       0 (0)    1 (10) 0.43
   =========================== ======== ====== ====================

   Binomial probability *P* = 0.03 for all the teaching methods where
   there is academic involvement.

   *P* â©½ 0.05.

.. _S5:

Content and assessment of old age psychiatry teaching
-----------------------------------------------------

In 95% of schools the undergraduate curriculum contained specific old
age psychiatry outcomes, compared with 100% of schools in the original
survey, where the undergraduate curriculum contained some theoretical or
clinical teaching of old age psychiatry. All schools were teaching
cognitive assessment and dementia (95% in the original survey) but, as
found in the original survey, fewer indicated that they covered
affective disorders (82% *v*. 91%) or psychotic disorders (77% *v*.
82%). Even fewer covered service organisation (36% *v*. 59%) (`Table
2 <#T2>`__). A variety of assessment methods are used (`Table
3 <#T3>`__), with the most common (82%) being the observed structured
clinical examination (OSCE). In the original survey, student assessment
was most commonly by â€˜formal examinationâ€™ (68%) and assessment of
performance during the clinical attachment (64%).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Teaching content

   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Topic          | Schools with   | Schools        | Ï‡\ :sup:`2`    |
   |                | academic old   | without        | (*P*)          |
   |                | age            | academic old   |                |
   |                | psychiatrist   | age            |                |
   |                | involvement    | psychiatrist   |                |
   |                | (*N* = 13)     | involvement    |                |
   |                |                | (*N* = 10)     |                |
   +================+================+================+================+
   | Cognitive      | 13 (100)       | 10 (100)       | 1.00           |
   | assessment     |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Dementia       | 13 (100)       | 10 (100)       | 1.00           |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Delirium       | 10 (77)        | 10 (100)       | 0.23           |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Affective      | 10 (77)        | 8 (80)         | 1.00           |
   | disorders      |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Psychotic      | 9 (69)         | 8 (80)         | 0.66           |
   | disorders      |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Service        | 4 (31)         | 4 (40)         | 0.69           |
   | organisation   |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Mental Health  | 11 (85)        | 7 (78)         | 0.62           |
   | Act            |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Cultural       | 7 (54)         | 4 (44)         | 0.68           |
   | issues         |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Other          | 2 (15)         | 0 (0)          | 0.49           |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Teaching and assessment methods in old age psychiatry

   ================== ==================
   Assessment         Schools (*N* = 23)
                      *n* (%)
   ================== ==================
   Formal examination 11 (49)
   \                  
   OSCE               18 (82)
   \                  
   Long case          4 (18)
   \                  
   MCQ                14 (63)
   \                  
   Coursework         6 (27)
   \                  
   e-portfolio        3 (13)
   \                  
   Logbook            10 (45)
   \                  
   Essay              4 (18)
   ================== ==================

   MCQ, multiple-choice questions; OSCE, observed structured clinical
   examination.

`Table 2 <#T2>`__ also shows the content of teaching according to
whether there is academic involvement which did not reach significance
for any topic.

.. _S6:

Discussion
==========

Arguably, the most powerful message from this survey is that 50% of
respondents did not feel that sufficient curriculum space is designated
to old age psychiatry. This had been a concern in the original survey,
in which 57% of schools had reported that there were significant
obstacles to introducing and maintaining old age psychiatry teaching in
the undergraduate curriculum. This raises the question of how much
progress has been made over the past 15 years. Similar surveys done in
elderly care medicine, a specialty facing a similar recruitment problem,
have also found that inadequate time (<2 weeks) is spent teaching about
subjects related to ageing, including dementia, which does not reflect
the predominance of older patients in most doctors'
workload.\ :sup:`8,9,10`

The main finding in the original survey undertaken in 1999 had been that
those medical schools with established academic old age psychiatry
departments provided more teaching of old age psychiatry and are more
likely to embrace new teaching methods.\ :sup:`7` Our survey showed that
59% of schools have academic old age psychiatrists involved in the
organisation and delivery of undergraduate teaching and 41% have an
academic old age psychiatrist represented on the board of studies or
equivalent. Similar to the original survey the main finding from the
current survey is that schools where academic old age psychiatrists are
involved in the organisation and delivery of teaching are more likely to
use a greater diversity of teaching methods; however, only the use of
simulation and home visits were found to be significant.

These results should be interpreted in the context that academics now
may be less engaged in organising teaching (unless they are specifically
medical educators) as they have predominantly research roles and greater
research pressures. This highlights a need to drive up the number of
other old age psychiatrists with teaching roles.

In the original survey all of the schools reported that the
undergraduate curriculum contained some theoretical and/or clinical
teaching of old age psychiatry and in our survey 95% of schools reported
that their undergraduate curriculum contains specific old age psychiatry
outcomes. Worryingly not all schools offer a clinical attachment in old
age psychiatry (86%, slightly higher than in the original survey (82%)),
and in those that did, the organisation of this is variable. As with the
original survey, the amount of time offered varies considerably, and in
some schools student exposure to old age psychiatry depends on
individual clinical attachments. A wide range of teaching formats are
reported, with the commonest methods being lectures and tutorials. Other
methods, such as interprofessional teaching, e-learning and simulation,
are less common (`Table 1 <#T1>`__). Similarly, there was relatively low
patient and carer involvement in teaching (50%).

Low use of interprofessional teaching and involvement of patients and
carers in particular are missed opportunities, as evidence has shown
that interprofessional education (IPE) can be used to significantly
improve confidence and change attitudes in staff managing older patients
with dementia or delirium.\ :sup:`11` This style of teaching delivery
could therefore also be applied to undergraduates, especially at a time
when the expectation from the GMC is for greater IPE within curricula to
improve team-working skills.\ :sup:`1,11` As such, teaching on topics
relevant to old age psychiatry could be the hook through which it is
possible to drive up the amount of IPE, and hence development of
team-working skills within the broader medical curricula, as well as
fostering more positive attitudes towards the older patient and
improving recruitment into this specialty.

As regards the content of teaching, all schools are delivering teaching
on dementia and cognitive assessment and the majority (91%) are teaching
on delirium. It is concerning that not all schools cover affective and
psychotic disorders (82% and 77%, respectively) in this age group as,
unlike dementia and delirium, these topics are less likely to be covered
by other specialties, and their presentation and management differ
considerably compared with general adult psychiatry. As with the
original survey,\ :sup:`7` cultural issues were covered less (50%).
Academic involvement in teaching did not lead to any significant
difference in the content of teaching, which should be expected if
medical schools are using a standard curriculum and is perhaps
reassuring given that not all medical schools will have academic old age
psychiatrists involved in the organisation of teaching.

In contrast to the original survey, where student assessment was most
commonly by a â€˜formal examinationâ€™, this survey showed that an OSCE was
the most commonly used method of assessment, with other techniques, such
as assessed coursework and portfolios or logbooks, less frequently
reported (`Table 3 <#T3>`__). The need to ensure that teaching and
assessment in medical schools is done to a high standard is crucial as
assessment drives learning. However, we do not advocate a standardised
assessment process as there are contextual variations in teaching
nationally. What is important for educators is to understand what is
being assessed and thereby select the correct assessment format as per
the Millers Pyramid,\ :sup:`12` i.e. multiple choice questions to test
knowledge, OSCEs to assess performance. This would enable assessment
processes to be undertaken in an appropriate manner and for schools to
demonstrate that learning outcomes have been achieved by students.

.. _S7:

Implications for recruitment
----------------------------

Given the concerns about recruitment into old age psychiatry, it is
important to consider the influence of the undergraduate curriculum
experience of old age psychiatry on postgraduate career choice. A survey
of graduates from Liverpool University 5 years
post-qualification\ :sup:`13` found that the majority felt their career
choice was primarily dictated by their postgraduate experience rather
than their undergraduate clinical attachments. However, in another
survey of graduates, Goldacre *et al*\ :sup:`14,15` found that factors
during undergraduate experience significantly outweighed any
inclinations before entry to medical school concerning the influence on
career choice. They also found that career choices were greatly
influenced by a particular teacher or department. The importance of a
good role model has also been identified by surveys in other
specialties,\ :sup:`16â€“18` highlighting the importance of individuals in
fostering enthusiasm and interest in a specialty.

Specialties with similar recruitment problems to old age psychiatry have
found that the most significant factors influencing final-year medical
students in their career choice were clinical mentors and
specialty-themed, problem-based learning cases.\ :sup:`18` However, for
psychiatry as a whole, other studies have found that attitude changes
towards considering a career in this specialty were similar whether
students were taught with problem-based learning or with a more
traditional curriculum.\ :sup:`19,20`

In elderly care medicine, a study done at the University of
Aberdeen\ :sup:`21` found that an intensive 8-day programme increased
the likelihood of fourth-year medical students considering this
specialty as a career. Several US studies have shown that a positive
attitude towards older people increases the likelihood of pursuing a
career in care of the elderly and that increased exposure to this
specialty during medical school has a positive influence on
attitudes.\ :sup:`22â€“24` This supports the view that the most effective
interventions to increase recruitment of elderly care physicians should
focus on positively influencing medical students' attitudes during
medical school through meaningful experiences during clinical
attachments, findings which could be extrapolated to include old age
psychiatry. Indeed, US and Canadian surveys looking at factors that
influence medical students choosing old age psychiatry as a career have
found that one of the key factors is completing an old age psychiatry
rotation alongside specific teacher attributes and training
experiences.\ :sup:`25,26` These findings support our key
recommendations (`Box 1 <#box1>`__).

.. _S8:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

The response rate to this survey was good (74%), although it must be
acknowledged that there may still have been a response bias, with a
poorer return from the schools without a strong academic old age
psychiatry department or representative for undergraduate teaching
provision in old age psychiatry. Consequently, we may have
underestimated the poorest end of the spectrum.

**Box 1** Key recommendations

#. Old age psychiatry should be offered as a clinical attachment in all
   medical schools.

#. All schools should deliver specific old age psychiatry outcomes in
   the undergraduate curriculum including affective and psychotic
   disorders, legal and cultural issues.

#. A minimum time delivering formal teaching and time spent on clinical
   attachment should be agreed by the College with medical schools to
   ensure adequate exposure in old age psychiatry.

#. Schools should strive to drive up the number of old age psychiatrists
   with teaching roles and ensure they are supported in delivering a
   greater diversity of teaching methods and acting as positive role
   models.

#. There should be greater use of patients and carers in teaching to
   help foster positive attitudes.

#. The use of interprofessional learning should be recognised in driving
   up the status of old age psychiatry and ability to practise
   effectively in collaboration with other professions.

#. There is a need to ensure that schools teach and assess to a similar
   high standard in order to demonstrate that old age psychiatry
   outcomes have been addressed.

#. Future surveys should look at surveying medical students on their
   opinion and experience of old age psychiatry as well as career
   intentions.

Of the responding schools, data were collected from only one
representative, with the hope that the respondent identified from each
school would be whoever had suitable knowledge of the undergraduate
curriculum. There is a possibility, however, that some of these
representatives may have had an inadequate or biased overview of the
undergraduate curriculum and that not all information was reported or
accurate.

It was apparent through some of the free-text responses that some
schools found it difficult to quantify the length of time spent teaching
curriculum outcomes specific to old age psychiatry. For medical schools
with an integrated curriculum, it may have been difficult to extract
this information, as there is an overlap with other specialties who may
have delivered this teaching.

It must be acknowledged that a limitation in the comparisons of academic
old age psychiatrist involvement is that results reported were
uncorrected and it is likely that there may have been no significant
difference due to the overall numbers being low, and the number of
comparisons being made. A further limitation was that the survey
explores the taught curriculum and does not cover student-selected
topics or the fact that some medical students may choose to do a
research period in old age psychiatry. There are also no data regarding
the opinion of medical students, and subsequently the influence of
individual schools' undergraduate experience on career intention.
Consequently, the assumption could not be made that medical schools with
a mandatory clinical attachment in old age psychiatry and embracing more
innovative methods of teaching delivery had a positive effect on
intention to pursue old age psychiatry as a career. Further research is
needed to explore the experience of the curriculum on paper and the
â€˜hidden curriculumâ€™ experienced by the students by means of surveys and
focus groups of undergraduate students as well as following up cohorts
of students into their chosen career.

.. _S9:

Recommendations
---------------

With the ageing population and increasing complexity of their needs, it
is imperative that the future generations of doctors are suitably
equipped with the knowledge, skills and attitudes for dealing with
future challenges. It is especially important that the undergraduate
experience fosters positive attitudes about old age psychiatry as a
specialty and potential future career to try to address the workforce
crisis we currently face. This survey of teacher practice has
highlighted that there is still variation across medical schools in how
old age psychiatry is taught, and made recommendations in how
undergraduate experience of old age psychiatry can be enhanced. The
value of interprofessional learning, as well as more involvement of
patients and carers, should be recognised in improving the
attractiveness and status of old age psychiatry. Although there may have
been progress over the past 15 years in embedding old age-specific
outcomes in the undergraduate curriculum, the consensus of opinion does
continue to be that more curriculum space needs to be given to old age
psychiatry.

#. Which medical school are you responding on behalf of? â€”â€”â€”â€”

#. What is your job title? â€”â€”â€”

#. What is the current staffing establishment in academic old age
   psychiatry?

   (number of posts 0 1 2 3 4 5 >5) (professor/reader/senior
   lecturer/lecturer/research fellow/research assistant)

#. Which of the following best describes the style of teaching at your
   medical school? (traditional (i.e. lectures and tutorials during
   years 2â€“3 followed by the clinical years), integrated (i.e. clinical
   attachments from year 1), problem-based (i.e. student-centred
   teaching), other.)

#. Does the undergraduate curriculum contain specific old age psychiatry
   outcomes? (yes/no/don't know)

#. Which topics are covered? Tick all that apply (cognitive
   assessment/dementia/delirium/affective disorders/psychotic
   disorders/depression/service organisation/Mental Health Act/cultural
   issues/other/none of the above)

#. How much time is spent teaching old age psychiatry in the
   undergraduate curriculum? (e.g. approximate number of days) â€”â€”â€”â€”

#. When is dementia and cognitive assessment first covered? (first
   year/second year/third year/fourth year/fifth year)

#. Are there plans to incorporate the recent Health Education England
   dementia curriculum into the teaching program? (yes/no/don't know)

#. Who delivers the majority of the teaching on cognitive assessment and
   dementia? (old age psychiatrist/other (please specify))

#. Is there a clinical attachment in old age psychiatry? (yes/no)

#. Is the duration of a clinical attachment in old age psychiatry
   dependent on individual student choice? (yes/no/compulsory attachment
   with opportunity to spend more time on old age psychiatry/compulsory
   attachment with no further opportunity to spend more time on old age
   psychiatry)

#. Which teaching methods are used for old age psychiatry teaching? Tick
   all that apply (lectures/tutorials/bedside teaching/problem-based
   learning/inter-professional/e-learning/simulation/home visits/joint
   teaching/other)

#. Are carers or patients involved in the delivery of teaching? (yes/no)

#. Which methods are used to examine students on old age psychiatry?
   (formal examination/OSCE/long
   case/MCQ/coursework/e-portfolio/logbook/essay/other)

#. Are academic old age psychiatrists involved in the organisation and
   delivery of undergraduate teaching of old age psychiatry?
   (yes/no/don't know)

#. Are academic old age psychiatrists represented on your board of
   studies or equivalent? (yes/no/don't know)

#. Do you think that there is sufficient curriculum space given to old
   age psychiatry? (yes/no)

#. Any other comments re: teaching of old age psychiatry? â€”â€”â€”

#. Would you like a copy of the results? (yes/no)

.. [1]
   Joint senior authors.

.. [2]
   **Sophia Bennett**, ST5 old age psychiatry, and **Poppy Ilderton**,
   medical student, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK; **John
   O'Brien**, Professor of Old Age Psychiatry and Honorary Consultant,
   University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; **John-Paul Taylor**,
   Clinical Senior Lecturer and Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist,
   Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK; **Andrew Teodorczuk**, Associate
   Professor, School of Medicine and Health Institute for the
   Development of Education and Scholarship (Health IDEAS), Griffith
   University, Queensland, Australia.
