===========================================================
Does the cognitive therapy of depression rest on a mistake?
===========================================================

Richard G. T. GippsCorrespondence to Richard G. T. Gipps
(richard.gipps@admin.ox.ac.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-10

:Abstract:
   Cognitive therapy for depression is common practice in today's
   National Health Service, yet it does not work well. Aaron Beck
   developed it after becoming disillusioned with the psychoanalytic
   theory and therapy he espoused and practised. But Beck's
   understanding of psychoanalysis appears to have been seriously
   flawed. Understood rightly, the psychoanalytic approach offers a
   cogent theory and therapy for depression which, unlike the cognitive
   approach, takes us to its emotional-motivational roots. A clinically
   successful therapy can afford to eschew theory and rest on its
   pragmatic laurels. This is not the case for cognitive therapy. The
   time is right to re-examine the psychoanalytic theory and treatment
   of depression.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) is, alongside antidepressant
medication and counselling, today's mainstay treatment for depression in
the UK. Such treatments tend to work better than nothing at
all,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` yet in general fare little better than
placebo,\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.c)` suffer relatively high relapse rates,
and often struggle to provide a complete
remission.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.e)`

CBT treatments for anxiety disorders, by comparison, appear more
successful.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` They work by helping the patient articulate,
then transcend, their underlying inchoate fears, the transformative
learning happening directly within action and experience. This bottom-up
experiential focus contrasts with the cognitive treatment of depression,
where the patient is more typically trained in an arduous top-down task
of managing unhealthy habits of mind through attentional and behavioural
training and rational self-management.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

One reason for the rather low remission and high relapse rates for
CBT-treated depression may be that the treatment does not reach to the
emotional roots of the problem. That CBT principally theorises and
treats the maintaining, rather than identifies underlying, causes of
depression was acknowledged by Aaron Beck, the American psychiatrist who
developed the cognitive aspect of this pragmatic depression treatment in
the 1950s.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`

The psychoanalytic psychology Beck displaced had a theory of the root
cause of depression: avoidance of intolerable emotion blocks healthy
emotional functioning, depletes uncontrived self-possession, and lowers
self-esteem.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` But his clinical experience (as a
psychoanalytic psychotherapist) and scientific research (on depression,
anger and dreaming) led Beck to discount the significance of such
unconscious emotion. Ever the pragmatist, he focused instead on treating
the conscious assumptions and ruminations of the patient which, he
proposed, were maintaining their depressive state.

This article argues that the versions of psychoanalytic theory and
therapy Beck espoused, practised and then rejected were recondite and
implausible. The claim is that Beck mistakenly threw out the
psychoanalytic baby of a significant psychological understanding and
treatment of depression with the bathwater of a rather idiosyncratic
understanding of psychoanalytic theory and practice. The thesis offered
is theoretical rather than scientific: it considers the fundamental
conceptual matter of how that theory is itself to be understood, rather
than the secondary empirical matter of evidence for or against
hypotheses derived from particular interpretations of it. But given the
availability of far more plausible versions of psychoanalytic theory and
practice that outline and treat depression at its emotional roots, and
given the relatively poor success of CBT for depression, the time is now
right to put the psychoanalytic theory back on the table and test
hypotheses and therapies derived from it.

.. _S1:

Psychopathological theory
=========================

An important theme in psychoanalytic psychopathology has depression
resulting from the avoidance of feelings of loss. When the acute sadness
of letting go of a beloved or an aspiration is too painful, the patient
may avoid it by shutting down and instead become flat and morose. This,
however, prevents adaptation to loss, since sadness is simply the most
fundamental form that our recognition of loss takes. Another especially
significant theme has depression resulting from the unconscious
avoidance of anger towards those to whom we are attached. Rather than
risk the feared relational fallout from expressing anger, the patient
unconsciously depletes herself, trading that sense of self-worth that
would be provided by an angrily assertive sense of injustice for the
stability of her relationship. A third theme has depression resulting
from the unconscious avoidance of fear. Rather than face the
vicissitudes of uncontrollable fate in one's love and work, the patient
instead constructs and lives in a dismal and diminished version of
himself, his situation and his future. Even if life thereby becomes
grim, at least now it will not take him by surprise.

Such ideas form but three strands of a more complex psychoanalytic
conceptualisation of depression,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)–(n.d.i)` but are fairly
widespread in both popular and clinical culture for good reason. For
clinically what we discover, again and again in straightforward cases,
is a depressed person who avoids sadness, fear and in particular anger
by going flat, downgrading her sense of her own value, shutting down
self-assertion, not allowing herself to get even reasonable hopes up,
falsely characterising herself as perpetrator rather than victim of
relational injustices, characterising herself as deserving of treatment
which reasonable others would consider unjust, denying the significance
of her unmet emotional needs, and envisaging a world in which the
exercise of agency appears foolhardy. In more complex cases, however, we
find masochistic self-abasement added to an anger-avoiding dynamic:
unconscious hatred towards another breaks through the attempts at
self-suppression and gives rise to intolerable guilt, and this in turn
inspires self-punishment where the anger towards the other is
‘retroflected’ (taken out on oneself), leading to further and darker
melancholic misery.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)`

It was by way of a reaction against such psychoanalytic theory that a
young, psychoanalytically minded American psychiatrist and dream
researcher developed the theory and practice of cognitive therapy.
Following a helpful personal experience of psychoanalysis, Aaron Beck
treated several depressed patients using psychoanalytical methods,
applied (albeit unsuccessfully) for membership of the American Institute
of Psychoanalysis, and published a few papers on psychoanalytic
psychotherapy and on the themes of his depressed patients'
dreams.\ :sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.l)` Reading these today we learn in
particular of his scientific interest in the increased prevalence of
thwarted, deprived, excluded, rejected, injured and ashamed themes in
his patients' dreams, and of his clinical interpretation of these along
psychoanalytic lines.

Already in these early papers, however, we find a curious feature which
presages his later rejection of psychoanalysis: although most of the
themes Beck describes (e.g. ‘I was in a restaurant but the waiters would
not serve me’; ‘Everyone was invited to the party but me’; ‘My fiancée
married someone else’) appear interpretable in terms of the simple
hypothesis of motivated self-depletion, surprisingly he interprets them
all in terms of the more complex dynamic of self-hatred: the depressed
patient's misery is always seen as deliberately rather than incidentally
self-inflicted, reflecting his ‘need to suffer’.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` Dreams
such as not getting food that is requested, or being rejected – which in
themselves appear at most to indicate a need to safely anticipate
setbacks or protect cherished others from one's resentment by portraying
life as hopeless and oneself as worthless – are instead
counterintuitively read as ‘the representation of self-punitive
tendencies … the depressed person feels guilt about his ego-alien drives
and punishes himself for them.’\ :sup:`(n.d.k)`

The question naturally arises as to why Beck was so drawn to the
masochism hypothesis. And this is particularly significant because it
was when his later experimental and clinical investigations – including
his patients' appropriately negative reactions to interpretations overly
organised by this hypothesis – rightly led him to doubt whether he
really was meeting everywhere with self-hatred, that he threw out the
entirety of the baby of the general psychoanalytic theory of depression
along with the specific counterintuitive bathwater of an over-reaching
application of the masochism hypothesis. Which is to say that the entire
project of explaining why a patient may be unconsciously motivated to
think and feel and act in depressive ways was abandoned; in Beck's hands
their condition now collapsed into a habitual rut of self-maintaining
negative thought, feeling and behaviour.

One answer to why Beck was so compelled by the masochism hypothesis that
it overrode his recognition of the frequent sufficiency of the simpler
theory of motivated self-depletion is apparent in the early papers
themselves. Beck somehow entirely forgets about the psychoanalytic ideas
of depression as due either to thwarted mourning or to avoided fear,
becoming solely preoccupied by the idea of it as due to suppressed
anger. Such depression as did not appear to evince anger (since, one
imagines, it was really due to suppressed sadness or fear) could then
only be brought into line with the suppressed anger hypothesis by
positing that such a patient was masochistically contriving to make
herself depressed.

Another answer only becomes apparent in Beck's later writings; it
concerns the nature of dreaming. (Grasping this takes a little patience,
but it is worth the effort.) In these later writings he tells us that
what he was actually trying to do in his early research was to set the
clinical psychoanalytic theory of depression as a function of suppressed
anger on a firmer scientific basis by providing quantitative
psychological evidence of unconscious anger in the dreams of his
depressed patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.n),(n.d.o)` Although he did not report
it at the time, what he later tells us he found is what has also been
established since::sup:`(n.d.p)` that as a group people with depression
have fewer themes of anger in their dreams than people who do not have
depression. This puzzled him, as somehow he had understood the Freudian
idea of dreams being the ‘royal road to the unconscious’\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`
to mean that feelings unacceptable to the waking patient ought to show
up straightforwardly in their dreams.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` The finding of
fewer angry themes in the dreams of patients with depression therefore
appeared to contradict the psychoanalytic hypothesis of depression as
resulting from suppressed anger. This troubled Beck, but – at least
until he found independent evidence of the implausibility of this
interpretation – he realised he could save the psychoanalytic theory by
interpreting the very dreaming of such miserabilist dreams as
masochistically motivated (‘he makes himself dream such miserable dreams
because he hates himself’).

What is deeply unclear in all of this is why Beck thought that Freud's
theory posited that unconscious emotions ought to be directly manifest
and countable in dreams. After all, Freud's theory was that dreams serve
to protect sleep by helping prevent the dreamer's anxious recognition of
emotions they find unacceptable, such as anger towards loved ones. In
that theory dream construction involves the disguise – through
displacement, condensation, reversal, negation and projection – of such
impulses and emotions as threaten a comfortable sense of self–other
relations. (Freud's ‘royal road’ refers not to a direct, undisguised
revelation of the unconscious, but rather to dreams offering
particularly rich sites for interpreting the products of defences
against intolerable feelings and motivations – by contrast with the
myriad, emotionally irrelevant concerns of waking life.) In retrospect
it seems at least possible that Beck's enthusiasm to formulate and test
a psychoanalytic hypothesis using the quantitative methods of empirical
psychology ended up getting the better of his grasp of the
psychoanalytic theory itself.

To sum up so far: a central plank of cognitive therapy's origin myth has
it that it developed out of an apparent scientific disconfirmation of
the clinical psychoanalytic theory of depression as a motivationally
explicable state.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` But in retrospect what seems more
likely to have happened is that an inappropriate quantitative
methodology deployed to provide support for an unlikely theory of
depressive dreaming actually found against it; that an implausibly
general theory of depressive masochism was developed to save the
floundering analytic theory; and that when this overly general masochism
theory was dropped for good reason, the whole idea of symptoms as
motivated by the avoidance of intolerable feelings – i.e. the whole idea
of a depth psychology – was jettisoned for no good reason at all.

.. _S2:

Therapeutic practice
====================

As described above, the development of cognitive therapy's
psychopathological theory rests on its unwarranted rejection of the
psychoanalytic notion of depression as unconsciously motivated. The
development of cognitive therapy's psychotherapeutic technique, however,
depends on its rejection of the centrality for psychotherapeutic
practice of what psychoanalysis terms the ‘transference
relationship’.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` A curious aspect, then, of Beck's
development of cognitive therapy is that it was actually inspired by his
encounter with, and dawning realisation of the clinical significance of,
what are clearly recognisable as his patients' transferences to him.

First, a note on ‘transference’. A defining preoccupation of
psychoanalysis is with how immersion in relationships which inspire
concern and attachment – such as those with psychotherapists, partners,
parents, employers, etc. – so readily elicits unrealistic fearful and
idealising expectations concerning others' views of us. These
relentlessly maintained, emotionally charged expectations are seen by
psychoanalysis as being at the root of much psychopathology, and their
manifestations inside and outside of therapy are known as negative and
positive transferences. They can be easy to attend from, as it were, but
powerfully difficult to attend to – i.e. they are often unconscious –
and their patterns are typically transferred from one significant other
to another over time.\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.s)` The task of psychoanalytic
therapy is the patient's emancipation from distorting transference
patterns, a task prosecuted by first facilitating the flourishing and
then the subsequent experiential emancipation from the transferences
between patient and psychotherapist, an experience that can then
generalise to the transferences in the rest of the patient's life. Much
of a psychoanalytical psychotherapist's training has to do with
developing his ability to make room for and be emotionally touched, yet
not inexorably swept along, by the patient's transference so he can
think about, experience, describe, and help liberate the patient from
her unconscious depressogenic emotional habits.

To return to cognitive therapy. As Beck\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` tells the story,
he had a patient who would lie on the couch each session and regale him
with lurid tales of her sexual exploits, while he sat back and offered
somewhat by-the-book psychoanalytic interpretations regarding the
content of whatever it had occurred to her to say. At the end of one
session, however, Beck asked his patient how she was feeling; she
replied ‘anxious’. Beck first suggested to her, in an interpretation
focusing only on intra-psychic issues, that conflicts about sex were
making her anxious. She cautiously responded, however, to the effect
that her real worry was interpersonal: her worry was that he was bored
by her. Beck then began to see ‘that there's a whole stream of
pre-conscious thinking that goes on that the patient doesn't normally
communicate to the analyst’\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` – especially pessimistic,
biased, black-and-white, over-general irrational expectations concerning
what the therapist thinks and feels about the patient. Beck came to call
these transference expectations the patient's ‘negative automatic
thoughts’ (NATs) and, drawing on the ‘rational therapy’ of Albert
Ellis,\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` went on to develop a significant range of
procedures to help the patient attend to and challenge their NATs.

There are several curious things about this and related narratives Beck
offers.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` The first is that Beck the novice psychoanalyst
started out (as one does) by naively listening to and interpreting the
explicit content of what the patient freely said, rather than listening
in with an analytic ear to what she was not saying, to the unconscious
dimension of the transference (i.e. listening to how he featured
latently in her mind), or listening in to his own countertransference
(i.e. to the feelings provoked in him by, in particular, the
performative rather than declarative aspect of her discourse). Thus,
despite the patient's manifest lack of inhibition in talking about sex,
Beck still interprets her anxiety as due to sexual conflict.

The second is that when Beck shows a real interest in his patient,
asking her how she feels, she is able to acknowledge her transference to
him, and they can understand it together to beneficial effect. We go on
to hear that these worries (which, despite, or perhaps because of, being
so very omnipresent in her mind she never discussed before) are actually
common for her in other settings too. As the therapeutic relationship is
strengthened (by Beck's concerned question about her actual feelings),
the emotionally alive experience of the transference (her worries about
Beck being bored by her) also begins to be acknowledged and worked
through, and interpretative speculation about intra-psychic conflict is
foregone.

The most striking thing about Beck's narrative, however, is that this
therapy-potentiating emotional experience of the transference is set
aside almost as soon as it is encountered. Anyone who has been in
psychotherapy will know how replete it is with holding back
acknowledgement, both to oneself and to the therapist, of one's thoughts
and impulses for fear of encountering one's own or the therapist's
disapproval, despite such fears speaking right to the heart of such
emotional difficulties as brought one to therapy in the first place.
Notwithstanding the simplicity of the ‘fundamental rule’ of
psychoanalysis – to ‘free associate’, i.e. say whatever is actually on
your mind (which is not the same as saying whatever you feel like
saying!) – the fact is that no one can truly follow
it,\ :sup:`(n.d.u),(n.d.v)` since we naturally associate away from
rather than towards conflictual emotional
preoccupations.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` This is why the therapist's job is often
to listen not so much to the content of what is said as to performative
matters of style, timing and omission. Beck, however, construes NATs as
merely incidentally hard for the patient to articulate and challenge –
due to a lack of training in attending to and reporting on
them\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` – rather than because of their emotional valence.
This, I submit, is intuitively implausible. More consonant with everyday
clinical and personal experience is the notion that his patient did not
elaborate her actual worries because she feared they might not be
disconfirmed – and chose instead to distract herself and please him with
endless talk about sex, presumably since, as we all know, Freudians do
have rather a reputation for being interested in such matters!

Cognitive therapists are often accused of ignoring the importance of the
therapeutic relationship, but as Beck's daughter Judith Beck explains,
this is false – cognitive therapy ‘requires a good therapeutic
relationship. Therapists do many things to build a strong alliance. For
example, they work collaboratively with clients … ask for feedback… and
conduct themselves as genuine, warm, empathic, interested, caring human
beings.’\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` However, as psychoanalytical psychotherapist
Jonathan Shedler responds, ‘This is the kind of relationship I would
expect from my hair stylist or real estate broker. From a
psychotherapist, I expect something else. [Beck appears] to have no
concept that the therapy relationship provides a special window into the
patient's inner world, or a relationship laboratory and sanctuary in
which lifelong patterns can be recognized and understood, and new ones
created.’\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` Shedler's optimism regarding his hair stylist
and estate agent perhaps warrants some cognitive restructuring, but his
point about the therapeutic relationship stands.

A relationship which is not merely instrumentally useful (as intended by
cognitive therapy), but itself intended as the unique locus of change
(as in psychoanalytic therapy), is one which both activates the
patient's latent transference fears (that the therapist is
untrustworthy, angry etc.) and simultaneously provides enough of a
working alliance to enable such prototypical fears to be experienced,
understood and worked through in real time. With a merely collaborative
and empathic focus the opportunity is lost for the real-time eliciting
and challenging of the patient's underlying emotional preoccupations.
The result is somewhat like trying to conduct exposure therapy for a
phobia without physically encountering the fearful stimulus, or like a
chat between two adults about the difficulties of a child left waiting
in the next room.

A popular canard has it that psychoanalytic psychotherapy is unhelpfully
preoccupied with the past, whereas CBT is practically focused on the
present. This ignores the way both therapies tend to formulate current
disturbance in terms of childhood-acquired pathogenic beliefs. More
importantly, it ignores the fact that, at the level of technique, CBT
tends to focus on matters arising in the patient's past week, whereas a
transference-focused psychotherapist hones in on uncomfortable
transference feelings alive right now between patient and therapist.
Rather than providing merely intellectual insight to further an ongoing
project of dreary self-management, itself supplementing an already
exhausting project of defensively managing intolerable feelings,
psychoanalytic psychotherapy instead offers an intrinsically mutative
emotional exchange which already constitutes a growth in self-possession
and a change of heart, obviating the need for such self-management.

.. _S3:

Implications
============

Work in the transference is designed to facilitate a patient's living
exposure to their real underlying fears about how they would be seen if
they were to allow themselves their own true feelings. The opportunity
is thereby provided for a true change of heart – i.e. for emancipation
from depressive cognition through an experiential recovery, acceptance
and integration of hitherto unconscious emotional experience. Ideally,
this would reduce the need to manage the dismal distal products of this
emotional evasion with therapeutic techniques of behavioural activation,
cognitive challenge or mindfulness. The result of such an effective
therapy for depression would be akin to that sometimes achieved by CBT
for anxiety conditions: a transformative learning, from the experiential
ground up, that reinstates true self-possession.

The time is past for studies comparing outcomes of self-professed
cognitive therapy/CBT and psychoanalytic practitioners. The apparent
success of particular therapies in such trials is better predicted and
explained not by therapeutic model\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` but by the
theoretical orientation of the lead experimenter,\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` the
personal qualities of the therapists,\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` or by theory
drawn from quite different models.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)` Beck himself
expressed the wish that cognitive therapy as a school die
out,\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` the apt thought here being that what matters is
not the treatment model but rather the particular treatment qualities
which are individually worthy of study.

CBT treatments for depression often suffer high drop-out
rates.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` One possible explanation for this is a lack of
attention to transference. Sometimes this may be because negative
transference undermines the therapeutic collaboration, although ideally
CBT therapists are trained in recognising and managing
this.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` At other times it may be because psychotherapeutic
relationships that are merely collaborative, rather than offering
experiential work in the transference, do not hit the therapeutic spot.
Recently, however, there has been a resurgence in the general theory
of,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` clinical practice and treatment manual
for,\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` and outcome studies supporting a
transference-involving psychoanalytic approach to depression. With
regard to outcome, outstanding results in helping patients with
treatment-resistant depression which is not readily resolved by CBT have
been obtained by particular practitioners of psychoanalytic
psychotherapy\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` and somewhat optimistic results have been
obtained with similar patients in the multi-practitioner Tavistock Adult
Depression Study.\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)`

The present article has not been concerned to argue for a psychoanalytic
approach to depression on the basis of empirical evidence. Instead, it
noted that Beck's development of a cognitive approach to depression was
predicated on his rejection of a psychoanalytic understanding of
depression in particular, of the dynamic unconscious in general, and of
psychoanalytic psychotherapeutic methods – and that his rationale for
all this was flawed. What he developed in its stead does not stand or
fall on this basis, and there are several benefits (especially clinical
pragmatism and a strong research tradition) to the therapy he developed.
But, given both the flawed rationale for rejecting a psychoanalytic
approach which, rightly understood, possesses considerable clinical
plausibility, and given the relatively poor results obtained by CBT for
depression in much clinical practice, the time is surely right to
revisit the psychoanalytic model.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R29

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R31

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R32

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R33

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R34

      n.d.ah.

.. [1]
   **Richard G. T. Gipps** Clinical psychologist in private practice,
   Student Welfare Support Services, University of Oxford, and Associate
   of Faculty of Philosophy, University of Oxford, UK.
