===============================================================================
Weekend new patient reviews in psychiatry: evaluation of activity over 3 months
===============================================================================



Michael Rutherford
Mark Potter
:Correspondence: Michael Rutherford
(michael.rutherford@swlstg-tr.nhs.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** South West London and St George's Mental Health
   NHS Trust developed a system of weekend new patient reviews by higher
   trainees to provide senior medical input 7 days a week. To evaluate
   the effectiveness of these reviews, the notes for all patients
   admitted over 3 months were examined. The mean length of stay for
   patients before and after the introduction of the weekend new patient
   reviews were compared via unpaired *t*-test.

   **Results** A total of 88 patients were seen: 84.4% of patients were
   seen within 24 h of admission. Higher trainees instituted some
   changes in 78.9% of patients. The most frequent action was to modify
   medication, in 47.8%. The average length of stay after the
   introduction of weekend reviews was not significantly different.

   **Clinical implications** Weekend reviews of newly admitted patients
   by higher trainees is a feasible method for providing senior input to
   patients admitted out of hours.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Medical specialties of various types are increasingly being requested to
deliver senior-led care throughout weekends and bank holidays. This
7-day working is felt to be potentially beneficial for patient care and
has been started by many acute specialties. The Academy of Medical Royal
Colleges released a report in 2013 outlining how this could be achieved
for different specialties, including psychiatry. :sup:`1` They
recommended that 21–30% of psychiatric in-patients would benefit from a
daily consultant-led review; mainly those who have been newly admitted
or are clinically unstable. They stated that all new admissions,
especially those under the Mental Health Act 1983, should receive a
review the following day to initiate a treatment plan, including
medication, observation levels, physical and psychosocial investigations
and referrals.

The Academy of Medical Royal Colleges also advised that their
recommendations were considered in light of the requirements of the
local organisation as practice is likely to vary depending on geographic
location, organisation size, on-call staffing and number of in-patient
units. They also acknowledged that to achieve these outcomes, certain
interventions and investigations would need to be available, such as
pathology access.

.. _S1:

Method
======

South West London and St George's Mental Health NHS Trust developed a
system of weekend ward reviews led by higher trainees with consultant
advice. The higher trainees in the Trust were on a full-shift on-call
rota with 09:00 h to 21:00 h shifts on weekends and bank holidays.
Patients admitted out of hours on Fridays, Saturdays or up to 09:00 h on
Sunday morning are reviewed by the on-call higher trainee the next day.
Patients admitted after 09:00 h on Sunday are reviewed on Monday by the
ward team, unless it is a bank holiday, in which case they are reviewed
by the higher trainee on call that day. After the higher trainee has
completed their reviews for a given site, they contact the on-call
consultant to discuss the cases and ensure the management plans
instituted are appropriate. This occasionally led to changes in
treatment plan. This provides an opportunity for supervision and
training and ensures consultant input. The role of the reviews was to
ensure that the patients received prompt assessment by a senior
clinician and a comprehensive management plan could be instituted. They
were not intended to facilitate immediate discharge, although it was
hoped that earlier treatment would reduce the time patients had to spend
on the ward.

To evaluate the activity involved in the weekend new patient reviews,
the notes for all patients admitted between 17:00 h on Friday and 09:00
h on Sunday between 1 January 2016 and 31 March 2016 were identified via
the RiO system used by the Trust. This provided information regarding
the timing of their admission. The clinical notes of each of these
patients were examined to determine the reason for their admission, when
they were seen by the on-call higher trainee, the diagnosis made and any
actions taken as a result of the weekend review. The mean length of stay
for patients admitted between 17:00 h on Friday and 09:00 h on Sunday
and 1 January 2015 to 31 March 2015 were also compared via unpaired
*t*-test. The number of serious untoward incidents in each time period
was also compared via Mann–Whitney *U*-test.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

A total of 88 patients were seen over the 3-month period. This equates
to 6.8 patients appropriate for senior review each weekend.

Of those admitted, 46 (52.3%) were male. The average age was 41.9 years
(range 18–84, s.d. = 17.8). For males the average age was 41.4 years
(range 18–84, s.d. = 19.6) and for females it was 42.5 years (range
19–83, s.d. = 15.9). These differences were not significant on *t*-test.

The time from admission to senior review is indicated in `Table
1 <#T1>`__. A total of 11 patients were not seen at all. Of these, 4
were admitted via the 136 Suite in the Trust.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Time from admission to senior review

   ======== ======== ========== =============
   Review   Number   Cumulative Cumulative
   within   of       number     percentage of
            patients            patients seen
   ======== ======== ========== =============
   12 hours 17       17         22.1
   \                            
   24 hours 48       65         84.4
   \                            
   36 hours 8        73         94.8
   \                            
   48 hours 4        77         100   
   ======== ======== ========== =============

Diagnoses were made by the higher trainee in 73 patients. The other 15
patients were diagnosed during later assessments. These diagnoses are
shown in `Table 2 <#T2>`__. There were no significant differences
between patients diagnosed by the higher trainee or at a later point on
two-tailed *z*-tests.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Diagnoses made by higher trainees, the diagnoses of patients not
      seen or not diagnosed by the higher trainee

   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   |           | Diagnosed | Diagnosed | Total     |       |    |       |
   |           | by higher | sub       | diagnoses |       |    |       |
   |           | trainee   | sequently |           |       |    |       |
   +===========+===========+===========+===========+=======+====+=======+
   | Psychosis | 31        | 42.5      | 8         | 53.3  | 39 | 44.3  |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   |           |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   | D         | 17        | 23.3      | 7         | 46.7  | 24 | 27.2  |
   | epression |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   |           |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   | Mania/    | 7         | 9.6       | 1         | 6.7   | 8  | 9.1   |
   | hypomania |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   |           |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   | Alcohol   | 7         | 15.6      | 1         | 6.7   | 8  | 9.1   |
   | or        |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   | substance |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   | misuse    |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   |           |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   | Pe        | 12        | 2.6       | 3         | 20    | 15 | 17    |
   | rsonality |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   | disorder  |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   |           |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   | Anxiety   | 2         | 1.3       | 2         | 13.3  | 4  | 4.5   |
   | and       |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   | stres     |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   | s-related |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   | disorders |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   |           |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   | Eating    | 1         | 5.2       | 1         | 6.7   | 2  | 2.3   |
   | disorder  |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   |           |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   | Deve      | 4         | 1         | 2         | 13.3  | 6  | 6.8   |
   | lopmental |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   | disorders |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   |           |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   | Physical  | 1         | 1.3       | 0         | 0     | 1  | 1.1   |
   | illness   |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   |           |           |           |           |       |    |       |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+
   | Unclear   | 1         | 1.3       | 1         | 6.7   | 2  | 2.3   |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------+----+-------+

The interventions made or recommended by higher trainees for the 77
patients reviewed during weekends are shown in `Table 3 <#T3>`__. This
does not include them indicating their agreement with actions made by
clinicians who saw the patients before them. Again, the number of
interventions shown exceeds the number of patients.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Interventions made or recommended by higher trainees as a result
      of weekend new patient reviews

   =========================================== ========== ====
   Intervention                                Total, *n* %
   =========================================== ========== ====
   Start medication                                       
       Regular antipsychotic                   8          10.4
       As required antipsychotic               2          2.6
       Mood stabiliser                         1          1.3
       Antidepressant                          8          10.4
       Sedation                                5          6.5
       Hypnotic                                3          3.9
       Physical medication                     3          3.9
       Nicotine replacement                    1          1.3
       Total in which medication started       24         31.2
   \                                                      
   Increase medication                                    
       Regular antipsychotic                   1          1.3
       Antidepressant                          2          2.6
       Sedation                                3          3.9
       Other psychotropics                     1          1.3
   \                                                      
   Stop medication                                        
       Antipsychotic                           1          1.3
       Sedation                                1          1.3
       Opiate replacement                      1          1.3
       All                                     2          2.6
       Total medication changes                37         47.8
   \                                                      
   Recommended interventions                              
       Regular antipsychotic                   2          2.6
       Psychotherapy                           3          3.9
       Electroconvulsive therapy               1          1.3
       Social interventions                    1          1.3
       Leave                                   1          1.3
       Transfer                                1          1.3
       Other specific assessments              3          3.9
   \                                                      
   Discharge                                   2          2.6
   \                                                      
   Recommendation for                          2          2.6
   Mental Health Act assessment                           
   \                                                      
   Physical investigations                     8          10.4
   \                                                      
   Physical monitoring or treatments           8          10.4
   \                                                      
   Total physical health interventions         11         14.3
   \                                                      
   Transfer to psychiatric intensive care unit 3          3.9
   \                                                      
   Change in observations                      3          3.9
   \                                                      
   Urine drug screen                           3          3.9
   \                                                      
   Specific advice or information              3          3.9
   \                                                      
   Obtained collateral information             2          2.6
   \                                                      
   No action                                   17         22.1
   =========================================== ========== ====

The length of stay for patients admitted between Friday 17:00 h and
Sunday 09:00 h between 1 January and 31 March in 2015 was 26 days (s.d.
= 37) and for the same period of time in 2016 the length of stay was 28
days (s.d. = 43). This was not significant.

The number of serious untoward incidents between January and March 2015
was 13, and during the same period in 2016 it was 28; this was
significant (*P* = 0.0652). However, when serious untoward incidents
were limited to those occurring in acute services and out of hours,
there was 1 incident between January and March 2015 and 3 incidents in
the same time period in 2016; these numbers were too low to be analysed
and so did not reach significance.

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

A substantial number of patients, 88 in total, were eligible for weekend
review over the 3 months covered by the service evaluation and 77 of
these were actually seen. A substantial minority of those not seen were
admitted through the Trust's dedicated 136 Suite. This mode of admission
may be a weak point in the current system, possibly as a patient
detained to the suite could be viewed as having been admitted at that
point, despite still awaiting formal assessment and possible admission.
Patients admitted via the 136 Suite should still have been reviewed the
following day.

Of those patients seen by the higher trainees, the vast majority (84.4%)
were seen within 24 h and most of the rest, up to 94.8%, were seen
within 36 h. Many of those seen between 24 and 36 h had been admitted
during the morning on a Saturday and the higher trainee was unable to
see them until the afternoon on Sunday. A small number (5.2%) were seen
after 36 h had elapsed. The reasons for this are unclear but could be as
a result of temporary limited provision of higher trainee cover due to
illness.

The characteristics of the patients admitted do not appear to be
remarkable, although it would have been useful to have a comparison
group of patients admitted during the week to determine whether there
were significant differences between the two, in terms of demographics,
admission reason and diagnosis. It is unclear why some higher trainees
did not formulate diagnoses for the patients they reviewed, but there
appears to be no significant differences between those diagnosed during
the weekend or following later assessments.

Higher trainees performed or recommended a wide variety of interventions
for patients, instituting some changes in 78.9% of cases. The most
frequent action was to start some form of medication; this was done for
31.2% of patients. If increasing and stopping medication is also
considered, then medication changes were performed in 47.8% of cases
seen by the higher trainees. These were in addition to prescriptions
made by admitting core trainees.

The next largest group of interventions were recommended physical
investigations and interventions, again, which had not been instituted
on admission. This occurred in 14.3% of patients reviewed. These varied
from instituting monitoring of fluid and food intake to obtaining
specific investigations, such as lithium levels.

A variety of other interventions were performed. It is reassuring that
only 2 patients needed to have a recommendation for detention under the
Mental Health Act completed. The others appear to be appropriately
informally or already detained under the Mental Health Act. The limited
number of discharges would be at least partially explained by this not
being the proposed aim of the weekend reviews.

In 22.1% of patients seen over the weekends no action was taken by the
higher trainee. This could be due to all reasonable interventions
already having been performed by an experienced core trainee or patients
requiring a period of observation before any definitive management plans
are made.

Despite these interventions being initiated earlier than expected, there
was no change in the average length of stay for patients who were
eligible for new patient reviews. This could be explained by the
interventions only being delivered 24–48 h earlier than they otherwise
would have been. The reviews were also not intended to facilitate
immediate discharge. A greater focus on expediting discharge over the
weekend may have led to a reduced length of stay.

Although the overall number of serious untoward incidents was
significantly higher in 2016 than 2015, there was no significant
difference when they were restricted to those associated with acute
out-of-hours services which would appear most clearly related to the
introduction of weekend new patient reviews. The overall increase in
incidents may be due to a continuing Trust drive to improve reporting
with a view to improving services, rather than a true increase and so
the figures are difficult to interpret accurately in this context.

This system did not require any changes in rota patterns for higher
trainees. The system was such that the reviews were carried out during
the scheduled 09:00 h to 21:00 h shift, with reviews ceasing at 21:00 h
so that patients could rest adequately without their evening or night
being disrupted. On rare occasions when all the planned reviews could
not be completed, they were postponed until the next day. Furthermore,
as mentioned above, the focus of the reviews was not discharge; this
prevented difficulties in coordinating with social care and other
agencies during the weekend. The system used by the Trust enabled it to
provide senior medical input 7 days a week in acute services without
disrupting weekday working or leading to any of the other concerns
raised by some authors. :sup:`2`

.. _S4:

Conclusions
-----------

There has been increasing emphasis on providing more senior weekend
medical input across all specialties. :sup:`1` In psychiatry, the
recommendations were mainly in terms of newly admitted patients.

Weekend reviews of newly admitted patients by higher trainees, with
consultant support, is a feasible and appropriate method for providing
senior input to these patients who could potentially remain on a ward
for more than 48 h without being seen by any clinician more senior than
a core trainee. This would not be considered appropriate in any other
medical specialty. If we are to be committed to parity of esteem in
healthcare, then it is reasonable for patients admitted to psychiatric
wards to be reviewed by a senior clinician within 24 h, as they would in
any other hospital. :sup:`3` This is particularly pertinent as the
higher trainees provided some intervention in most patients, modifying
medications in just under half of those admitted. It may be valuable to
determine how this compares with patients reviewed during medical or
surgical post-take rounds.

.. [1]
   **Dr Michael Rutherford**, Specialist Trainee 6, South West London
   and St George's Mental Health NHS Trust. **Dr Mark Potter**, Acting
   Medical Director and Consultant Psychiatrist, South West London and
   St George's Mental Health NHS Trust.
