==============================================================
Mental Health in the Digital Age: Grave Dangers, Great Promise
==============================================================



Melvyn W. B. Zhang [1]_
:Date: 2017-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Technology has always been a double-edged sword: there are associated
risks and benefits. As a practising psychiatrist I increasingly rely on
technology at work, using next-generation electronic medical records and
at times recommending appropriate smartphone-based applications as
additional therapy for my patients.

In contrast to numerous other titles about technology and its impact on
healthcare – which have emerged as a result of the massive technical
advances in the past decade – *Mental Health in the Digital Age* does
not focus only on the benefits of the use of technology in mental
healthcare. It offers a timely balanced perspective by also providing an
in-depth analysis of the risks.

The risks highlighted in the book are not limited to addictive
behaviours such as internet or gaming addiction, but also include
cyberbullying and the increased risk of suicide due to pro-suicide
websites and suicide pacts. Cyberbullying is perhaps one of the most
common problems linked with the use of technology to date and it is not
unusual for me and my team to see children and adolescents who refuse to
go to school as a result of cyberbullying. Unlike conventional forms of
bullying, cyberbullying implies the use of social networks and
internet-based messaging services to harass an individual. This work
examines not only the prevalence of the problem, but also the various
prevention strategies available, such as having a specific academic
curriculum to deal with the issue.

The authors review the existing literature comprehensively – referring
also to current evidence – and look at the potential of technology
across several areas of mental healthcare, including the provision of
psychotherapy and the integration of patients' health records. They also
discuss how recent advances – such as virtual reality – could in
principle be a powerful tool in exposure therapy. As a team with an
interest in e-health, my colleagues and I have been developing
smartphone applications for various mental health disorders. The
introduction of virtual reality technology means that we could perhaps
tap on games and various other sensors and headset devices to create an
interactive environment not just for psychotherapy but for other forms
of interventions too.

This is a good guide for novices in e-health but equally a useful tool
for the more experienced in this area. It would be helpful if a future
edition included more detailed coverage of smartphone applications and
their inherent risks and benefits – a topic of concern not only for
clinicians, but patients at large.

.. [1]
   **Melvyn W. B. Zhang**, Associate Consultant Psychiatrist and Adjunct
   Research Scientist, Institute of Mental Health, Biomedical Institute
   for Global Health Research & Technology and National University of
   Singapore; Singapore; email: ciezwm@nus.edu.sg
