=================================================================================================================================
Known unknowns and unknown unknowns in suicide risk assessment: evidence from meta-analyses of aleatory and epistemic uncertainty
=================================================================================================================================

Matthew Large
Cherrie Galletly
Nicholas Myles
Christopher James Ryan
Hannah MylesCorrespondence to Matthew M. Large (mmbl@bigpond.com)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-6

:Abstract:
   Suicide risk assessment aims to reduce uncertainty in order to focus
   treatment and supervision on those who are judged to be more likely
   to die by suicide. In this article we consider recent meta-analytic
   research that highlights the difference between uncertainty about
   suicide due to chance factors (aleatory uncertainty) and uncertainty
   that results from lack of knowledge (epistemic uncertainty). We
   conclude that much of the uncertainty about suicide is aleatory
   rather than epistemic, and discuss the implications for clinicians.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Uncertainty is the psychological state of being unsure, of having doubt,
of not fully knowing. Uncertainty is central to modern medicine, where
its recognition drives diagnostic efforts and leads to the pursuit of
evidence-based practice. All medical decision-making occurs under
conditions of varying uncertainty about diagnosis, optimal treatment and
prognosis. This is true in the assessment of suicidal patients.

Uncertainty has two underlying components: epistemic uncertainty that
results from a lack of knowledge, and aleatory uncertainty that results
from random or chance events.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)–(n.d.b)` In medical
practice, both types of uncertainty are at play. A teenage tobacco user
might or might not develop cancer later in life. This is mostly a matter
of chance, a chance that will increase with heavier and longer tobacco
use. This longitudinal cancer risk is probabilistic, akin to the throw
of a die, and further knowledge might not greatly reduce uncertainty
about what will eventually happen. In middle age, the same smoker might
develop haemoptysis. A chest X-ray would reduce uncertainty about the
presence or absence of lung cancer, but it might be more clearly
resolved by a biopsy. Uncertainty in this case is not probabilistic –
the smoker either has or does not have cancer. This is now a question
that can be resolved with more information. Chance is no longer playing
a part.

It is generally considered that uncertainty in suicide risk assessment
can be greatly reduced by a detailed assessment of the patient's
suicidal thoughts, plans and actions, and attention to other demographic
and clinical factors. Suicide risk assessment guidelines and relevant
peer-reviewed publications often contain long lists of questions to ask
and factors to consider.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)–(n.d.d)` This approach assumes
that more substantial knowledge of the patient, their illness,
circumstances and intentions will reduce the epistemic uncertainty in
the assessment. Few would doubt that chance also plays a major part in
suicide. The course of underlying illness, the vagaries of individual
decision-making and impulsivity, and the patient's future circumstances
are all sources of aleatory uncertainty.

In this article we consider the uncertainty surrounding suicide using
the framework of epistemic and aleatory uncertainty. In order to do
this, we use recent meta-analytic research to interrogate the
proposition that uncertainty about suicide risk can be reduced by
knowing more about suicidal thoughts and behaviours, or by the knowledge
of a wider range of suicide risk factors.

.. _S1:

Can knowing about suicidality reduce uncertainty about suicide?
===============================================================

No small number of references could begin to do justice to the
importance that suicidal ideation and behaviours have assumed in suicide
research. Several recent systematic meta-analyses have synthesised the
quantitative peer-reviewed literature on the statistical relationship
between suicidality and suicide. Each of these meta-analyses has cast
doubt on the notion that knowing more about suicide ideas, or
suicidality more broadly, reduces uncertainty about suicide.

Two meta-analyses published in 2011, one examining risk factors for
suicide by psychiatric in-patients\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` and the other
examining risk factors for suicide by recently discharged
patients,\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` found that the association between suicidal
ideation and suicide was statistically weak, with diagnostic odds ratios
(OR) of less than 3. In 2015, Chapman *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` published
a meta-analysis finding that suicidal ideation was significantly
associated with suicide among patients with schizophrenia spectrum
conditions. However, suicidal ideation was not significantly more likely
to lead to suicide than no suicidal ideation among patients with mood
disorders (OR = 1.49, 95% CI 0.92–2.42).

A 2016 meta-analysis\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` examined the broader question of
whether self-injurious thoughts and behaviours deserve their status as
strong predictors of future suicidal behaviour. This study found that
self-injurious thoughts and behaviours are only weakly associated with
later suicide attempts (OR = 2.14, 95% CI 2.00–2.30) and death from
suicide (OR = 1.54, 95% CI 1.39–1.71). The authors concluded that
assessments of suicidality provided an improvement in prognostic
accuracy that was only marginally above chance.

Another 2016 meta-analysis examined the psychometric properties of both
individual risk factors and suicide risk assessment scales (the Beck
Hopelessness Scale, Suicide Intent Scale and Scale for Suicide Ideation)
among populations of people who self-harm.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` The authors
found a modest statistical association between previous self-harm and
suicidal intent and later suicide, concluding that individual risk
factors are ‘unlikely to be of much practical use because they are
comparatively common in clinical populations’. With respect to use of
suicide risk scales they considered that they ‘may provide false
reassurance and [are], therefore, potentially dangerous’.

Thus, five recent meta-analytic summaries of the peer-reviewed
literature have each reached similar conclusions – knowing about suicide
thoughts and behaviours can only reduce uncertainty about future suicide
to a modest extent.

.. _S2:

Can knowing about a wider range of risk factors reduce uncertainty about suicide?
=================================================================================

If enquiries about our patients' suicide ideas, plans and actions do not
help very much, what else should mental health professionals do to
reduce uncertainty? The most common and obvious answer is to consider a
comprehensive range of other suicide risk factors. Again it is simply
not possible to describe the full range of articles, guidelines and
peer-reviewed papers that consider the range of potentially important
risk factors for suicide. A weakness of this literature is that although
very large numbers of risk factors for suicide have been identified,
there is no widely accepted way in which this information can be
combined to improve the predictive strength of suicide risk assessment.
Further, despite widespread recommendations for a comprehensive
consideration of suicide risk factors, there are doubts as to whether
combining risk factors can ever produce clinically useful predictive
models. More than 30 years ago, Pokorny\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` concluded his
paper describing a landmark prospective suicide prediction study with
the statement that it ‘is inescapable that we do not possess any item of
information or any combination of items that permit us to identify to a
useful degree the particular persons who will commit suicide, in spite
of the fact that we do have scores of items available, each of which is
significantly related to suicide’.

We recently published a meta-analysis that further examined the dilemma
posed by Pokorny.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` We synthesised the results of all the
published longitudinal prospective studies that used multiple risk
factors to model future suicide among cohorts of psychiatric patients.
We included experimental studies that employed multiple regression or
survival analysis and studies that validated suicide risk prediction
instruments. Our main outcome measure was the odds of suicide in
high-risk patients compared with lower-risk patients. One of the aims of
the meta-analysis was to determine if the observed between-study
variability in this OR could be explained by the number of risk factors
used in the predictive modelling. The results were very clear. We found
a pooled OR of 4.84 (95% CI 3.79–6.20) derived from 37 studies and 53
samples of patients. This indicates that the rate of suicide among
high-risk patients can be expected to be about 5 times the rate of
suicide of low-risk patients. While this sounds like it might be a
clinically useful finding, these odds do not meaningfully improve on the
pooled ORs of about 4 that are associated with some individual suicide
risk factors among psychiatric patients – factors such as depression,
hopelessness and prior suicide attempts.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)` The
meta-analysis also found that 56% of suicides occurred in high-risk
groups (sensitivity) and 44% occurred among the lower-risk group. Over
an average follow-up of 5 years, 5.5% of high-risk patients, but 1% of
low-risk patients, died by suicide. This 5.5% suicide mortality over a
period of 5 years means the probability of suicide of high-risk patients
over clinically important durations is extremely low. For example, the
weekly probability of suicide of a high-risk patient over the 5-year
follow-up can be estimated at 0.055/(5×52) = 0.0002115 or 1 in 4700
people. In practical terms, what this means is that if a patient is
deemed at higher risk of suicide because of the presence of one or more
risk factors (recall that the number of risk factors seems unimportant),
our best estimate of the incidence of suicide in the following week is
about 1 in 4700. Even if there was a hypothetical dynamic risk factor
that transiently increased the next-week risk of suicide by 10 times,
strict supervision of almost 500 high-risk people for 1 week would be
needed to prevent one suicide – assuming that such supervision were 100%
effective.

Relevant to the present paper, the meta-analysis found that the
predictive models that used more suicide risk factors had no more
statistical strength, and no better discrimination between high-risk and
lower-risk groups, than studies that used fewer factors (slope 0.007,
95% CI−0.016 to 0.03, *P* = 0.53). In fact, studies that employed two
factors had a similar predictive strength to studies that employed ten
or more factors. `Figure 1 <#F1>`__ plots the diagnostic odds with 95%
confidence intervals effect size of models using 2 or 3 factors (8
samples), 4 or 5 factors (11 samples), 6 or 7 factors (7 samples), 8 or
9 factors (5 samples) and 10 or more factors (22 samples) with obviously
overlapping confidence intervals. We concluded that multivariate models
offered little advantage over single risk factors and that multivariate
models that relied on more suicide risk factors performed no better than
those that use fewer risk factors.

.. figure:: 162f1
   :alt: Odds ratios of the predictive strength of multivariate suicide
   risk assessment according to the number of factors in the predictive
   model. Diamonds indicate the pooled estimate and the (overlapping)
   95% confidence intervals. Data from Large *et al*.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)`
   :name: F1

   Odds ratios of the predictive strength of multivariate suicide risk
   assessment according to the number of factors in the predictive
   model. Diamonds indicate the pooled estimate and the (overlapping)
   95% confidence intervals. Data from Large *et al*.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)`

.. _S3:

Implications of the limits to epistemic uncertainty
===================================================

The findings of these recent meta-analytic studies undermine one of our
profession's main assumptions about suicide risk assessment. Suicidal
ideation,\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` suicide behaviour\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.i)` and
more complex modelling\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` offer predictive advantages only
a little better discrimination than chance. Hence, most of our
uncertainty about suicide risk is aleatory; knowing more does not help
because epistemic uncertainty plays only a minor part.

So what should clinicians do? First, we believe that this fundamental
problem with suicide risk assessment needs to be acknowledged. We need
to acknowledge our powerlessness to usefully classify individuals or
groups of patients according to future suicide risk. We need to
acknowledge this to ourselves, and communicate this to health
departments, to the courts, and most importantly, to our patients and
their families.

Second, we need to provide a more universal standard of care, involving
a complete and sympathetic assessment of every patient, their illness
and their circumstances. Such assessment is needed to guide
individualised treatment plans, and might also have the intrinsic
benefit of reducing suicidality.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Where modifiable risk
factors are found, we need to try to modify them. For example, patients
who present with suicidal ideation when intoxicated should not be
summarily discharged when sober and denying suicidal ideation, but
should be offered access to addiction services that have some prospect
of reducing suicide risk and improving their lives, irrespective of
their overall risk category.

Third, we need to be very sparing in our use of involuntary treatment as
a reaction to suicide risk. It is likely that very few patients who we
admit to hospital would have died by suicide as out-patients over the
period of time usually associated with a contemporary length of stay.
Patients making ongoing immediate threats might still be admitted to
hospital, as such threats are a crucial communication and legitimate
focus of care without recourse to notions of probability. However,
suicide risk is simply not a sufficient warrant for making paternalistic
decisions about involuntary hospital care. Equally, we should be careful
not to automatically deny low-risk patients voluntary in-patient
treatment when they want it. Many suicides are by low-risk patients and
we should not pretend we are able to peer into their future any more
than we can discern the future of a higher-risk patient.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.l.

.. [1]
   **Matthew Large**, Conjoint Professor, School of Psychiatry,
   University of New South Wales, and Senior Psychiatrist, Prince of
   Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia; **Cherrie Galletly**, Professor,
   School of Psychiatry, Adelaide University, and Psychiatrist, Ramsay
   Health Care (SA) Mental Health, Adelaide, Australia; **Nicholas
   Myles**, Registrar, The Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, Australia;
   **Christopher James Ryan**, Associate Professor, Discipline of
   Psychiatry and Centre for Values, Ethics and the Law in Medicine,
   University of Sydney, Sydney, and Senior Psychiatrist, Department of
   Psychiatry, Westmead Hospital, Australia; **Hannah Myles**, PhD
   candidate, School of Psychiatry, Adelaide University, and Registrar,
   Country Health Local Health Network, Adelaide, Australia.
