================================================================
The Other Side of Silence: A Psychiatrist's Memoir of Depression
================================================================



Tom Brown [1]_

:date: 2017-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Linda Gask is an eminent academic psychiatrist with an outstanding
international reputation. I state this upfront because it is none too
obvious from this book – owing to her self-effacing style – and in my
opinion, it is very relevant. I should also declare an interest as Linda
and I were in the same year at Edinburgh University's medical school and
I have heard small snippets of this story from her over the ensuing
years.

In this excellent book Linda Gask shows what may be achieved despite
living with a recurrent depressive illness; hope emerges even from her
darkest moments and this work should encourage many. It is striking for
its frankness and honesty – no small achievement given that she clearly
must have known it would be read not only by colleagues, but by patients
past and present, some of whom would have known little about her. She
even mentions her failure to pass the MRCPsych exam at the first attempt
and describes her – surprising to some! – experience of how sensitive
and supportive a very senior academic colleague was at this time.

The book chronicles her life and career and the impact of her illness,
including thoughtful reflections on its roots (in her early life). She
teaches us about depression through the mirror of her own illness and
that of her patients, and brings this to life through the use of
clinical vignettes. She emphasises the importance of both biological and
psychosocial factors in the origins of this illness and her description
of treatments is both fair and accurate. Her accounts of her
interactions with patients are particularly helpful and should be of
value to any doctor, whether trainee or senior. I especially valued her
comments on those whose failure to improve is ascribed to personality
disorder, which is, alas, an all too common tactic of many
psychiatrists.

This is an exceptional book and should be read by many, both doctors and
patients. The high-profile endorsements on the cover are entirely
deserved. Some years ago Linda wrote another excellent book entitled *A
Short Introduction to Psychiatry*. I gave it to many medical students to
read. I will give this to many more.

.. [1]
   **Tom Brown**, retired psychiatrist, UK; email:
   t.m.brown@blueyonder.co.uk
