=============================================================================================================
Adherence to medication in the community: audit cycle of interventions to improve the assessment of adherence
=============================================================================================================



Saeed Farooq
Abid Choudry

:Correspondence: Abid Choudry (abidchoudry@doctors.org.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2017-2

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To investigate whether medication adherence is
   monitored during follow-up in out-patient reviews. A retrospective
   audit was carried out with a sample of 50 follow-up patients with a
   diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. Following
   this, interventions were made prior to the re-audit (including text
   messaging clinicians and prompt sheets in the out-patient department
   to encourage adherence discussions).

   **Results** There was an improvement on all the standards set for
   this audit following the interventions. More doctors had discussed
   medication adherence (62% second cycle *v.* 50% first cycle) with
   their patient and there was increased discussion and documentation
   regarding medication side-effects (60% second cycle *v.* 30% first
   cycle). More clinicians discussed the response to medication (60%
   second cycle *v.* 46% first cycle).

   **Clinical implications** Treatment adherence is not regularly
   monitored or recorded in clinical notes in routine psychiatric
   out-patient appointments. This highlights the need for regular
   training to improve practice.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The World Health Organization defines adherence as the extent to which a
person's behaviour – taking medication, following a diet, and/or
executing lifestyle changes – corresponds with agreed recommendations
from a healthcare provider. :sup:`1` Although often used interchangeably
with the term ‘compliance’, adherence is preferred by many as it
acknowledges the patient's role in the decision-making process. :sup:`2`
It has been claimed that increasing the effectiveness of adherence
interventions may have a far greater impact on the health of the
population than any improvement in specific medical treatments. :sup:`3`

Non-adherence to treatment is a major barrier to effective treatment in
psychiatry, particularly in individuals with psychotic disorders. Rates
of non-adherence vary between 24 and 40% based on medication refill
rates available from pharmacy records. :sup:`4,5` This is understandable
in view of the different populations, variety of diagnoses, variable
follow-up periods and, most importantly, the different definitions and
measurement methods used in research. :sup:`6` It has been reported in
the literature that non-adherence rates to medication for bipolar
disorder typically range between 20 and 60%, with an average of 40%.
:sup:`7–9` In schizophrenia, a systematic review of 39 studies reported
a mean rate of medication non-adherence at 41%. :sup:`10` When the
analysis was restricted to the five methodologically most rigorous
studies, which included defining adherence as taking medication at least
75% of the time, the non-adherence rate increased to 50%. :sup:`10`
Non-adherence to treatment in schizophrenia is often associated with
potentially severe clinical consequences. :sup:`11,12` It is also
estimated that up to 40% of the total annual cost of schizophrenia,
which amounts to £400 million in the UK, could be due to non-adherence
to treatment. :sup:`13`

The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines
:sup:`14,15` recommend that treatment adherence be regularly monitored
in patients with schizophrenia but there is relatively little
information about how this is done in clinical practice. In general,
doctors uniformly underestimate the degree of non-adherence in their
patients. :sup:`16`

.. _S1:

Aims
====

This audit was aimed at investigating whether medication adherence is
monitored during the follow-up of patients diagnosed with schizophrenia
or schizoaffective disorder. We also evaluated the ways in which
medication adherence is discussed during out-patient reviews and
recommend practice improvement.

.. _S2:

Method
======

We conducted a retrospective audit in 50 patients presenting to the
out-patient follow-up clinic in two UK community mental health teams
providing treatment for patients within the complex care team. The
clinics were based in the Black Country Partnership NHS Foundation
Trust. Only patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder who were currently under out-patient follow-up
were included. A random sample of patients was generated by taking every
fifth patient from the list provided by the clinic administrator. The
last clinic letter was reviewed to collect data via the medical notes
and electronic healthcare records.

The standards were identified using the NICE guidelines on medicines
adherence and treatment of psychosis and schizophrenia. :sup:`14,15` The
guidelines have emphasised what should be reviewed and discussed in
out-patient clinics. Specifically, they recognise that the treatment
should be regularly and systematically reviewed to monitor treatment
adherence. During the titration of treatment the following should be
regularly monitored: response to treatment, including changes in
symptoms and behaviour side-effects of treatment emergence of movement
disorders weight waist circumference pulse and blood pressure adherence
overall physical health.

The NICE guideline on treatment adherence explicitly states that when
reviewing medication the clinician should enquire about adherence: “‘If
non adherence is identified, clarify possible causes and agree any
action with the patient. Any plan should include a date for a follow up
review.’ :sup:`15`” As a consequence, the standards set out for this
audit were that: 100% of patients should have a discussion with the
doctor regarding the medication, including response and side-effects
100% of patients should have a discussion with the doctor regarding
adherence to medication if medication is stopped, reasons for this
should be explored. In light of this we constructed a data collection
tool for the audit (`Box 1 <#box1>`__).

**Box 1** Information gathering tool for the audit

-  Was adherence to medication discussed?

-  Did the clinician ask the patient about any periods when they had
   missed taking medication?

-  Did the patient mention missing any medication and was this discussed
   with the patient?

-  Had the patient missed any medication over the past month?

-  Were side-effects of the medication discussed?

-  Did the clinician ask the patient whether these side-effects had
   impact on their adherence?

-  If non-adherence was noted to be a significant problem, were any
   strategies to improve adherence discussed?

-  Was the response to medication discussed?

-  If medication was stopped, were reasons for this explored?

.. _S3:

Results
=======

.. _S4:

Audit cycle 1
-------------

Data were collected over a period of 4 weeks. The results showed that
adherence was discussed and documented only in 50% of consultations,
side-effects were discussed only in 30% of consultations and response to
medication was discussed in 46% of cases. Further questioning in terms
of assessing adherence appeared to be poorly done, with less than 10% of
consultations assessing adherence in greater detail.

The results of this initial audit highlighted either a gap in clinical
practice or poor documentation. The results were discussed with
colleagues in the weekly audit meeting in the hospital and
recommendations were made to improve the practice (`Box 2 <#box2>`__)

**Box 2** Recommendations following the first audit cycle

#. Provide formal training to doctors regarding assessing adherence
   during the induction for junior trainees and through a session
   delivered in the local teaching programme for the rest of the
   clinicians.

#. Provide a list of questions to be asked regarding adherence in
   clinics.

#. Provide a text reminder to doctors on clinic days to remind them to
   assess adherence.

#. Re-audit following implementation of changes.

As a consequence of the initial audit, a change in practice was brought
about by introducing information sheets in each clinic room with
possible questions concerning adherence to ask when assessing patients
in clinic. A brief session on adherence was also added to the junior
doctor induction. Then, a text message reminder was sent to colleagues.
This included consultants, specialty doctors and trainees (core and
foundation year 2) at the start of each clinic for a period of 3 months.
The text message was very brief, reminding colleagues to discuss
adherence with their patients in clinic. The colleagues' consent was
sought prior to this 3-month trial. We initially planned to send the
text reminders using `NHS.net <NHS.net>`__, which provided such a
service, but that stopped in early 2015. As a result, we sent out a
group message using the work mobile phone.

Following this period a re-audit was carried out. It again focused on
patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder but only
spanned the intervention period of the prior 3 months.

.. _S5:

Re-audit
--------

As before, a random sample of 50 patients was selected. A similar
procedure was carried out, but only patients reviewed after the initial
audit were included. The same data collection tool was used (`Box
1 <#box1>`__). The results are illustrated in `Fig. 1 <#F1>`__.

.. figure:: 43f1
   :alt: Comparison of key audit results.
   :name: F1

   Comparison of key audit results.

The results indicated an improvement in all three key comparisons. More
doctors had discussed medication adherence with their patient over the
past 3 months (62% *v.* 50%, *P* = 0.22), and there was increased
discussion with patients and documentation of side-effects (60% *v.*
30%, *P* = 0.0025). More clinicians discussed the response to medication
with their patients in the second audit (60% (*n* = 30) *v.* 46% (*n* =
23), *P* = 0.16). The results regarding further questions about
adherence continued to be poor, with only 4% (*n* = 2) asking about
whether the patient had missed any doses of medication. However, it was
felt this may be secondary to a lack of documentation rather than being
a true reflection of practice.

*P*-values revealed a significant difference in the two audits for the
discussion about side-effects, with an improvement noted following the
interventions. However, there was no significant difference on
discussions about adherence and response to medication between the two
audits.

.. _S6:

Discussion
==========

Improving treatment adherence is at the heart of clinical psychiatry. It
requires building a therapeutic relationship with patients,
understanding their needs and tailoring treatment accordingly.
Monitoring treatment adherence is a continuous process during which the
need to continue medication in the long term is regularly stressed. We
need to identify the barriers and help patients and carers to overcome
these. This can only be achieved if the treatment is regularly monitored
for its efficacy, side-effect burden and acceptability to patients.

This audit presents a rather disappointing picture of the conversation
about treatment adherence, which is not common in clinical encounters.
Such discussions took place in just half of the consultations, whereas
questions about possible side-effects and response to medication were
raised even less frequently. The first variable improved to about 60%
after regular reminders and inclusion of this topic in the junior doctor
induction, but this result was not statistically significant. However,
the results were statistically significant concerning discussions about
side-effects, with a significant improvement noted following the
interventions. This perhaps highlights the need for regular training to
improve the monitoring of treatment adherence.

It has been shown that simple questions about different aspects of
medication-taking behaviours can be effective in improving treatment
adherence. :sup:`17` Most of the information regarding assessment of
adherence is based on clinical experience or limited research.
Clinicians can start by asking patients ‘Have you missed any pills in
the past week?’ A positive response indicates there may be a problem
with adherence. Clinicians should bear in mind that patients tend to
overestimate their actual adherence to therapy and that the accuracy of
the self-report depends on the patient's cognitive abilities, attitudes
and openness towards the therapist. :sup:`6` Some simple questions that
can be asked in routine clinical care include: ‘How are you taking your
medications?’, ‘Have you ever forgotten to take your medications?’, ‘Are
you experiencing any adverse drug reactions?’, ‘How are you feeling
since you started the medication?’ :sup:`6`

The results of the audit should be interpreted in the light of some
limitations. It is possible that these questions are asked but not
regularly documented. Patient medication adherence was not directly
measured in the audit. The study had a small sample size that represents
a snapshot of clinical encounters, which may not be generalisable. The
discussion about treatment adherence may have taken place in different
settings such as the in-patient setting or with other members of the
multidisciplinary team such as the community psychiatric nurse. We used
text message reminders, which has helped the clinicians ask about
adherence. Text messages have often been used to remind patients abut
medication, but they have not been commonly used to alter the
clinicians' behaviour, and can prove a simple and effective method for
improving adherence with good practice.

.. [1]
   **Dr Saeed Farooq** is a Clinical Senior Lecturer, Institute for
   Primary Care and Health Sciences, Keele University; Visiting
   Professor, Staffordshire University; and Honorary Consultant
   Psychiatrist, South Staffordshire and Shropshire Healthcare NHS
   Foundation Trust. **Dr Abid Choudry** is a Specialty Registrar in
   General Adult Psychiatry, Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust.
