================================================================
Vitamin D deficiency in adolescents in a tier 4 psychiatric unit
================================================================



Neil F. Stewart
Simon N. Lewis
:Correspondence: Simon N. Lewis (slewis9@nhs.net)  [1]_

:date: 2017-6

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To review the current clinical practice and
   guidelines for testing and treating vitamin D deficiency in
   adolescents admitted to a tier 4 adolescent psychiatric unit in north
   London. The blood test results of 56 patients admitted between 2012
   and 2014 were examined to determine whether vitamin D levels had been
   tested. For those individuals who were tested for vitamin D, results
   were analysed by gender and ethnicity.

   **Results** Of 56 patients admitted, 48% were tested for vitamin D
   deficiency and in 81.5% of cases we uncovered deficiency or severe
   deficiency; 18.5% had the minimum levels of vitamin D for bone health
   as per our trust guidelines.

   **Clinical implications** Adolescents within tier 4 adolescent mental
   health services may be at higher risk of vitamin D deficiency and so
   assessment of vitamin D levels should be considered as part of a
   standard physical health review for this group of young people.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

It is well known that vitamin D plays a role in bone health. In
addition, vitamin D receptors have been found in several areas of the
brain and are reported to be involved in neuroimmuno-modulation,
neuroprotection, neuro-plasticity and brain development.\ :sup:`1` Given
that some of these receptors are found in brain areas implicated in
mental illnesses such as depression,\ :sup:`1` it is plausible that
vitamin D and/or vitamin D deficiency have a role in the pathogenesis of
mental illness.

Existing guidelines identify risk factors for vitamin D
deficiency\ :sup:`2–4` (details available from the authors on request),
although there is little that relates specifically to adolescents or
individuals within mental health settings. We hypothesised that patients
in a tier 4 adolescent psychiatric unit in north London may be at
increased risk of vitamin D deficiency, potentially having had reduced
exposure to sunlight as a result of their psychiatric presentations.
Linked to this, according to data from the UK National Census in
2011,\ :sup:`5` there is a higher proportion of individuals with
increased skin pigmentation (black and minority ethnic (BME)) compared
with the national average within inner London schools, which may reflect
general population trends in urban areas.

.. _S1:

Aim
===

We examined the blood test results of all patients admitted to Simmons
House, a tier 4 adolescent psychiatric unit, to review our management of
individuals with vitamin D deficiency, make recommendations for future
practice and identify areas where further study is needed.

.. _S2:

Method
======

The blood test results of patients admitted to the unit between 2012 and
2014 were examined after a clinical observation that a number of
patients had vitamin D deficiency. Patient notes were checked to
determine gender, ethnicity, whether they were tested for vitamin D
levels and the result of the test. The results were classified according
to local laboratory reference ranges at the Whittington Hospital NHS
Trust in London: <25 nmol/L severe deficiency, 25–50 nmol/L deficiency
and 50 nmol/L minimal vitamin D levels for bone health. The results were
also mapped to other guidelines, such as National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines (<25 nmol/L ‘low vitamin D
status’) and those outlined by the Endocrine Society and Society for
Adolescent Health and Medicine (>75 nmol/L ‘adequate’).\ :sup:`4,7`

.. _S3:

Results
=======

Of 56 patients on the unit between 2012 and 2014, 48% (*n* = 27) were
tested for vitamin D deficiency. According to local laboratory reference
ranges (Whittington Hospital NHS Trust), 81.5% (*n* = 22) were deficient
or severely deficient (40.7% deficient and 40.7% severely deficient) and
18.5% had the minimum levels for bone health. Applying the NICE
guidelines, 40.7% of patients had low vitamin D status. No individuals
tested had levels of >75 nmol/L (a level recommended in other
guidelines).\ :sup:`4,7` The results are summarised in `Table
1 <#T1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Vitamin D levels in the tested patient sample

   +--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |        | Patients | Tested   | D        | Minimum  | Vitamin  |
   |        | *n*      | for      | eficient | level of | D at     |
   |        |          | vitamin  | or       | vitamin  | > 75     |
   |        |          | D        | severely | D for    | nmol/L   |
   |        |          | levels   | deficien | bone     |          |
   |        |          | (%)      | t\ `a <# | healt    |          |
   |        |          |          | TFN2>`__ | h\ `b <# |          |
   |        |          |          | (%)      | TFN3>`__ |          |
   |        |          |          |          | (%)      |          |
   +========+==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+
   | Male   | 14       |   8 (57) |   6 (75) | 2 (25)   | 0 (0)    |
   +--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |        |          |          |          |          |          |
   +--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Female | 42       | 19       | 15 (79)  | 4 (21)   | 0 (0)    |
   |        |          | (45.2)   |          |          |          |
   +--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |        |          |          |          |          |          |
   +--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | White  | 39       | 18       | 13       | 5 (27.8) | 0 (0)    |
   |        |          | (46.1)   | (72.2)   |          |          |
   +--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |        |          |          |          |          |          |
   +--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | BME    | 17       |   9      |   9      | 0 (0)    | 0 (0)    |
   |        |          | (52.9)   | (100)    |          |          |
   +--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |        |          |          |          |          |          |
   +--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Total  | 56       | 27 (48)  | 22       | 5 (18.5) | 0 (0)    |
   |        |          |          | (81.5)   |          |          |
   +--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+

   BME, Black and minority ethnic.

   <50 nmol/L

   >50 nmol/L

.. _S4:

Results by ethnicity
--------------------

Nearly half of adolescents who were White were tested (46.1%, 18/39),
and 72.2% (*n* = 13) were deficient or severely deficient in vitamin D.
In individuals from BME groups, who were potentially at higher risk of
vitamin D deficiency due to increased skin pigmentation, 52.9% (9/17)
were tested for vitamin D levels and 100% were deficient or severely
deficient. There was no significant statistical association between
ethnicity and vitamin D deficiency (χ\ :sup:`2` = 3.07, *P* = 0.136
(Fisher's exact test)).

.. _S5:

Results by gender
-----------------

Three-quarters of the sample were female (*n* = 42); 14 were male. Of
the 57% (*n* = 8) males tested, 75% (*n* = 6) were deficient or severely
deficient in vitamin D, whereas of the 45.2% (*n* = 19) females tested,
79% (*n* = 15) were deficient or severely deficient in vitamin D. There
was no statistical association between gender and vitamin D deficiency
(χ\ :sup:`2` = 0.05, *P* = 1.000 (Fisher's exact test)).

.. _S6:

Discussion
==========

.. _S7:

Are adolescents at risk?
------------------------

There is emerging evidence that the adolescent population in general is
at risk of vitamin D deficiency.\ :sup:`8` Although risk factors may
vary, depending on geographical location, seasonal changes, latitude and
variations in ultraviolet light levels, there has also been a suggestion
of a worldwide re-emergence of rickets in the paediatric
population.\ :sup:`9` The Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health
identifies adolescents as having an ‘increased need’ for vitamin
D,\ :sup:`10` and the draft NICE guidelines\ :sup:`6` stated that young
people undergoing rapid periods of growth are at an increased risk of
vitamin D deficiency, although this did not appear in the final
guideline.\ :sup:`2`

.. _S8:

Which guidelines to use?
------------------------

An update to the NICE guidelines regarding vitamin D deficiency was
published in November 2014 with the aim of increasing vitamin D
supplement use among at-risk groups.\ :sup:`2` The guidelines include
the findings of the *National Diet and Nutrition Survey* showing that
8–24% of children (depending on age and gender) may have vitamin D
deficiency (details available from the authors on request). It is also
noted that up to 75% of Asian adults may be deficient in vitamin D. The
groups at risk of vitamin D deficiency, including adolescents, are:
people who have low or no exposure to the sun, for example those who
cover their skin for cultural reasons, those who are housebound or
confined indoors for long periods, andpeople with darker skin, for
example people of African, African-Caribbean or South Asian origin.

There appears to be a lack of consensus between various guidelines in
defining a biochemical vitamin D deficiency. NICE guidelines\ :sup:`2`
give a level of <25 nmol/L as low vitamin D status, but local laboratory
reference ranges and recommendations made in other guidelines vary. For
example, the Endocrine Society\ :sup:`4` and the Society for Adolescent
Health and Medicine\ :sup:`7` provide different recommendations
regarding required vitamin D levels, which appear to be higher than
those in the NICE guidelines.\ :sup:`2` `Table 2 <#T2>`__ summarises the
guidelines.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Vitamin D levels by guideline

   +--------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |              | Whittington    | NICE           | Endocrine      |
   |              | Hospital NHS   | guidelines     | Society and    |
   |              | Trust          |                | SAHM           |
   |              | laboratory     |                | interpretation |
   |              | interpretation |                |                |
   +==============+================+================+================+
   | < 25 nmol/L  | Severe         | Low vitamin D  | Deficiency     |
   |              | deficiency     | status         |                |
   +--------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |              |                |                |                |
   +--------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | 25–50 nmol/L | Deficiency     | n/i            | Deficiency     |
   +--------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |              |                |                |                |
   +--------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | >50 nmol/L   | Minimal levels | n/i            | Recommended or |
   |              | for bone       |                | ‘adequate’     |
   |              | health         |                | level          |
   +--------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

   SAHM, Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine; n/i, no
   interpretation offered in the guideline.

.. _S9:

Prevention and treatment
------------------------

Vitamin D deficiency can be treated with oral or intramuscular
supplementation, usually in the D\ :sub:`3` form (cholecalciferol), as
this may be more effective than vitamin D\ :sub:`2` in raising serum
25(OH)D levels.\ :sup:`11` NICE guidelines outline the daily vitamin D
intake requirements to minimise the risk of deficiency in various age
groups, with 400 IU for ‘at risk’ adults. Similar requirements have been
suggested for adolescents.\ :sup:`8` Medical causes of vitamin D
deficiency, other than reduced sunlight exposure, should also be
considered, for example reduced parathyroid hormone levels or
malabsorption disorders such as coeliac disease. No single treatment
recommendation for vitamin D deficiency is given in national guidelines.

.. _S10:

How much sun exposure is recommended?
-------------------------------------

A recent NICE guideline, published in February 2016, outlines the risks
and benefits of sunlight exposure.\ :sup:`12` It recognises that advice
on sunlight exposure to date has been available from many sources and
that the information has often been ‘inconsistent and potentially
confusing’.\ :sup:`12` Young people and their parents/carers could be
confused, worrying about balancing advice to limit sun exposure, because
of the increase in incidence of skin cancer and other skin disorders,
with a need to have sun exposure for vitamin D production.\ :sup:`13,14`
The new NICE guideline acknowledges that, with a proviso that ‘a simple
definitive message telling different groups how often and how long they
can be exposed to sunlight to ensure minimum risk but maximum benefit’
is not possible because of the multiple biological, social and
environmental factors that contribute towards an individual's
risk-and-benefit profile.\ :sup:`12` Specific risk factors for skin
cancer such as a family history of the disease should always be
considered when giving sun exposure advice, and the NICE guideline also
mentions groups who should take ‘extra care to avoid skin damage and
skin cancer’. This includes young people.\ :sup:`12`

It is suggested that skin colour charts may be helpful in making
judgements about sun exposure advice. Individuals with naturally very
light skin (skin types I and II) are at greater risk of sunburn and skin
cancer and require shorter times of sun exposure to synthesise vitamin D
compared with those with darker skin types (types V and VI), who are at
increased risk of vitamin D deficiency in the UK.\ :sup:`12`

Advice should be tailored for the time of year and the time of day. For
example, in the UK between March and October and between 11 am and 3 pm,
short periods of sun exposure to the forearms, hands or lower legs are
required to synthesise vitamin D, whereas longer times are required
between 3 pm and 11 am.\ :sup:`12` Between October and March, there is
‘very little of the ultraviolet B wavelength the skin needs to make
vitamin D’.\ :sup:`12`

With so many factors to consider, it is perhaps not surprising that the
general advice given in the NICE guideline remains equivocal, with an
emphasis on providing consistent, balanced messages regarding the risks
and benefits of sunlight exposure for each individual. It is suggested
that: ‘short (less than the time it takes for skin to redden or burn),
frequent periods of sunlight exposure are best for vitamin D synthesis.
In addition, this type of exposure is less likely to result in skin
cancer’.\ :sup:`12` This advice is broadly similar to advice published
in a multiagency consensus document in 2010
(https://www.cancerresearchuk.org/sites/default/files/vitamind-consensus.pdf).\ :sup:`7`

.. _S11:

Study recommendations
---------------------

If it were assumed that all of the individuals in our study who were not
tested – deliberately or by accidental omission – had ‘optimum’ vitamin
D levels, then 39.3% (*n* = 22) of the total sample had vitamin D
deficiency. However, it seems unlikely that all of the non-tested
patients had optimal levels given that, for example, 8 BME patients were
not tested and 100% of those who were tested were deficient or severely
deficient in vitamin D.

Factors influencing whether patients on Simmons House Adolescent Unit
were tested for vitamin D before 2015 have not been explored in this
project. The apparent idiosyncrasy of testing is beyond the scope of the
present study but was one of the reasons for the study and subsequent
recommendations detailed in the `Appendix <#APP1>`__.

The results could suggest that all individuals within Simmons House at
risk of vitamin D deficiency were identified and their levels tested
accordingly. Alternatively, it may be that a proportion of the 52% of
individuals not tested had an undetected vitamin D deficiency,
particularly those from BME backgrounds given that 100% of the BME
patients who were tested had deficiency or severe deficiency. As
increased skin pigmentation is identified as a specific risk factor for
vitamin D deficiency in the NICE guidelines, it could be that all
adolescents with increased skin pigmentation admitted to a tier 4
adolescent psychiatric unit should have their vitamin D levels checked.
This may be particularly relevant in units with culturally diverse
populations. Specific recommendations made for Simmons House are
detailed in the `Appendix <#APP1>`__.

Perhaps any adolescent with a mental illness of a severity that requires
in-patient admission is at risk of reduced sun exposure and consequent
vitamin D deficiency, no matter their ethnicity. It could be suggested
that all patients within tier 4 adolescent psychiatric units should be
considered at high risk of vitamin D deficiency and tested, unless there
was clear evidence to the contrary, such as a confirmed history of
adequate sun exposure and theoretically sufficient dietary intake.

Choosing a particular treatment regime depends on clinical need and
consideration of local guidelines. Recommendations given in various
London NHS trusts guidelines (St Bartholomew's and The London NHS Trust,
Royal Free Hospital NHS Trust and The Whittington Hospital NHS Trust;
details available from the authors on request) range from treating a
deficiency with oral cholecalciferol in doses of 2000 to 6000 IU per
day, or once-weekly doses of 20 000 IU, all for a minimum of 3 months
before rechecking vitamin D levels. Once the serum 25(OH)D level has
been normalised, the recommended maintenance doses range from 400 to
1000 IU of cholecalciferol per day, with NICE suggesting 400 IU per day
as a prophylactic dose for those at risk of deficiency. Therefore, at
the very least, it seems that prophylactic supplementation of 400 IU of
vitamin D\ :sub:`3` per day should be considered for adolescents at risk
of vitamin D deficiency, or treatment of a confirmed vitamin D
deficiency initiated after discussion with the adolescent and/or their
family/carers. Treatment regimens should be in line with local
guidelines until a sufficient evidence base is established to provide
national guidelines.

More research is needed into the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency in
all age groups, both in the general population and in hospital settings
(general and psychiatric hospitals). The topic is likely to appear in
the medical literature frequently in years to come, with hypothesised
links between vitamin D deficiency and a multitude of medical conditions
ranging from cancer to psychosis,\ :sup:`15` multiple
sclerosis\ :sup:`16` and the possibility of a worldwide re-emergence of
rickets in the paediatric population.\ :sup:`9` The relationship between
vitamin D and mental illness is not known. A meta-analysis\ :sup:`17`
published in the *British Journal of Psychiatry* in 2013 supported an
association between low vitamin D concentrations and depression, mostly
based on observational studies. However, the nature of the association
is not yet known to be causal and the paper also noted that the quality
of evidence in this particular area to date is poor; no randomised
control trials have been performed.\ :sup:`17`

If an association between depression and vitamin D deficiency were to be
confirmed through future study, vitamin D supplementation could
potentially be a cost-effective treatment adjunct with minimal adverse
effects. In the meantime, the beneficial effects of vitamin D on bone
health have been clearly demonstrated. Future research might include a
nationwide project through the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Quality
Network of Inpatient CAMHS Units (QNIC; `qnic.org.uk <qnic.org.uk>`__)
to which almost all tier 4 units in the UK are allied for appraisal and
accreditation. Additionally, consideration of whether the child and
adolescent population attending tier 3 child and adolescent mental
health services (CAMHS) should be tested for their vitamin D status
requires further thought.

#. All admissions to Simmons House should be considered at high risk of
   vitamin D deficiency, especially individuals with increased skin
   pigmentation or with a history suggestive of a lack of sun exposure.
   Therefore, vitamin D levels should be included as part of the routine
   physical assessment.

#. If blood tests are refused or clinically inappropriate, prophylactic
   treatment should be considered with 400 IU cholecalciferol (vitamin
   D\ :sub:`3`) orally once daily, assuming informed consent is gained.

#. If a vitamin D deficiency is detected, baseline corrected calcium
   levels should be tested, plus a full bone mineral profile and testing
   of parathyroid hormone levels, along with routine admission blood
   tests (e.g. full blood count, urea and electrolytes, liver function
   tests, random blood glucose, thyroid function tests and lipid
   profile).

#. Treatment of a vitamin D deficiency should consist of high-dose
   cholecalciferol (vitamin D\ :sub:`3`) (5000–6000 IU) orally daily for
   3 months. Vitamin D levels and corrected calcium levels should then
   be checked again and a maintenance dose of cholecalciferol (vitamin
   D\ :sub:`3`) 400 IU commenced once daily when vitamin D levels have
   normalised. Continuation of treatment should be tailored to each
   individual, based on severity of the deficiency and ongoing risk
   factors for vitamin D deficiency. Longer-term management of
   supplementation should be discussed with primary care colleagues.

#. Patients and/or their families/carers should be made aware of
   potential side-effects of treatment i.e. vitamin D toxicity or
   hypercalcaemia, which may present with anorexia, weight loss,
   vomiting and polyuria.

#. Ongoing examination of blood test results (serum vitamin D levels)
   should take place and internal audit on clinical practice should
   continue.

.. [1]
   **Neil F. Stewart** is a Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Specialist
   Registrar, North East London NHS Foundation Trust, and **Simon N.
   Lewis** is a Consultant Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist,
   Whittington Health NHS Trust and University College London Hospitals
   NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
