---
abstract: |
  The Care Act 2014 represents a significant change in legislation in
  England. For the first time it brings together various aspects of
  adult social care into a single statute succeeding earlier acts and
  policy. Given its importance to the lives of service users and carers,
  clinicians need to have a clear understanding of its implications. We
  provide an overview of why it was developed, its underlying principles
  and international comparisons, as well as implications for
  assessments, interventions and outcomes. The impact on the lives of
  patients and carers is discussed, as well as dilemmas and challenges
  the Act presents. While it addresses other important aspects of social
  care, including safeguarding, Mental Health Act section 117 aftercare
  and duty of candour, we focus on personalisation because of the
  opportunities it provides to enhance management plans for people
  experiencing mental health problems.
author:
- Deb Barnes
- Billy Boland
- Kathryn Linhart
- Katherine WilsonCorrespondence to Billy Boland
  (<billy.boland@hpft.nhs.uk>) [^1]
date: 2017-6
institute:
- 1Hertfordshire Partnership NHS Foundation Trust
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
title: Personalisation and social care assessment -- the Care Act 2014
---

# Why was the Care Act 2014 developed? {#S1}

The Care Act 2014 represents the latest evolution in current attitudes
to care. It was asserted by Norman Lamb MP, Care and Support Minister in
the UK coalition government, as 'the most significant reform of care and
support in more than 60 years'.^1^ Think Local Act Personal (TLAP, a
partnership of more than 50 organisations, including the National Health
Service (NHS), 'committed to transforming health and care through
personalisation and community-based
support'([www.thinklocalactpersonal.org.uk/About-us/](www.thinklocalactpersonal.org.uk/About-us/)))
sees it as representing a significant change in legislation, of
importance to service users and carers in England and Wales because 'for
the first time it puts them in control of their care and support. It
also makes clear what kind of care they should expect'
([www.thinklocalactpersonal.org.uk/Browse/careact2014/](www.thinklocalactpersonal.org.uk/Browse/careact2014/)).

Social care law can be seen to have begun with the National Assistance
Act in 1948 that contained provisions for the basis of the modern
welfare state. Direct payments as a method of personalisation were
introduced in 1996 by the Community Care Act. More recent updates, such
as the Carers and Disabled Children Act 2000 and the Health and Social
Care Act 2001, broadened and refreshed these approaches. Separately,
safeguarding of adults from abuse was dealt with by the Department of
Health in *No Secrets*.^2^ The Care Act 2014 succeeds earlier acts with
a single statute. The golden thread running through the Act is the
promotion of individual well-being ([Box
1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}): "'The general duty of a local
authority, in exercising a function under this Part in the case of an
individual, is to promote that individual\'s well-being.' (Care Act 2014
section 1(1))'As a service user who has in the past been a carer to a
diverse group of individuals, I feel that had a lot of these changes
been made in the past, many people\'s lives would have transformed
sooner rather than later. That being said, we are now moving forward to
enable individual lives to be more fulfilled.' (Deb Barnes)"

**Box 1** Scope: purpose of the Care Act (adapted from the Care Act
2014)

a.  To reform the law relating to care and support for adults

b.  To reform the law relating to support for carers

c.  To make provision about safeguarding adults from abuse or neglect

d.  To make provision about care standards

e.  To establish and make provision about Health Education England

f.  To establish and make provision about the Health Research Authority

g.  To make provision about integrating care and support with health
    services

**Box 2** Care Act specified outcomes

The specified outcomes as defined in the Act are: managing and
maintaining nutritionmaintaining personal hygienemanaging toilet
needsbeing appropriately clothedbeing able to make use of the adult\'s
home safelymaintaining a habitable home environmentdeveloping and
maintaining family or other personal relationshipsaccessing and engaging
in work, training, education or volunteeringmaking use of necessary
facilities or services in the local community including public transport
and recreational facilities or services, andcarrying out any caring
responsibilities the adult has for a child.

# What are the international comparisons? {#S2}

In establishing the Care Act, a cap on spending for long-term social
care was originally proposed to be introduced in April 2016. However,
this has now been postponed until at least 2020. In 2014, The King\'s
Fund reviewed international comparisons for health and social care
provision.^3^ It highlights that The Netherlands introduced a
'universal' (i.e. available to all) system of insurance for long-term
care in 1968. In the 1990s it introduced caps in response to rising
costs, but this led to long waiting lists and the caps were abolished.
Latterly, they have raised the threshold to access social care and
outlined aspects of care that are expected to be delivered by families.
Sweden established the right to tax-funded legislation in 1982/1983,
whereas countries including Germany, France, Japan and South Korea all
have mandatory long-term care insurance schemes.

# Assessment under the Care Act {#S3}

Assessment of needs, both for service users and their carers, is a core
aspect of the Care Act. The process is divided into three stages:
identifying needs, assessing eligibility and care planning.^4^ Each of
these should be viewed not only as a gateway to support but as an
intervention in itself.

## Stage 1: identifying needs {#S4}

The Act places a statutory duty on local authorities to provide
assessments for any adult, including carers, appearing to have a need
for care or support, regardless of the local authority\'s view of the
level of that need or the individual\'s financial resources (section
9--10). It is important to note that in some areas this responsibility
may be delegated by the local authority to partner organisations, such
as NHS foundation trusts, and that assessment may be carried out by a
range of professionals, including healthcare professionals. This
assessment should address the person\'s needs in relation to the
specified outcomes as defined in the Care Act ([Box
2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"}). It aims to identify the impact of
these needs, the person\'s desired outcomes, and whether the provision
of care and support services will be effective in contributing to the
achievement of these outcomes (section 9(4), 10(5)). For clarity, we
have used the term 'specified outcome' as a technical definition to
refer to those outcomes specified in the Care Act ([Box
2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"}) and 'personal outcome' to describe all
possible outcomes individuals may see as important.

It is crucial that the individual, their carer and any other person the
individual requests be fully involved in the assessment process.
Consideration should also be given to the most appropriate kind of
assessment. Options for supported self-assessment, telephone assessment,
joint assessment with other agencies or a combined assessment of the
needs of, for example, the individual and their carer, may be
appropriate (Care Act section 6(3)). In addition, in cases where the
individual has significant difficulty in representing themselves at
assessment and has no suitable advocate, the local authority is required
to provide an independent advocate regardless of the individual\'s
capacity under the Mental Capacity Act 2005.^5^

## Stage 2: assessing eligibility {#S5}

At the eligibility stage, the Care Act replaces previous Fair Access to
Care (FACS) guidance on eligibility criteria^6,7^ with a national
eligibility threshold based on the causes, extent and impact of the
individual\'s needs (\~[Box 3](#box3){ref-type="boxed-text"}). It should
however be noted that local authorities are able, where considered
appropriate, to meet non-eligible needs and may choose to do so, for
example, in order to prevent further deterioration.

### Well-being, individual personal outcomes and eligibility {#S6}

In order to judge eligibility, impacts and contexts of needs are
relevant: individual needs must be considered against the specified
outcomes to determine whether or not they can be met, and reasons for
this should be understood. Some social needs are not addressed by the
Care Act, for example housing and debt. A homeless person would not be
eligible purely by virtue of their homelessness, but the reasons for
homelessness may make them eligible. For example, becoming homeless
solely through relationship breakdown would not be considered
potentially eligible. However, homelessness through an inability to
manage a tenancy due to the impact of severe mental illness (i.e.
impaired 'ability to maintain a habitable home' as defined in the
specified outcomes) may well be eligible.

Furthermore, the impact on well-being is a personalised assessment and
an individual perception, so that two people with the same needs in
relation to specific outcomes could end up with a different assessment
of eligibility. For example, obsessive-compulsive disorder could
manifest in repetitive behaviours which affect an individual\'s ability
to maintain family relationships and employment. These two specified
outcomes may be fundamental for one person and significantly affect
their well-being. Another person may have very different priorities or
personal outcomes that they want to achieve; their well-being is not
significantly affected and they would not be eligible.

The word 'significant' is not defined in the legislation, rather it is a
judgement made by the local authority after considering the person\'s
needs and what is important to them. However, well-being is a broadly
defined and holistically assessed concept, relating to areas such as:
personal dignity; physical and mental health and emotional well-being;
protection from abuse and neglect; control by the individual over
day-to-day life; participation in work, education, training or
recreation; social and economic well-being; domestic, family and
personal relationships; suitability of living accommodation; and the
individual\'s contribution to society.^5^

**Box 3** The National Eligibility Threshold (Regulation 2(1)14)^11^

An adult\'s needs meet the eligibility criteria if -- the adult\'s needs
arise from or are related to a physical or mental impairment or
illness;as a result of the adult\'s needs the adult is unable to achieve
two or more of the outcomes \[...\] andas a consequence there is, or is
likely to be, a significant impact on the adult\'s well-being.

The key to assessment under the Care Act is understanding what personal
outcome (personal aim, wish or goal) the individual is looking for and
what their needs are, before considering how these needs can be met.
Person-centred assessment focuses on the individual and the difficulty
they have in achieving personal outcomes, balanced with their strengths
and support network; it does not start with service provision. For
example, the assessment does not begin with 'the person needs
residential care', but rather may find that 'the person is unable to
wash, dress and feed themselves. This is having an impact on their
personal dignity and their ability to continue to live safely in their
own home'.

The local authority must consider what strengths, resources and
capabilities the person has themselves and within their support networks
and wider community. This strengths-based approach to assessment and
care planning can maximise opportunities for utilising assets found
within communities and normative support networks, thereby reducing
dependence on service provision by meeting people\'s needs in more
innovative and creative ways.

## Stage 3: care planning {#S7}

In developing and delivering preventive approaches to care and support,
local authorities should ensure that individuals are not seen as passive
recipients of support services, but are actively encouraged and
supported to participate and are able to design care and support based
around achievement of their goals. All assessments and subsequent care
and support plans should be person-centred and genuinely engage the
person and people involved in their care throughout.

Support plans should consider the broader needs identified by the
assessment as well as the personal outcomes associated with the
specified outcomes the individual is looking to achieve to maintain or
improve their well-being. The person\'s own capabilities, assets and
strengths and the potential for improving their skills, as well as the
role of any support from family, friends or others that could help them
to achieve what they wish for, should be incorporated into the plan. A
person\'s independence should be maximised across these networks before
any statutory service provision is considered to meet the desired
personal outcomes.

Any person who requires ongoing support and has eligible needs is
entitled to have these needs met through a personal budget. The Care Act
2014 has given parity to carers, who are now entitled to have their own
eligible needs met through a carer\'s personal budget. A personal budget
is an amount of money allocated for a person\'s support; this can be
managed with or on behalf of the individual by the local authority or a
broker, or can be paid to the individual as a direct payment.
Person-centred care and support planning means that a person can receive
part or all of their personal budget as a direct payment. Direct
payments aim to enable a person to exercise the maximum possible choice
over how they are supported, who they are supported by and where they
are supported. The person must understand how much money is likely to be
required to meet their eligible needs and have clear and realistic
expectations of what is available locally. People who self-fund are
entitled to receive necessary information, advice and support with
support planning.

The third national TLAP survey^8^ demonstrated that over three-quarters
of personal budget holders reported a positive impact of personal
budgets on their lives. People with mental health difficulties were more
likely than other groups to report a positive impact on relationships
with carers, family and friends. However, older people were less likely
than other cohorts to report a positive impact on mental health.

# Review {#S8}

Plans may be revised as a scheduled review or in response to changing
needs or circumstances. The review should be a positive opportunity to
consider whether the plan is enabling the person to meet their needs and
achieve their desired personal outcomes. At this point it can be
considered whether the support provided is working (be this through a
carer, the community, through a direct payment or a commissioned service
through a personal budget), whether new personal outcomes need to be
defined, or whether any changes need to be made to care and support to
achieve improvement.

# Responsibilities of professionals {#S9}

The Care Act places a responsibility on the local authority to inform
the individual of their eligibility determination and produce a written
record of whether any of their needs meet the eligibility criteria, and
the reasons for this decision. Where an individual does not have
eligible needs, the local authority must also provide information on
what support may be available in the wider community, or what preventive
measures might be taken to prevent or delay the condition progressing.
This will require professionals responsible for eligibility
decision-making to clearly evidence the reasons for their decisions and
present these in an accessible format for the person concerned.

# Implications for service users and carers {#S10}

The Care Act 2014 has changed the ability that a service user or carer
has to influence assessment of their own needs and eligibility. Whereas
the FACS criteria^7^ considered the needs of the individual, they did
not consider their whole well-being and how this fits into their
everyday lives, meaning that some service users may not have completely
fitted into the specified categories. The criteria that the Care Act
2014 looks at focus on the individual in context, so that the impact on
their well-being cannot now be overlooked or misjudged.

This holistic approach is mirrored by the TLAP 'I' statements, which
make their markers for change much simpler to understand across a
diverse range of individuals ([Box 4](#box4){ref-type="boxed-text"}).
These statements complement the Care Act in allowing the individual
service user to take control of everything that supports their specific
needs and requirements. 'I' statements are presented in the form of
first-person statements, for instance, 'I have the information and
support I need in order to remain as independent as possible'.

> 'A service user or carer can automatically feel comfortable in all the
> statements as they are very clear and acknowledging. They allow you to
> take control of everything that supports your needs and requirements.
> The implications are quite dramatic; you feel worthwhile and not a
> burden to anyone and it allows you to take greater control of your own
> personal needs.' (Deb Barnes)

**Box 4** Think Local, Act Personal 'I' statements^9^

-   Information and advice: having the information I need, when I need
    it

-   active and supportive communities: keeping friends, family and place

-   flexible integrated care and support: my support my own way

-   workforce: my support staff

-   risk enablement: feeling in control and safe

-   personal budgets and self-funding: my money.

# Dilemmas and challenges {#S11}

The Care Act 2014 has introduced some major statutory changes to the way
social care is delivered nationally, and as such presents a number of
dilemmas and challenges to service users, carers and service providers.

## Assessment as intervention {#S12}

Assessment under the Care Act should be an intervention in itself rather
than merely a process by which individuals are granted or denied access
to funded services. This presents challenges both for local authorities
as a whole and for individual professionals in a number of areas,
including the necessary provision of reliable and up-to-date information
about local services, and management of the time and resources required
to ensure that assessments can be completed in a full and holistic
manner.

## Provision of appropriate and proportionate assessment {#S13}

Assessment under the Care Act 2014 requires local authorities to become
more flexible in administering assessments and to develop assessment
processes which allow for this both internally and in collaboration with
other organisations.

## Measurement of efficacy {#S14}

Whereas the Care Act 2014 defines specified outcomes for service users
and carers, the way in which these are met will be highly specific to
each individual service user and may create challenges in the ways local
authorities monitor and measure the efficacy of service delivery.

## Provision of services {#S15}

Local authorities are expected under the Care Act to promote and shape
the local market so as to achieve diverse provision of care and support
in their area. This carries with it budgetary implications with regards
to commissioning, funding and fee-setting, which must be considered not
only in terms of local authority budgets but also in relation to
providers\' sustainability.^10^

## Carer support {#S16}

The Care Act broadens previous definitions of the carer role and
requires assessment of support needs for anyone who feels that they
fulfil this role.^6^ The challenge for local authorities is to provide
sufficient information to all potential carers on their rights to
assessment and possible financial support, while managing the
potentially increased demand for these assessments and provisions.

## Conclusion {#S17}

Time will tell whether the aspirations of the Care Act are achieved. The
emphasis is clear that care should be holistic and empowering; promotion
of well-being is at its core. It is hoped that it will develop services
that are inclusive, work in a person-centred way, and achieve specific
outcomes. The introduction of the Care Act makes this way of working a
statutory duty that public services will be measured by. It will be
through individual lives and stories that success will be realised.

[^1]: **Deb Barnes**, Expert by Experience, **Billy Boland**, Consultant
    Psychiatrist, **Kathryn Linhart**, Consultant Social Worker, and
    **Katherine Wilson**, Consultant Social Worker, all at Hertfordshire
    Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust.
