==============================================================================================================================
Drug information update. Atypical antipsychotics and neuroleptic malignant syndrome: nuances and pragmatics of the association
==============================================================================================================================



Siddharth Sarkar
Nitin GuptaCorrespondence to Nitin Gupta (nitingupta659@yahoo.co.in)
 [1]_
:Date: 2017-8

:Abstract:
   Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a rare but potentially fatal
   adverse event associated with the use of antipsychotics. Although
   atypical antipsychotics were initially considered to carry no risk of
   NMS, reports have accumulated over time implicating them in NMS
   causation. Almost all atypical antipsychotics have been reported to
   be associated with NMS. The clinical profile of NMS caused by certain
   atypical antipsychotics such as clozapine has been reported to be
   considerably different from the NMS produced by typical
   antipsychotics, with diaphoresis encountered more commonly, and
   rigidity and tremor encountered less frequently. This article briefly
   discusses the evidence relating to the occurrence, presentation and
   management of NMS induced by atypical antipsychotics.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) refers to an idiosyncratic severe
adverse reaction associated with the use of antipsychotics. It is a rare
and unpredictable side-effect that has been associated with both first-
and second-generation antipsychotics. :sup:`1, 2` It occurs in about
0.02–3% of individuals who are prescribed antipsychotics. :sup:`3` NMS
is generally characterised by rigidity fever, autonomic dysregulation,
tremor, elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels and leucocytosis
(`Box 1 <#box1>`__). :sup:`4` NMS is a potentially fatal adverse event.
It can lead to permanent neurological impairment in survivors in the
form of parkinsonian symptoms and cognitive deficits, which could be
primarily ascribed to the raised core body temperature and ischaemia
following rhabdomyolysis. :sup:`5–7`

Atypical (second-generation) antipsychotics were initially considered to
have negligible risk of inducing NMS due to their distinctive
pharmacodynamic characteristics. :sup:`8` In fact, side-effect profile
has been one of the important distinguishing features between typical
(first-generation) and atypical antipsychotics. However, considerable
research evidence has accumulated to suggest that atypical
antipsychotics are also associated with NMS. :sup:`9,10` Clozapine was
one of the earliest atypical antipsychotics implicated in the causation
of NMS. :sup:`11` Subsequently, almost all of the atypical
antipsychotics have been associated with the occurrence of NMS. The
clinical features of NMS induced by atypical antipsychotics have been
reported to be somewhat different from those induced by typical
antipsychotics. :sup:`10`

Atypical antipsychotics are among the most commonly prescribed
antipsychotics. :sup:`12,13` They are utilised for the treatment of a
range of psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, mania,
depression with psychotic symptoms and personality disorders, and for
behavioural symptoms in dementia and intellectual disability.
:sup:`14,15` Hence, understanding the clinical presentation and
occurrence of NMS associated with atypical antipsychotics is of clinical
relevance. This article discusses the evidence relating to the
occurrence of NMS with atypical antipsychotics and various aspects of
management for this condition. The authors reckon that the definition of
‘atypical’ antipsychotics itself may not have clear margins, :sup:`16`
yet the term ‘atypical’ remains in clinical usage to refer to those
medications that have comparably smaller chances of causing
extrapyramidal symptoms. We do not aim to present a systematic review of
the topic, but rather a pragmatic review of the literature on NMS with
atypical antipsychotics.

.. _S1:

Reports of atypical antipsychotics causing NMS
==============================================

.. _S2:

Risperidone
-----------

Risperidone has been associated with probably the largest number of
cases of atypical antipsychotic-induced NMS. :sup:`9,17` It has been
noted more frequently in the younger age group who had been
antipsychotic naive. A severe clinical picture of typical NMS has been
encountered, marked by rigidity, extrapyramidal symptoms, fever and
highly elevated CPK levels. Tachycardia was more common than diaphoresis
and autonomic dysregulation occurred frequently. :sup:`9`

.. _S3:

Clozapine
---------

Cases of clozapine-induced NMS, reported since the 1980s, typically
occurred with rapid dose increases. Also, many patients who developed
clozapine-induced NMS had a history of NMS with other antipsychotics.
Tachycardia, tachypnoea, diaphoresis and autonomic lability were
encountered frequently, possibly due to clozapine acting on adrenergic
and muscarinic receptors. :sup:`18` Rigidity and extrapyramidal symptoms
were rare, possibly due to the lower affinity of clozapine to the
D\ :sub:`2` receptor. The increases in CPK were lower and delayed when
compared with other antipsychotics. The occurrence of fever and
autonomic instability in patients receiving clozapine in the absence of
rigidity may necessitate ruling out the diagnosis of clozapine-related
agranulocytosis before a diagnosis of NMS. :sup:`19` The clinical
severity of clozapine-induced NMS has been described to be lower than
with other antipsychotics, and hence such cases have infrequently
required intensive care unit admissions. The infrequent occurrence of
rigidity and extrapyramidal symptoms in patients with clozapine-induced
NMS require a high degree of suspicion for this diagnosis. However,
certain researchers have suggested that clozapine-induced NMS should not
be considered as a diagnosis in the absence of typical features of NMS.
:sup:`20`

**Box 1** Symptoms and signs commonly encountered in neuroleptic
malignant syndrome

-  Fever

-  Rigidity

-  Elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels

-  Tachycardia

-  Tachypnoea

-  Altered mental state

-  Fluctuating blood pressure

-  Diaphoresis

-  Leukocytosis

.. _S4:

Olanzapine
----------

Although olanzapine has been reported to present with the typical
features of NMS, extrapyramidal symptoms and fever were absent in a
small proportion of patients. Autonomic imbalances and diaphoresis are
frequent, and are often the first signs to appear in patients with
olanzapine-induced NMS. Nausea was infrequent, probably due to the
antiemetic purported properties of olanzapine, :sup:`21` but
neurological impairments such as hemiplegia, ataxia and seizures have
been reported. :sup:`9` Several cases have been reported in patients
receiving other medications apart from antipsychotics, for example mood
stabilisers and antidepressants, and the clinical picture of NMS has
been more severe in such patients. :sup:`9`

.. _S5:

Amisulpride
-----------

Several cases of amisulpride-induced NMS have been described in the
literature, :sup:`22,23` many reported in elderly males. The clinical
profile primarily involves an altered mental state, frequent rigidity
and high levels of CPK, whereas high fever, tremor and other autonomic
symptoms have been reported less frequently. The lower propensity to
cause autonomic symptoms is probably due to low affinity in amisulpride
for muscarinic, adrenergic, serotonergic and histamine receptors than in
other antipsychotics. :sup:`24`

.. _S6:

Quetiapine
----------

Quetiapine-induced NMS has been primarily reported in the elderly,
although it has also been described in children. :sup:`25` Clinically,
it presents with extrapyramidal symptoms and prominent autonomic
symptoms such as tachycardia, blood pressure fluctuations, tachypnoea
and diaphoresis. These prominent autonomic symptoms may be consequent to
noradrenaline reuptake inhibition, histaminergic antagonism and
serotonin toxicity associated with the use of quetiapine. :sup:`23` The
outcome of quetiapine-induced NMS has been relatively poor, probably due
to the older age of patients in whom it has been reported. :sup:`9`

.. _S7:

Aripiprazole
------------

Several case reports and case series have accumulated on the occurrence
of NMS in patients receiving aripiprazole. :sup:`26,27` Rigidity and
altered mental state seem to be present frequently in such patients,
while fever, diaphoresis and tachypnoea are less frequent. NMS has been
reported to occur more commonly with fast upward titration of dosages of
aripiprazole. The severity and duration of NMS seem lower than in other
antipsychotic medications, probably due to the partial dopamine agonist
activity of aripiprazole. Aripiprazole has also been implicated in
combination antipsychotic regimens, when used alongside other atypical
antipsychotics such as clozapine. :sup:`27`

.. _S8:

Ziprasidone
-----------

Few cases of ziprasidone-induced NMS have been described. :sup:`28,29`
The onset of NMS in these patients has been generally abrupt, with most
displaying typical features such as alterations of mental state, fever,
diaphoresis, tachycardia, blood pressure alterations, leukocytosis,
tremor, and other extrapyramidal symptoms with high CPK. No fatality has
been reported with ziprasidone to date, and recovery is usually achieved
in about 10 days.

.. _S9:

Paliperidone
------------

Paliperidone has a similar pharmacodynamic profile to risperidone, but
it has a lower affinity for dopamine receptors and higher serotonin
antagonist activity. Paliperidone-induced NMS has been described mainly
in patients who have been previously treated with other atypical
antipsychotics and have had a recent dose increase or cross-titrations.
:sup:`30,31` Paliperidone-induced NMS presents with a typical clinical
profile with mental state alteration, rigidity, diaphoresis,
hyperpyrexia, tremor and other extrapyramidal symptoms, and the outcome
is favourable, with resolution achieved in all cases.

.. _S10:

Zotepine
--------

Several cases of zotepine-induced NMS have been described in the
literature. :sup:`22,32` Rapid dose escalation was reported in one case,
although NMS has also developed with the usual titration pattern.
Zotepine-associated NMS presents with alterations of mental state,
rigidity, diaphoresis, fever, tachycardia and leukocytosis, with less
frequent occurrence of tremor, tachypnoea and alterations in blood
pressure.

.. _S11:

Other atypical antipsychotics and summary
-----------------------------------------

At present, there is a single case report of iloperidone being
considered as a cause of NMS. :sup:`33` The patient, who had
schizophrenia, developed mutism, diaphoresis, diffuse lead pipe rigidity
and tachycardia without fever or marked increase in CPK levels. The
outcome was favourable, but the patient also required anticoagulation
therapy for the management of comorbid pulmonary embolism.

Blonanserin was reported as a cause of NMS in a 30-year-old female with
intellectual impairment. :sup:`34` The patient presented with fever,
tachycardia, rigidity, extrapyramidal symptoms and leukocytosis after
the initiation of blonanserin. Symptomatic improvement was seen after
discontinuation.

Although different atypical antipsychotics have different NMS clinical
symptom profiles, rigidity, tremor and fever are encountered less
frequently with atypical antipsychotics, whereas diaphoresis is quite
common. Clozapine is particularly associated with atypical presentations
of NMS with infrequent CPK level elevations. Risperidone, on the other
hand, produces a clinical picture more similar to the NMS induced by
typical antipsychotics. Some of the atypical antipsychotics have also
been associated with serious features such as myoglobinuria and acute
renal failure. :sup:`35,36`

.. _S12:

Risk factors for atypical antipsychotic-induced NMS
===================================================

A few significant risk factors for atypical antipsychotic-induced NMS
have been identified. They have been reported in one study as male
gender, confusion, dehydration and delirium. :sup:`25` Another study
reported Black and minority ethnic background, antipsychotic
polypharmacy, use of aripiprazole, and increasing dosing patterns.
:sup:`37` More recently, it has been suggested that rapid dose
escalation of the antipsychotic may be a risk factor for NMS. :sup:`2`
The demographic profile of patients who developed NMS with atypical
antipsychotics does not seem to differ substantially from that of
patients with NMS induced by typical antipsychotics.

.. _S13:

Management
==========

.. _S14:

Diagnostic uncertainty
----------------------

The clinical picture and features of NMS with atypical antipsychotics
seem to be different from those of typical antipsychotics. This had led
to uncertainty over the diagnosis of NMS in patients on atypical
antipsychotics who manifest only few of the NMS symptoms. :sup:`38`
Among the core symptoms of NMS, fever is often encountered less
frequently in patients with atypical antipsychotic-induced NMS.
:sup:`38` The issue is further complicated by the various operational
definitions of NMS. :sup:`38` The DSM-IV-TR defines NMS as the presence
of severe muscle rigidity and elevated temperature after antipsychotic
initiation along with two or more of: diaphoresis, dysphagia, tremor,
incontinence, changes in level of consciousness, mutism, tachycardia,
elevated or labile blood pressure, leukocytosis, or laboratory evidence
of muscle injury (elevated CPK level). Various other criteria for NMS
have been postulated, each with varying emphasis on the individual
symptoms and signs. :sup:`39` Another set of criteria defines NMS in
patients with either three major symptoms (hyperthermia, rigidity,
elevated CPK level) or two major and four minor symptoms (diaphoresis,
tachycardia, tachypnoea, abnormal blood pressure, leukocytosis, altered
consciousness). :sup:`40` Yet another diagnostic system defines NMS
through the presence of extrapyramidal symptoms and fever (⩾37°C)
alongside three minor symptoms within a 48-hour period. :sup:`41` This
may potentially mean that a case fulfilling the diagnosis of NMS
according to one set of criteria may not do so with another set. The
DSM-5 has taken a pragmatic approach of not explicitly stating the
number of criteria required for the diagnosis of NMS.

It has been proposed that with the growing awareness of NMS, those in
the early course of its development may benefit from early
identification and immediate treatment. This may lead to an abortive
course of NMS development, with an incomplete picture and only few of
the criteria being met. Hence, some authors have proposed a dimensional
concept of NMS, which takes into consideration the minor and
subthreshold forms of NMS. :sup:`38,42` This is likely to further our
knowledge about NMS pathophysiology, clinical profile subtypes and
appropriate management strategies.

Furthermore, various other medical and neurological conditions may
present with a clinical picture similar to NMS (briefly mentioned in
`Box 2 <#box2>`__). Patient condition may require expedient decisions so
that a rational line of management can be instituted. Hence, the
clinician may need to take a brief and focused history for being
reasonably sure about the diagnosis. Neuroimaging and
electroencephalogram may be helpful for ruling out neurological
pathologies mimicking NMS. For example, in patients with psychosis,
catatonia may be considered as a differential diagnosis, especially when
the patient is mute and exhibits staring. It may not be possible to
exhaustively rule out all differential diagnoses, and at times
management may need to be started on an empirical basis.

.. _S15:

Treatment strategies for NMS
============================

The management of NMS caused by atypical antipsychotics would not be
substantially different from the management of NMS induced by typical
antipsychotics (`Box 3 <#box3>`__). NMS is a medical emergency and
requires immediate attention for clinical management. Clinical diagnosis
should be supplemented by laboratory tests, particularly CPK levels and
total leukocyte counts. Once the diagnosis is suspected, the offending
antipsychotic agent must be immediately stopped. Regular monitoring of
the vitals should be carried out. The patient should be moved to the
intensive care unit based on the severity of their medical condition.
Intensive care would typically focus on monitoring of cardiorespiratory
and renal status. Serial monitoring of serum electrolytes should be
performed and corrected as required. In extreme hyperthermia, physical
cooling measures may be instituted.

Several pharmacological options are available for the treatment of NMS.
:sup:`43,44` Dopaminergic agents such as amantadine and bromocriptine
have been demonstrated to decrease the duration of and mortality
associated with NMS. Amantadine 200 mg to 400 mg per day in divided
doses is administered either through a nasogastric tube or orally.
Bromocriptine is started at the dose of 2.5 mg three times a day and can
be titrated upwards to 45 mg per day. Benzodiazepines, particularly
lorazepam, can be given when underlying catatonia is suspected and where
agitation is encountered in the patient. Lorazepam challenge can be done
with 1 to 2 mg lorazepam administered parenterally, and may be continued
in cases which show some response. Dantrolene is a muscle relaxant that
can be applied in cases presenting with severe rigidity and
hyperthermia. It is initiated at doses of 1–2.5 mg/kg body weight and
can be repeated 6 hourly if improvement is seen. It can be administered
orally after improvement with the parenteral preparation.

**Box 2** Differential diagnosis of neuroleptic malignant syndrome

-  Amphetamine toxicity

-  Anticholinergic delirium

-  Benign extrapyramidal side-effects

-  Brain abscess

-  Catatonia

-  Heat stroke

-  Malignant catatonia

-  Malignant hyperthermia

-  Meningitis or encephalitis

-  Mid-brain structural lesions

-  Non-convulsive status epilepticus

-  Sepsis

-  Serotonin syndrome

-  Thyrotoxicosis

The altered mental state encountered during NMS also needs attention. If
sedation is required, benzodiazepines may be a preferred choice. The
medical management of the patient takes precedence over the underlying
psychiatric disorder. As the patient's condition improves, discussion
about further treatment options may be initiated.

.. _S16:

Re-challenge with antipsychotics after NMS
==========================================

One of the important considerations for a clinician is to whether to
start another antipsychotic after a patient develops NMS. If the
antipsychotic had been started for the control of psychotic symptoms,
then the risk of psychosis without the cover of antipsychotics is high.
The clinician may have to weigh the pros and cons of re-starting
antipsychotic medication: the advantage of making the patient more
manageable against the risk of inducing NMS.

**Box 3** Treatment of neuroleptic malignant syndrome

-  Consider shifting to intensive care unit

-  Regular monitoring of vitals

-  Monitoring of electrolytes and correction if required

-  Management of medical comorbidity

-  Physical cooling measures if required

-  Dopaminergic medications: amantadine and bromocriptine

-  Muscle relaxant: dantrolene

-  Benzodiazepines: for management of agitation, when clinical suspicion
   of catatonia is present

Several reports of post-NMS antipsychotic re-challenge have been
published. :sup:`45–48` Indications for a re-challenge need to be
clearly documented and other options of management (including
electroconvulsive therapy) should be explored. Taking informed consent
from the patient and/or family members/carers becomes necessary in such
circumstances. Re-challenge should be done with an atypical
antipsychotic with low propensity to cause NMS and dose titration should
be gradual. Careful monitoring should be instituted, watching the
evolution of symptoms of NMS. The re-challenge strategies thus adopted
are in no way different from those post-NMS due to typical
antipsychotics.

.. _S17:

Conclusions
===========

As psychiatrists, we are likely to encounter NMS induced by atypical
antipsychotics during clinical practice. Although it is an uncommon
adverse event of antipsychotic use, the potential fatality requires the
clinician to take cognisance of this, and institute treatment
immediately. The presentation of NMS induced by atypical antipsychotics,
especially clozapine, may be quite different from NMS induced by typical
antipsychotics – rigidity and tremor are encountered less frequently,
while diaphoresis is probably encountered more frequently. Hence, a high
degree of clinical suspicion may be required. Overall, the management of
NMS induced by atypical antipsychotics is not broadly different to the
management of that induced by typical antipsychotics. Additionally, an
episode of resolved NMS does not preclude the subsequent initiation of
antipsychotics, although due caution needs to be exercised while
re-challenging antipsychotics in patients with a history of NMS induced
by atypical antipsychotics.

.. [1]
   **Siddharth Sarkar**, MD, Assistant Professor, Department of
   Psychiatry and National Drug Dependence Treatment Centre, All India
   Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. **Nitin Gupta**, MD,
   Professor of Psychiatry, Government Medical College and Hospital,
   Chandigarh, India.
