=======================================================================================
Shared decision-making in medication management: development of a training intervention
=======================================================================================



Ute Stead
Nicola Morant
Shulamit Ramon
:Correspondence: Ute Stead (utestead@doctors.org.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2017-8

:Abstract:
   Shared decision-making is a collaborative process in which clinicians
   and patients make treatment decisions together. Although it is
   considered essential to patient-centred care, the adoption of shared
   decision-making into routine clinical practice has been slow, and
   there is a need to increase implementation. This paper describes the
   development and delivery of a training intervention to promote shared
   decision-making in medication management in mental health as part of
   the Shared Involvement in Medication Management Education (ShIMME)
   project. Three stakeholder groups (service users, care coordinators
   and psychiatrists) received training in shared decision-making, and
   their feedback was evaluated. The programme was mostly well received,
   with all groups rating interaction with peers as the best aspect of
   the training. This small-scale pilot shows that it is feasible to
   deliver training in shared decision-making to several key
   stakeholders. Larger studies will be required to assess the
   effectiveness of such training.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Shared decision-making is a collaborative process in which clinicians
and patients make treatment decisions in partnership. Both partners
bring valuable contributions to this process: patients share their
experiences, values and preferences, and clinicians support patients in
clarifying these, as well as providing clinical expertise and
evidence-based information about treatment options. Jointly, they aim to
reach an agreement on the best way to proceed. :sup:`1–3`

Shared decision-making is considered particularly relevant for
preference-sensitive decisions, where there are several reasonable
treatment options and evidence does not support a clear best choice.
Different options require the balancing of possible benefits against
potentially significant adverse or as yet unknown effects. :sup:`3–5`
Most medication decisions in mental health fall into this category,
which makes psychiatric medication management an important area for
shared decision-making. :sup:`6`

There are good reasons for encouraging adoption of shared
decision-making in mental health. Many patients wish for greater
participation in treatment decisions. :sup:`7` In chronic conditions,
where long-term healthcare decisions are required, studies have shown
that shared decision-making improves satisfaction, adherence and
well-being. :sup:`8` Shared decision-making is at the core of recovery
principles which promote autonomy and self-management skills, as well as
being considered essential for delivering patient-centred care. :sup:`9`
National and international government initiatives, :sup:`1,10–13` such
as the UK Health and Social Care Act 2012 and the US Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act 2010, endorse shared decision-making, as do
professional bodies :sup:`14–16` and practice guidelines. :sup:`17–21`
Shared decision-making is an expected element of all NHS care (Health
and Social Care Act 2012, s. 23, 26). Although there is evidence of its
benefits, and many patients want greater involvement, :sup:`7` the
adoption of shared decision-making into routine clinical practice
continues to be slow, :sup:`22,23` especially in mental health :sup:`24`

A range of interventions has been developed to promote implementation of
shared decision-making, predominantly in physical health. :sup:`25–28`
Although this is an evolving area, relatively few interventions focus
specifically on treatment decisions in mental health. :sup:`6,29–33`
Evidence is sparse regarding the effectiveness of such interventions in
general, :sup:`23,25` and in mental health settings in particular,
:sup:`33` although some promising results have been reported. These
include a study of in-patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective
disorder who received five sessions of shared decision-making training;
:sup:`29` a multifaceted programme based on shared decision-making
concepts for primary care physicians treating patients with depression;
:sup:`30` a peer-run Decision Support Centre in the waiting area of a
psychiatric medication clinic; :sup:`31` and online resources supporting
shared decision-making. :sup:`32` The limited evidence available points
towards interventions being more effective when involving healthcare
professionals and patients together, rather than only targeting one
group. :sup:`23`

The Shared Involvement in Medication Management Education (ShIMME)
project was set up to promote shared decision-making of service users
(the term ‘service users’ was used in the ShIMME project and has been
retained here) in medication decisions by delivering a specially
developed training programme to three key stakeholder groups: service
users, care coordinators and psychiatrists. (In the context of the
ShIMME project ‘care coordinator’ refers to psychiatric nurses, social
workers, occupational therapists, psychologists, support workers, peer
workers and students training in these disciplines.) To our knowledge
this is the first UK-based project to deliver and evaluate such an
intervention that targets multiple stakeholders simultaneously.

The project was a partnership between Cambridgeshire and Peterborough
NHS Foundation Trust (CPFT) and Anglia Ruskin University. Reflecting the
strong collaborative ethos, service users were active team members
jointly with academic researchers, mental health practitioners and other
professionals working within CPFT.

This paper describes the stages of the ShIMME project: consultations
about shared decision-making, development and implementation of a pilot
intervention, and evaluation of feedback. It is one of several articles
relating to the project. :sup:`34–36`

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Consultation phase
------------------

The initial phase of the project involved a literature review and
consultation with local stakeholders about the process of shared
decision-making. Data were collected via focus groups with practitioners
and users of adult mental health services in CPFT. Four focus groups
were conducted with service users (*n* = 27), two with psychiatrists
(*n* = 4), one with community psychiatric nurses (CPNs, *n* = 10), and
one with care coordinators other than CPNs (*n* = 8). Four individual
telephone interviews were also conducted with psychiatrists. Discussion
was generated in response to open questions about current practice in
medication management, how decisions should ideally be made, perceived
barriers to and facilitators of shared decision-making, and how shared
decision-making training should be conducted. Consultation groups lasted
around 90 min and were audio recorded. The anonymised transcripts were
analysed using thematic analysis, :sup:`37` conducted with NVivo
software (`www.qsrinternational.com <www.qsrinternational.com>`__). This
involved a detailed exploration of transcript texts by two team members
who worked in collaboration to iteratively develop themes.

The following themes about shared decision-making in medication
management, which are presented in more detail elsewhere, :sup:`34`
emerged from this analysis and fed into the development of the training
programmes.

#. Ongoing respectful, trusting, open and honest relationships are
   paramount – service users' concerns and experiences need to be heard
   and taken seriously.

#. Differences of power in the consultation can be complex and a barrier
   to shared decision-making – clinicians can underestimate the effect
   this has.

#. Access to reliable, user-friendly information is essential, including
   information about reducing or coming off medication and adverse
   effects of medication.

#. All available treatment options should be considered, including
   non-pharmacological treatments.

#. The process of shared decision-making needs to be flexible, taking
   into account preferences and situations which may change over time.
   Acute stages of illness or crisis situations were identified as times
   when shared decision-making would be likely to be more problematic.

#. Broader stakeholders (beyond service user and prescribe! :sup:`1` )
   have important roles in the shared decision-making process (e.g.
   other professionals, carers).

#. There is currently significant variation in medication management and
   the extent to which this involves shared decision-making.

.. _S3:

Training intervention: design
-----------------------------

A multidisciplinary working group including service users, academic
researchers, psychiatrists, a mental health nurse and a pharmacist met
regularly to develop the training intervention. The results of the
consultations, literature review and examples of existing practice fed
into the development.

Training was designed to be delivered to service users, care
coordinators and psychiatrists in parallel but separate groups. The aim
was to optimise the impact of the intervention by delivering it
simultaneously to key stakeholders who are actively involved in
medication management, while addressing the specific training needs and
concerns of each group. Each group was facilitated by a service user
trainer, and either a psychiatrist (for service user and psychiatrist
groups) or a mental health nurse (for care coordinator groups), allowing
participants to learn from two relevant perspectives.

The programme employed a range of interactive learning methods. These
included specially commissioned video material showing different
clinical scenarios, small group exercises, general group discussions,
use of testimonials and role plays. The resource materials and hand-outs
covered a diverse range of views and approaches, to raise awareness and
stimulate discussion. All participants had access to the public section
of the project website
(`www.shimme.arcusglobal.com <www.shimme.arcusglobal.com>`__) as well as
a secure discussion forum for their group.

The training programmes for the three stakeholder groups covered the
same core content: background to the project key components of shared
decision-making in the clinical encounter and rationale for promoting
shared decision-making barriers to and facilitators of shared
decision-making awareness of the effects of power imbalances in
psychiatric consultations developing collaborative relationships
importance of clarifying personal preferences, values and experiences in
shared decision-making the concept of a ‘meeting of two experts’ in the
clinical encounter, with personal experience and clinical expertise
complementing each other :sup:`38` accessing and appraising information
about medication, including examples of decision aids raising awareness
of adjuncts or alternatives to medication addressing issues around
coming off or reducing medication trialling of versions of three
paper-based tools developed for supporting and recording the shared
decision-making process information about useful websites.

In addition to the core content, the service user groups focused on:
practising setting personal goals and identifying preferences making use
of a personal well-being plan and self-help resources looking beyond
medication to enhance well-being, drawing on Deegan's work on ‘personal
medicine’ :sup:`39` introduction to assertiveness how to access
information about medication, including a talk by a National Health
Service (NHS) trust mental health pharmacist, who was available for
further discussion afterwards supported ‘hands-on’ experience exploring
relevant websites.

Besides the core content, the care coordinator training focused on
adopting the role of a ‘shared decision-making coach’, supporting
service users to play a more active part in the shared decision-making
process :sup:`35` The programme for psychiatrists focused on
competencies and resources that support embedding shared decision-making
into routine clinical practice while acknowledging real-life challenges.

.. _S4:

Training intervention: delivery
-------------------------------

All training group participants were recruited from CPFT community
mental health services: service users from the rehabilitation and
recovery pathways; and professionals from these services and from
assertive outreach teams. Service users were invited to participate by
their care coordinators and psychiatrists and care coordinators were
approached by team managers. In total, 47 service users, 12
psychiatrists and 35 care coordinators took part in the training.

Training was held in three different locations to reduce travelling for
participants. Service users were reimbursed for travelling costs and
received a fee (£40) for completing an evaluation before and after the
programme.

The training was delivered in small group settings (2–12 participants),
with each cohort completing their course of training together. An
atmosphere of trust, acceptance and respect was encouraged. Participants
had the opportunity for informal interaction before and after sessions
as well as during breaks. Facilitators and project team members could be
contacted between sessions for additional support.

Service user training groups were structured into four 2h sessions,
meeting fortnightly After the training, two follow-up sessions were
offered for ongoing support. Care coordinators met three times, at
monthly intervals, for 1.5 h. Psychiatrists had two 2 h sessions, one
month apart, with an online self-study component. For organisational
reasons one multidisciplinary team of clinicians received their training
together in a single day.

.. _S5:

Evaluation
----------

The experience and impact of the training intervention was evaluated by
collecting quantitative and qualitative data anonymously from
participants at different stages of the project.

After providing baseline data, participants and facilitators completed a
short questionnaire after each session, and participants completed a
longer one immediately after the final training session. The
questionnaires explored what the participants had hoped to learn from
the programme, their views on its content and impact, and feedback on
particular sessions, practical aspects, teaching methods and support
materials.

Analysis of quantitative and qualitative data examining the impact of
the intervention at a 12-month follow-up, as well as an economic
analysis, will be reported on separately.

.. _S6:

Results
=======

Although care coordinators and psychiatrists were mostly trained in
separate groups, their demographic and feedback data are reported as one
group of clinicians. Demographic and attendance data for service users
and clinicians are shown in `Table 1 <#T1>`__ and `Table 2 <#T2>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Demographic characteristics of participants

   ===================================== ============= ==========
   \                                     Service users Clinicians
                                         (*n* = 47)    (*n* = 47)
                                         *n* (%)       *n* (%)
   ===================================== ============= ==========
   Female                                22 (47)       33 (70)
   \                                                   
   Male                                  25 (53)       14 (30)
   \                                                   
   Mean age, years                       48            45
   \                                                   
   Ethnicity                                           
       White                             42 (89)       37 (79)
       Black                             1 (2)         1 (2)
       Asian                             0             4(9)
       Other                             3 (6)         2 (4)
       No data                           1 (2)         3 (6)
   \                                                   
   Education                                           
       Tertiary/further                  30 (64)       
       Secondary                         14 (30)       
       Primary or less                   1 (2)         
       No data                           2 (4)         
   \                                                   
   Employment `a <#TFN16>`__                           
       Paid/self-employed                3 (6)         
       Voluntary employment              7 (14)        
       Unemployed                        25 (50)       
       Student (including part-time)     4 (8)         
       Age-related retirement            4 (8)         
       Other                             7 (14)        
   \                                                   
   Professional background of clinicians               
       CPN/nurse                                       11 (23)
       Occupational therapist                          9 (19)
       Clinical psychologist                           2 (4)
       Social worker                                   2 (4)
       Support time and recovery worker                6 (13)
       Peer support worker                             2 (4)
       Team leader/deputy manager                      3 (6)
       Psychiatrist                                    12 (26)
   ===================================== ============= ==========

   CPN, community psychiatric nurse.

   More than one answer possible.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Session attendance

   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                | Patients       | Care           | Psychiatrists  |
   |                |                | coordinators   |                |
   +================+================+================+================+
   | Sessions       | 4 × 2 h        | 3 × 1.5 h      | 2 × 2 h        |
   | offered        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Cohorts        | 6              | 2 + 1 (team    | 2 + 1 (team    |
   | training       |                | training day)  | training day)  |
   | delivered to   |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Attendance     | 37 (79%)       | 20 of 21 (95%) | 6 of 10 (60%)  |
   |                | attended at    | attended at    | attended both  |
   |                | least          | least          | training       |
   |                | 3 sessions of  | 2 sessions of  | sessions       |
   |                | 4              | 3              | 2 attended     |
   |                |                | 14 attended    | team training  |
   |                |                | team training  | day            |
   |                |                | day            |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

The mean length of contact with mental health services for service users
was 17 years. The most common reported diagnoses were schizophrenia,
schizoaffective disorder or psychosis (*n* = 28, 60%), followed by
depression (*n* = 12, 26%), bipolar affective disorder (*n* = 9, 19%),
personality disorder (*n* = 5,11%), anxiety (*n* = 4, 9%) and
post-traumatic stress disorder (*n* = 4, 9%). Some participants reported
multiple diagnoses. The majority of service users received state
benefits (*n* = 43, 92%), with *n* = 39 (83%) on a disability living
allowance.

Immediate post-programme feedback was given by 61 (65%) participants: 33
(70%) service users and 28 (60%) clinicians, including 22 (63%) care
coordinators and 6 (50%) psychiatrists. Before starting the programme,
service users mostly hoped to learn about ways to cope with their
symptoms not solely focused on medication, to understand their
medication better and to negotiate decisions. Clinicians were
particularly interested in improving their practice, learning about the
model and process of shared decision-making, availability of support
materials, and sharing experiences with colleagues.

Expectations of the programme were largely met in both groups, with the
majority of participants expressing a positive view about its content.
In all groups, the opportunity for discussion and exchange of views with
peers was highlighted as the best aspect of the programme. In addition,
service users valued the clarity of the information conveyed, access to
resources and the prospect of greater collaboration in consultations.
Clinicians also appreciated access to resources and the information
given, as well as the opportunity to reflect on their own practice,
particularly in the case of psychiatrists.

There was little negative feedback. Just over half of service users (*n*
= 17, 52%) and the majority of clinicians (*n* = 20, 71%) did not
identify any aspects of the programme as being ‘least satisfactory’.
Some service users mentioned dissatisfaction with practical aspects or
teaching methods, and a few referred to difficulties reading all the
paperwork/understanding everything. A small number of psychiatrists
expressed concerns about a perceived bias against their profession. Most
participants felt the training was pitched at the right level. Use of
the project website was variable, with about half of service users
visiting it outside sessions. Most psychiatrists visited the website,
but only a few care coordinators did. The online forum was not used by
any of the groups.

Most clinicians rated the training programme as relevant to their
clinical practice, but fewer expected that what they had learned would
shape their future practice. Over half of service users expected or were
at least hopeful that the programme would affect future practice.

A summary of the post-programme feedback is given in `Table 3 <#T3>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Summary of feedback

   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      | Service users (*n* = | Clinicians (*n* =    |
   |                      | 33)                  | 28)                  |
   +======================+======================+======================+
   | Most important       | Lifestyle            | Improving practice   |
   | things               | changes/coping with  | Learning about SDM   |
   | participants         | s                    | model and process    |
   | hoped to learn       | ymptoms/alternatives | Support              |
   | `a <#TFN18>`__       | to medication        | materials/tools for  |
   |                      | Understanding        | SDM Sharing ideas    |
   |                      | medication           | and practice         |
   |                      | Medication           | Information about    |
   |                      | manage               | medication,          |
   |                      | ment/SDM/negotiating | including            |
   |                      | decisions Sharing    | side-effects and     |
   |                      | experiences          | coming off Learning  |
   |                      | Understanding        | about the project    |
   |                      | side-effects of      | Gaining confidence   |
   |                      | medication           | in discussions with  |
   |                      | Asse                 | service users        |
   |                      | rtiveness/confidence | Understanding        |
   |                      | with professionals   | service user         |
   |                      | Info about           | perspective          |
   |                      | project/research     |                      |
   |                      | Reducing/coming off  |                      |
   |                      | medication           |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Views on             | Positive views 28    | Positive views 21    |
   | content of the       | (85%): interesting,  | (75%) 18 (82%) care  |
   | programme            | helpful,             | coordinators, 3      |
   |                      | informative,         | (50%) psychiatrists: |
   |                      | empowering,          | very good, good,     |
   |                      | encouraging, learned | interesting,         |
   |                      | a lot Other comments | informative,         |
   |                      | 4 (12%): SDM needs   | well-balanced Other  |
   |                      | to be implemented    | comments 4 (14%):    |
   |                      | from consultant      | repetitive, some     |
   |                      | psychiatrist         | prejudice against    |
   |                      | downwards/did not    | psychiatrists        |
   |                      | learn that much      |                      |
   |                      | concrete             |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Best aspects         | Meeting others,      | Interaction with     |
   | of programme         | exchanging views and | others, chance to    |
   | `a <#TFN18>`__       | experiences,         | discuss              |
   |                      | supportive           | implementation of    |
   |                      | environment          | SDM Direction        |
   |                      | Information          | regarding            |
   |                      | conveyed, new ideas  | resources/tools to   |
   |                      | and access to        | support SDM,         |
   |                      | resources Learning   | information Concept  |
   |                      | to be involved in my | of SDM Gaining       |
   |                      | medication           | confidence in        |
   |                      | management, feeling  | promoting            |
   |                      | confident my views   | SDM/putting SDM into |
   |                      | will be listened to  | practice Reflecting  |
   |                      |                      | on own practice      |
   |                      |                      | Getting service user |
   |                      |                      | perspective          |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Least satisfactory   | Practical aspects,   | Practical aspects,   |
   | aspects              | teaching methods Not | teaching methods     |
   | `a <#TFN18>`__       | understanding        | Perceived bias       |
   |                      | everything, not able | against              |
   |                      | to read all          | psychiatrists Did    |
   |                      | paperwork Parts      | not improve personal |
   |                      | boring, same         | knowledge of         |
   |                      |                      | medication Content   |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Training pitch       | 32 (97%)             | 20 (71%): 17 (77%)   |
   | at right level       |                      | care coordinators, 3 |
   |                      |                      | (50%) psychiatrists  |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Use of project       | 17 (52%)             | 11 (39%): 6 (27%)    |
   | website              |                      | care coordinators, 5 |
   |                      |                      | (83%) psychiatrists  |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Relevance of         | Expecting impact: 12 | Relevant: 23 (82%)   |
   | training             | (36%) Hopeful of     | Impact on own        |
   | programme and        | impact: 7 (21%)      | practice in future:  |
   | impact on future     | Doubtful/unsure: 5   | yes 16 (57%), no 1   |
   | practice             | (15%) Relevant for   | (4%),                |
   |                      | others: 2 (6%)       | hopeful/probably 2   |
   |                      |                      | (7%)                 |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

   SDM, shared decision-making.

   Listed in order of frequency.

.. _S7:

Discussion
==========

The ShIMME project was a small-scale exploratory project with an
emphasis on service users co-leading in all aspects, while aiming to
ensure the views of all key stakeholders were integrated into the
development and delivery of the training intervention.

The training programme was well received overall, demonstrating the
feasibility of providing group-based training in shared decision-making
to service users and practitioners in NHS community settings. In this
case, service user participants were drawn from the rehabilitation and
recovery pathways which serve people with chronic and often severe
mental health problems. Demographic data from participants indicated
high levels of chronicity and disability. The positive feedback, good
attendance and engagement from this group suggest that taking part in
shared decision-making training is possible and worthwhile for people
experiencing a range of mental health challenges.

Feedback indicated that service user participants were interested in
being actively involved in managing their mental health, including
gaining a better understanding of medication and exploring a range of
other strategies to foster well-being. Clinicians showed an interest in
improving their practice by learning about shared decision-making.

Members of all the stakeholder groups gave positive feedback about the
group-based training, allowing for the exchange of ideas and experiences
with peers. This was also reflected in facilitator comments about the
supportive atmosphere and participants' enjoyment of meeting with each
other in the service user groups. Interaction with peers seemed to be an
important aspect of the whole programme.

There may also be advantages in service users and clinicians attending
joint training groups, allowing participants from different backgrounds
to work together on an equal basis and to gain a better understanding of
others' perspectives without the pressures and structures of the
clinical encounter. The involvement of carers and important others might
bring further benefits.

The feedback about the content, approach and pitch of the teaching
within the group of psychiatrists was not quite as positive as in the
other groups. The reasons for this are likely to be multifaceted and
would warrant further exploration, with possible adjustments of the
programme. Away to enhance acceptability and engagement would be to
encourage more psychiatrists to become involved in shared
decision-making training and development of tools. :sup:`28` Use of the
project website was limited, in particular by care coordinators and
service users. Technical difficulties with the website might have
contributed to this, but comments during sessions indicated that some
participants, particularly service users, had low IT confidence and
limited internet access outside the training sessions. Future training
programmes will need to provide non-digital resources, as well as
supporting access and use of IT resources.

The project team developed three paper-based tools to support the
process of shared decision-making, which were trialled in training
groups and repeatedly revised. Although useful, these would need to be
integrated into the existing electronic records system to be truly
effective in promoting, supporting and documenting the process of shared
decision-making without significantly affecting consultation time. At
present this remains a challenge, but there have been some promising
recent developments. :sup:`40`

Both groups of clinicians considered the training relevant to their
clinical practice, although they appeared uncertain whether the
programme would influence their future practice. This might be due to
concerns about additional barriers to implementation or aspects of the
training itself. Despite their positive feedback about the programme,
service users were also cautious about its impact. This might reflect
the perception that they have little influence in making significant
changes to their healthcare delivery or doubts about positive
initiatives being translated into clinical practice.

While this pilot programme had the limitations of a modest number of
participants, not all of whom provided feedback, the consultation data
from local stakeholders, the development of the training programme and
the feedback from participants were all encouraging. Drawing on
experiences from this project, CPFT has been working towards
implementing shared decision-making across the trust by embedding shared
decision-making into its procedures, raising awareness and offering
training to practitioners across the trust
(`www.promise.global/sdm.html <www.promise.global/sdm.html>`__). The
associated Recovery College
(`www.cpft.nhs.uk/about-us/recovery-college-east.htm <www.cpft.nhs.uk/about-us/recovery-college-east.htm>`__),
which is open to service users, family, friends and staff, also included
training in shared decision-making. The pilot project benefitted from a
supportive environment within the trust, and the success of
implementation in other organisations would depend on their own local
conditions.

The complexity and difficulty of implementing shared decision-making in
a mental health setting should not be underestimated. :sup:`36,41` For
it to truly become a routine part of clinical practice, changes in
attitudes and behaviours are necessary among all parties involved, as
well as the wider society. :sup:`36,42` Psychiatrists are well placed to
take on a leadership role in promoting shared decision-making within
health services and should also be pivotal in explaining the benefits of
increased patient autonomy and responsibility to the general community.

We thank all ShIMME project team members, service users and
practitioners, as well as Dr Fiona Blake, Sheena Mooney, Mary Jane
O'Sullivan and others for critically reviewing the manuscript. We are
grateful to Prof. Matthew Large for his contributions as part of the
*BJPsych Bulletin* Author Mentoring Scheme.

.. [1]
   **Ute Stead** is a Specialty Doctor in Psychiatry at Cambridgeshire
   and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust. **Nicola Morant** is an
   independent research consultant and Lecturer in Qualitative Mental
   Health Research in the Division of Psychiatry, University College
   London. **Shulamit Ramon** is the Mental Health Recovery Research
   Lead at the University of Hertfordshire.
