=======================================================
Motivational Interviewing: A Guide for Medical Trainees
=======================================================



Ed Day [1]_
:Date: 2017-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

I first encountered motivational interviewing as a trainee when I read
Miller and Rollnick's classic 1991 book *Motivational Interviewing:
Preparing People to Change Addictive Behavior* and the key concepts have
always resonated with me. Although it seems obvious that a man requiring
major surgery due to cardiac disease should stop smoking, it is rarely
helpful to insist that he does so. People have ambivalent feelings when
it comes to changing entrenched behaviours and it is often better to
elicit their own reasons for change. After all, it has been said that
people believe what they hear themselves say. Perhaps because of its
apparent simplicity, motivational interviewing has become an important
technique for most UK addiction therapists and its influence has
gradually spread to other areas of practice. Therefore, does the world
need another book on motivational interviewing?

This book is written by a group of trainees spanning all specialties of
medicine, with the goal of demonstrating how motivational interviewing
can fundamentally improve the doctor-patient relationship. Motivational
interviewing is a way of being rather than an intervention and the book
reminded me of its roots in Carl Rogers' person-centred approach to
therapy, based on building empathy, congruence and positive regard. As
someone who bemoans the biomedical nature of British psychiatry, I was
surprised that it succeeded in reawakening my interest in interviewing
skills that not only elicit information but also provide therapeutic
insights and direction.

Like the practice of psychiatry, motivational interviewing is
straightforward to do but hard to do really well. It is not easy to
learn from books and so the editors provide lots of dialogue to
illustrate key points, and a series of videos on a linked website. They
add personal reflections, as well as illustrations of the integration of
motivational interviewing into electronic case records and its use in
less familiar settings such as paediatrics. There is also a practical
emphasis on how to teach and supervise motivational interviewing in the
real world. Their enthusiasm for the subject was infectious and I was
left in agreement that learning motivational interviewing should be a
priority in medical education.

.. [1]
   **Dr Ed Day**, Senior Lecturer in Addiction Psychiatry, King's
   College London, Consultant in Addiction Psychiatry, Birmingham and
   Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK; email:
   edward.day@kcl.ac.uk
