=========================================================================
Psychiatry and the geriatric syndromes – creating constructive interfaces
=========================================================================

Simon Thacker
Mike Skelton
Rowan HarwoodCorrespondence to Simon Thacker
(simon.thacker@derbyshcft.nhs.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-4

:Abstract:
   Integrating mental and physical healthcare is difficult to achieve
   because of professional and organisational barriers. Psychiatrists
   recognise the problems resulting from fragmentation of services and
   want continuity of care for patients, but commissioning and service
   structures perpetuate these problems. One way forward may be to
   follow the syndromic model employed by geriatricians as a means of
   avoiding over-emphasis on diagnosis above the pragmatics of
   implementing multi-component, coordinated care. Commissioners need to
   be made aware of the overlap and complementarity of skills possessed
   by old age psychiatry and geriatric medicine to create joint services
   for people vulnerable to dementia and delirium. A re-forged alliance
   between the two specialties will be necessary to turn integrated care
   for frail, elderly people from rhetoric into reality.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

People with severe mental illnesses such as schizophrenia die younger
than expected, losing an average 15 years of their lives to
cardiovascular and other diseases.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` This has led to calls
for a more integrated approach to care, with greater emphasis on
physical health. In this article, we examine some current issues in the
care of older people with severe mental illnesses such as dementia and
delirium. We argue that existing systems compartmentalise care and lack
the sophistication to deal with the complexity of these illnesses. We
suggest that a more collaborative approach between old age psychiatry
and geriatric medicine in both hospital and community settings could
yield benefits.

Geriatric medicine occupies a position of unfashionable scepticism about
the ‘medical model’ of care and its corollary of single-mode
interventions. Under the banner of ‘comprehensive geriatric assessment’
attention is paid to function, mental health, and social and
environmental factors as well as (usually multiple) acute and chronic
medical diagnoses. Elements of prevention, rehabilitation, palliation
and mental health models are used flexibly. Care often includes
cessation of medicines, recognition of burdens placed on patients by
medical intervention, and the prioritisation of comfort, rather than an
expectation that death is delayed.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Old age psychiatry
can learn from geriatric medicine by embracing complexity, comorbidity
and the ultimate inevitability of deterioration, signalling a return of
old age psychiatry to its origins.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

.. _S1:

What is a geriatric syndrome?
=============================

Geriatric syndromes are states of ill health which occur with high
frequency in older people but which do not fit into discrete disease
categories. They are typically explained by a range of organ
dysfunctions and diseases, have functional and social implications, and
therefore require care that is complex and traverses traditional
disciplinary boundaries. Delirium, falls, immobility and urinary
incontinence have been described as geriatric syndromes, but the term is
loose and may also include pressure sores and sarcopenia. Dementia and
other mental health problems can be thought of in similar
terms.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

.. _S2:

Dementia as a geriatric syndrome
--------------------------------

Dementia is common towards the end of life; 6% of people who die aged
65–69 years and 58% of those who die aged 95 or over have
dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` The aetiology of late-onset dementia is often
multifactorial.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` Dementia causes functional decline, and
contributes to falls and incontinence. Multi-morbidity is
usual\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` and the symptom burden in the last year of life of
people with dementia exceeds that of people dying with
cancer.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Dementia causes problems with safety awareness
and loss of independence, and is a source of much carer strain. Crises
are frequent, and usually have physical, mental, social or care-system
contributors. People with dementia frequently transit between home,
hospital and care home. These ‘unique and changing personal,
psychosocial and physical needs’ are acknowledged in the Memory Services
National Accreditation Programme,\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` but secondary care
memory clinics are unlikely to be the only way to address
them.\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.k)`

A more comprehensive and accessible form of engage – ment is needed, in
the form of primary care liaison psychiatry or rapid response community
mental health teams (CMHTs). CMHTs for older people led the way in
delivering dementia care within communities (long before community
geriatrics was a tangible entity).\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` These teams are under
threat, with proposed merger into ‘ageless’ community teams. This would
require increasing focus on psychopathology and behaviour, with a likely
prioritisation of single (psycho)pathologies. Failure to recognise and
appreciate the special needs of patients with dementia and the skills of
CMHTs in addressing them risks diminishing patient care.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`
At the same time, the need to address physical and functional
comorbidity suggests that an overt alliance between old age psychiatry
and geriatric medicine is needed.

.. _S3:

Delirium as a psychiatric syndrome
----------------------------------

Delirium and dementia frequently co-occur in older people in the general
hospital. Dementia has achieved a high national profile in the UK. By
contrast, delirium barely enters public discourse. Two-thirds of elders
acutely admitted to hospital with delirium have underlying
dementia\ :sup:`(n.d.n),(n.d.o)` and half of people with dementia in
acute hospitals have delirium.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` Informant history is
vital in identifying the two syndromes, but persistent, subacute and
subsyndromal delirium is common and the syndromes can be difficult to
distinguish, especially where prior dementia was undiagnosed, leading to
the coining of the term ‘cognitive spectrum disorders’ to cover
both.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` Between 10 and 20% of delirium in older people
does not have an identifiable precipitant\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` and the
cognitive impact of delirium may persist for months or merge into the
onset of a dementia syndrome.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` Some survivors develop
post-traumatic stress disorder. Uncertainties also exist as to the
division of clinical responsibility between geriatricians and
psychiatrists. Arguably, neither specialty can do it well in isolation.

The development of health services in the UK over the past 20 years has
seen psychiatrists focus on patients in the community while
geriatricians have increasingly assumed responsibility for the acute
medical intake, militating against collaboration. The diagnostic
uncertainties and sequelae of delirium imply the need for systematic
follow-up, which geriatric medicine is poorly placed to provide.
Psychiatry has a role in working with the third sector and primary care
to highlight the malign effects of delirium even in the context of
successfully treated acute physical illness.

The publication of delirium guidelines from the National Institute of
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has been a major advance in the
promotion of delirium management,\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` but evidence is weak
that any specific intervention or programme of delirium care improves
outcomes.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` Conversely, there is evidence that
multi-component interventions aimed at preventing delirium can reduce
its incidence and improve outcomes.\ :sup:`(n.d.v),(n.d.w)`

Establishing a role for delirium prevention in hospitals and community
settings is a challenge given the low profile of delirium training in
medical and nursing schools, poor recognition by clinicians, and
competing imperatives for healthcare organisations. Conceptualising
delirium as both a safety risk to individual patients and an
organisational risk due to increased length of stay and adverse health
outcomes provides an incentive for change. Old age psychiatrists, with
their emphasis on the importance of assessing mental health alongside
physical health, can valuably contribute to both delirium care and
education.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)`

.. _S4:

Why is delirium prevention not taken more seriously in community psychiatry?
============================================================================

Prevalence studies of delirium in any setting are fraught with the
problem of distinguishing delirium from dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` A
Swedish study of very elderly people found that 52% of people with
dementia had experienced delirium within the previous month compared
with 5% of those without dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` Work in the
Netherlands revealed a delirium prevalence of 9% in care
homes.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)`

The evidence for the value of delirium prevention programmes in care
homes has yet to be established, but there is evidence that coordinated
programmes to reduce the prescribing of culprit medications are
effective in preventing delirium.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` A trial of the
effectiveness of multi-component delirium education in preventing the
disorder in care homes is underway in the UK.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)`

People with dementia who are living in their own homes and are in
receipt of care from CMHTs are also at high risk of delirium.
Behavioural and psychological symptoms in dementia (BPSD) are associated
with morbid – ities that contribute to delirium, such as falls,
nutritional deficits and polypharmacy. Delirium can cause a similar
range of symptoms, which may become chronic and constitute
BPSD.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` Delirium is triggered by physical illness,
injury, medications or medication withdrawal, and rightly remains the
domain of primary care and geriatricians, but unless psychiatry co-owns
the delirium agenda, the cross-over of skills from the management of
BPSD will fail to shape delirium prevention, assessment and management.
The similarities between delirium prevention programmes and those for
the non-pharmacological management of BPSD are
striking.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae),(n.d.af)`

.. _S5:

Frailty
=======

Frailty is a state of vulnerability to decline in the face of stressors,
in the context of precarious multisystem physiology and social
adversity.\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` Epidemiological evidence highlights the
importance of frailty in elderly populations. It has proven difficult to
operationalise, but recognisably overlaps with dementia in
cross-sectional studies.\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)` One view conceptualises it as
the effect of cumulative deficits\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)` and the other as a
phenotype characterised by three or more of the following factors:
unintentional weight loss, self-reported exhaustion, poor grip strength,
slow walking speed and low physical activity.\ :sup:`(n.d.aj)` However,
geriatricians recognise that frailty will often manifest through
geriatric syndromes – falls, immobility (‘off legs’), delirium (‘more
confused’), urinary or faecal incontinence (often associated with
delirium, dementia and immobility) and susceptibility to drug
side-effects (antidepressants making a patient ‘very
drowsy’).\ :sup:`(n.d.ak)` The maturation of old age psychiatry as a
specialty has been facilitated by the advent of specific therapies for
Alzheimer's disease, but an emphasis on prescribing for Alzheimer's
disease has selected against attendance by frail elders and those with
non-Alzheimer pathology (particularly vascular dementia) and cognitive
deficits outwith a full-blown dementia syndrome.

Comprehensive geriatric assessment aims to consider the full range of
factors contributing towards frailty (`Table 1 <#T1>`__). Its
implementation is linked to better outcomes.\ :sup:`(n.d.al)` It has
parallels with biopsychosocial assessment, although this does not have
similar evidential weight behind it, and indeed has been criticised by
the psychiatric profession as ‘mere eclecticism’.\ :sup:`(n.d.am)` The
accusation of vagueness laid against biopsychosocial assessment suggests
that it needs to find a home within an operationally defined,
evidence-based structure such as comprehensive geriatric assessment. The
two processes differ only in the emphasis and differential expertise of
the clinicians undertaking them. Geriatricians recognise that they tend
to neglect the mental health dimension, which may be reduced to a brief
cognitive assessment or screening test for depression. There is
therefore a fertile opportunity for mutual learning between geriatrics
and psychiatry in the area of the assessment of frailty.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Components of comprehensive geriatric assessment

   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   | Domains              | Items to be assessed                         |
   +======================+==============================================+
   | Medical              | Co-morbid conditions and disease severity    |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Medication review                            |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Nutritional status                           |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Problem list                                 |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      |                                              |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   | Mental heath         | Cognition                                    |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Mood and anxiety                             |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Fears                                        |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      |                                              |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   | Functional capacity  | Basic activities of daily living             |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Gait and balance                             |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Activity/exercise status                     |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Instrumental activities of daily living      |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      |                                              |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   | Social circumstances | Informal support available from family or    |
   |                      | friends                                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Social network such as visitors or daytime   |
   |                      | activities                                   |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Eligibility for being offered care resources |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      |                                              |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   | Environment          | Home comforts, facilities and safety         |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Use or potential use of telehealth           |
   |                      | technology etc.                              |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Transport facilities                         |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
   |                      | Accessibility to local resources             |
   +----------------------+----------------------------------------------+

   Reproduced from Martin, 2010.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)`

.. _S6:

Sustainable integration
=======================

The needs of older people with mental health disorders are not well
served by a retreat to psychiatric specialisation, restrictive referral
criteria or commissioning models based on activity alone. Geriatric
medicine recognises and embraces complexity and uncertainty, and
responds by flexibly utilising a variety of models, albeit at times with
tensions between them. Old age psychiatry can learn from comprehensive
geriatric assessment. Geriatric medicine needs to take mental health
more seriously, to increase the depth and sophistication with which it
assesses the mental state, and can learn from person-centred care and
recovery models. The logical future for both disciplines is in
collaboration and integration that transcends organisational and
cultural barriers.

A sustainable integration of physical and mental healthcare for older
people will require more than cooperation between clinicians. The
joining of forces between psychiatrists and geriatricians can take place
at an organisational level when mental health and community trusts
merge. However, we also need a flexible, accessible, consultative model
of psychiatry that seeks to empower a broad range of community
practitioners and will be the means to generate influence on problems
that are just too common and multi-morbid to be addressed solely by
clinic-based approaches or a single professional discipline. This
reinforces the need for CMHTs for older people, and highlights the need
to change the commissioning model from one based on activity defined by
clinic attendances. Crises in care homes, for example, often represent a
complex interplay of medical, mental, social and environmental issues
best addressed by timely multi-disciplinary input rather than
transferring responsibility on to a single discipline. Accessible advice
on a broad range of cases managed primarily by other teams (‘liaisons’)
allows for teaching and upskilling while preserving specialty provision
for patients with more severe, less tractable mental health problems.
These teaching and support roles need a commissioning model.

CMHTs are in a good position to identify dementia and promote delirium
prevention measures. Working alongside community geriatrics will
strengthen old age psychiatry by allying it with the developing evidence
base and increasing its workforce.

The Rapid Assessment Interface and Discharge (RAID) model developed in
Birmingham has captured the attention of policy-makers through its
widely publicised potential financial savings. But it also demonstrates
the total immersion of mental health practitioners in the
multi-professional melee that is acute hospital care.\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)`
Why not import this style of working into primary care and scale down
the centralised psychiatric clinic? This has been tried in Gnosall,
Staffordshire, where a model of primary care liaison psychiatry has
created a well-received, effective service for people with
dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.ap)`

.. _S7:

Conclusion
==========

Psychiatrists must lobby commissioners to recognise the plight of those
frail, elderly patients who are not living well but dying with the
multiple comorbidities of dementia within a healthcare system that fails
to accommodate complexity. People with dementia are prone to crisis and
comorbidity, necessitating attention to physical health (parity of
esteem) equal to that developing for other severe mental illness.
Emphasising geriatric syndromes (and the importance of sound mental
health assessment within comprehensive geriatric assessment) is a good
way to defend old age psychiatry while at the same time developing
integrated physical and mental healthcare for older people. An
invigorated liaison psychiatry, underpinned by a re-forged alliance
between old age psychiatry and geriatric medicine, gives a pointer to
how integration might work, and enables parity of esteem for mental and
physical health.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R29

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R31

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R32

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R33

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R34

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R35

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R36

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R37

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R38

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R39

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R40

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R41

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R42

      n.d.ap.

.. [1]
   **Simon Thacker** MBChB, MRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist,
   Derbyshire Healthcare Foundation NHS Trust, Kingsway Hospital, Derby;
   **Mike Skelton** MBBS, MRCPSych, Assistant Professor, Department of
   Psychiatry, The University of Nottingham, Institute of Mental Health,
   Nottingham; Rowan Harwood MA, MSc, MD, FRCP, Consultant Geriatrician,
   Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Queen's Medical Centre,
   Nottingham.
