======================================
A Devil's dictionary for mental health
======================================



Philip Timms

:Correspondence: Philip Timms (philip.timms@slam.nhs.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2017-10

:Abstract:
   Clinical psychiatry, for all its emphasis on scientific rigour, is
   mediated mainly by words rather than by numbers. As with other
   professional areas, it has developed its own set of jargon words and
   phrases. Many of these are not the technical terms traditionally seen
   as jargon, but standard English words and phrases used in an
   idiosyncratic way. They therefore go unnoticed as jargon, while
   enfeebling our communications. I have used the template of Ambrose
   Bierce's *The Devil's Dictionary* to highlight some examples, with
   the aim of helping us all to talk, write and, perhaps, think more
   clearly.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

A review of health literacy suggests that patients often do not
understand what doctors are trying to tell them – and, rather obviously,
tells us that we should be more straightforward.\ :sup:`1` But it is not
just us. The US boss of Pfizer has exasperated a British parliamentary
committee with his obscure business jargon.\ :sup:`2` Farrington has
highlighted the chasm between clinical and managerial
language.\ :sup:`3` Brian Lask pilloried the ‘infestation’ of family
therapy publications with jargon, pomposity and
impenetrability.\ :sup:`4` And, although they were mainly addressing
technical obfuscation, a pair of psychologists have trenchantly
characterised much of the research communication in their field as
‘bullshit’.\ :sup:`5` They recommend translating ‘others' procedures and
outcomes in(to) ordinary language’ to separate out any discernible
content from the chaff of jargon.

But I am not here going to consider how we talk to patients or managers
– or even researchers and academics. I have been thinking about how we
talk to each other. It can be said that technical jargon does not matter
inside a profession because each participant understands the words
involved. It only becomes a problem when a professional tries to
communicate with outsiders.\ :sup:`6` But I think we may have a problem
in day-to-day communication between those of us involved in mental
health services. Over the past few years I have noticed the appearance
of words and phrases which, because of their novelty and lack of
definition, create real problems with communication. Many of these can
be seen as ‘weasel’ words or phrases. They carry a covert meaning or
overtones of meaning – or, sometimes, no meaning at all. They can be
defined as ‘something that someone says either to avoid answering a
question clearly or to make someone believe something that is not true’
(http://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/weasel-words). Some
are more technical, but all can be seen as forms of jargon owing to
their characteristic use in medicine and psychiatry.

.. _S1:

What is jargon?
===============

But what is jargon? The current version of the online Oxford Dictionary
defines it as ‘Special words or expressions used by a profession or
group that are difficult for others to understand’. It also tells us
that it been with us for nearly 400 years, being derived from Late
Middle English, originally in the sense of ‘twittering, chattering’,
later ‘gibberish’
(`www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/jargon <www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/jargon>`__).
Earlier dictionaries are more robust: ‘Barbarous or debased language:
gibberish: speech full of technical terms etc’.\ :sup:`7` Synonyms
include slang, cant, idiom, argot, patter and gobbledegook
(`www.thesaurus.com/browse/jargon <www.thesaurus.com/browse/jargon>`__).
Nobody much likes jargon, even though we all seem driven to use it.

At first hearing, such language may not sound at all technical. The
words or phrases are drawn from day-to-day English, but, as we use them,
their meaning starts to dissolve. They become the aforementioned weasel
words because they are either novel or of broad, inclusive meaning.
Those inside a profession find that they can use such language in an
idiosyncratic way to preserve professional authority and
power.\ :sup:`8` If you cannot understand a discussion, you cannot
participate. The young may feel that they have to use this language to
be an authentic part of professional life. The old, consciously or
unconsciously, realise that it can be used to conceal, confuse,
stonewall and neuter objections or criticism. Moreover, jargon is mostly
categorical and conceptual, not concrete and specific. It can present an
intimidating facade behind which, if one takes the trouble to look,
there is little of substance. Although unsavoury, is it not a victimless
crime? Not according to the House of Commons Public Administration
Select Committee. They felt that ‘the use of inaccurate, confusing or
misleading official language which results in tangible harm, such as
preventing individuals from receiving benefits or public services,
should be regarded as maladministration’ (p. 16).\ :sup:`6` Perhaps,
then, we should take this issue more seriously.

One might, in an uncharitable moment, single out managers as the main
offenders. However, I have heard colleagues from our sister professions
talking impenetrably, as well as my fellow psychiatrists and,
regrettably, myself. We are all guilty. So, I decided to round up some
words and phrases that seem, to me, to be misused in this way. Some of
these are specific to psychiatry and mental health, some are used across
medicine. Some remain a local coinage, others have attained a more
universal currency. We hear some in the front line, in wards and
community teams, and others in committee rooms and consultation papers.
Ambrose Bierce was a 19th-century journalist who was similarly intrigued
by the ways in which language can be misused. I have used the template
of his *The Devil's Dictionary*\ :sup:`9` to produce my own, somewhat
scattershot, rogue's gallery.

.. _S2:

My Devil's Dictionary
=====================

**Acting out**: an analytical term provoked by extravagant behaviour.
Example: ‘the patient acted out by shouting in the lounge’. We are
thereby relieved from the burden of considering the matter further.

**Adherence** (to medication, advice, etc.): a delusion, held by all
doctors, most strongly by enthusiastic pharmacologists. For us, a
mainstay of treatment. For our patients, an irritation best neglected.
They are reluctant to reveal their disinterest, not wishing to distress
their psychiatrist.

**Acuity**: a snappy euphemism which removes to arms-length the stress
and risk of our under-resourced and risky services. Essential to reduce
the anxiety felt in higher echelons of management.

**Behavioural**: a term used by those of us with no behavioural
training, to describe behaviour of which we disapprove (*see* ‘Acting
out’). Commonly combined with ‘just’ – ‘It's just behavioural’. Usually
paired with the helpful conclusion: ‘he/she is not for our service’.

**Best evidence**: the cracked and misty lens with which the one-eyed
man navigates the country of the blind.

**Care pathway**: a sequence of ideal interventions (*see* ‘Best
evidence’) for a model patient. Lengthy and complicated, so best
illustrated on a sheet of A3 paper. The dogged patient may be said to
trudge, march or run the gauntlet on such a trek.

**Challenge**: the presentation of the impossible and implausible as a
bold plan. Example: the NHS Challenge – save £20 billion in the next 3
years while improving quality. You can then, subsequent to the
inevitable failure of the plan, pillory those involved as being
old-fashioned, inflexible, not trying hard enough … according to taste.

**Clinician**: a drone, a harmless drudge who sees patients. They can
apparently perform audit, supervision and research simultaneously (*see*
‘Job description’). Their ability to be in two places at once (*see*
‘Job description’) suggests that they would have been burned as witches
in less scrupulously rational times.

**Consultation**: the practice of gathering views about a proposed
change in a service. To complain that such views are subsequently
ignored would be both harsh and naive (*see* ‘Listening event’ and
‘Efficiency saving’).

**Cover**: an illusion of doubles. It suggests that an overworked
colleague will also do your work in your absence. Essential to maintain
the appearance of an adequately staffed service.

**Cut**: the Voldemort word that must never, ever, be uttered (*see*
‘Efficiency saving’). Sometimes linked with ‘Transformation’.

**Distress**: a catch-all for every experience from mild anxiety to
raging psychosis. As one gently minimises the more extreme and
intractable varieties of experience, one can slyly insinuate that
psychiatry is just a way to medicalise normal experience.

**Efficiency saving**: as the wolf to Red Riding Hood's grandmother.
Cloaked in two benign words with which none can take issue, it stalks
our services – and suddenly they disappear. *See also* ‘Challenge’ and
‘Cut’.

**Evidence**: the single academic paper that supports one's proposed
course of action.

**Holistic**: a synonym for comprehensive, originating from the word
‘whole’. But where did the ‘W’ go? The spelling generates a spurious
overtone of spirituality. Clearly not intentional; evidence of
unconscious processes at work.

**Hypothesis**: a simple idea that leaves port to the sound of marching
bands, but then founders on the rocks of bureaucracy or upon the craggy
island of sober reflection.

**Integration**: the unicorn of service provision. Often spoken of but
rarely seen. Some say they have seen it in Birmingham. Others say it is
a mirage, glimpsed by the desperate.

**Innovation**: a novelty that attracts money.

**Inappropriate** (behaviour): rational behaviour of which we
disapprove. Studiously neutral, it is commonly used in close proximity
to an emphatic font. Example: ‘patients must *not* use our accident and
emergency department inappropriately’.

**Job description**: a work of fantasy that masquerades as a workaday
agenda. As nectar to the bee, it attracts naive applicants to your
service while obscuring the inquisitive gaze of our College. Any
subsequent disaffection can be met with the phrase ‘caveat emptor’.

**Just**: an excellent way to deny complexity. One can avoid the trouble
of biopsychosocial formulation without admitting to idleness, ignorance
or indifference. Example: ‘It's just… behavioural/social/drug-induced
…’.

**Liaison**: the assurance that someone will, at some time, communicate
something to someone. Example: ‘Community mental health team to liaise
with primary care’. A common parasite of care plans and strategy
documents. The phrase ‘liaison psychiatry’ can be honourably exempted.

**Listening event**: a talking shop.

**Metric**: a swaggering and self-confident synonym for ‘number’,
‘figure’ or ‘statistic’. It ballasts with false weight the inadequate
and corrupted data that leak out of our struggling services.

**Medical model**: a synonym for the crudely biological. Essential if
one has a sketchy acquaintance with medicine but a sincere desire to
damn psychiatry. Best bolstered by a quote from an antique textbook
which few have ever read – or even heard of.

**Mission statement**: a haiku of the obvious. A way for those remote
from the front line to sincerely avow the commitments of an
organisation. Only misfits and malcontents could assert that such
statements are banal and platitudinous.

**New ways of working**: the promise that clinical drones (see above)
can become queen bees. The admirable and novel element is that
psychiatrists should, as far as possible, steer well clear of patients.

**Ongoing**: a way to communicate to the naive reader an impression of
dogged and ceaseless activity.

**Paradigm shift**: a bit of a change. It proclaims how different (and
how much better) your pet idea (*see* ‘Hypothesis’) is from everything
that has gone before. Such shifts promise seismic change but most,
mysteriously, register zero on the Richter scale of life.

**Prioritisation**: cutting one service to provide another. One service
dies and another is born. Disney's circle of life.

**Quality indicator**: an easily measurable irrelevance.

**Quality improvement**: an unarguable good. It marvellously exempts
management from any responsibility for the lack of armaments or
ammunition and ‘empowers’ frontline platoons to sort out the subsequent
carnage.

**Research**: the selection of an unrepresentative group of people, the
provision of an unsustainable intervention and the careful selection of
a rating cut-off point to show your intervention to its best advantage.

**Recovery**: a two-edged sword. To Tweedledum, an essential
reorientation of services to patient priorities. To Tweedledee, a
pretext for culling rehabilitation services.

**Reconfiguration**: another attempt to rearrange the chairs on the deck
of the Titanic (*see* ‘Transformation’).

**Significance** (statistical) (*see also* ‘Research’): a simple number
that lends colossal weight to negligible differences.

**Signposting**: a respectable way to rebuff those seeking help from our
service. We direct the patient towards another step on their therapeutic
pilgrimage (*see* ‘Care pathway’), braced by the pious assurance that
another will meet their need. Much loved by hard-pressed commissioners
for whom distance from our services is by far the best medicine.

**Target**: a worthy aim, applauded by all. The resources marshalled to
meet it hyperperfuse privileged parts of the organisation but induce
gangrene and necrosis elsewhere.

**Triage**: a battlefield technique to sift the doomed from the
salvageable. Applied to civilians in peacetime when the money runs out.

**Transformation**: an ‘abracadabra’ word, the promise to turn an ugly
duckling into a swan. This powerful spell can reduce resistance to
modish technology or to shedding staff Memories mysteriously fail when
the new swan proves to be just another maladroit fowl.

**Vision(s)**: in a patient, evidence of brain dysfunction. In
ourselves, evidence of foresight, imagination and understanding.

**Work-life balance** (*see* ‘Job description’): an excellent way to
communicate an uncomfortable truth. Example: ‘We know you need to work
X+1 sessions to do the job, but we will only pay you for X sessions’.
Dissimulation is charmingly paired with an expression of concern for
one's welfare.

.. _S3:

Casting out demons
==================

The American edition of the online Oxford Dictionary, somewhat
uncharitably, states that weasel words are ‘intentionally ambiguous or
misleading’.\ :sup:`7` I am less judgemental and would suggest that they
have a less deceitful function. They help us to feel more at ease with
difficult truths we have both to confront ourselves and to present to
others. However, although we may feel more comfortable, we will not be
communicating as well as we could – and not thinking as clearly as we
should. I would not go as far as the Local Government Association which
was widely reported to have published, for its members, a list of banned
words and phrases.\ :sup:`10` After all, context is everything and, in
spite of my accusations, some of these words may be used quite helpfully
from time to time. But an awareness of them can serve us as the canary
once served the coal miner: as a sign that something may not be quite
right, and that we need to keep our wits about us. To the charge that I
am a cynic, I confess that I do not have the stomach for it. I still
shrink from the uncomfortable and cling to desperate and unreasonable
hopes. I have been unable to yet become that paragon described
inimitably by Bierce\ :sup:`9` (p. 34) as ‘A blackguard whose faulty
vision sees things as they are, not as they ought to be’.

This list is not comprehensive and is certainly not static. New weasel
words will emerge as others wither and perish. Each of us can identify
our own offenders. To pay attention to how we talk (and write) is not
self-indulgent. It can help us to think more clearly, to communicate
more meaningfully and to engage with reality rather than self-serving
fantasy.

.. [1]
   **Dr Philip Timms** FRCPsych is a retired consultant psychiatrist,
   and honorary senior lecturer, King's College London.
