---
author:
- Duncan Double[^1]
date: 2017-2
title: Schizophrenics can be good mothers too
---

To protect her children the author of this book chose to publish it
under a pseudonym, Q. S. Lam. However, it\'s easy to break her anonymity
and she accepts it can only be partial. She is a British Bangladeshi
artist who has had several psychotic episodes, including postpartum. She
has been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder but prefers to describe
herself as having a different sort of brain.

Her friend Stephen Fry has described the book as 'brilliant' -- an
endorsement displayed on the book cover -- and Alastair Campbell has
tweeted the same. Artwork and poetry complement the narrative of the
author\'s personal and family history, which includes episodes of
psychosis, and the description of the dissociated parts of herself and
how she recovers. She does not take antipsychotic medication.

She makes remarks -- not always very complimentary -- about each mental
health practitioner that she has seen over the years, dating back to the
time when she first sought help. Also discussed is the impact of her
mental health problems on her husband and children. She moved to
Brussels, as her husband works there.

The psychiatrist she has most identified with is Erik Thys, who is also
an artist. He did not advise Q.S. not to have a second child; instead,
he said it was 'doable'. Q.S. openly questions whether it was fair on
her children that she became a mother and dedicates the book to them.

The strength of this book is its honesty. Q.S. has experienced multiple
sexual assaults by men and considers whether her mental health issues
are a sane response to an insane situation. She reveals her heart and
mind, truthfully expressing what she feels and thinks, and I found the
directness of the book attractive. As Q.S. notes, doctors generally
don\'t like their authority to be challenged. However, in my opinion
there needs to be an open discussion about the stigmatisation of mothers
with mental health problems.

[^1]: **Duncan Double**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Norfolk & Suffolk NHS
    Foundation Trust, Lowestoft, UK; email: <dbdouble@dbdouble.co.uk>
