==========================================================================================================================================
Antipsychotic prescribing of consultant forensic psychiatrists working in different levels of secure care with patients with schizophrenia
==========================================================================================================================================



Anna Machin
Lucy McCarthy

:Correspondence: Anna Machin (anna.machin@nottshc.nhs.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2017-4

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To detect any differences in the antipsychotic
   prescribing practices of consultant forensic psychiatrists working in
   different levels of secure care with patients diagnosed with
   schizophrenia, and to identify potential reasons for any differences.
   Prescribing data were collected from four secure hospitals within one
   National Health Service trust. A questionnaire was sent to consultant
   forensic psychiatrists working at those hospitals as well as those
   working in the trust's community forensic services.

   **Results** Consultants working in high security prescribed more oral
   antipsychotics than consultants working in medium and low security,
   who prescribed more depot antipsychotics, as established via the
   prescribing data. The questionnaire provided insight regarding the
   reasons for these preferences.

   **Clinical implications** There were differences in the antipsychotic
   prescribing practices of consultant forensic psychiatrists working in
   different levels of secure care, and, overall, the rate of depot
   antipsychotic prescribing was lower than might be expected. Although
   it was positive that the rate of polypharmacy was low when compared
   with earlier studies, the lower-than-expected rate of depot
   antipsychotic prescribing has clinical implications.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Schizophrenia is an enduring mental illness characterised by remissions
and relapses. Treatment is available in the form of psychosocial
interventions but the mainstay of effective management is antipsychotic
medication.\ :sup:`1–3` Antipsychotic efficacy is reduced by poor
adherence and it is estimated that the risk of relapse is 2 to 6 times
greater for patients not taking antipsychotic treatment.\ :sup:`1`

Forensic psychiatrists working in secure hospitals are likely to have
case-loads with high levels of comorbidity, non-adherence and
risk;\ :sup:`4,5` a history of aggression has been found to predict the
use of high-dose antipsychotic treatment (total antipsychotic doses
totalling greater than 100% maximum *British National Formulary*
dose).\ :sup:`1`

Paton *et al*\ :sup:`6` reported on an in-patient census. Most (97%) of
the 53.2% diagnosed with psychosis were prescribed an antipsychotic.
Polypharmacy (the prescription of more than one antipsychotic agent) was
common. Of those prescribed a regular antipsychotic, 51.6% were
prescribed a first-generation agent, 11.3% were prescribed clozapine and
33% were prescribed a depot agent (80% of these patients had a psychotic
illness). High-dose prescribing was more common when a depot agent was
prescribed.

No previous studies have examined the prescribing patterns of forensic
psychiatrists working in differing levels of security. It is important
to identify such patterns to build on existing knowledge and to identify
areas requiring change.

.. _S1:

Aims
====

To detect any differences in the antipsychotic prescribing practices of
consultant forensic psychiatrists working in different levels of secure
care within a National Health Service (NHS) trust, and to identify
potential reasons for any differences. We hypothesised that there would
be no significant differences in prescribing patterns in this clinician
group.

.. _S2:

Method
======

.. _S3:

Settings and sample
-------------------

Covering a vast geographical area, the NHS trust studied is one of the
largest in England and provides services in a variety of settings. Its
secure hospitals feature one high secure hospital, two medium secure
hospitals and one low secure hospital. Information on antipsychotic
prescribing was collected on all in-patients with schizophrenia in these
four hospitals in July 2014. A questionnaire was sent to the 34
consultant forensic psychiatrists based at the hospitals and 3
community-based consultant forensic psychiatrists working within the
same trust.

.. _S4:

Procedure
---------

.. _S5:

Prescribing patterns
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In July 2014, the electronic healthcare records were used to produce a
list of all current in-patients at the trust's four secure hospitals.
The clinical records (electronic and paper healthcare records, and
pharmacy records) were then used to ascertain which of these patients
had schizophrenia. Further information was collected about patients with
schizophrenia (gender, age, ethnicity, length of stay, antipsychotic
medication prescribed), to produce an anonymised data-set detailing the
percentage of patients diagnosed with schizophrenia at each hospital,
and the proportion of patients with schizophrenia prescribed different
types of antipsychotic medication.

.. _S6:

Consultant questionnaires
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Owing to the absence of a validated instrument, a semi-structured
self-report questionnaire was developed to assess forensic consultants'
attitudes to the prescription of oral and depot antipsychotic
medications. The questionnaire was designed to take less than 5 min to
complete. Consultants were asked in which level of security they worked
and then three further questions: Disregarding the special case of
clozapine, when treating a patient with schizophrenia do you have a
general preference for either oral or depot antipsychotic medications?
(Yes/No)Please indicate the strength of any preference on the scale
below (0–100 anchored Likert scale: 0 – oral, 100 – depot).What are the
reasons behind any stated preference? ((a) Improves adherence, (b)
Better clinical outcome, (c) More convenient for the patient, (d) More
convenient for the clinical team, (d) The next level of
security/community team would expect/prefer it). There was also space
for a free-text response. The three community consultants were asked two
further questions: How important is the route of antipsychotic
administration in your considering whether to accept a patient on to
your caseload? (0–100 anchored Likert scale: 0 – very important, 100 –
not at all important).How likely are you to accept a patient currently
prescribed an oral antipsychotic (not clozapine)? (0–100 anchored Likert
scale: 0 – very unlikely, 100 – very likely). The Likert scale is an
ordinal psychometric assessment of attitudes or opinions, typically
lacking concrete answers to accommodate neutral or undecided feelings.
It was selected for this questionnaire owing to the speed and ease of
completion, low cost, ease of distribution, and providing results
amenable to analysis.

The Likert scale has been criticised for failing to measure the true
attitudes of respondents, as it gives only 5 to 7 options of choice, and
also for the space between each choice in reality possibly not being
equidistant. In view of this, and in an attempt to further maximise
freedom on behalf of the responder and to avoid railroading respondents
into giving polarised responses, the Likert scale was amended to include
some characteristics of an analogue scale.

The questionnaire was sent, with a cover letter, to all forensic
consultants working in the four secure hospitals and in community
forensic services in the NHS trust. After 3 months, the questionnaire
was sent again to encourage non-responders. All data were supplied
anonymously.

.. _S7:

Ethical considerations
----------------------

The project proposal was reviewed by the trust's research and
innovations department and approved as service evaluation; research
ethics approval was therefore not required. Patient anonymity was
preserved throughout the study.

.. _S8:

Analytic strategy
-----------------

SPSS version 21 (Windows 10) was used for data analysis. Chi-square and
ANOVA were used where appropriate. All tests were two-tailed and *P* ⩽
0.05 was used to determine statistical significance.

.. _S9:

Results
=======

.. _S10:

Demographic information
-----------------------

In July 2014, there were 556 patients detained at the four secure
hospitals; 265 (48%) were diagnosed with schizophrenia. The sample
characteristics are summarised in `Table 1 <#T1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Sample characteristics of in-patients at each of the four secure
      hospitals

   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | High    | Medium  | Medium  | Low     | *P*\    |         |
   |         | secure  | secure  | secure  | secure  |  `a <#T |         |
   |         | h       | h       | h       | h       | FN1>`__ |         |
   |         | ospital | ospital | ospital | ospital |         |         |
   |         |         | 1       | 2       |         |         |         |
   +=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+
   | Total   | 339     | 69      | 85      | 63      | –       |         |
   | number  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Schizop | 139     | 53 (77) | 33 (39) | 40 (63) | **      | χ\ :    |
   | hrenia, | (41)    |         |         |         | 0.001** | sup:`2` |
   | *n* (%) |         |         |         |         |         | =       |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | 38.52,  |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | d.f. =  |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | 3       |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Eth     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | nicity, |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | *n* (%) |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 100     | 41 (77) | 21 (64) | 17 (42) | **      | χ\ :    |
   |   White | (72)    |         |         |         | 0.002** | sup:`2` |
   | British |         |         |         |         |         | =       |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | 15.23,  |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | d.f. =  |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | 3       |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 5 (4)   | 0 (0)   | 1 (3)   | 2 (5)   | 0.500   | χ\ :    |
   |   White |         |         |         |         |         | sup:`2` |
   | other   |         |         |         |         |         | = 2.34, |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | d.f. =  |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | 3       |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 19 (14) | 3 (6)   | 4 (12)  | 11 (28) | **      | χ\ :    |
   |    Blac |         |         |         |         | 0.026** | sup:`2` |
   | k/Black |         |         |         |         |         | = 9.25, |
   | British |         |         |         |         |         | d.f. =  |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | 3       |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 9 (6)   | 5 (9)   | 2 (6)   | 3 (7)   | 0.902   | χ\ :    |
   |    Asia |         |         |         |         |         | sup:`2` |
   | n/Asian |         |         |         |         |         | = 0.58, |
   | British |         |         |         |         |         | d.f. =  |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | 3       |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 6 (4)   | 4 (8)   | 5 (15)  | 7 (18)  | **      | χ\ :    |
   |    Mixe |         |         |         |         | 0.024** | sup:`2` |
   | d/other |         |         |         |         |         | = 9.42, |
   | et      |         |         |         |         |         | d.f. =  |
   | hnicity |         |         |         |         |         | 3       |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Age,    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | years   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 40.0    | 36.9    | 36.5    | 38.1    | 0.100   | ANOVA   |
   |    Mean | (9.8)   | (8.7)   | (8.8)   | (10.3)  |         | *F*\    |
   | (s.d.)  |         |         |         |         |         | :sub:`( |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | 3,261)` |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | = 2.10  |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 38.6    | 37.2    | 35.2    | 35.9    | –       |         |
   |  Median | (21.    | (19.    | (21.    | (19.    |         |         |
   | (range) | 9–66.3) | 6–60.0) | 8–58.2) | 8–62.0) |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Length  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | of      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | stay,   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | years   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 6.4     | 2.1     | 1.9     | 3.0     | **      | ANOVA   |
   |    Mean | (4.5)   | (1.9)   | (1.4)   | (3.9)   | 0.001** | *F*\    |
   | (s.d.)  |         |         |         |         |         | :sub:`( |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | 3,261)` |
   |         |         |         |         |         |         | = 26.86 |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 5.9     | 1.5     | 1.4     | 1.5     | –       |         |
   |  Median | (0.     | (0      | (0.     | (0.0    |         |         |
   | (range) | 1–21.4) | .1–8.0) | 03–5.6) | 3–18.2) |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Female  | 5 (3.6) | 0 (0)   | 1 (3.0) | 4       | 0.093   | χ\ :    |
   | pa      |         |         |         | (10.0)  |         | sup:`2` |
   | tients, |         |         |         |         |         | = 0.58, |
   | *n*     |         |         |         |         |         | d.f. =  |
   | (%)\    |         |         |         |         |         | 3       |
   |  `b <#T |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | FN2>`__ |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 43.1    | –       | –       | 41.7    | 0.373   | ANOVA   |
   |    Age, | (5.9)   |         |         | (13.4)  |         | *F*     |
   | years:  |         |         |         |         |         | \ :sub: |
   | mean    |         |         |         |         |         | `(2,7)` |
   | (s.d.)  |         |         |         |         |         | = 1.14  |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 41.1    | –       | –       | 39.7    | –       |         |
   |    Age, | (36.    |         |         | (25.    |         |         |
   | years:  | 9–54.3) |         |         | 7–62.0) |         |         |
   | median  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | (range) |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Length  | 4.9     | –       | –       | 1.1     | 0.053   | ANOVA   |
   | of      | (2.4)   |         |         | (0.4)   |         | *F*     |
   | stay,   |         |         |         |         |         | \ :sub: |
   | years:  |         |         |         |         |         | `(2,7)` |
   | mean    |         |         |         |         |         | = 4.62  |
   | (s.d.)  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Length  | 6.5     | –       | –       | 1.1     | –       |         |
   | of      | (1      |         |         | (0      |         |         |
   | stay,   | .3–6.8) |         |         | .5–1.6) |         |         |
   | years:  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | median  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | (range) |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+

   Bold denotes significance (*P* ⩽ 0.05).

   As medium secure hospital 2 had only 1 female in-patient, means and
   medians for age and length of stay have not been calculated.

Medium secure hospital 1 provides a male-only service. The high secure
hospital and medium secure hospital 2 have wards specialising in the
care of patients with personality disorder, whereas medium secure
hospital 1 and the low secure hospital do not, hence the differences in
the rate of schizophrenia. The proportion of patients from Black and
minority ethnic (BME) groups was high when compared with the general
population\ :sup:`7` (29% *v.* 14% respectively). The rate was highest
for the low secure hospital (53%). This significant finding mirrors an
earlier study\ :sup:`8` which found an overrepresentation of BME groups
admitted to low secure services across the UK.

There was little difference in mean patient age between the four
hospitals, and expected differences in the mean lengths of stay.

.. _S11:

Pattern of prescribing
----------------------

Of all patients with schizophrenia, 3% (*n* = 8) were not prescribed
antipsychotic medication and 12% (*n* = 33) were prescribed
antipsychotic medication constituting polypharmacy. The most common
polypharmacological combination was clozapine augmented with a
second-generation oral antipsychotic. Data regarding the prescription of
antipsychotic medication are summarised in `Table 2 <#T2>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Antipsychotic prescribing for patients with schizophrenia at the
      four hospitals

   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | High    | Medium  | Low     |         |         |         |
   |         | secure  | secure  | secure  |         |         |         |
   |         | h       | ho      | h       |         |         |         |
   |         | ospital | spitals | ospital |         |         |         |
   +=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+
   | Regular |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | fi      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | rst-gen |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | eration |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | antips  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ychotic |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | only,   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | *n* (%) |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Oral    | 6 (4)   | 2 (4)   | 0 (0)   | 2 (2)   | 2 (5)   | 10 (4)  |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Depot   | 17 (12) | 7 (13)  | 8 (24)  | 15 (17) | 9 (22)  | 41 (15) |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Regular |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | sec     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ond-gen |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | eration |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | antips  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ychotic |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | only,\  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   |  `a <#T |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | FN3>`__ |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | *n* (%) |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Oral    | 59 (42) | 8 (15)  | 10 (30) | 18 (21) | 11 (27) | 88 (33) |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Depot   | 1 (1)   | 9 (17)  | 0 (0)   | 9 (10)  | 6 (15)  | 16 (6)  |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Cl      | 33 (24) | 18 (34) | 10 (30) | 28 (33) | 8 (20)  | 69 (26) |
   | ozapine |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | only,   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | *n* (%) |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Total,  | 139     | 53      | 33      | 86      | 40      | 265     |
   | *n*     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+

   Excluding clozapine.

Clozapine was prescribed to 26% of all patients, with the highest
prescription rate observed in medium security hospitals (33%).

Excluding polypharmacy and clozapine use, more patients were prescribed
a second-generation oral agent than a first-generation oral agent (33%
*v.* 4%); this was true for all four hospitals. In general, this pattern
was reversed for depot agents, with more patients being prescribed a
first-generation depot agent than a second-generation depot agent (15%
*v.* 6%). 70% of patients with schizophrenia in high security were
prescribed an oral antipsychotic only (including clozapine), compared
with 56% of patients in medium security and 52% of patients in low
security (`Table 2 <#T2>`__). It emerged that 13% of patients with
schizophrenia in high security were prescribed a depot antipsychotic
only, compared with 28% of patients in medium security and 37% of
patients in low security. Owing to the relatively small sample sizes,
data from the two medium secure hospitals and one low secure hospital
were combined for statistical analysis, as shown in `Table 3 <#T3>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Oral and depot antipsychotic prescribing for schizophrenia in high
      security and the other hospitals

   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |                 | High secure     | Other           | Total, *n* |
   |                 | hospital        | hospitals       |            |
   |                 |                 | \ `a <#TFN4>`__ |            |
   +=================+=================+=================+============+
   | One type of     | 98 (70)         | 69 (55)         | 167        |
   | regular oral    |                 |                 |            |
   | antipsychotic   |                 |                 |            |
   | only, *n* (%)   |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |                 |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   | One type of     | 18 (13)         | 39 (31)         | 57         |
   | regular depot   |                 |                 |            |
   | antipsychotic   |                 |                 |            |
   | only, *n* (%)   |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |                 |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   | Other,          | 23 (17)         | 18 (14)         | 41         |
   | \ `b <#TFN5>`__ |                 |                 |            |
   | *n* (%)         |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   |                 |                 |                 |            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+
   | Total, *n*      | 139             | 126             | 265        |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------+

   Medium secure hospital 1, medium secure hospital 2, low secure
   hospital.

   More than one type of antipsychotic prescribed regularly, no regular
   antipsychotic prescribed.

Chi-square testing revealed a significant difference in the rate of
prescribing of oral and depot antipsychotic medication between the high
secure hospital and the other hospitals (χ\ :sup:`2` = 12.78, d.f. = 2,
*P* < 0.01). The data suggest that more oral medication was used in high
security and more depot medication was used in the other hospitals.
`Table 4 <#T4>`__ shows the route of medication administration for
patients with schizophrenia broken down by ethnicity. When medication
was prescribed (i.e. excluding the ‘no antipsychotic prescribed’
category), chi-square analysis showed a statistically significant
difference between the ethnic groups (χ\ :sup:`2` = 6.90, d.f. = 2, *P*
< 0.05); depot antipsychotics appear to be used more frequently for
patients from BME groups.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T4

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Medication administration for patients with schizophrenia by
      ethnicity

   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+
   |          | Regular  | Regular  | Regular  | No       | Total |
   |          | depot    | oral     | depot    | antip    |       |
   |          | antip    | antip    | and      | sychotic |       |
   |          | sychotic | sychotic | oral     |          |       |
   |          | only     | only     | antip    |          |       |
   |          |          |          | sychotic |          |       |
   +==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+=======+
   | BME      | 23       | 48       | 5 (6.4)  | 2 (2.6)  | 78    |
   | p        | (29.5)   | (61.5)   |          |          |       |
   | atients, |          |          |          |          |       |
   | *n* (%)  |          |          |          |          |       |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |       |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+
   | White    | 34       | 142      | 5 (2.7)  | 6 (3.2)  | 187   |
   | p        | (18.2)   | (75.9)   |          |          |       |
   | atients, |          |          |          |          |       |
   | *n* (%)  |          |          |          |          |       |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |       |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Total    | 57       | 190      | 10       | 8        | 265   |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+

.. _S12:

Consultant questionnaires
-------------------------

The questionnaire was sent to the 34 consultant forensic psychiatrists
based at the four secure hospitals in the trust (19 at the high secure
hospital, 10 at the two medium secure hospitals and 5 at the low secure
hospital), as well as to the 3 forensic consultants working in community
forensic services within the same trust. The overall response rate was
78% (74% high secure, 80% medium secure, 80% low secure and 100%
community). Limitations in the data collected leave us unable to comment
on any differences (e.g. gender, age, years of experience) between
consultants who did and did not respond.

Of the hospital-based consultants responding to the questionnaire, 35%
expressed a preference for oral medication and 42% expressed a
preference for depot medication; 23% did not express a preference. The
mean score on the 0–100 scale, where 0 indicated a preference for oral
and 100 for depot medication, was 37 (s.d. = 20) for respondents from
high security and 74 (s.d. = 22) for respondents from other settings
(medium security and low security); ANOVA demonstrated a significant
difference between the two groups (*F*\ :sub:`(1,24)` = 19.759, *P* <
0.01). Thus, those working in high security preferred oral medications
and those working in other settings preferred depot medications.

Most (89%) expressing a preference for oral medications worked in high
security. The following reasons were given: convenience for patient,
adherence, safety, less invasive, improved engagement, increased patient
responsibility and improved therapeutic relationship. Most (73%)
expressing a preference for depot medications worked in medium or low
security, and their reasons were: adherence, clinical outcome,
expectation from next level of security, reduced side-effects, reduced
tension between patient and team, easier risk management in community,
‘mental health review tribunal’/‘Ministry of Justice’ reassurance, and
reduced adverse events.

All of the community-based forensic consultants expressed a preference
for depot medication; stated reasons included adherence, clinical
outcome and convenience for the patient.

Community-based forensic consultants were asked two further questions
(see Method). It emerged that route of administration was important for
consultants when considering whether or not to accept a patient (mean
rating for question 1, where 0 was ‘very important’ and 100 was ‘not at
all important’, was 31 (s.d. = 17)). Considering question 2, consultants
were also likely to accept patients currently prescribed an oral
antipsychotic (not clozapine) (mean rating 72 (s.d. = 21), where 0 –
very unlikely, 100 – very likely).

.. _S13:

Discussion
==========

.. _S14:

Findings
--------

This study demonstrates a similar rate of antipsychotic prescribing
(97%) as a previous study;\ :sup:`6` 3% of patients were not prescribed
antipsychotic medication. Consultant psychiatrists may opt not to
prescribe antipsychotic medication in the context of a drug-free trial
related to diagnostic uncertainty or severe side-effects, or because a
patient has refused to take such medication.

This study reveals significant differences in the antipsychotic
prescribing practices of consultants working in different levels of
secure care. Consultants in high security were found to prescribe more
oral antipsychotics, and those in medium and low security were found to
prescribe more depot antipsychotics. It may be that the likelihood of
high secure patients having an extended period of supervised care ahead
of them reduces the bearing of adherence on antipsychotic selection.

The overall rate of depot antipsychotic prescribing was lower than that
found by Paton\ :sup:`6` and also lower than that quoted in the Maudsley
guidelines.\ :sup:`9` Polypharmacy was less prevalent than in Paton's
study;\ :sup:`6` this finding was welcome but perhaps unsurprising as
over a decade later the risks associated with polypharmacy are better
understood and many trusts have guidelines restricting polypharmacy. The
Care Quality Commission also actively discourages polypharmacy. The most
common combination of clozapine augmented by a second-generation oral
antipsychotic is in keeping with usual approaches to treatment-resistant
schizophrenia.

BME patients with schizophrenia were significantly more likely than
their White counterparts to be prescribed a depot antipsychotic. This
finding builds upon existing research.\ :sup:`10,11`

Significant differences in the opinions expressed by consultants were
found: consultants working in high security preferred oral
antipsychotics and consultants working in other settings preferred depot
antipsychotics. Overall, 31% of all respondents expressed a preference
for oral antipsychotics and 89% of these worked in high security,
whereas 48% of respondents expressed a preference for depot
antipsychotics and 79% of these worked in medium and low security and
the community. Comments from community consultants suggest there is no
expectation that patients should be prescribed a depot antipsychotic
before they are deemed suitable to be managed by community services.

It is noteworthy that the presence of a community forensic team may mean
that the area served by the NHS trust in this study is not typical of
other areas in England and Wales. Community forensic services are not
available countrywide and it may be that general adult psychiatrists
accepting patients from secure services hold different views than their
forensic colleagues.

.. _S15:

Adherence
---------

Both consultants preferring oral antipsychotics and those preferring
depot antipsychotics listed ‘adherence’ as a reason for their
preference. For patients with schizophrenia, poor adherence can be
related to forgetfulness, disorganisation, complexity of regime, cost,
lack of insight, ambivalence, poor relationship with therapist, stigma,
side-effects and lack of perceived efficacy.\ :sup:`3,12` Higher rates
of non-adherence have been reported in patients with schizophrenia
prescribed oral medication than those prescribed depot
medication\ :sup:`13` and patients treated with depot medication have
been found more likely to continue medication, and to continue it for
longer, than patients treated with oral medication. It has been
suggested that improved adherence is likely to lead to better clinical
and functional outcomes.\ :sup:`14`

Stone & Niz\ :sup:`15` found that non-adherent patients with
schizophrenia were more likely to enter the criminal justice system and
suggest that consideration be given to using depot antipsychotics (or
clozapine) as a first-line treatment for offenders with schizophrenia.
Arango *et al*\ :sup:`16` studied patients with schizophrenia and a
history of violence. Of those who were violent again, those prescribed
oral antipsychotics were violent sooner, and more frequently, than those
prescribed depot antipsychotics. The authors link improved adherence to
reductions in violence. It may therefore appear counterintuitive that
the forensic population studied were prescribed less depot medication
than patients in an earlier, mixed population, study\ :sup:`6` and the
rates quoted in the Maudsley guidelines.\ :sup:`9`

.. _S16:

Efficacy
--------

Reviews comparing the efficacy of oral and depot
antipsychotics\ :sup:`12,17` report that mirror-image and some large
cohort studies have favoured depot preparations but randomised
controlled trials (RCTs) have not.

Lafeuille *et al*\ :sup:`18` compared outcomes in patients who relapsed
on an oral medication and were then ‘switched’ to a depot antipsychotic
with those who remained on an oral medication. ‘Switched’ patients had
fewer readmissions and fewer emergency presentations. Johnson\ :sup:`19`
found that 33 months after being discharged from hospital, 40% of
patients prescribed depot antipsychotics relapsed, in comparison with
60% of patients prescribed oral antipsychotics. David & Adams’
review\ :sup:`3` of non-forensic patients with schizophrenia identified
little difference between oral and depot antipsychotics in terms of
relapse rates or side-effects, but depot formulations were found
superior in bringing about ‘important global change’. Leucht *et
al*\ :sup:`20` present a systematic review and meta-analysis of 10 RCTs
carried out between 1975 and 2010; there were significantly fewer
relapses in out-patients prescribed depot medication than in those
prescribed oral medication.

.. _S17:

Psychiatrist attitude
---------------------

Haddad *et al*\ :sup:`21` report that 50% of psychiatrists said that
their use of depot antipsychotics had reduced in the previous 5 years,
and 23% said that their use had increased (the 5-year time-span included
the introduction of second-generation depot agents). Despite 89% opining
that depot administration was associated with better adherence, and 98%
opining that depot administration was associated with reduced relapse
rates, only 4% said that depot was their ‘first choice’ route of
administration for patients requiring long-term treatment. The findings
from the current study may go some way in explaining the possible
cognitive dissonance demonstrated by Haddad *et al*'s findings, i.e.
consultant psychiatrists may consider many things other than adherence
when deciding on antipsychotic treatment.

Potkin *et al*\ :sup:`22` reviewed prescriber-patient conversations and
found that depot antipsychotics were discussed only half of the time
when a patient prescribed an oral antipsychotic wished to discuss a
change in medication.

.. _S18:

Advantages and disadvantages of depot antipsychotic medication
--------------------------------------------------------------

Previous studies have commented on perceived advantages and
disadvantages of depot medications.\ :sup:`1,3,12–14,19,22,23`
Advantages have included a more constant plasma level, improved
bioavailability, reduced availability of medication for overdose,
improved adherence, more time to intervene when non-adherence is
identified, reduction in family conflict and reduced treatment costs.
Studies assessing patient attitude towards depot medication have
revealed generally positive attitudes.\ :sup:`3,22`

Disadvantages have included concern about side-effects, effect on
therapeutic relationship, risk of high-dose prescribing,
inappropriateness of use post-neuroleptic malignant syndrome, less
flexibility and delayed response (i.e. mental state improvement on
initiation, side-effect reduction on discontinuation). Potkin *et
al*\ :sup:`22` found that the usual reason for a patient declining depot
medication was needle phobia.

This study adds to the existing literature by providing a forensic
perspective on the advantages and disadvantages of depot medication.

.. _S19:

Limitations
-----------

This study encountered a number of limitations which restrict the
generalisability of the findings to wider forensic and indeed
non-forensic settings. These include the small sample size, particularly
with regard to the community consultants, the use of a non-validated
questionnaire, and not including patients in the private sector (who in
2007 accounted for 35% of patients in England).\ :sup:`24`

.. _S20:

Clinical implications
---------------------

Community teams caring for forensic patients with schizophrenia do not
seem to have an expectation that patients should be prescribed a depot
antipsychotic medication before they are deemed suitable for their
service. It could be argued that given the relatively low rate of depot
antipsychotic prescribing found in this study, and the superiority of
depot preparations in terms of adherence, readmission and relapse rates,
‘important global change’ and, notably, risk of violence revealed
through this literature review, consultants working with forensic
populations should consider taking steps to increase their use of depot
antipsychotic medications.

.. _S21:

Directions for future research
------------------------------

Future research could attempt to evaluate the opinions of a more
representative sample of consultant forensic psychiatrists, or the
opinions of general adult psychiatrists and non-medical practitioners,
particularly nurses,\ :sup:`3` who may be expected to receive the
handover of patients formerly known to forensic services. It would also
be interesting to establish whether or not the perceived effectiveness
of different types of antipsychotics influences prescribers' choices.
Future research could further explore the finding that BME patients are
more likely to be prescribed a depot antipsychotic than their White
counterparts. It may also be useful to undertake a follow-up study,
where patients stepped down from high or medium security are followed up
some time after discharge and any changes in antipsychotic prescription
are identified and investigated.

We are grateful to Dr Chris Clark, Dr Simon Gibbon, Dr Najat Khalifa and
Sarah Brennan for their help and advice.

.. [1]
   **Anna Machin**, ST6 forensic psychiatrist, East Midlands Training
   Scheme, The Wells Road Centre, Nottingham; **Lucy McCarthy**, Senior
   Research Fellow, East Midlands Centre for Forensic Mental Health,
   Leicester.
