==========================================================================================================================================
Systematic review into factors associated with the recruitment crisis in psychiatry in the UK: students', trainees' and consultants' views
==========================================================================================================================================



Abid Choudry
Saeed Farooq

:Correspondence: Abid Choudry (abidchoudry@doctors.org.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To review the literature to examine the factors
   that may be affecting recruitment into psychiatry in the UK. We
   systematically searched four databases to identify studies from 1974
   to 2016 and identified 27 papers that met the specified inclusion
   criteria.

   **Results** Most papers (*n* = 24) were based on questionnaire
   surveys. The population in all studies comprised of 1879
   psychiatrists, 6733 students and 220 746 trainees. About 4–7% of
   students opt for a career in psychiatry. Enrichment activities helped
   to attract students more towards psychiatry than just total time
   spent in the specialty. Job content in terms of the lack of
   scientific basis, poor prognosis and stigma towards psychiatry,
   work-related stress and problems with training jobs were common
   barriers highlighted among students and trainees, affecting
   recruitment. Job satisfaction and family-friendly status of
   psychiatry was rated highly by students, with lifestyle factors
   appearing to be important for trainees who tend to choose psychiatry.

   **Clinical implications** Negative attitudes and stigma towards
   psychiatry continue to persist. Teaching and training in psychiatry
   needs rethinking to improve student experience and recruitment into
   the specialty.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Psychiatry as a career has been negatively regarded and unpopular among
medical students. About 3.6% of British graduates decide on a career in
psychiatry whereas about 6% are needed.\ :sup:`1` From 2000 to 2011, the
absolute number of consultant psychiatrists in England rose from 2904 to
4394 (an increase of 51%), with similar increases in Scotland and Wales,
in line with the expansion of the consultant workforce in most secondary
care specialties.\ :sup:`1` A need for more psychiatric consultant posts
has been predicted based on projections of increasing workloads due to
the increased population needs.\ :sup:`2` A perceived fall in the
proportion of UK medical school graduates choosing a postgraduate career
in psychiatry, and low competition ratios for first-year core specialist
training (CT1) posts in psychiatry,\ :sup:`3–5` has led to many
questions about the way in which psychiatry is taught at medical school
and how psychiatry could be made as an attractive career
option.\ :sup:`6–8`

Low recruitment in psychiatry is a global issue, highlighted in a number
of publications.\ :sup:`9,10` However, the problem also has
country-specific dimensions, as each country has different factors such
as the pay scale for the specialty, medical education system and
training programmes, which may attract or dissuade medical students from
a career in psychiatry. The subject has not been reviewed systematically
especially in the context of recruitment in the UK. The review question
was: what are the factors that influence recruitment to psychiatry as a
career choice and how can this be improved? The aim of this paper is to
systematically review the literature from the UK on psychiatry as a
career choice. We are specifically interested in identifying the factors
that influence the recruitment into psychiatry with emphasis on barriers
and facilitators affecting recruitment. A greater understanding of the
views ranging from medical students to trainees and consultants working
in the UK may enable curriculum developers and recruitment leads to
design programmes that attract students and trainees to psychiatry as a
career and improve students' attitudes towards psychiatry in the long
term.

.. _S1:

Method
======

We followed the PRISMA statement\ :sup:`11` as a guide for conducting
the systematic review. The following electronic databases were searched
from 1974 onwards: Medline, EMBASE, CINAHL, PsycINFO. These databases
were selected in view of the fact that almost all the literature
published from the UK would be covered in these databases. Keywords used
in the searches included: medical students, trainees, doctors,
consultant, attitudes, psychiatry, career, undergraduate psychiatry.
Boolean operations and truncations were added to allow for alternative
endings in the keyword searches. The search was last updated in August
2016.

We included studies that described a UK sample, were published in
English in a peer-reviewed journal and provided original data on careers
in psychiatry or factors affecting recruitment in psychiatry. We
excluded studies that had the primary objective of addressing other
issues that were not directly relevant to recruitment in psychiatry but
only mentioned their effects on career choice as a secondary effect.
Studies which provided data on medical careers in general were included
if these provided data relevant to psychiatric careers or recruitment.

The electronic search returned 601 relevant abstracts and titles. We
screened the titles and abstracts and excluded the studies that were not
directly relevant to the objectives of the review. Therefore we excluded
the studies that did not describe a UK sample or did not provide the
original data. We also excluded the studies that described the
recruitment to certain subspecialties and therefore not relevant to the
recruitment to psychiatry in general. After screening these titles and
abstracts we decided to examine 56 full text papers. Finally, we
included 27 papers in the review. Further details are provided in `Fig.
1 <#F1>`__. The studies were conducted in a number of different
populations, settings and periods, and also used diverse methodologies
varying from surveys to statistics derived from databases. The 30-item
Attitudes Towards Psychiatry (ATP-30),\ :sup:`12` a validated tool used
to assess attitudes of students towards psychiatry, was used in four
papers; other papers used different questionnaires to assess attitudes.
Due to the diverse methodologies it was inappropriate to pool the data
to produce a statistical summary. We therefore describe the main
findings and produce a narrative summary of results.

.. figure:: 346f1
   :alt: Summary of the abstracts reviewed to identify relevant papers.
   CAMHS, child and adolescent mental health services.
   :name: F1

   Summary of the abstracts reviewed to identify relevant papers. CAMHS,
   child and adolescent mental health services.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

.. _S3:

Characteristics of included studies
-----------------------------------

`Table 1 <#T1>`__ shows the characteristics of the 27 studies included
in the review. The majority of studies (*n* = 24) were surveys and
questionnaire-based studies. The other studies included one database
study of doctors entering training posts and two retrospective cohort
studies, which looked at which medical school psychiatrists had
attended. These reported on medical students (*n* = 12), trainees (*n* =
10), medical students and trainees (*n* = 1), trainees and consultants
(*n* = 1) and consultants (*n* = 3). One of these studies looked at data
from postgraduate departments in different medical schools, and one
study reported on the database of applicants to MMC (Modernising Medical
Careers) for training posts.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Study characteristics

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Author/year | Population  | Me          | Total       | M:F ratio,  |
   |             |             | thod/design | sample, *n* | %/          |
   |             |             |             |             | response    |
   |             |             |             |             | rate, %     |
   +=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
   | Brook,      | Medical     | Re          | 531         | No data     |
   | 1976        | school of   | trospective |             | provided    |
   | \ :sup:`19` | origin      | cohort      |             |             |
   |             | for         |             |             |             |
   |             | ps          |             |             |             |
   |             | ychiatrists |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Brook,      | Medical     | Re          | 1229        | No data     |
   | 1983        | school of   | trospective |             | provided    |
   | \ :sup:`21` | origin      | cohort      |             |             |
   |             | for         |             |             |             |
   |             | ps          |             |             |             |
   |             | ychiatrists |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Levine *et  | Medical     | Survey      | 30          | No M:F      |
   | al*,        | students    |             |             | data/100    |
   | 1983        |             |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`24` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Brook *et   | Medical     | Survey      | 498         | 64:36/40    |
   | al*,        | students    |             |             |             |
   | 1986        |             |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`20` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Calvert *et | Medical     | Survey      | 392         | M:F, no     |
   | al*,        | students    |             |             | significant |
   | 1999        |             |             |             | di          |
   | \ :sup:`33` |             |             |             | fference/70 |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Mcparland   | Medical     | Cohort      | 379         | 54:46/84    |
   | *et al*,    | students    | study –     |             |             |
   | 2003        |             | survey      |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`30` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Maidment    | Medical     | Survey      | 837         | 33.         |
   | *et al*,    | students    |             |             | 6:66.4/99.6 |
   | 2003        |             |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`31` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Petrides &  | Medical     | Cohort      | 8283        | Only        |
   | McManus,    | students    | study –     |             | descriptive |
   | 2004        |             | survey      |             | data        |
   | \ :sup:`23` |             |             |             | provided in |
   |             |             |             |             | this paper  |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Rajagopal   | Medical     | Survey      | 301         | 3           |
   | *et al*,    | students    |             |             | 1.9:68.1/52 |
   | 2004        |             |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`35` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Cu          | Medical     | Survey      | 467         | 44:64/51    |
   | rtis-Barton | students    |             |             |             |
   | & Eagles,   |             |             |             |             |
   | 2011        |             |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`25` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Budd *et    | Medical     | Survey      | 905         | 36:64/Not   |
   | al*,        | students at |             |             | provided    |
   | 2011        | 4           |             |             | clearly     |
   | \ :sup:`26` | different   |             |             | reported    |
   |             | medical     |             |             | range       |
   |             | schools     |             |             | 50–85%      |
   |             |             |             |             | depending   |
   |             |             |             |             | on          |
   |             |             |             |             | medical     |
   |             |             |             |             | school      |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Archdall    | Medical     | Survey      | 15          | 30:70/100   |
   | *et al*,    | students    |             |             |             |
   | 2013        |             |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`34` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Halder *et  | Medical     | Survey      | 484         | 34:66/None  |
   | al*,        | students –  |             |             |             |
   | 2013        | 18 UK       |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`28` | medical     |             |             |             |
   |             | schools     |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Farooq *et  | Medical     | Survey      | 291         | Males       |
   | al*,        | students    |             |             | 37:63/16    |
   | 2014        | (only UK    |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`27` | data used)  |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Maidment    | Trainee     | Survey      | 234         | 52.         |
   | *et al*,    | doctors     |             |             | 1:47.9/67.4 |
   | 2004        |             |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`31` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Goldacre    | Trainee     | Survey      | 21 845 year | Year 1      |
   | *et al*,    | doctors     |             | 1           | 55:45/75    |
   | 2005        | (graduates  |             | 17 741 year | Year 3      |
   | \ :sup:`14` | from 1974   |             | 3           | 56:44/74    |
   |             | to          |             |             |             |
   |             | 2000, UK    |             |             |             |
   |             | medical     |             |             |             |
   |             | schools)    |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Lambert *et | Trainee     | Survey      | 572         | No M:F      |
   | al*,        | doctors     |             |             | data/74     |
   | 2006        |             |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`15` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Fazel *et   | Trainee     | Database    | 31 434      | No M:F data |
   | al*,        | doctors     | analysis    |             |             |
   | 2009        | (all        |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`13` | applicants  |             |             |             |
   |             | to MMC for  |             |             |             |
   |             | training    |             |             |             |
   |             | posts)      |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Barras &    | Trainee     | Survey      | 359         | 52.         |
   | Harris,     | doctors     |             |             | 2:47.8/16.1 |
   | 2012        |             |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`38` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Goldacre    | Trainee     | Survey      | 9155        | 37:63/56    |
   | *et al*,    | doctors who |             |             |             |
   | 2012        | had         |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`16` | qualified   |             |             |             |
   |             | in 2002,    |             |             |             |
   |             | 2005,       |             |             |             |
   |             | 2008        |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Goldacre    | Trainee     | Survey      | 33 974      | Year 1      |
   | *et al*,    | doctors who |             |             | 49:51/65.9  |
   | 2013        | qualified   |             |             | Year 3      |
   | \ :sup:`17` | between     |             |             | 51:49/68.6  |
   |             | 1974        |             |             | Year 5      |
   |             | and 2009    |             |             | 52:48/69.5  |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Svirko *et  | Trainee     | Survey      | 9348        | 46.         |
   | al*,        | doctors who |             |             | 9:55.8/52.2 |
   | 2013        | qualified   |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`18` | 2005, 2008, |             |             |             |
   |             | 2009        |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Collier &   | Hospital    | Survey      | 19 medical  | No M:F      |
   | Moreton,    | p           |             | schools     | data/70     |
   | 2013        | ostgraduate |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`22` | departments |             |             |             |
   |             | of 19       |             |             |             |
   |             | medical     |             |             |             |
   |             | schools     |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Woolf *et   | Medical     | Cohort      | 105         | 34:66/50    |
   | al*,        | students    | study –     |             |             |
   | 2015        | and         | survey      |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`37` | trainee     |             |             |             |
   |             | doctors     |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Korszun *et | Trainee     | Survey      | 309         | 61.         |
   | al*,        | doctors,    |             |             | 5:38.5/None |
   | 2011        | academics,  |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`36` | trust       |             |             |             |
   |             | clinicians  |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Dein *et    | Consultants | Survey      | 72          | 68:32/82.7  |
   | al*,        |             |             |             |             |
   | 2007        |             |             |             |             |
   | \ :sup:`39` |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Denman *et  | Consultants | Survey      | C           | 55:45/41.7  |
   | al*,        | and         |             | onsultants: | (           |
   | 2016        | trainees    |             | 47          | consultants |
   | \ :sup:`32` |             |             | Trainees:   | 42%,        |
   |             |             |             | 51          | trainees    |
   |             |             |             |             | 41%)        |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

   M, male; F, female; MMC, Modernising Medical Careers.

   Data not used from this paper just broad findings in review.

In survey-based studies response rates varied from 16% to 100%. Mean
response rate from the papers which had figures available (*n* = 20) was
63.3%. The population in all studies comprised of 1879 psychiatrists,
6733 students and 220 746 trainees. One database study\ :sup:`13` looked
at 31 434 trainee doctors, and studies by Goldacre *et al* were aimed at
all doctors in training, accounting for large numbers of respondents in
the trainee subcategory.\ :sup:`14–18`

.. _S4:

The influence of the medical school and teaching practices
----------------------------------------------------------

Most of the research addressing the influence of the medical school and
teaching practices on selecting psychiatry as a career was carried out
in the 1970's and 1980's. Two studies by Brook *et al*\ :sup:`19,20`
looked at the medical school of origin for 531 psychiatrists between
1961 and 1970 and reported no significant relationship between schools
that had a professional unit or specific teaching programme and students
pursuing psychiatry in the long term. However, it was noted that those
schools that produced fewer psychiatrists tended to have either a
recently established professional unit or none.\ :sup:`19`

No clear pattern emerged in terms of the type of teaching offered at
each university and the impact this had on choice of psychiatry as a
career in the long term.\ :sup:`19` All four Scottish schools, and
Cambridge and Oxford were noted to be higher in terms of producing
psychiatrists, attributed possibly to the well-established professional
units such as the Maudsley and Bethlem Royal hospitals.\ :sup:`19` The
personality, charisma and enthusiasm of teachers were associated with an
increase in the uptake of psychiatry in the long term.\ :sup:`19,21`

Brook *et al*\ :sup:`21` found that the effectiveness of teaching rather
that the amount of teaching had an effect on student attitudes and
recruitment into psychiatry The attitude of non-psychiatric teachers
appeared to be influential with doctors experiencing negative attitudes
of other doctors towards psychiatry.\ :sup:`21` The two hospitals which
ranked top in terms of producing psychiatrists had changed their
teaching model. One stressed the importance of psychiatry as being part
of general medicine, emphasising the effectiveness of physical therapy,
whereas the other placed emphasis on liaison psychiatry and
psychotherapy.\ :sup:`21`

More recent work by Collier *et al*\ :sup:`22` looked into the teaching
time allocated for psychiatry in foundation programmes across the
country. They found that only 2.3% of teaching was dedicated to
psychiatry compared with 44.1% to medical and surgical
topics.\ :sup:`22` Exposure to psychiatry remained limited with 4 out of
17 hospitals in the survey not having any teaching on psychiatry for
medical students.\ :sup:`22` Doctors generally led a higher proportion
of medicine and surgery teaching sessions (63%) compared with psychiatry
(48%).\ :sup:`22`

.. _S5:

Medical students' views of psychiatry and factors affecting career choice
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Twelve studies examined the factors affecting medical students' career
choice and one study looked at both medical students and trainees.
Petrides *et al*\ :sup:`23` studied the theoretical understanding of how
different medical specialties are perceived and how choices are made.
Psychiatrists were found to have a more artistic approach to medicine,
seeing interpreting and responding imaginatively to a range of medical,
social, ethical and other problems. This is in keeping with early work
by Levine *et al*\ :sup:`24` who also found that there was a group of
students who were ‘psychologically minded’ and they could be identified
and encouraged to make psychiatry as career choice.

Budd *et al*\ :sup:`26` found that job satisfaction (98%, *n* = 128) and
family-friendly status of psychiatry (79%, *n* = 103) were important for
students who rated psychiatry as one of their top three
choices.\ :sup:`26` The academic status was significantly less important
(48%) for students who placed psychiatry as their top three specialty
schools *v.* 63% for those who did not place psychiatry in their top
three choice.\ :sup:`26`

.. _S6:

Choice of psychiatry as a career among medical and sixth form students
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The number of students choosing psychiatry has remained fairly stable at
around 4–7%.\ :sup:`25–27` Three per cent of students from six medical
schools placed psychiatry as their first choice, with 18% seriously
considering it.\ :sup:`20` Halder *et al*\ :sup:`28` found similar
results in 18 medical schools; 16% chose psychiatry as a future career
on entering medical school but by the final year only 3% had decided to
pursue a career in the subject. These results were replicated by Farooq
*et al*\ :sup:`27` In a survey of sixth form students, Maidment *et
al*\ :sup:`29` reported that 60.9% (*n* = 363) indicated that it would
be very likely or they would definitely want to pursue psychiatry as a
career. In terms of overall intentions to pursue a career in a
specialty, the ratings for psychiatry was similar to general medicine at
12.4% (*n* = 72) *v.* 12.2% (*n* = 69) respectively.\ :sup:`29`

.. _S7:

Effect of undergraduate attachment and education on choosing psychiatry as a career
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Positive attitudes towards psychiatry and the influence by a teacher
during the attachment correlated with an intention to purse psychiatry
as a career in the long term.\ :sup:`29–31` Three studies highlighted
the importance of psychiatric attachment. Student attitudes improved as
the attachment progressed.\ :sup:`26,30,31` Maidment *et al*\ :sup:`29`
found 1.4% of fourth-year medical students expressed a definite
intention to pursue which rose to 4.7% after their
attachment.\ :sup:`29` McParland *et al*\ :sup:`30` reported that 19%
(*n* = 58/309) of students were very attracted to psychiatry or had a
definite intention to pursue psychiatry at the start of the placement,
which increased to 27% (*n* = 101/373) of students at the end of the
attachment. The importance of the undergraduate experience was
highlighted by a recent study showing 50% of consultants and 37% of
trainees surveyed decided on a career in psychiatry while still at
medical school.\ :sup:`32`

Calvert *et al*\ :sup:`33` looked into the attitudes of medical students
towards psychiatry and psychiatric patients at year 1, 3 and 5 in
medical school. First-year medical students were more likely to have
stereotypical views compared with third- and fifth-year students, and
were more likely to agree with statements such as ‘Psychiatry deals with
imaginary illness’ (mean 1.4, s.d. = 0.9, *P* < 0.5).\ :sup:`33`
Fifth-year students (mean 3.2, s.d. = 1.4) showed lower agreement than
third-year medical students (mean 3.6, s.d. = 1.2, *P* < 0.5) with the
statement ‘Psychiatry is as a challenging career’.\ :sup:`33` As they
progressed through medical school, students recognised that mental
illness has serious morbidity and that people do recover from mental
illness,\ :sup:`33` showing that attitudes towards psychiatric patients
improved with greater clinical experience but possibly became more
negative towards psychiatry as a career.

Other factors that appeared to affect students positively included
enrichment activities, i.e. activities beyond standard teaching and
clinical placements led to a significantly increased interest in
psychiatry.\ :sup:`28` These included research experience in psychiatry
(13% *v.* 4% in those not interested in psychiatry, *P* = 0.001),
university psychiatry clubs (38% *v.* 11%, *P* < 0.001), psychiatry
electives (14% *v.* 1%, *P* < 0.001) and psychiatry special study
modules (38% *v.* 16%, *P* < 0.001).\ :sup:`28`

McParland *et al*\ :sup:`30` identified factors which increased interest
in psychiatry, including: influence or encouragement by someone during
the attachment (74%, *n* = 282), particularly the influence by
consultants (43%, *n* = 163), exposure to interesting and stimulating
ideas (29%, *n* = 110), liking someone's approach (27%, *n* = 103),
feeling someone believed in their ability (11%, *n* = 41) and having
formed close working relationships (9%, *n* = 33).\ :sup:`30` Other
factors that had a significant impact were: receiving encouragement from
the consultants (*n* = 374, *P* < 0.001, *r* = 0.26), seeing patients
respond to treatment (*n* = 374, *P* < 0.001, *r* = 0.20) and having a
direct role in the involvement of patient care (*n* = 374, *P* < 0.001,
*r* = 0.26).\ :sup:`30`

.. _S8:

Factors which did not affect career choice of medical students
--------------------------------------------------------------

Seeing patients in different settings or different phases of the illness
had no effect on career choice of medical students when deciding their
career intentions.\ :sup:`28` Interestingly, one study found that the
earning potential and status of psychiatry had no effect on selecting
psychiatry as a career choice.\ :sup:`26` Other factors related to
teaching such as quality of rating of small group teaching and
lectures,\ :sup:`28` the curriculum type used\ :sup:`30,31` and
performance at viva examinations and multiple choice questions also had
no effect on the career choice.\ :sup:`31`

.. _S9:

Factors discouraging medical students to choose psychiatry as a career
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Curtis-Barton *et al*\ :sup:`25` in their survey (*n* = 467) found that
the factors discouraging students to pursue a career in psychiatry
included: prognosis of patients (62%), perception that there is a lack
of evidence in diagnosis (51%), lack of scientific basis (53%) and the
amount of bureaucracy and paperwork in the specialty (48%). Other
discouraging factors included the stigma towards psychiatry (30%), the
standing of the profession among medical colleagues (31%) and comments
by other specialists (26%).\ :sup:`25,34` Psychiatry scored the lowest
among the specialties as a career choice. Students described psychiatry
as boring, unscientific, depressing, stressful, frustrating and ‘not
enjoying the rotation’.\ :sup:`35`

Many students experienced psychiatry as being different to other
specialties. For some this was a reason not to pursue psychiatry as a
career but for others it was a positive aspect of the specialty Students
felt ward rounds focused on ‘social issues’ rather than medical
conditions. Some found it an ‘emotional burden’ and others felt that
psychiatry could not ‘fix’ people and no one is being cured.\ :sup:`34`

A survey by Korszun *et al*\ :sup:`36` examined the views of trainee,
academics and clinicians on students not taking up psychiatry. The
following factors were identified as deterring the students from
psychiatry: negative attitudes towards psychiatrists from other doctors
and health professionals (57%), stigmatisation of psychiatry (40%),
stigma associated with mental health disorders (39%), poor teaching and
role modelling from psychiatrists (37%), psychiatry not seen as medical
or scientific enough (26%) and poor morale among psychiatrists
(26%).\ :sup:`36`

.. _S10:

Factors affecting trainees' and consultants' choice of psychiatry
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Fazel *et al*\ :sup:`13` found that psychiatry was the sixth most
popular specialty out of ten specialty groups for trainees applying for
training places. A higher proportion of female graduates were shown to
choose psychiatry between 1974 (32%) and 1999 (59%).\ :sup:`13` However,
a more recent survey showed a slight decline in the number of women
choosing psychiatry over the last decade, 4.9% (1999) *v.* 4.6 %
(2009).\ :sup:`17`

Goldacre *et al*\ :sup:`14` examined career choices for medical students
over the past 40 years. The number of doctors choosing psychiatry as a
career has hardly changed and remains around 4–5%, which is similar to
figures from 1975.\ :sup:`14` It was noted that students who went on to
work in psychiatry 10 years after graduation, 52% (224 out of 428) had
chosen psychiatry in the first year after graduation and 71% (308 out of
434) had chosen it in year 3.\ :sup:`14`

In common with the factors attracting students towards psychiatry,
numerous studies identified factors that appear to attract trainees
towards psychiatry The major attractions for choosing psychiatry are
listed in `Box 1 <#box1>`__. Denman *et al*\ :sup:`32` found that the
most common factor influencing core trainees' (60%) and consultants'
(70%) decisions to specialise in psychiatry was emphasis on the patient
as a whole.\ :sup:`32` Trainees highlighted that mental health was an
area of need (53%) and empathy and concerns for people with mental
illness (53%) were important reasons for choosing psychiatry.\ :sup:`32`

**Box 1** Factors attracting medical students and trainees in pursuing
psychiatry as a career

.. _S11:

Medical students
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Encouragement by colleagues\ :sup:`24,26,30,31`

-  Influence by someone during the placement\ :sup:`24,30`

-  Females are more likely to favour a career in
   psychiatry\ :sup:`24,27,30`

-  Family history of mental illness was associated with choosing
   psychiatry\ :sup:`24`

-  Quality of experience\ :sup:`26,27,30,33`

-  Role models can have a positive impact on students pursuing a career
   in psychiatry\ :sup:`28,30,33`

-  Enrichment activities\ :sup:`27,28`

.. _S12:

Trainees
~~~~~~~~

-  Hours and conditions of work\ :sup:`17,31,32`

-  The doctor's personal assessment of their aptitudes and
   skills,\ :sup:`17,31,32` for example recognising factors such as
   using one's intellect to help others\ :sup:`37`

-  Experience of the subject as a student\ :sup:`17,31`

-  Inclinations before medical school and a positive student
   experience\ :sup:`17,37`

-  Attitudes and inclination to psychiatry as a medical
   student\ :sup:`24,31,37`

-  Lifestyle factors\ :sup:`32,37`

-  Encouragement from consultants and senior doctors\ :sup:`31`

-  Emphasis on the patient as a whole person and empathy/concern for
   mentally ill people\ :sup:`32`

.. _S13:

Barriers associated with not choosing psychiatry as a long-term career choice for trainees
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Barras & Harris\ :sup:`38` explored trainee's experiences (*n* = 359)
within psychiatry. Trainee attitudes were grouped into different
categories. The attitudes towards psychiatry (12.6%), professional role
(12%) and day-to-day working (11.3%) were identified as the main
negative factors. Trainees raised concerns with the training programmes
in psychiatry, such as problems with the rota and not having enough time
with patients.\ :sup:`38` Many trainees felt frustrated with the Annual
Review of Competence Progression (ARCP) process and workplace-based
assessments, as well as the duplication of paperwork being a constant
frustration.\ :sup:`38`

The studies identified a number of barriers against choosing psychiatry
as a career (`Box 2 <#box2>`__).

Trainees felt improvements were needed in terms of training
opportunities and felt this could be enhanced by providing a variety of
jobs, increasing research opportunities and increasing medical aspects
of training.\ :sup:`38`

Work looking into consultant psychiatrists' views into why they chose
psychiatry was limited to two papers.\ :sup:`32,39` Dein *et
al*\ :sup:`39` found that the majority of consultants (46%) chose
psychiatry as a career soon after leaving medical school, and a recent
study surveying consultants in the West Midlands found that 50% had made
their choice by graduation from medical school.\ :sup:`32` The main
reasons cited by consultants for choosing psychiatry as a career
included: empathy for those with a mental disorder (36.1%), interface
with neuroscience (25%), expectation of better working conditions in
psychiatry (20%) and influence of teaching at medical school
(19.4%).\ :sup:`39` Denman *et al*\ :sup:`32` highlighted several ‘very
important’ reasons for consultants choosing psychiatry including: career
in psychiatry would be intellectually challenging (60%), sense of
fulfilment expected from seeing patients improve (47%) and enjoyment of
problem-solving (47%). Lifestyle factors such as salary, better working
conditions and quality of life were shown to be more important reasons
for choosing psychiatry for trainees compared with
consultants.\ :sup:`32`

**Box 2** Barriers associated with not choosing psychiatry as a career

-  Job content (71.7%) (*n* = 71) (including the lack of scientific
   basis, job not being clinical, poor
   prognosis)\ :sup:`15,17,25,35,36,38`

-  Poor public image of psychiatry\ :sup:`15,25,36`

-  Lack of respect towards psychiatry as a specialty by other
   specialties\ :sup:`15,25,36`

-  Work-related stress cited by (49%)\ :sup:`15` trainees in
   psychiatry\ :sup:`38`

-  25–50% of trainees leaving psychiatry as a specialty cited lack of
   resources as one of the main reasons which was significantly more
   than those rejecting general practice and trauma and
   orthopaedics\ :sup:`15,38`

-  25–50% of trainees leaving psychiatry\ :sup:`15,16,38` highlighted:

   a. lack of adequately supervised training

   b. lack of evidence base to diagnosis and treatment

   c. lack of improvement in patients

   d. work-life balance

   e. work not clinical enough

-  Physical risks involved in the job\ :sup:`15`

-  Sense of eroded professionalism\ :sup:`36,38`

-  Too much paperwork and duplication\ :sup:`25,36,38`

-  Problems with rota and not enough time with patients\ :sup:`38`

-  Trainees leaving the scheme felt frustrated with workplace-based
   assessments\ :sup:`38`

-  Low morale among workforce\ :sup:`33`

-  Future role of psychiatrists being eroded\ :sup:`33`

.. _S14:

Discussion
==========

This is the first systematic review of literature which examined factors
that influence the choice of psychiatry as a career in the UK. The main
findings are that enrichment activities help to attract students more
towards psychiatry than just total time spent in the specialty. Job
satisfaction and family-friendly status of psychiatry was rated highly
by students who tend to choose psychiatry. Role models and encouragement
from consultants may increase the number of students who want to pursue
psychiatry as a career. The major factors that appeared to dissuade
medical students/trainees from pursuing psychiatry as a career included:
an apparent lack of scientific basis of psychiatry and work not being
clinical enough, perception that psychiatry is more concerned about
social issues, the bureaucracy, paperwork, apparent poor prognosis of
patients, stigma towards psychiatry as a specialty, low morale, and
onerous workloads as a consultant.

We are aware of one previous systematic review that examined medical
students' attitudes towards psychiatry internationally.\ :sup:`40` In
common with our study this systematic review alongside another survey of
psychiatrists\ :sup:`36` highlighted the stigma towards mental illness
as a major barrier influencing negative medical views towards
psychiatry.\ :sup:`40` Stigma towards psychiatry as a specialty arises
from a variety of sources, notably from medical students themselves. In
addition, this stigma could arise from ward staff attitudes towards
patients and from other doctors in other specialties, which detract
students.\ :sup:`13,25,34`

Other reviews have looked at one aspect such as the effect of clinical
experience of psychiatry on medical students' attitudes towards the
specialty.\ :sup:`41` Lyons\ :sup:`40` highlighted the impact of
poor-quality teaching leading to negative attitudes towards psychiatry
and highlighted the need to address psychiatry curricula and introduce
novel teaching strategies.\ :sup:`40` El-Sayeh *et al*\ :sup:`42` have
previously highlighted the importance of teaching and the various
methods which could be utilised to try to improve the student experience
and in turn help attract students towards psychiatry. The recent survey
by Korszun *et al*\ :sup:`36` highlighted that the number of clinicians
compared with academics and trainees agreed that they did not have time
to teach medical students (*P* < 0.001). Both clinicians (42%) and
academics (47%) felt that teaching medical students did not contribute
to their future career prospects compared with 21% of trainees (*P* <
0.001)\ :sup:`36` Fewer clinicians considered teaching to be a
significant component of their appraisal compared with trainees and
academics.\ :sup:`36` The combination of poor teaching practices due to
lack of resources or commitment and the stigma reinforce the poor image
of psychiatry.

We feel that the findings of our study support the recommendations made
by Mukherjee *et al*\ :sup:`43` which identify a number of steps to
address the crisis in psychiatry recruitment at different nodal points
in a medical career, i.e. prior to entry to medical school, during
medical education and after graduation.

.. _S15:

Improving recruitment
---------------------

This study highlights the need to change the experience of psychiatry at
undergraduate and postgraduate level in keeping with work by Shah *et
al*\ :sup:`44` who highlighted early medical experience, influence of
seniors and the aspects related to working environment as areas that
could be affected positively which in turn could have a positive effect
on choosing psychiatry as a career. Kelley *et al*\ :sup:`45`
highlighted the impact of foundation programme experience in psychiatry,
with a significantly higher proportion of trainees pursuing a career in
psychiatry compared with those without any exposure to psychiatry (14.9%
*v.* 1.8%). This correlates with earlier findings by Shah *et
al*\ :sup:`44` that found a significant correlation between those
Scottish students considering psychiatry as a career and having held a
psychiatry post.\ :sup:`43` A recent survey by Denman *et al*\ :sup:`32`
showed that 43% of psychiatry trainees made their decision to specialise
in psychiatry during the foundation years, correlating with increased
exposure to psychiatry during the foundation years with 80% of trainees
in this survey completing a post in psychiatry during the foundation
years. Specific enrichment activities beyond standard teaching and
clinical placements such as research experience in psychiatry,
university psychiatry clubs, summer schools,\ :sup:`46` psychiatry
electives and psychiatry special study modules appear to be a way in
which medical students will gain invaluable experiences and improve
their attitudes to psychiatry. These need to be adopted and evaluated in
future programmes to enhance recruitment in psychiatry Collier *et
al*\ :sup:`22` found that only 2.3% of teaching was dedicated to
psychiatry compared with 44.1% to medical and surgical topics, which
does not help the poor image of psychiatry. This and similar issues need
to be addressed at institutional level.

A number of studies found that psychiatry has a perception that it is
not a ‘scientific’ or ‘medical’ discipline.\ :sup:`15,36,38` Medical
students and trainees expressed the views about the weakened medical
identity of psychiatry. The erosion of the role of the psychiatrist was
cited by some psychiatry trainees as a potential factor that would make
them consider leaving psychiatry training.\ :sup:`38` This unfortunately
is not helped by negative comments or ‘bad-mouthing’ of
psychiatry.\ :sup:`36,47`

Interventions such as anti-stigma films and Medfest\ :sup:`48` have been
shown to improve medical students' attitudes to psychiatrists, serious
mental illness and psychiatry, at least in the short term.\ :sup:`48,49`
However, it appears that there is need to reconsider the content of
psychiatric training and the undergraduate curriculum. It has been
suggested that moving undergraduate teaching from in-patient to general
hospital settings such as liaison psychiatry will allow students to see
patients with problems that are relevant to medical practice.\ :sup:`47`
Setting up and evaluating such programmes that have the potential to
offer a different and enjoyable experience for medical students and
foundation doctors should be a priority to improve the image of and
recruitment into psychiatry.

.. _S16:

Limitations
-----------

A limitation of the study is that almost all data are based on surveys
and databases. This represents a cross-sectional view on the subject.
The lack of any comparisons with other specialties, which may have
similar recruitment rates, is particularly concerning. The focus on UK
studies is also a limitation but was necessary to understand the factors
affecting recruitment in this country We noted with some concern that
there are only a few studies that address the positive aspects of
psychiatry,\ :sup:`26–28,30–33` which may attract students and trainees
towards psychiatry, and how these can be used for improving the
recruitment. Future studies need to address this gap in the literature.
Finally, we feel that the problems underlying the recruitment in
psychiatry perhaps also reflect the lack of parity of esteem. Unless
mental health is valued equally with physical health, the misconceptions
and distorted perceptions about psychiatry as a discipline in which a
medical career can be fruitfully pursued will linger on and will hinder
aspiring physicians from considering psychiatry as a career option.

.. [1]
   **Dr Abid Choudry**, ST5, Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust. **Dr
   Saeed Farooq**, Clinical Senior Lecturer, Research Institute for
   Primary Care and Health Sciences, Keele University, and South
   Staffordshire and Shropshire NHS Foundation Trust.
