=========================================================
Mental Capacity Act (Northern Ireland) 2016\ `† <#fn1>`__
=========================================================

Gerard Lynch
Catherine Taggart
Philip CampbellCorrespondence to Gerard Lynch
(gerry.lynch@northerntrust.hscni.net)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   Mental health legislation in Northern Ireland has always been
   separate from legislation in the rest of the UK; the Mental Health
   (Northern Ireland) Order (MHO) had been in place since 1986. In
   common with other jurisdictions, this legislation utilises the
   presence of mental disorder and risk as criteria for detention and
   involuntary treatment. The MHO has been replaced by the Mental
   Capacity Act (Northern Ireland) 2016 (MCA), an example of ‘fusion’
   legislation in which impairment of decision-making capacity and best
   interests are the only criteria to be used when making decisions
   across health and social care. In this paper, we outline the
   development of the MCA to date, and discuss its potential to improve
   mental healthcare by placing the treatment of mental illness within
   the same legislative framework as physical illnesses.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Mental Capacity Act (Northern Ireland) 2016 (MCA) is an example of a
‘fusion’ legislation – a generic law applicable across all medical
specialties and social care where an intervention is proposed and the
person has impaired decision-making capacity.

The MCA was enacted in May 2016. Since then, the Department of Health
has completed phase 1 of the implementation work; creating a first
working draft of a code of practice, and working on forms and draft
regulations associated with the Act. This work has been shared with a
‘virtual’ MCA Reference Group, composed of a wide range of stakeholders.
The first full draft of the code of practice, forms and regulations have
recently been circulated to the MCA Reference Group and the second
phase, a pre-consultation phase on the full draft, has just begun.

.. _S1:

Background
==========

The Bamford review of mental health and learning disability, established
in 2002, was a wide-ranging examination of the delivery of mental health
and learning disability services in Northern Ireland.

In addition to the examination of service delivery, the review also
undertook a review of the mental health legislation, the Mental Health
(Northern Ireland) Order (MHO), which had been on the statute books
since 1986. Criteria for involuntary treatment of mental illness under
the MHO were based on diagnosis and risk; the presence of mental illness
or severe mental impairment, and failure to detain leading to a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to self or others. In
addition, certain conditions were specifically excluded – no person
could be detained solely on the grounds of personality disorder,
dependence on alcohol or other drugs, or sexual deviancy.

There was no specific or separate mental capacity legislation in
Northern Ireland. Decisions on the treatment of incapacitous patients
are taken under common law, with decisions based on a presumption of
capacity and the doctrine of necessity (best interests).

The Bamford review decided that the legislation was not compliant with
essential principles (autonomy, justice, benefit and least harm). In
2007, it recommended that::sup:`(n.d.a)` There should be a single
comprehensive legislative framework for the reform of mental health
legislation and the introduction of capacity.The framework should be
based on agreed principles.These principles should apply to all
healthcare decisions, as well as welfare and financial needs.Impairment
of decision-making capacity should be a mandatory prerequisite for any
interference with a person's autonomy without their consent.Individuals
who are subject to the criminal justice system should have access to
assessment, treatment and care which is equivalent to that available to
other people.

A public consultation was held in 2011. There was strong support for the
proposal of a single legislative framework. It was therefore decided to
fuse mental capacity and mental health law into a single bill. The
resulting draft bill was the subject of another consultation in 2014,
followed by its introduction to the Stormont Assembly. There, it
underwent further consideration and amendment, and was passed as the
Mental Capacity Act (Northern Ireland), receiving Royal Assent in May
2016.

.. _S2:

Aims and principles
===================

Fusion legislation provides equally for all circumstances in which a
person's autonomy might be compromised on health grounds. It puts
impaired decision-making capacity at the heart of all non-consensual
interventions. By treating mental and physical illnesses equally under
the law, it reduces stigma associated with separate mental health
legislation, and is respectful of a person's autonomy and
decision-making capacity whether they have a mental or a physical
illness.

Compatibility with international statements on human rights,
particularly the European Convention on Human Rights
(ECHR)\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` and the United Nation's Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD),\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` is an issue for any
legislation dealing with involuntary treatment. Conventional mental
health legislation, which uses a diagnostic test for involuntary
treatment, could be regarded as being incompatible with Article 14 (1)
(b) of the CRPD – ‘the existence of a disability shall in no case
justify a deprivation of liberty’. No UK mental health legislation is
currently compliant with the CRPD.

Proponents of fusion legislation argue that capacity, as the test for
involuntary treatment, is a functional test, i.e. a particular ability
at a particular time, and therefore not directly linked to diagnosis or
disability. However, the MCA retains a ‘diagnostic’ element; the person
is unable to make a decision because of an impairment of, or a
disturbance in, the functioning of the mind or brain. It therefore
arguably still fails to satisfy Article 14 (1) (b) of the CRPD.
Nevertheless, the MCA is fully compliant with the ECHR, and its strong
rights- and principles-based ethos moves the legislation significantly
towards CRPD compliance.

.. _S3:

Content of the MCA
==================

The MCA revokes the MHO for those aged 16 and over and puts common law
into statute.

.. _S4:

Capacity test
-------------

Statutory decision-making will come into play when a person lacks
capacity. There is a presumption that the person has capacity, there
must be no unjustified assumptions based on age, appearance or
condition, there must be a respect for decisions even if unwise, the
person must be given all practical help and support, and the act must
always be in the person's best interests.

There are two tests to be satisfied in reaching a decision about a
person's decision-making capacity: a diagnostic test – there must be an
impairment of, or a disturbance in, the functioning of the mind or
brain, and;a functional test – the person is unable to understand the
information relevant to the decision, to retain the information long
enough to make the decision, to appreciate the relevance of that
information and use or weigh the information as part of the process of
making that decision, and communicate the decision. There must be a
causal link between the two tests – the person is unable to make a
decision because of impairment or disturbance in the brain or mind.

Looking at the functional test, the specific difference between this and
other definitions of lack of capacity is the use of the word
‘appreciate’. The consultation document\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` emphasises the
importance of the inclusion of the appreciation element: its inclusion
moves a decision about capacity from a purely cognitive test (p. 13,
para. 2.22). The consultation document gives as an example: ‘A person
whose insight is distorted by their illness or a person suffering from
delusional thinking as a result of their illness may not, therefore,
meet this element of the test’ (p. 13, para. 2.22).\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

.. _S5:

Protection from liability
-------------------------

The legislation puts into statute the common-law definition of necessity
and protects the person (D) doing the act from liability if D takes
reasonable steps to establish whether the person (P) lacks capacity in
relation to the matter in question and D reasonably believes that it is
in P's best interests for the act to be done. There is therefore a shift
in emphasis from the MHO, which confers statutory powers, to a situation
where non-consensual intervention is predicated on protection from
liability for D.

.. _S6:

Future decision-making
----------------------

The Act includes a robust lasting powers of attorney system. A lasting
powers of attorney must be registered with the Office of Public Guardian
before being activated and extends to health and welfare decisions, when
the attorney reasonable believes that the person lacks capacity and must
always act in the person's best interests.

In addition, advance decisions to refuse treatment must be complied
with, if valid and applicable under common law. This means that an
effective advance decision to refuse treatment for a mental disorder (or
indeed any disorder) cannot be overridden, if made when P had capacity.
However, the Act allows that, if there is doubt, D will be protected
from liability if he or she gives life-sustaining treatment or treatment
required to prevent a serious deterioration in P's condition. Advance
decisions were not put into statute in order for the courts to continue
to develop the law in the light of the MCA.

.. _S7:

Safeguards
----------

The Act provides for a proportionate increase in the number of
safeguards that must be met if D is to be protected from liability as
the seriousness of the interventions or acts being done to P increases.
These additional safeguards must be met in addition to the general
safeguards.

-  For acts of restraint, D must reasonably believe that there is a risk
   of harm to P, and that the act of restraint is proportionate to the
   likelihood and seriousness of that harm.

-  For serious interventions or treatment with serious consequences,
   there must be a formal assessment of capacity and a written statement
   of incapacity by a suitably qualified person, and a nominated person
   must be in place, who should be consulted and whose views should be
   taken into account. Serious interventions include, but are not
   limited to, serious treatment for physical illness, any intervention
   that causes the person serious distress or serious side-effects,
   affects seriously the options that will be available to P in the
   future or has a serious effect on his/her day-to-day life. The
   decision whether or not an act is a serious intervention or treatment
   with serious consequences rests with D. However, some acts are always
   serious interventions. These are: (a) deprivation of liberty, (b)
   attendance for certain treatments requirement and (c) community
   residence requirement.

-  Certain serious interventions must be authorised by a trust panel.
   These include acts (a), (b) and (c) above, or the act is the
   provision of treatment with serious consequences and the nominated
   person objects, P resists or it is being done while the person is
   being deprived of their liberty.

-  For attendance for certain treatment requirements, D must reasonably
   believe that failure to impose the requirement would be more likely
   than not to result in P not receiving the treatment.

-  For community residence requirements, the prevention of harm
   condition must be met.

The trust panel will be made up of three persons with relevant
expertise. The application will be made by a ‘prescribed person’ and
must include a medical report and a care plan. The statutory criteria
will differ depending on the measure for which authorisation is being
sought.

-  For treatment with serious consequences when the act amounts to a
   deprivation of liberty, the ‘prevention of serious harm’ condition
   must be met. D must reasonably believe that failure to detain P in
   circumstances amounting to a deprivation of liberty would create a
   risk of serious harm to P or serious physical harm to others, and the
   detention of P is a proportionate response to the likelihood of harm
   and the seriousness of the harm concerned.

-  For attendance for certain treatment requirements, D must reasonably
   believe that failure to impose the requirement would be more likely
   than not to result in the person not receiving the treatment.

-  For community residence requirements, the ‘prevention of harm’
   condition must be met.

-  For compulsory treatment with serious consequences against the wishes
   of the nominated person, the ‘prevention of serious harm’ condition
   must be met.

A second opinion is required when the act is the provision of
electroconvulsive therapy or is a treatment with serious consequences
where the question of best interests is finely balanced, or is the
continuation of medication beyond 3 months (if the medication is
treatment with serious consequences) when the person is an in-patient or
in a care home, or is subject to requirements to attend for treatment in
the community.

The Act provides for the provision of an independent mental capacity
advocate (IMCA). An IMCA must be in place when the Act requires an act
to be authorised or, although not requiring authorisation, is a serious
compulsory intervention. The role of the IMCA is to support and
represent P; the IMCA must be consulted but is not a decision maker.

Where an authorisation has been granted, an application can be made to a
review tribunal in respect of the authorisation. This provides a
judicial review of the decision to ensure that it has been made in
accordance with the law and that the criteria for the authorisation have
been met. Applications to the tribunal can be made by P and the
nominated person. Cases may also be referred to the tribunal by the
Department of Health, the Attorney General or the High Court. The trust
must refer to tribunals when authorisation has been extended for 1 year
(for those aged 16–17) or 2 years (for those aged 18 or over).

The clauses describing the additional safeguards to be put in place do
not apply when the situation is an emergency. D is protected from
liability if there is a reasonable belief that delay would create an
unacceptable risk of harm to P. However, D is expected to take
reasonable steps to ensure that the safeguard is met by the relevant
time.

.. _S8:

Children and young people
=========================

The Act cannot be applied to children under the age of 16 because it
puts into statute the common law presumption of capacity. For those aged
16–17, the MCA will operate alongside the Children (Northern Ireland)
Order 1995, and additional safeguards will be put in place. The original
MHO will continue to be in place for the small number of under-16s who
require compulsory assessment/treatment in hospital for mental disorder.
This has been the subject of some controversy; if the current
legislation is discriminatory and stigmatising, it is difficult to argue
for its continued use in one particular group. It has been argued that a
legislative framework for those under 16 must be brought forward. This
will be a difficult task, not least because a capacity-based framework
will have to grapple with the complex question of emerging capacity in
young people. The government has indicated that their intention is that
there will eventually be legislation for those under 16, but at present,
this is some way off.

.. _S9:

Criminal justice provisions
===========================

There are new disposal options following a finding of unfitness to plead
or insanity, including public protection orders (PPOs) and supervision
and assessment orders. There are powers to remand an accused person to
hospital, to transfer prisoners to hospital for treatment, for interim
detention orders and for immediate hospital direction on conviction.
Although the MCA contains powers for involuntary admission to hospital
in various circumstances, treatment decisions are based on capacity to
consent and subject to the core provisions of the Act. This means that
there are circumstances under which a person can be admitted to hospital
against their capacitous wishes; however, they cannot be treated against
their capacitous wishes.

New criteria form the basis for entry into the criminal justice
provisions. A ‘disorder’, a ‘disorder requiring treatment’ and ‘an
impairment of, or disturbance in, the functioning of the offender's mind
or brain’ replace mental illness and severe mental impairment. A
disorder is broadly defined to include any disorder or disability,
whether mental or physical: a disorder requires treatment if any of its
symptoms or manifestations could be alleviated or prevented from
worsening by treatment.

A person can be remanded to hospital if the medical report condition or
the treatment condition are met. The medical report condition is that
the person has or may have a disorder, that a report should be made into
that person's condition, that an assessment would be impracticable in
custody, and that it would be practicable to assess the person in
hospital. The treatment condition is that the person has a disorder
requiring treatment, that failure to provide in-patient treatment would
‘more likely than not’ result in serious physical or psychological harm
to the accused person or serious physical harm to others, and that
remanding the person to hospital would be likely to result in
significantly better clinical outcomes.

PPOs replace hospital orders. A PPO can be made when detention
conditions are met. These are that: ‘there is an impairment of, or a
disturbance in, the offender's mind or brain’, that ‘appropriate care
and treatment is available’, that dealing with the person without
detention ‘would create a risk, linked to the impairment or disturbance,
of serious physical or psychological harm to others’ and that depriving
the person of their liberty would be a proportionate response to the
likelihood and seriousness of that harm. Restrictions may be added where
the restriction conditions are met.

A prisoner can be transferred to hospital where they have a disorder
requiring treatment, failure to provide treatment would be ‘more likely
than not’ to result in serious harm to the person or serious physical
harm to others, and appropriate treatment is available.

Patients admitted to hospital under the MCA criminal justice provisions
will remain there following tribunal only if the ‘prevention of serious
harm’ condition is met. The criteria for the ‘prevention of serious
harm’ condition differ for those subject to PPO and for transferred
prisoners or those subject to hospital direction. The criteria for those
subject to PPO are: the person has ‘an impairment of, or a disturbance
in, the functioning of the mind or brain’;releasing the person would
create a risk of serious harm to others; anddepriving the person of
their liberty is proportionate to the likelihood and seriousness of the
risk.

The criteria for transferred prisoners or those subject to hospital
direction are: the person has the disorder for which they were
transferred;effective treatment can be given; andit is ‘more likely than
not’ that discharging the person to prison would result in serious harm
to the person or serious physical harm to others.

.. _S10:

Discussion
==========

The MCA is unique in that it repeals separate mental health legislation,
replacing it with a single piece of legislation applicable across all
medical specialisms and social care, whereby involuntary treatment is
only permitted when the person (a) has impairment of decision-making
capacity and (b) the intervention proposed is in the person's best
interests.

The arguments for and against replacing conventional mental health
legislation with a law based on capacity have been well rehearsed in a
recent debate.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`

The removal of mental health legislation that makes decisions about
involuntary treatment based on diagnosis and risk will require a
significant change in practice for professionals working in mental
health in Northern Ireland. It is somewhat ironic that such a radical
piece of legislation, based on non-discrimination, is being introduced
in a jurisdiction that spends the lowest proportion of its health budget
on mental health of any UK nation.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

The Act must work across a wide and diverse range of settings – care
homes, mental health services (both in-patient and community) and
general hospitals. It will affect staff who have little previous
knowledge or experience of the principles behind capacity assessment. It
is therefore imperative that a comprehensive training and supervision
programme is put in place, which will have considerable resource
implications.

The inclusion of the ‘appreciation’ element introduces a difference in
the definition of capacity in the MCA compared with that used in other
jurisdictions. The addition of the ‘appreciation’ element moves the
definition of capacity away from purely cognitive terms towards the
concept of capacity being affected by factors such as emotional
colouring, delusions and lack of insight.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Because of
this difference, it cannot be assumed that studies that have
demonstrated the reliability of capacity assessments\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`
will automatically apply in the case of the MCA. The reliability of the
use of capacity assessments using this definition of capacity in routine
clinical mental health practice requires to be evaluated.

The shift away from compulsory intervention based on in-patient
treatment when a particular threshold of risk is reached may facilitate
earlier intervention and allow for a proportionate response across a
wide range of treatment and care settings. On the other hand, there is a
more widely expressed concern that capacity legislation may delay
appropriate treatment.

Trust panels can authorise a very wide range of interventions. As health
and social care professionals work under the principle of beneficence,
there is a risk of ‘slippage’, with staff making decisions about
impaired capacity based on a person making foolish or unwise choices.
This could lead to the unintended consequence of the Act leading to a
greater rather than a lesser restriction of a person's autonomy and
self-determination.

There is a plethora of issues that could potentially affect clinical
practice; for example, exactly what constitutes serious interventions,
how to manage fluctuating capacity, the question of decision-making
capacity in patients with personality disorder, patients who retain
capacity but present a risk to self or others, and the potential
conflict between human rights (especially the right to life) and
autonomy. Some of these issues may be addressed by the code of practice,
others may be left to clinicians or courts.

.. _S11:

Conclusions
===========

Fusion legislation (of which the MCA is an example) is a radical change
in the approach to involuntary psychiatric treatment. It is an exciting
and innovative development and there are substantial potential benefits,
including the reduction of stigma, the protection of patient autonomy,
and the removal of confusing parallel mental health and mental capacity
legislation. It is also more compliant with CRPD and ECHR. Much of the
practical impact of the MCA depends on the development of a
comprehensive code of practice and the provision of a comprehensive
training and supervision programme. In addition, as Szmukler & Kelly
have pointed out,\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` the gathering of data on its
implementation is vital and the MCA must be subject to a rigorous and
comprehensive evaluation.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

.. [1]
   **Dr Gerard Lynch**, MD, FRCPsych, Chair, Royal College of
   Psychiatrists in Northern Ireland, and locum consultant psychiatrist,
   Northern Health and Social Care Trust. **Dr CatherineTaggart**, MB,
   MRCPsych, LLM, consultant in liaison psychiatry, Belfast Health and
   Social Care Trust. **Dr Philip Campbell**, LLM, MRCPsych, locum
   consultant forensic psychiatrist, Belfast Health and Social Care
   Trust.
