================
Irving Gottesman
================
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: American psychologist and behaviour geneticist who radically changed traditional views of schizophrenia
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Peter McGuffin
:Date: 2017-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 124f1
   :alt: Irving Gottesman used a register of twins at the Maudsley and
   Bethlem Royal hospitals in London for his study of schizophrenia.
   Photograph: Lisa Miller, University of
   Minnesota/`theguardian.com <theguardian.com>`__
   :name: F1

   Irving Gottesman used a register of twins at the Maudsley and Bethlem
   Royal hospitals in London for his study of schizophrenia. Photograph:
   Lisa Miller, University of
   Minnesota/`theguardian.com <theguardian.com>`__

The research and writings of the clinical psychologist and behaviour
geneticist Irving Gottesman, who has died aged 85, radically changed the
way psychologists and psychiatrists think about schizophrenia and, more
generally, about what Irv called the ‘origins of madness’ (which was the
subtitle of his 1991 book Schizophrenia Genesis).

His path to becoming a dominant figure in psychiatric genetics began at
an international conference in 1961 when, as a psychology lecturer at
Harvard University, he was introduced to Eliot Slater, director of the
Medical Research Council (MRC) psychiatric genetics unit at the
Institute of Psychiatry in London, and the doyen of psychiatric genetics
of his day.

Slater agreed that Irv might join his unit provided he brought his own
funding. Irv duly won a three-year grant from the US National Institutes
of Health (NIH) and arrived in London in 1963. Slater was an austere and
imposing figure and the building that housed his unit was equally
austere, a makeshift postwar prefabricated building, affectionately
known by staff as ‘the hut’, on the fringe of the campus of the Maudsley
hospital in Camberwell. Although its physical environment was poor, the
unit had much intellectual capital, provided by Slater himself, his
deputy director Valerie Cowie, a psychiatrist trained in the new
techniques of cytogenetics, and a brilliant if self-effacing senior
research assistant, Jerry Shields.

The hut also housed another world-class asset, the Maudsley Twin
Register. Begun by Slater in 1948, it contained the names of all
patients entering the Maudsley and Bethlem Royal hospitals who had been
born a twin. Irv's successful NIH proposal was for a study of
schizophrenia using the register and Slater paired him with Shields to
carry out the work.

The principle of the classic twin method is straight-forward. Identical
or monozygotic (MZ) twins share all their genes, whereas fraternal or
dizygotic (DZ) twins share half their genes. MZ and DZ twins usually
share the environment in which they are raised. Therefore if a disorder
such as schizophrenia shows greater co-occurrence (‘concordance’) in MZ
versus DZ twins this is evidence of a genetic effect. Similarly, absence
of 100% concordance in MZ twins is evidence of environmental effects.
The Gottesman-Shields Twin Study (1967) clearly confirmed the
proposition that both genes and environment play a role in schizophrenia
(at a time when theorists in the US and Britain were blaming parents,
particularly mothers, for ‘causing’ the disorder).

One of Irv and Jerry's major contributions was to propose a plausible
mode of inheritance for schizophrenia. One of the big puzzles about
familial common diseases at the time was that none (including physical
disorders such as heart disease, diabetes, some cancers) showed the
simple ratios of affected:unaffected within families predicted by
Mendel's laws.

The most widely accepted solution for schizophrenia was Slater's model
invoking the idea of a dominant gene with ‘incomplete penetrance’ (some
people carry the gene but do not show the disorder). Irv and Jerry
boldly proposed an alternative polygenic model, derived from the work of
the Edinburgh mathematical geneticist DS (Douglas) Falconer, in which
liability to develop schizophrenia has a normal ‘bell-shaped’
distribution in the population (like height or weight) contributed to by
many genes. But, unlike height or weight, there is a threshold effect,
so that only the 1% or so of the population with the highest liability
show the disorder.

The Gottesman-Shields polygenic model of schizophrenia eventually gained
ascendancy, even though the final clinching piece of evidence emerged
only in 2014 with the publication of a huge genome-wide molecular study
of tens of thousands of subjects showing that more than 100 genes are
involved.

Another far-reaching conceptual innovation was their idea of
‘endophenotypes’. Irv and Jerry proposed in their 1972 book,
Schizophrenia and Genetics, that the genetic basis of psychiatric
disorders could be better understood, and specific genes more readily
identified, by the discovery of biological characteristics that lie a
step closer to DNA than the clinically observable symptoms and signs,
the ‘exophenotypes’, by which disorders are defined. Irv continued to
elaborate the endophenotype concept over ensuing years and it provoked
thousands of papers by others, a sort of Higgs boson for biological
psychiatry. Unlike the Higgs particle, the existence of endophenotypes
has yet to be proved experimentally for any of the major disorders.

Irv was born in Cleveland, Ohio, to Hungarian-Romanian Jewish emigre
parents, Bernard, an insurance agent, and Virginia (nee Weitzner). He
was a science enthusiast from an early age and began a physics degree
while serving as an officer in the US navy, later switching to
psychology. He completed his PhD at the University of Minnesota on the
genetics of personality but initially had great difficulty in getting
his findings published because of the prevailing orthodoxy in US
academia in the late 1950s that behaviour was entirely due to nurture
and nothing to do with nature.

After his postdoctoral fellowship in London, Irv returned in 1966 to the
biology-friendly department of psychology in Minneapolis and set up one
of the first behaviour genetics training programmes in the US. He
thereafter held chairs in Washington University in St Louis (1980–85),
where I first came under his mentorship as a visiting MRC fellow, and at
the University of Virginia (1986–2001), where he set up a clinical
psychology doctorate, before returning to Minnesota, where he remained
for the rest of his career.

He won many plaudits and prizes worldwide but retained particular
affection for and gratitude to the UK, where his recent awards included
honorary fellowship of the Royal College of Psychiatrists and King's
College London.

Irv is survived by his wife, Carol (nee Applen), whom he married in
1970, and their sons, Adam and David, and grandchildren, Josh, Ava and
Fiona.

Irving Isadore Gottesman, clinical psychologist and geneticist, born 29
December 1930; died 29 June 2016
