=========================================
Anthony Carl (Tony) Kaeser FRCP, FRCPsych
=========================================
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: Consultant in Old Age Psychiatry, Basildon sector, Thameside Community Healthcare NHS Trust
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Mike Lowe
:Date: 2017-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 58f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

Tony Kaeser, who recently died aged 84, was one of the pioneer
consultant psychiatrists who from the 1960s onwards developed
departments of psychological medicine in district general hospitals at
the time when long-stay mental asylums were being phased out. In the
years following his appointment in 1969 as a general adult psychiatrist
to Runwell Hospital, he was involved in innumerable planning meetings
with the then North East Thames Regional Health Authority to advance the
new purpose-built department of psychological medicine at Basildon
District General Hospital. This was eventually opened in 1977. It was
Tony's attention to detail which improved the ward day areas for the
patients â€“ initially they were going to look out on to industrial sites,
but with some reconfiguring of the layout the views were transformed to
field and countryside vistas.

In the 1980's Tony was appointed convenor for training approval visits
for the East Anglian Division of the Royal College of Psychiatrists. He
provided liaison psychiatry services at Basildon District General
Hospital and was the consultant psychiatrist for the Regional Plastic
Surgery and Burns Unit at St. Andrew's Hospital, Billericay for 11
years. He was Chairman of the Basildon General Hospital District
Consultant Staff Committee. For the last 7 years of his career he chose
to work full time in psychogeriatrics. Despite his heavy clinical load,
his professional services were extended willingly to staff and their
families from all areas of the National Health Service (NHS) in South
Essex.

He was a Foundation member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists. The
College recognised his abilities by inviting him in 1984 to act as
convenor leading the first team to visit the large Hong Kong training
scheme. Shortly before retiring, Tony became a General Medical Council
Examiner for doctors with health problems and for a number of years in
retirement was one of two Lord Chancellor's Visitors for England. He was
also an Area Visitor for the Royal Medical Benevolent Fund until he
reached their retirement age.

Tony was born in London in 1932. He qualified at St. Mary's Hospital in
1957 and after house jobs in general medicine he obtained the MRCP and
entered the Maudsley training scheme. After obtaining the DPM he was
appointed senior registrar at the Maudsley and Institute of Psychiatry.
From there he was appointed consultant psychiatrist to Runwell Hospital.

A gentle, kindly, impressively ethical doctor, he was considered in his
thinking and conversation but precise, soundly analytical and
unfailingly wise. His manners to everyone he encountered were impeccable
and right to the end he retained his genuine interest in people. When he
became ill himself, he wanted to know about the lives of his carers.

His personal life was varied and fulfilling. He inherited his father's
stamp collection. He loved a wide range of music and enjoyed playing his
pianola. He joined in regular contract Bridge sessions with medical
colleagues throughout his career and retirement, and these only came to
an end 4 years before his death. Tony had a great sense of fun and
participated in the staff Christmas show for patients. His performances
in playing the femme fatale were such a success that he resigned himself
to being typecast. He took delight in the achievements of the members of
his family. His wife Wendy was an NHS health visitor and they had 2
children and 6 grandchildren, one of whom is a dancer with the Royal
Ballet.

In the latter years of his retirement he experienced gradually declining
health. He had been diagnosed with a rare hereditary form of amyloid
heart disease and although his cognitive faculties were largely
undiminished, progressive cardiac failure slowly developed and he died
on 18 May 2016. In line with his commitment to humanistic principles,
Tony donated his body tissues for the benefit of others and his brain
for research into amyloid disease.
