====================================================================
Service user perspectives on coercion and restraint in mental health
====================================================================



Diana Rose
Emma Perry
Sarah Rae
Naomi Good
:Date: 2017-8-01

:Abstract:
   Coercion remains a central aspect of many people’s mental healthcare.
   It can include the use of legislation to restrict freedoms, the use
   of physical restraint, the restriction of freedom of movement and/or
   association, and the forced or covert administration of medication.
   There is good evidence that the use of such measures can traumatise
   service users. This article reports the findings of a survey of
   service users regarding their experiences of coercion and restraint
   and embeds this in the wider international and institutional
   environment.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Most jurisdictions in the industrialised West promulgate mental health
legislation which permits infringement of liberty and treatment against
the will of the person detained. Increasingly, coercion in the community
is also allowed. Partly at the behest of the World Health Organization,
other countries are developing similar legislation. This ability to
compel and coerce is unique in medicine and, from within psychiatry, has
been called discriminatory (Dawson & Szmukler, 2006) and criticised for
the focus on risk.

Dealing first with the United Nations’ 2006 Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and its implications for coercion and
compulsion globally, this article summarises what is known about service
users’ responses to coercion and compulsion, which includes chemical,
physical and mechanical restraint. Responding to the paucity of studies
focusing specifically on physical restraint (which is commonly followed
by chemical restraint), this article reports on recent experiences of
people subject to this practice in the UK while situating this in more
general concerns.

.. _s1:

The CRPD
========

The CRPD appears to be top of the agenda for service user movements
everywhere except the UK. The European Network for (ex) Users and
Survivors of Psychiatry (ENUSP) has provided a point-by-point
explanation of how European human rights legislation is in breach of the
CRPD and the World Network (WNUSP) was involved in drawing up the
Convention itself. It is important as it is the first time that people
‘with psychosocial disabilities’ have been recognised as equal in law to
other citizens in terms of rights.

But the Convention is controversial, particularly since the publication
of the General Comment on Article 12, which states that all persons with
disabilities must be deemed to have legal capacity all of the time. This
intensifies the commitment in Article 14 to abolish compulsory detention
and treatment by doing away with the last criterion on which it could be
justified. The General Comment has drawn the ire of leading Western
psychiatrists (Freeman *et al*, 2015). The debate is also not settled
within service user circles, as shown by the different positions of Tina
Minkowitz and Anne Plumb (see Spandler *et al*, 2015).

.. _s2:

Global South
============

The CRPD language of ‘persons with psychosocial disabilities’ has also
had important implications in the Global South. There is a move from the
terms ‘user/survivor’ to ‘persons with psychosocial disabilities’. For
example, the Pan African Network of Users and Survivors of Psychiatry is
now the Pan African Network of Persons with Psychosocial Disabilities. A
similar move has been counselled in India (Davar, 2013). This is not
simply a change in language but a political position that states ‘we
don’t have psychiatry and don’t want it’.

An Indonesian government programme, Aceh Free Pasung, intends to protect
the human rights of people with severe mental illness by eliminating the
practice of *pasung* from the province. *Pasung* means restraint by
shackles, rope, wooden stocks and cages, and can cause death. Since the
alternative was the building of a mental health hospital, the initiative
has enabled access to free hospital treatment (Minas *et al*, 2011). Its
replacement with neuroleptics, restraint and hospital confinement is
nevertheless problematic.

.. _s3:

Industrialised West
===================

Decisions about coercion often hinge on the concept of risk. Recent
evidence suggests that risk assessments exclude service users from the
discussion and render invisible the fact that the assessments are more
or less fictions in actuarial terms (Coffey *et al*, 2017).

How risk of harm within mental health settings is perceived and managed
has received attention. However, harm in the context of restraint is
mostly not recognised. Nonetheless, restraint-related deaths have been
reported throughout the Western world, including in the UK, where 38
deaths have been recorded since 1988, 15 of people from Black and
Minority Ethnic (BME) communities (Aiken *et al*, 2011). A qualitative
study of in-patients showed that nurses and patients had very different
accounts of both the determinants of and appropriate responses to
violence and aggression (Rose *et al*, 2015).

Reviewing evidence of the effects of restraint, Cusack *et al* (2016)
concluded that ‘restraint can be a form of abuse, its inappropriate use
often being a consequence of fear, neglect and lack of using
de-escalation techniques’.

A small pilot study by the National Survivor User Network (NSUN), as yet
unpublished, surveyed 65 people about their experiences of restraint and
recruited respondents mainly through the weekly e-bulletin. The findings
align with Strout’s (2010) integrative review of the international
qualitative literature on patient perspectives on the use of restraint.
Strout identifies four categories: negative psychological impact,
re-traumatisation, perceptions of unethical practices, and the broken
spirit. Of the respondents surveyed in the NSUN study, 43% (*n* =28)
stated that their most recent experience of restraint had felt like an
act of aggression ‘a great deal’, 12% (*n* = 8) ‘a lot’ and 15% (*n*
=10) ‘somewhat’. Although the number was small, all respondents from BME
communities (*n* =5) stated that their experience had felt like an act
of aggression ‘a great deal’ or ‘a lot’. Respondents frequently cited
the unnecessary use of physical force and the number of staff members
who were involved in each incident of restraint. The most frequent
reason for restraint given by respondents was the refusal to take
medication, and physical restraint was routinely followed by a rapid
tranquillising injection. This was often experienced as shaming and
humiliating:

   When I become agitated it is very obviously extreme fear and terror.
   On each occasion it is ALWAYS male staff pinning me down – always
   face down so [I] can’t breathe or move and who pull my underwear
   off/down to inject. They know the abuse history – it has been a
   police case. They never have talked to me afterwards. It is like
   being raped again.

One clear theme was the link between instances of physical restraint and
tranquillisation with retraumatisation. Consistent with studies of
women’s experience of restraint representing an event that re-enacts the
experience of trauma and sexual abuse, Gallop *et al* (1999) found that
restraint and associated feelings of humiliation, punishment and
powerlessness engendered traumatic emotional reactions such as fear,
anxiety and rage.

Half of the respondents stated that experiencing physical restraint had
affected their engagement with services ‘a great deal’. The majority
reported a loss of trust in staff, and increased fear, suspicion and
wariness. Others reported that they avoided services because of their
experiences.

The Promise study (Wilson *et al*, 2015), which informs the development
of a proactive care framework to reduce the need for physical
intervention, involved interviews with both staff and patients. The most
dominant theme to emerge centred on staff–patient communication and
relationships, with 11 patients and 19 staff members providing
suggestions:

   if you wish to reduce the number of restraints a high level of
   communication is needed whatever the issues of a particular patient,
   whatever their predisposition to violence or hatred of psychiatric
   staff, or factions within the resident group, or dislikes of a
   particular patient. In an ideal world there must be more verbal
   communication … the culture is to encourage what Winston Churchill
   used to say was a ‘jaw jaw rather than war war’, to counsel and
   support a person onto a different state of thinking. (Wilson *et al*,
   2015)

.. _s4:

Conclusion: minimising coercion and restraint
=============================================

In the NSUN study, 94% (*n* =50) of respondents reported that restraint
could have been managed very differently, emphasising that if staff had
taken the time to listen and to speak to them addressing fears,
frustrations and concerns, the situation could have been avoided.
Respondents said that staff needed better training and that service
users should be involved in this.

No differences were found in the experiences of restraint occurring
within the past 10 years compared with the past 2 years. Of the NSUN
respondents, 40% (*n* = 23) reported incidents of restraint that
occurred within the past 2 years, suggesting no recent improvement in
experiences of restraint. These findings signal that the 2-year UK
government programme ‘Positive and Safe’, launched in 2014 with the goal
of reducing the need for physical restraint (Department of Health,
2014), has had no impact to date and that a fundamental culture change
is needed. This directive was followed by an investigation involving the
facedown restraint of a woman eight and a half months pregnant in July
2016 (*Mental Health Today*, 2016).

There are various arguments for reducing coercion and restraint and many
different approaches that service users say they find more beneficial.
Since 2007 the Mental Health Act in England has made it mandatory for
advocacy to be practised by professionals alone, although the service
user voice is not completely absent (Newbigging *et al*, 2015). It will
be important to regain and strengthen the user voice within peer and
self-advocacy, as has happened in Africa (Kleintjes *et al*, 2013).

Joint crisis plans or advance directives are counselled by many as a
means of reducing incidents of restraint and of listening to the needs
of service users (Papageorgiou *et al*, 2002; Amering *et al*, 2005).
Approaches that include peer facilitators and improvements to the
frequency and quality of communications are crucial. Some existing
institutional systems make good communication a practical impossibility.

From the perspective of service users, coercion and restraint are mostly
harmful and must stop being legitimised. There is an urgent need to
challenge and address these practices as they represent gross human
rights violations according to the stipulations of the CRPD. UK
compliance with the legislation is due to be monitored in the next 2
years.

.. _s5:

*Conflict of interest*. No authors have any conflicts of interest to
declare.
