==================================================================
The Psychedelic Policy Quagmire: Health, Law, Freedom, and Society
==================================================================



Adam G. Van Hagen [1]_

:date: 2017-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The resurgence of psychedelic research has opened up a new realm of
possibilities in consciousness research. However, public policy
surrounding the use of psychedelics has struggled to acknowledge that
they may be effective therapeutic treatments or tools for enhancing
self-awareness and exploring consciousness. Highlighting the need for
redress, this anthology argues that current international public policy
is not scientifically or culturally informed and is thus divorced from
the empirical evidence that is supposed to inform its construction and
implementation.

The book examines the complex policy issues surrounding
psychedelic-based healing modalities and calls for an urgent shift in
policy regulating the research and application of psychedelic
substances. At its core, it is a scathing criticism of legal frameworks
and regulatory policies that control the use of and research on
psychedelics, and goes so far as to suggest that current structures and
mechanisms impose a status quo of consciousness, thereby preventing
people from fully enacting their right to freedom of religion, thought
and conscience. At the very least, policy makers and ethicists need to
give due attention to medical and psychotherapeutic research on
psychedelics and the role they have in facilitating direct spiritual
experiences. This includes acknowledging the transformative effect that
experience may have on the self, as well as the right of all people to
freedom of religion, thought and conscience.

Any book that rates these substances highly as a connection between the
individual, society and the human race as a whole will find its
detractors. That being said, *The Psychedelic Policy Quagmire* presents
a strong case for the notion that psychedelics have transcended
seemingly outdated legal, academic, cultural and spiritual paradigms.
Although – by the editors' own admission – this volume is by no means
definitive, it will undoubtedly prove to be a lightning rod in the
academic community. With its focus on research and policy that maximise
the benefits of the use of psychedelics, reduce the potential dangers of
misuse and remove impediments to achieving these ends, it is inevitable
that this book will be a catalyst for lively and robust debate.
Recommended to academics and researchers in various fields, including
psychology, psychiatry, anthropology and the arts, this work should
challenge many long-held assumptions about these fascinating substances.

.. [1]
   **Adam G. Van Hagen**, Harm reduction coordinator, Afrikaburn
   Sanctuary Community of practice, Cape Town, South Africa; email:
   adam.van.h@gmail.com
