---
author:
- Julia Bland[^1]
date: 2017-8
references:
- id: R1
- id: R2
- id: R3
- id: R4
- id: R5
- id: R6
- id: R7
- id: R8
- id: R9
- id: R10
- id: R11
- id: R12
title: "Scottish independence: the view of psychiatry from Edinburgh"
---

![](234f1){#F1}

As a southerner and medical psychotherapist, it was with some
trepidation that I 'Ubered' to Professor Eve Johnstone\'s house in
Edinburgh, which boasts over a hundred roses in her immaculate garden.
After all, I was going to meet the woman whose research work had
wrenched the pendulum radically in the direction of biological
psychiatry, with her landmark *Lancet* paper^1^ showing anatomical
differences on CT scans between the brains of those with and without
schizophrenia. I feared that she ate psychotherapists for breakfast,
although she had sounded kind and friendly on the telephone. My anxiety
was misplaced, since the person who emerged was a woman of fierce
intelligence, with rigorous, idealistic, uncompromising and wholly
admirable moral standards; compassionate and committed to patients and
science, without any personal vanity, unless you include intellectual
certainty.

Professor Johnstone is not a postmodern relativist: her life has indeed
been a life scientific. For her this is seamless: the scientific truth
is what leads to effective and therefore optimal treatment. She has
never given interviews before, owing to a self-deprecating Scottish
horror of self-publicity, but agreed to speak now as a retired
professor.

Eve Cordelia Johnstone, 'Scottish neuroscientist', is the eighth
generation of Glaswegian Presbyterian doctors, but the first woman
doctor in her family. She laughed gently at my southern ignorance in
asking about Catholicism in Glasgow: of course the Catholics were often
of Irish origin, poor, poorly educated and discriminated against. No
chance of eight generations of doctors then. (In fact, her father was a
dentist because his serious deafness made medicine impossible.)

She remembered vividly the poverty and overcrowding in Glasgow, the
worst in the UK at the time. One of her first patients on medical take
was an exhausted woman presenting with open tuberculosis, a urinary
tract infection and a haemoglobin of 8, who arrived late at night, after
three jobs that day: scrubbing steps, cleaning offices, then washing
dishes. 'Had she ever been to the hospital before?' I ask. 'Yes, to be
sterilised after having 13 children.' The woman was 35 and looked 20
years older. Infant mortality was 28/1000 in Glasgow at this time,
compared with about 6/1000 now.

Born in 1944, the young Eve was sent to an academic private Presbyterian
girls\' school and was an obvious high flyer. This remained the case:
she qualified in medicine in Glasgow in 1967. As a woman medical
student, she was one of a 20% maximum quota. Most of her female
contemporaries ended up doing a bit of part-time practice rather than
working 'in a serious capacity', as she put it.

As a clinical researcher who looked after patients with scrupulous care,
she is proud of having been supported by the Medical Research Council
(MRC) continuously for 33 years, which is almost unprecedented. She did
research at Northwick Park in Harrow from 1974 until 1989, and was
Professor and Head of Department of Psychiatry at the University of
Edinburgh from 1989 until 2010. She has a reputation in Edinburgh for
supporting younger psychiatrists, although she has no time for slacking
(or striking, as a doctor): 'I worked 12 hours a day, it was what I
expected'.

# The struggle for schizophrenia {#S1}

In 2016 it may be hard to remember the climate in which the 1976
*Lancet* paper landed.^1^ Debate on the origin and meaning of mental
illness was in the international public domain. The flamboyant R. D.
Laing, a fellow Scot, was describing psychosis as a sane response to an
insane society, chiming perfectly with the other social and sexual
revolutions in progress.^2^ Thomas Szasz published *The Myth of Mental
Illness* in the same year, depicting psychiatrists (and all other
doctors) as agents of social control.^3^ In 1975 Milo≈° Forman\'s *One
Flew over the Cuckoo\'s Nest* portrayed the excesses of medicalisation,
incarceration and psychosurgery.^4^ A famous study emerged in the USA in
1973, showing how journalists going to the emergency room complaining of
'hearing' three words in their heads attracted the diagnosis of
schizophrenia.^5^ This massively discredited conventional psychiatric
diagnosis. In the UK, David Cooper published *The Death of the Family*
(1971), describing the family as the crucible of mental illness, and
coined the term 'anti-psychiatry'.^6^ The now discredited and
mother-blaming notion of the 'schizophrenogenic mother' was widely held.

So just imagine the hostile reaction that a paper showing anatomical
changes in schizophrenia would receive. As Professor Johnstone
remembers: 'There was all this anti-psychiatry stuff \[...\] People were
saying schizophrenia didn\'t exist \[...\] I had to prove my opponents
wrong.' As she reminisces today, it is not difficult to detect her
contrarian relish for the battle: Professor Johnstone had no time for
these theories. 'There were 200 000 people in hospital with
schizophrenia \[... \] what did they think they were there for?' she
asks incredulously. It was also the time that John Wing had written
about the phenomenon of institutionalisation,^7,8^ although she points
out 'he never claimed that the institutions were the cause of the
illness'.

In her own mind, Professor Johnstone was crystal clear: "'I felt it had
to be that this was a disease, but I couldn\'t prove it \[...\] and then
the non-invasive method of CT scanning came in. I was lucky. Before that
people had to do pneumoencephalography (injecting air into the
ventricles and X-raying them, resulting in terrible headaches and
worse), so there were no controls because of the dangers of the
technique. The papers were all in Japanese or German.'" This is a
chilling moment: we are talking the Third Reich. 'It sounds awful to
admit', she says 'but the best papers \[in support of the notion of
schizophrenia as a disease originated in\] the Third Reich. The Nazis
wanted proof that schizophrenia was an inherited degenerative
condition.' When the 1976 study was published, even other
neuroscientists objected, suggesting that the anatomical change could be
secondary to drug treatment or encephalitis. 'But I knew something was
wrong with these people \[... \] When I was 21, I saw a 21-year-old
woman, terribly distressed by paranoid delusions, who had been working
in a bank 3 weeks earlier. It was ridiculous to say this was due to
imperfect interpersonal reactions at home \[... \] just stupid.'

With iron determination, she then went on to refute all the challenges
to the original paper with a study of 600 people with schizophrenia in
Shenley hospital.^9^ They were followed up until death, and their brains
at autopsy showed larger ventricles and smaller brains. However, there
was no gliosis, suggesting that the pathology may be neurodevelopmental.
Professor Johnstone, for all her modesty, cannot suppress an element of
glee in having pipped to the post her American research competitors.
Daniel Weinberger, backed by the enormous funds of the National
Institute for Mental Health, confirmed her findings 2.5 years later.^10^
Not shirking controversy, she then ran a placebo-controlled trial of
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), which demonstrated ECT to be effective,
albeit only for about 8 weeks, particularly in those depressed patients
who experienced delusions and had intellectual disability.

Her next project, the Edinburgh High Risk Study,^11^ was a prospective
study of 16- to 22-year-olds, carefully comparing the incidence of
developing schizophrenia in a cohort of people whose relatives had
schizophrenia, the controls having no family history. Twenty-one of the
high-risk group who then developed schizophrenia in fact had some
anatomical differences in the brain when they were still well. The
changes include smaller amygdala and hippocampus and hyperfolded
gyrification. Of course, this finding raises a host of ethical issues in
relation to premorbid diagnosis and its implications.

I asked Professor Johnstone what she thought of the recovery model, and
she was sceptical: "'Seems to me a bit of a semantic issue \[...\] ifs a
dreadful illness, very hard for families, specially if you knew the
people before they became ill \[...\] and people don\'t want to say how
bad it\'s going to be. I don\'t think the \[Royal College of
Psychiatrists\] has emphasised psychopharmacology enough. We need much
more individually tailored treatments, taking account of distinct
side-effect profiles, not general algorithms. Unfortunately, it\'s not
true that the drugs we have now are vastly better, although it is better
to have a wider range.'" She sees non-pharmacological treatment as 'a
bit better than nothing, if \[the patient\] will engage', but her
scrupulous honesty demands that we acknowledge that 'a terrible thing
has happened to them.' Talking to her it was clear that she personally
provided intensive clinical care to her patients and their families, and
we could easily agree that continuity of care is crucial and dangerously
eroded in many overstretched contemporary psychiatric services. She is
unconvinced of the benefits of the newer antipsychotics: 'It\'s true the
side-effects are different, but they hammer weight on to you, which is
very distressing for young people.' As for clozapine, the benefits have
been 'greatly exaggerated'.

Her academic success has been recognised. She received a CBE in 2002 for
services to medicine, and a Lifetime Achievement Award of the European
Psychiatric Association in 2009. She also had many senior roles in the
MRC, including the chairing of the highly publicised inquiry into the
disastrous linking of the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccine and
autism. With the distressed parents of autistic children leading a class
action against the government on the basis of the Wakefield paper,^12^
she was truly in the eye of the storm. 'I had to carry the parents with
me.' The disgraced Wakefield 'got what he deserved', she says.

In retirement Professor Johnstone has remained actively interested in
the link between schizophrenia and cognitive impairment. She reminds me
that there is a 3% point prevalence of schizophrenia in people with mild
intellectual disability, three times higher than in the general
population. The focus of understanding is in the area of overlap of
schizotypal cognitions, molecular genetics and anomalies of brain
structure, where 'we are seeing a final common pathway that leads to
schizophrenia.' The large data-sets she has in this area fit well with
the work of the Patrick Wild Centre, a charitable trust in Edinburgh set
up for research into autism, fragile X syndrome and intellectual
disability. Politically savvy and persuasive, she raised the funds for
the centre, named after a person with severe autism.

# Future hopes {#S2}

In terms of the future, she told me about some hopeful developments in
Edinburgh, which have potential for a personalised preventive
psychiatry. Starting with a simple skin biopsy fibroblast, stem cells
and then neurones can be grown, giving an opportunity to 'develop drug
treatments which basically work on an individual patient\'s brain which
has been developed in a dish', as Professor Stephen Lawrie, her
successor at the University of Edinburgh, put it. Roll on the day.

[^1]: **Julia Bland**, Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist, South London
    and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, formerly Co-Director, MedNet
    service, London, UK, email: <julia.bland@hotmail.co.uk>
