====================================
Prevent: what is pre-criminal space?
====================================



David Goldberg
Sushrut Jadhav
Tarek YounisCorrespondence to Sushrut Jadhav (s.jadhav@ucl.ac.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-8

:Abstract:
   Prevent is a UK-wide programme within the government's anti-terrorism
   strategy aimed at stopping individuals from supporting or taking part
   in terrorist activities. NHS England's Prevent Training and
   Competencies Framework requires health professionals to understand
   the concept of pre-criminal space. This article examines pre-criminal
   space, a new term which refers to a period of time during which a
   person is referred to a specific Prevent-related safeguarding panel,
   Channel. It is unclear what the concept of pre-criminal space adds to
   the Prevent programme. The term should be either clarified or removed
   from the Framework.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Prevent Training and Competencies Framework :sup:`1` begins thus:
“‘Prevent is part of the Government's counter-terrorism strategy CONTEST
and aims to stop people becoming terrorists or supporting terrorism; as
such it is described as the only long term solution to the threat we
face from terrorism. Prevent focuses on all forms of terrorism and
operates in a pre-criminal space, providing support and redirection to
vulnerable individuals at risk of being groomed in to terrorist activity
before any crimes are committed. Radicalisation is comparable to other
forms of exploitation; it is therefore a safeguarding issue staff
working in the health sector must be aware of. [… ] Staff must be able
to recognise signs of radicalisation and be confident in referring
individuals who can then receive support in the pre-criminal space.’ (p.
5)” The Framework is cascaded down the National Health Service (NHS)
hierarchies in England to ensure that all front-line staff in the NHS
receive mandatory training in the Prevent process. NHS staff refer
patients considered vulnerable to radicalisation to local Prevent leads
and onward to Prevent case managers and the Channel panel. The Channel
acts as a multi-agency panel along the lines of other safeguarding
panels in England.

This Training and Competency Framework follows from the *Prevent Duty
Guidance*, :sup:`2` the *Channel Duty Guidance* :sup:`3` and the
*Channel: Vulnerability Assessment Framework* :sup:`4` produced by the
government following *CONTEST: The United Kingdom's Strategy for
Countering Terrorism* :sup:`5` and the Counter-Terrorism and Security
Act 2015. The Framework does not name these documents but mentions two
other documents which focus on multi-agency working. The first,
*Safeguarding Children and Young People*, :sup:`6` details the roles and
competencies for healthcare staff when working with other professionals
to safeguard children and young people. The second, *Building
Partnerships, Staying Safe*, :sup:`7` stresses the importance of
effective interprofessional working.

The focus of the Framework is on training. Among the competencies listed
within is to understand the concept of pre-criminal space. This article
examines this term using publicly accessible government documents and
internet searches performed on Google and Google Scholar. It is a
textual analysis, read in the context of other government documents,
:sup:`8` which presumes that what is read may not necessarily be what
the authors initially intended. Meanings applied to words, particularly
new compound words, gain significance over time and use. :sup:`9` One of
the presumptions of this method is that textual analysis may not relate
directly to what is happening in practice.

.. _S1:

Pre-criminal space in the NHS England Framework
===============================================

‘Pre-criminal space’ appears four times in the Framework document,
including twice in the introduction: ‘Prevent focuses on all forms of
terrorism and operates in a pre-criminal space’ (p. 5) ‘… individuals [
… ] can then receive support in the pre-criminal space’ (p. 5) ‘…
aware[ness that] [ … ] the health sector contribution operates in
pre-criminal space’ (p. 8) ‘Understand [ … ] the concept of pre-criminal
space’ (p. 10). The meaning of ‘pre-criminal space’ can be deduced from
these quotes. ‘Prevent focuses on all forms of terrorism and operates in
a pre-criminal space’ suggests that pre-criminal space may relate to
specific physical spaces and times where professionals ‘operate’ or act
within the aims of the Prevent programme. The statement that
‘individuals [ … ] can then receive support in the pre-criminal space’
suggests that the professional activity involved is ‘support’. What
constitutes ‘support’ is detailed in the *Channel Duty Guidance*.
:sup:`3` The fact that ‘the health sector contribution operates in
pre-criminal space’ implies that other health sector activities may not
operate in the pre-criminal space. In what way NHS activity in this
‘space’ is different from that in other space is not stated anywhere.
The need for health professionals to understand ‘the concept of
pre-criminal space’ suggests that there is an important difference
between what pre-criminal space is and what it is not. Read in the
context of Prevent :sup:`2` and *Channel Duty Guidance*, :sup:`3`
pre-criminal space is likely to start on acceptance of a referral of a
person within the Channel panel, or perhaps on referral or discussion of
the possibility of referral by NHS staff to Channel personnel. Thus,
pre-criminal space has temporal and spatial aspects. As the time and
space is decided by negotiation with and between professionals, the term
also has inter-professional dimensions. This is supported by Framework
naming documents that focus on effective multidisciplinary work rather
than the Prevent and Channel Duty guidelines. :sup:`6,7`

The Framework document views the Prevent programme as part of the wider
safeguarding agenda. However, there is one important difference compared
with other safeguarding panels: the coordinator of the Channel process,
the Channel Police Practitioner (CPP), is a police officer or is
employed by the police (ref. 3, para. 30). Thus, unlike other
safeguarding procedures, the police have a central coordinating
function.

.. _S2:

Coining of ‘pre-criminal space’
===============================

The term pre-criminal space is new. It was introduced by this Framework
and cascaded to all trusts by NHS England. The term does not occur in
non-NHS Prevent documents or in CONTEST. References to pre-criminal
space since the term was introduced are largely found in trust
documentation and NHS PowerPoint presentations, together with some
journalist reports and blogs. For instance, the *Telegraph* comments on
the police use of the term and possible repercussions on state-Muslim
relations. :sup:`10`

All NHS trusts in England are mandated to enact the Framework document
and produce policy or guidance documents. None of these documents define
pre-criminal space any further. Many use pre-criminal space with
quotation marks, a few prefacing the term with ‘so-called’. The usual
statement is a reiteration of ‘Prevent operates in the pre-criminal
space’. Occasionally the hyphen is replaced by a space between ‘pre’ and
‘criminal’ but the words are never placed directly together. The most
detailed definition we have found comes from a glossary in a Prevent
document from Mersey Care NHS Trust, beginning with a precautionary
note: ‘These definitions relate to PREVENT and are not always
authoritative in any wider context.’ ‘Pre-Criminal Activity/Space’ is
explained by focusing on ‘multi-agency working to ensure that
individuals are diverted away before any crime is committed’. :sup:`11`
This definition merges ‘space’ with multi-agency activity.

.. _S3:

Denotation and connotation
==========================

So far we have argued that pre-criminal space refers to the time when a
person is engaged by the Channel panel and related professionals. It
denotes the time, space and interprofessional activity involved in
planning, coordinating support and possibly monitoring in the NHS
England Prevent programme. What is unclear is whether the Channel
process and panel meetings are in any way different from other
multi-agency activities. This may be deduced by examining possible
connotations of the term based on participants' understanding of
language use in its social context.

Pre-criminal space consists of three terms: ‘pre’ meaning before,
‘criminal’ as a person who has committed a crime or repeated crimes, and
‘space’ as a continuous physical area. ‘Pre’ appears to modify the
second term, ‘criminal’, rather than space. Hyphens are not usually used
after prefixes such as ‘pre’, unless the resulting meaning becomes
ambiguous, for example ‘pre-order’ rather than ‘preorder’. Thus, the use
of the hyphen both gives a separation between pre-crime and crime and
creates the link. The term implies that the ‘space’ is pre-criminal, not
the individual. While the use of the term ‘space’ suggests a physical
space, such as a meeting room, there are no references to where the
vulnerable person is to be supported. ‘Space’ in this context is used as
a relational concept, common in expressions such as ‘I need space to
think’, meaning ‘I need a place for myself, away from certain social
relationships’.

.. _S4:

The derivation of pre-criminal space
====================================

The etymology of the term is significant to the discussion. ‘Pre-crime’
and ‘space’, as separate words, suggest they are potentially independent
concepts. The term ‘precrime’ was said to be coined by science fiction
writer Philip K. Dick in his short story *Minority Report*. :sup:`12`
The drama is based on the concept that crime has not occurred yet but
will occur in future unless measures are taken. The belief that crime
can be prevented by identification and intervention has a long history.
In the 19th century, Lambroso's theory of criminal atavism famously
purported to identify future criminals by their abnormal physical
appearance. In recent years, criminologists use the term pre-crime to
criticise the move to criminalise people prior to the committing of
crime. :sup:`13` More recently, the term ‘pre-criminal space’ has been
used in the US security industry in relation to Islamic fundamentalist
terrorism. :sup:`14` We find no evidence that the concept of ‘space’ in
pre-criminal space derives from academic theorising about space.
Depending on context, however, space connotes elements of time as well
as physical or abstract forms of space. Space in pre-criminal space can
thus gain different metaphoric associations depending on the immediate
social context. Pre-criminal space may describe the physical space where
‘support’ is planned, ‘operated’ or monitored. It may also relate to the
time that the person is subject to the Channel panel process, or to
differences in the social rules of interprofessional interaction, as
compared with different safeguarding panel discussions. Finally, it may
refer to differing social identities of the person referred to the
Channel panel and the professionals involved.

.. _S5:

Rhetoric
========

The Framework provides an abbreviated and reasoned argument in support
of the Prevent programme and the involvement of health professionals.
Like all arguments, it persuades through the use of the metaphoric
qualities which words gain in use. There are two sets of metaphors
within the Framework, one pertinent to NHS professionals and the other
to the police. The health metaphors are borrowed from structural
engineering, with vulnerability and support suggesting the
diathesis-stress model. The person is weakened from external assault or
internal deficiency; structural support is provided from outside so the
individual can withstand potential assaults or threats. Even the WRAP
acronym (Workshops to Raise Awareness of Prevent) suggests physical
bodily protection against external threat. The criminal justice terms
(i.e. radicalisation, extremism, CONTEST, counter-terrorism, strategy)
suggest a heightened spatial metaphor, polarisation and direction of
movement. The creation of the term pre-criminal space may be an attempt
to bridge the health and police use of metaphor: the health metaphor
aiming for stability and predictability, while the criminal justice
metaphor focuses on adaptability. The lack of effective definition of
pre-criminal space allows for evolving inter-agency norms during the
Channel process to vary with context.

If new concepts emerge by visual analogy, :sup:`15` pre-criminal space
can be seen as an extension of crime prevention. It can be visualised as
a system of continuous and contained passages. Prior to the vent
(derived from the Latin root, as in *prevent),* professionals direct
radicals, people who have an attractive or repulsive charge or energy,
past the vent and into the channel. As the radicals pass along the vent
their charge or energy becomes less strong and the radical no longer
moves towards the extreme.

If the term pre-criminal space mobilises healthcare professionals and
Channel partners towards a crime prevention role of health intervention,
pre-criminal space has the potential to act as a form of ‘excitable
speech’ to alert listeners to the threat of terrorism. :sup:`16` The
rhetorical use of the term pre-criminal space during the Channel process
could be perceived as an attempt to persuade professionals to disclose
information or make decisions they would otherwise not make in other
safeguarding forums and in comparable circumstances.

.. _S6:

Opinion
=======

The Training and Competency Framework is an action plan, laying out who
does what, when and with whom. For the implementation of Prevent, terms
need to be defined to such a degree that the participants can understand
the concepts involved. Indeed, the Framework itself asks NHS staff to
understand the concept of pre-criminal space (p. 10). Pre-criminal space
clearly denotes a period of time in the Prevent process without adding
further meaning and keeping open the opportunity for the term's possible
rhetorical use in Channel meetings.

One synonym for pre-criminal space is crime prevention. This raises the
possibility of changing the wording of the Framework to replace this
obscure and newly coined term with ‘crime prevention’. Alternatively,
discussion and clarification of the concept of pre-criminal space would
allow it to define the participants' relationships as the crime
prevention activity proceeds. Further multidisciplinaiy research linking
NHS documents to practice may enable the Prevent guidance and framework
to be linked with practice. When the time comes for the Prevent
framework to be updated (although no such date is given in the
document), we recommend that the term should be clarified or removed.

We thank the Newton International Fellowship, supported by the Royal
Society, the British Academy, and the Academy of Medical Sciences.

.. [1]
   **David Goldberg** is a Visiting Researcher in the Division of
   Psychiatry, University College London, and medical anthropologist,
   London, UK. **Sushrut Jadhav** is a consultant psychiatrist, Camden &
   Islington NHS Foundation Trust, London, and Clinical Senior Lecturer
   in Cross-cultural Psychiatry, University College London, UK. **Tarek
   Younis** is a PhD/PsyD candidate at Université du Québec à Montréal,
   Canada, and consultant for the Montréal police regarding Arab/Muslim
   community issues.
