======================================================================
Police liaison and section 136: comparison of two different approaches
======================================================================



Oliver Jenkins
Stephen Dye
Franklin Obeng-Asare
Nam Nguyen
Nicola WrightCorrespondence to Oliver Jenkins
(oliver.jenkins@nsft.nhs.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-4

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** Two police liaison and section 136 schemes were
   developed alongside police services at different sites within the
   same NHS trust. In one, a mental health nurse worked with frontline
   police attending incidents related to mental health. The other
   involved nurses providing advice from the police control room.
   Section 136 detentions were measured over two 6-month periods (6
   months apart) before and after practice change. Data analysed
   included total numbers of section 136 assessments, outcomes following
   subsequent assessment, and relevant diagnostic and demographic
   factors. Association of any change in section 136 total numbers and
   proportion subsequently admitted was investigated in both sites.

   **Results** The model involving a nurse alongside frontline police
   showed significant reduction in section 136 numbers (38%, *P* < 0.01)
   as well as greater admission rates (*P* = 0.01). The scheme involving
   support within the police control room did not show any change in
   section 136 detention but showed a non-significant (*P* = 0.16)
   decrease in subsequent admission.

   **Clinical implications** Mental health nurses working alongside
   frontline police officers can help improve section 136 numbers and
   outcomes.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Section 136 of the Mental Health Act 1983 enables an individual police
officer to remove any person found in a place to which the public have
access appearing to have a mental disorder and to be in immediate need
of care or control to a place of safety, such as a hospital, police
station or a purpose-built section 136 unit. The section can only be
used if the officer believes it is in the interests of that person or
necessary for the protection of others. Although section 136 can be an
important care pathway to enable an individual to receive appropriate
support, it can also be a very distressing experience for them – some
report feeling criminalised and punished for having a mental
illness.\ :sup:`1` Its use is also costly given that it requires the
input of an approved mental health professional (AMHP) and two doctors
for the assessment, plus police and often nursing time to manage the
detained person and staff the place of safety.

.. _S1:

Background and aims
===================

The Mental Health Act Commission has highlighted the challenge of
collating data on the use of section 136,\ :sup:`2` but figures have
only been gathered at a national level by the Health and Social Care
Information Centre over the past 5 years.\ :sup:`3` These combine police
and mental health records on section 136 detentions but have limited
detail on outcomes. At a national level the rates of section 136
detentions to places of safety between 2010/2011 and 2014/2015 increased
from 14 111 to 19 406.\ :sup:`3` Attempts to combine inconsistently
recorded data have shown a steady upward trend at a rate greater than
has been seen with use of the other Mental Health Act sections for
detention.\ :sup:`4`

Significant variation is seen regionally in section 136 use. Outcomes
from such detentions, often seen as markers of how appropriately the
detention has been applied, are also seen to vary from region to region:
from areas where around 60% are admitted to hospital\ :sup:`5` to those
where 68% are discharged.\ :sup:`6` While theories to explain these
variations have included a rural/urban divide, police culture,
socioeconomic deprivation and diagnostic factors,\ :sup:`7` the
available data have been limited in both accuracy and detail.

In response to concerns about the growing use of this police power and
regional variation, there has been a national drive to improve
inter-agency working between police and mental health services. Both the
Bradley Report\ :sup:`8` and the Crisis Care Concordat\ :sup:`9` placed
emphasis on local agencies working more closely to improve the
experience of individuals in a mental health crisis and to intervene as
early as possible within the criminal justice system. Areas have
responded differently to the challenge. This paper analyses various
aspects of section 136 and changes observed with different ways of
inter-agency working within two areas of the same National Health
Service (NHS) trust, in Ipswich and Norwich.

The local response in Ipswich has been a Commissioning for Quality and
Innovation (CQUIN)-funded pilot scheme developed in partnership between
Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust (NSFT) and Suffolk
Constabulary. The scheme commenced in April 2014 and involves two
experienced mental health nurses working on alternate shifts alongside
frontline police officers, 7 days a week from 14:00 until 00:00, to help
assess and appropriately divert members of the public who present with
potential mental health-related emergencies. Accompanied by a police
officer (individuals vary with police rota), they are seen as the
initial point of contact for officers attending a potential mental
health-related event. They are able to perform face-to-face assessments
in a dedicated police car but can also provide advice to other officers
over the phone.

Norwich was chosen as the control site as it was closely matched by
size, ethnicity and measures of deprivation (`Table 1 <#T1>`__). Norwich
also established a police liaison service (funded by the police service)
to address the same national concerns. It employed 4 mental health
nurses on rotation providing support to the local police force between
8:00 and 22:00, 7 days a week. However, they were based in the police
control room and offered telephone advice to police officers without
face-to-face contact with the public.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Results: population parameters\ `a <#TFN1>`__

   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      | Ipswich              | Norwich              |
   +======================+======================+======================+
   | Population           | 442                  | 483                  |
   |                      | 000\ `b <#TFN2>`__   | 000\ `c <#TFN3>`__   |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Index of deprivation | 72                   | 61                   |
   | ra                   |                      |                      |
   | nking\ `d <#TFN4>`__ |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | White British, %     | 82.94                | 83.65                |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

   2011 census data.\ :sup:`10`

   Ipswich, Suffolk Coastal, Babergh and Mid-Suffolk local authorities.

   Norwich, North Norfolk, South Norfolk and Broadland local
   authorities.

   Lower value indicates higher deprivation.

The aims of this study were to examine changes in and between Ipswich
and Norwich regarding section 136 detentions and hospital admission
rates of detained individuals. This would enable us to build on past
research and consider what factors were driving the use of section 136
locally, and in turn better understand any impact the police liaison
projects may have had.

.. _S2:

Method
======

This retrospective study compared numbers and outcomes of section 136
assessments, characteristics of detained individuals and some follow-up
data. Information was obtained prior to and following differing changed
practices within the trusts for the two areas. Numbers of section 136
detentions were gained from local section 136 suite records and
cross-referenced with data gathered at trust level in an attempt to
capture all section 136 assessments in Ipswich and Norwich. Further data
pertaining to each individual were then collected retrospectively from
hospital records using electronic notes (Epex in Ipswich and Carenotes
in Norwich). Data were gathered for two 6-month periods: 1 June – 30
November 2013 and 1 June – 30 November 2014. This was to limit any
impact on results of the preparation for and introduction of services.
This also allowed for comparison of the same 6-month cycle (a year
apart) pre- and post-intervention in both areas and between areas.

The project was viewed as service evaluation by the trust's research and
development department and thus did not require ethics approval. The
exact information gathered and hypotheses to be tested were agreed at
the planning stage. Data were entered into Minitab (version 16) to allow
for appropriate statistical analysis. The exact data collection
questions can be found in `Box 1 <#box1>`__.

Such a study set-up meant that each location had a control group prior
to intervention and an experimental group post-intervention. Analysis
was conducted pre- *v.* post-intervention in both locations and between
the locations. Null hypotheses were that there were no differences
between locations or between pre- and post-intervention. Population
sizes covered by each section 136 suite were established by combining
police force estimates of the locality from which officers were
detaining people and the 2011 census local authority population
sizes.\ :sup:`10` Chi-squared statistical tests were used where
appropriate. We used *t*-tests when comparing section 136 numbers per
100 000 population, Fisher's exact test for comparing proportions, and
the Mantel–Haenszel procedure to identify possible confounding factors.

.. _S3:

Results
=======

.. _S4:

Demographics
------------

As seen in `Table 2 <#T2>`__, there were no significant differences in
the study participants' age or gender pre-intervention compared with
post-intervention in either area individually or between the areas.
There were no significant differences in ethnicity either, with the
overwhelming majority of individuals assessed being of White British
background.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Results of section 136 assessments in two study
      areas\ `a <#TFN6>`__

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Me    | Ip    | No    | Be    |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | asure | swich | rwich | tween |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | -area |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | d     |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | iffer |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | ence, |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | *P*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
   | Se    | 169   | 104   | **0   | 87    | 93    | 0.82  | **<0  | 0.39  | **0   |
   | ction | (77)  | (47)  | .01** | (36)  | (39)  | \ `c  | .01** |       | .01** |
   | 136   |       |       | \ `c  |       |       | <#TFN |       |       |       |
   | as    |       |       | <#TFN |       |       | 8>`__ |       |       |       |
   | sessm |       |       | 8>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ents, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | \ `b  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 7>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Age,  | 34.7  | 37.5  | 0.12  | 37.7  | 37.7  | 0.98  | 0.10  | 0.94  | 0.15  |
   | y     | (     | (     | \ `d  | (     | (     | \ `d  | \ `d  | \ `d  | \ `d  |
   | ears: | 13.3) | 14.9) | <#TFN | 14.0) | 14.0) | <#TFN | <#TFN | <#TFN | <#TFN |
   | mean  |       |       | 9>`__ |       |       | 9>`__ | 9>`__ | 9>`__ | 9>`__ |
   | (     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | s.d.) |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | M     | 58.0  | 51.0  | 0.26  | 47.6  | 52.7  | 0.50  | 0.12  | 0.80  | 0.30  |
   | ales, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | %     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Co    | 82    | 52    | 0.53  | 52    | 40    | **0   | **0   | 0.40  | 0.33  |
   | ntact | (     | (     |       | (     | (     | .01** | .01** |       |       |
   | with  | 48.5) | 50.0) |       | 65.0) | 44.0) |       |       |       |       |
   | CMHS  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | in    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | past  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 2     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | w     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | eeks, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Admi  | 40    | 39    | **0   | 29    | 22    | 0.16  | 0.10  | **0   | 0.89  |
   | tted, | (     | (     | .01** | (     | (     |       |       | .04** |       |
   | *n*   | 23.7) | 37.5) |       | 33.3) | 23.7) |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 23    | 23    | 0.89  | 16    | 17    | 0.10  | 0.85  | 0.15  | 0.46  |
   |   Adm | (     | (     |       | (     | (     |       |       |       |       |
   | itted | 57.5) | 59.0) |       | 55.2) | 77.2) |       |       |       |       |
   | under |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | M     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ental |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | H     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ealth |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | Act,  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Ass   | 122   | 72    | 0.15\ | –     | –     | –     | –     | –     | –     |
   | essed | (     | (     |  `e < |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | d     | 72.2) | 69.2) | #TFN1 |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | uring |       |       | 0>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ‘pre  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | sumed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | t     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | riage |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ho    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | urs’, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 31    | 28    | **<0. | –     | –     | –     | –     | –     | –     |
   |  Admi | (     | (     | 01**\ |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | tted, | 25.4) | 38.9) |  `e < |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       | #TFN1 |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       | 0>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Ass   | 9     | 11    | **<0. | –     | –     | –     | –     | –     | –     |
   | essed | (     | (     | 01**\ |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | and   | 19.1) | 34.4) |  `e < |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | adm   |       |       | #TFN1 |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | itted |       |       | 0>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | in    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ‘     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | non-t |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | riage |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ho    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | urs’, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | No    | 39    | 15    | 0.08  | 8     | 25    | **<0  | **0   | **0   | **<0  |
   | m     | (     | (     |       | (9.2) | (     | .01** | .01** | .03** | .01** |
   | ental | 23.1) | 14.4) |       |       | 26.9) |       |       |       |       |
   | il    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | lness |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | foll  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | owing |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | se    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ction |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 136   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ssess |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ment, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Not   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | adm   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | itted |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 94    | 56    | **0   | 42    | 37    | **0   | 0.95  | **<0  | **<0  |
   |    Of | (     | (     | .04** | (     | (     | .02** |       | .01** | .01** |
   | fered | 72.9) | 86.2) |       | 72.4) | 52.1) |       |       |       |       |
   | foll  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ow-up |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | by    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | seco  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ndary |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | MHS,  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 58    | 50    | **<0  | 30    | 27    | 0.88  | 0.27  | **0   | 0.98  |
   |       | (     | (     | .01** | (     | (     |       |       | .04** |       |
   |   Att | 61.7) | 89.3) |       | 71.4) | 73.0) |       |       |       |       |
   | ended |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | first |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ap    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | point |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ment, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 27    | 8     | 0.14  | 14    | 1     | **0   | 0.62  | **<0  | 0.12  |
   |    ⩾1 | (     | (     |       | (     | (1.4) | .01** |       | .01** |       |
   | fu    | 20.9) | 12.3) |       | 28.0) |       |       |       |       |       |
   | rther |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | se    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ction |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 136   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | asses |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | sment |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   |    in |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | subse |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | quent |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 4     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | w     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | eeks, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | (%)   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

   CMHS, community mental health services; MHS, mental health services.
   Bold denotes significance.

   χ\ :sup:`2` tests unless indicated otherwise.

   Per year per 100 000 population.

   Fisher's exact test for equality of two proportions using figures per
   100 000 population per year.

   Two-sample *t*-test of difference of mean with null hypothesis of no
   difference.

   Fisher's exact test for equality of two proportions using the
   percentage figures.

.. _S5:

Numbers of section 136 assessments
----------------------------------

There was strong evidence to suggest, over the total time periods, that
Norwich had proportionately fewer section 136 assessments per 100 000
population than Ipswich (*P* = 0.01). This difference was greater in the
pre-intervention period. Between the two 6-month periods there was a
small, non-significant increase in those detained under section 136 in
Norwich but a large reduction in section 136 assessments in Ipswich
post-intervention (*P* = 0.01) (`Table 2 <#T2>`__ and `Fig. 1 <#F1>`__).

.. figure:: 79f1
   :alt: Section 136 assessments and subsequent admissions.
   :name: F1

   Section 136 assessments and subsequent admissions.

**Box 1** Survey questions

#. Pre- or post-intervention?

#. Ipswich or Norwich?

#. Date of assessment?

#. Time of assessment?

#. Gender?

#. Age?

#. Ethnicity?

#. Broad ICD-10 category?

#. Number of section 136 assessments the individual had in the previous
   6 months?

#. Any contact with mental health services in past 2 weeks?

#. If so, what type of contact?

#. Main reason for section 136?

#. Any specified location?

#. Was the individual admitted?

#. If so, was this under detention?

#. If admitted, what was the length of admission?

#. If not admitted, was follow-up offered by secondary mental health
   services?

#. If so, was the first appointment complied with?

#. If not admitted, was the individual subject to a further section 136
   assessment within the subsequent 4 weeks?

.. _S6:

Admission
---------

Over all the data collected, there was no significant difference in
admission to hospital following section 136 assessment between Ipswich
and Norwich. Prior to intervention, although admission was less likely
in Ipswich than in Norwich, this was non-significant. In Ipswich there
was a significant change in admission post-intervention (*P* = 0.01),
with a higher conversion to admission. Post-intervention, there was a
difference between Ipswich and Norwich (*P* = 0.04), with higher
admission in the former. Thus the interventions were associated with a
proportionate increase in admissions following section 136 in Ipswich.
Although data suggested that the admission proportion decreased in
Norwich, this was non-significant (*P* = 0.16).

Apart from weak, non-significant evidence to suggest that in Norwich
those admitted post-intervention were more likely to have been detained
than pre-admission (*P* = 0.10), there was no other association between
detention under the Mental Health Act following admission and pre- and
post-intervention status.

.. _S7:

Contact with community mental health services
---------------------------------------------

Any contact with community mental health services (CMHS) in the 2 weeks
prior to section 136 assessment was measured. In Norwich, data provided
strong evidence that in the pre-intervention period there were more
individuals who had some contact with CMHS than in the post-intervention
period (*P* = 0.01) and when compared with Ipswich (*P* = 0.01). In
Ipswich there was no evidence of any difference between contact pre-
*v.* post-intervention.

For those individuals who were not admitted to hospital following
section 136 assessment, the proportion that had at least one subsequent
136 assessment in the following 4 weeks decreased in both sites, but the
change was significant only in Norwich (*P* < 0.01 *v. P* = 0.14 in
Ipswich).

In Ipswich there was moderate evidence to suggest that, if not admitted,
people were more likely to be offered follow-up from secondary mental
health services post-intervention than pre-intervention (*P* = 0.04). If
follow-up was offered in Ipswich, there was strong evidence to suggest
that the first follow-up contact was more likely to be kept
post-intervention than pre-intervention (*P* < 0.01). In Norwich there
was evidence that a person was more likely to be offered follow-up prior
to as opposed to after the intervention (*P* = 0.02), but no evidence to
suggest any difference between compliance rates pre- *v.*
post-intervention.

.. _S8:

Diagnosis
---------

There was weak non-significant evidence to suggest that people assessed
in Ipswich were more likely to have been deemed to have ‘no mental
illness’ prior to the intervention compared with post-intervention (*P*
= 0.08), but in Norwich there was strong evidence to the contrary (*P* <
0.01).

Counts of pre- and post-intervention broad ICD-10 categories of
individuals assessed from each site are shown in `Fig. 2 <#F2>`__.

.. figure:: 80f2
   :alt: Broad ICD-10 diagnostic categories. a. Not recorded. ICD
   categories are the first number within the ICD-10 classification: 0 –
   organic, including symptomatic, mental disorders; 1 – mental and
   behavioural disorders due to psychoactive substance use; 2 –
   schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders; 3 – mood
   (affective disorders); 4 – neurotic, stress-related and somatoform
   disorders; 5 – behavioural syndromes associated with physiological
   disturbances and physical factors; 6 – disorders of adult personality
   and behaviour; 7 – mental retardation; 8 – disorders of psychological
   development; 9 – behavioural and emotional disorders with onset
   usually occurring in childhood and adolescence.
   :name: F2

   Broad ICD-10 diagnostic categories. a. Not recorded. ICD categories
   are the first number within the ICD-10 classification: 0 – organic,
   including symptomatic, mental disorders; 1 – mental and behavioural
   disorders due to psychoactive substance use; 2 – schizophrenia,
   schizotypal and delusional disorders; 3 – mood (affective disorders);
   4 – neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders; 5 –
   behavioural syndromes associated with physiological disturbances and
   physical factors; 6 – disorders of adult personality and behaviour; 7
   – mental retardation; 8 – disorders of psychological development; 9 –
   behavioural and emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in
   childhood and adolescence.

.. _S9:

Time of day
-----------

We were unable to obtain the exact time of implementation of the actual
section 136 order for individuals. Time between implementation and
assessment following the order is influenced by many factors. Trust
policy states that this should happen within 3 hours.

In Ipswich the triage service was funded for 10 hours per day (between
14:00 and 00:00). As an estimate within this study, following
implementation of the order, individuals who were assessed between 15:00
and 03:00 were deemed to have been assessed in a time period in which
the triage service was operating. Within these time periods, the numbers
assessed and numbers admitted are shown in `Table 2 <#T2>`__ (numbers
admitted following assessment out of these time periods are also shown).
Thus, a similar proportion were assessed within the triage hours both
pre- and post-intervention (72.2% and 69.2%).

As stated above, admission following section 136 in Ipswich was more
likely after the triage service commenced. On further analysis this
effect was seen to be confounded by assessment within/outside triage
times (Mantel-Haenszel odds ratio 5.44, *P* = 0.02) with a significant
association in the triage times (*P* = 0.05). This indicated that the
triage service intervention had most association with differing
admission rates within the triage times.

Unfortunately, due to a large number of missing assessment time data in
Norwich, a similar analysis was not deemed feasible.

.. _S10:

Discussion
==========

This retrospective study evaluated the impact of two recently developed
police liaison schemes based in closely matched semi-rural areas within
a single mental health NHS trust, with a focus on section 136 rates and
outcomes before and after the projects were established.

The pre-intervention findings show that Suffolk Constabulary was
detaining significantly higher numbers of people for assessment in the
Ipswich area than the police force in Norwich. This difference matches
the only data available prior to 2013/2014 on section 136 rates for the
two regions, from 2005/2006, in which the Independent Police Complaints
Commission (IPCC) analysed regional variation across England and found
Suffolk to be a medium-rate user and Norfolk a low-rate user of section
136 detentions to police custody.\ :sup:`11`

Well-matched local population demographics and demographic profiles of
those detained would indicate that differences are not linked with
variation in race, gender or age. The diagnostic profiles of those
detained also show little variation between sites. These observations
are significant given that a number of studies have identified common
factors pertaining to those detained under section 136, such as Black
men being over-represented, and the typical individual tending to be a
young male, unemployed, with a psychiatric history and diagnosis of
schizophrenia.\ :sup:`12`

As police officers are the sole implementers of S136 detentions, their
attitudes and training around mental health can be considered an
important variable. Qualitative studies have identified high rates of
concern among police officers over inadequate training in relation to
mental illness,\ :sup:`13` and poor understanding of their role in
relation to section 136.\ :sup:`14` Informal feedback from the two
police forces involved in this study indicates that mental health
training is similar and thus would be an unlikely source of variation.

The IPCC report also observed that low-rate forces used alternative
powers such as breach of the peace and that well-known ‘suicide spots’
such as seaside cliffs were observed in police force areas with high
rates.\ :sup:`11` Data we have gathered on both police forces show a
similar arrest rate (15 *v.* 16 per 1000 population) but a slightly
higher crime rate (49.76 *v.* 43.98 per 1000 population) in Suffolk
compared with Norfolk.\ :sup:`15` However, there are also lower levels
of policing per 1000 of population in Suffolk (3.11 *v.*
3.33).\ :sup:`15` The impact of these slight differences is hard to
interpret. Ipswich has a locally well-known ‘suicide spot’ but numbers
of detentions relating to its locality were not significant.

Findings from the post-intervention data support the theory that a
mental health liaison service to the police can have a significant
impact on section 136 rates and also suggest which model is more
effective. The Ipswich site showed a 38% reduction in the use of the
police power during the post-intervention study period. In that time,
there were no other significant changes to police or mental health
policy or resourcing locally. This reduction is in contrast to the
steady increase in the use of section 136 nationally.\ :sup:`16` The
Norwich site with support based solely in the police control room, by
contrast, showed no significant change in overall numbers of section 136
detentions. The data provide some possible explanations for this
observed difference between the sites.

It could be speculated that the impact of a liaison service with
experienced mental health nurses in Ipswich, where rates were higher 10
years ago\ :sup:`11` and pre-intervention rates were high in this study,
was to enable the local constabulary to achieve a greater level of
confidence in dealing with mental health-related crises that is already
present in Norwich. The detention outcome data in Ipswich may be seen to
lend weight to this idea. Post-intervention we observed a proportionate
increase in admission rates, an increase in offer of community support
if discharged and a reduction in those deemed to have ‘no mental
illness’. These outcome measures can be interpreted as markers of a
service better able to identify those with mental health needs and,
combined with an increase in engagement, suggest it is better at
signposting to appropriate services.

By contrast, the Norwich data post-intervention show a proportionate
decrease in admission rates, decrease in follow-up being offered and
increase in ‘no mental illness’ assessments despite overall numbers
remaining approximately the same. It could be inferred that support
based in the police control room is only effective for individuals known
to mental health services, whereas members of the public unknown to
services need to be assessed face-to-face to provide effective input
from a specialist service. Our recording of those who had contact with
mental health services in the 2 weeks prior to detention showed that for
both areas approximately 50% were either known to or actively open to
mental health services, which is lower than estimates from previous
research of around 75–84%.\ :sup:`12` The near equal percentage of those
in contact with mental health services prior to detention in Ipswich
could further suggest that the face-to-face liaison service is able to
affect detention rates for both those known to mental health services
and those not known.

The data relating to time of assessments in Ipswich suggested that while
the liaison service had a greater impact on conversion to admission
rates during their working hours, there was a near-even drop in section
136 rates across all hours. This could indicate that multi-agency
working has promoted an ability among the local police force to better
identify those who should be detained for further assessment. Lending
further weight to this perception is the fact that the service in
Ipswich was only in operation 76% of the time due to planned leave and
sickness.

A follow-up to the Bradley Report claims that similar schemes are
producing positive results, including reduced section 136
rates.\ :sup:`17` We believe that our study provides an evidence base
for these as yet unpublished findings, and lends weight to the value and
impact of closer inter-agency working between police and mental health
services. The breadth of data and comparison of models available in this
study may help to guide the development of future schemes and their
refinement.

.. _S11:

Limitations
-----------

Within this study we gathered data regarding individuals detained to
places of safety under section 136 within the two main urban areas in
Norfolk and Suffolk, namely Norwich and Ipswich. There will have been a
few occasions where these sites were occupied and people were
subsequently taken to other localities. Although we can say that both
areas are equally resourced and from experience know these numbers to be
small, this should be acknowledged as a weakness. Estimations of section
136 rates per population size in each area must be viewed with caution
as the local authority boundaries do not equate to areas that the 136
suites serve, and it was difficult to achieve clarity on this. The study
could not define the areas where the section 136 detention was made and
this may have been outside the area covered by the triage services,
which may have led to an underestimate of the impact of either service.

While this study builds towards a better understanding of the model that
is most effective in police liaison work, it lacked a detailed analysis
of the work done directly by the mental health nurses and police
officers involved. Any future studies should include these data
alongside qualitative feedback from relevant professionals and
individuals to enable a fuller understanding of the impact of such a
service.

.. [1]
   **Oliver Jenkins**, consultant, **Stephen Dye**, consultant and
   **Franklin Obeng-Asare**, ST6, Acute Inpatient Services, Norfolk and
   Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust, Ipswich. **Nam Nguyen**, GP ST1,
   Emergency Department, University Hospital Lewisham, London. **Nicola
   Wright**, staff nurse, Acute Inpatient Services, Norfolk and Suffolk
   NHS Foundation Trust, Ipswich.
