=================================================================================================
Unlocking an acute psychiatric ward: the impact on unauthorised absences, assaults and seclusions
=================================================================================================



Ben Beaglehole
John Beveridge
Warren Campbell-Trotter
Chris FramptonCorrespondence to Ben Beaglehole
(ben.beaglehole@otago.ac.nz)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-4

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** The acute psychiatric in-patient service in
   Christchurch, New Zealand, recently changed from two locked and two
   unlocked wards to four open wards. This provided the opportunity to
   evaluate whether shifting to an unlocked environment was associated
   with higher rates of adverse events, including unauthorised absences,
   violent incidents and seclusion. We compared long-term adverse event
   data before and after ward configuration change.

   **Results** Rates of unauthorised absences increased by 58% after the
   change in ward configuration (*P* = 0.005), but seclusion hours
   dropped by 53% (*P* = 0.001). A small increase in violent incidents
   was recorded but this was not statistically significant.

   **Clinical implications** Although unauthorised absences increased,
   the absence of statistically significant changes for violent
   incidents and a reduction in seclusion hours suggest that the change
   to a less restrictive environment may have some positive effects.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The locking of psychiatric institutions is an important topic because
detention involves significant restrictions on human rights, ensconced
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. However, studies that have
evaluated the impact of unlocking a psychiatric ward are rare; we were
only able to identify four such studies spanning 7-decade-long assessing
in this area. Lang *et al*\ :sup:`1` evaluated a policy change that
resulted in a ward changing from being largely locked for 6 months to
being largely open for 6 months and found that negative outcomes were
more common during the closed time period. Other studies are
considerably older\ :sup:`2,3` and were largely positive in their
findings, with the exception of the study by Molnar *et al*,\ :sup:`4`
which reported an increase in the frequency of ‘elopement’ (unauthorised
absence) from 2.5 to 7% of admissions in the context of changing ward
policy to allow a largely unlocked environment.

Any consideration of locked psychiatric wards must be viewed in the
context of emerging policy that recommends minimising the use of locked
psychiatric wards\ :sup:`5` and emphasises a duty to provide psychiatric
care in the least restrictive environment. A desire to provide least
restrictive care created the impetus for our local psychiatric service
to shift from an acute in-patient environment consisting of two locked
wards and two unlocked wards to four largely unlocked wards. It also
provided the opportunity to evaluate the impact of the change through
reporting of long-term data detailing adverse events, such as
unauthorised absences, ward violence and rates of seclusion, prior to
and following the changes in ward environment.

.. _S1:

Method
======

Data for this study were taken from the acute in-patient service in
Christchurch, New Zealand. The service is the sole provider of acute
in-patient services to adults aged 18–65 in the city of Christchurch,
outlying towns and rural areas, with the exception of forensic patients,
patients with an intellectual disability and in-patients requiring
planned detoxification from substances, who are admitted elsewhere. The
acute in-patient service receives admissions from community and
emergency psychiatric services when care in the community is no longer
feasible, with a typical case mix consisting of patients with affective
disorders, psychotic disorders and personality disorders.

The service underwent major architectural change in 2013. Before, the
service was configured with two locked wards (totalling 20 beds), two
wards (totalling 44 beds) that were predominantly unlocked except
overnight, and a seclusion area with 3 seclusion rooms. In response to
service development initiatives and the desire to provide less
restrictive care, the wards were reconfigured into 4 largely unlocked
16-bed wards (except overnight when the wards remain locked). At the end
of each ward is a zone called the ‘high care area’, which is quieter
than the general ward and provides care for up to three of the more
unwell patients. Each high care area is continuous with its adjacent
ward and can be designated ‘high care’ when doors are closed or locked,
or be regarded as part of the general ward when extra clinical input is
not required. The décor and bedrooms of the high care area are identical
to the adjacent ward, but an additional lounge, bathroom and courtyard
are provided in order for the high care area to act as a self-sufficient
unit when required. All wards, including the high care areas, are
intended to be unlocked as much as possible but each ward or high care
area can be locked separately in order to detain a patient if this is
deemed necessary. The high care area bedrooms were not outfitted for
seclusion but the seclusion area remained unaltered and could still be
used if required. `Figure 1 <#F1>`__ presents details of the ward
layout. If the ward or a high care area is locked, it is recorded in the
restraint register as an environment restraint, and is therefore
available for review.

.. figure:: 93f1
   :alt: Acute in-patient service: ward layout. H, high care area; Sec,
   seclusion area; C, courtyard.
   :name: F1

   Acute in-patient service: ward layout. H, high care area; Sec,
   seclusion area; C, courtyard.

In addition to these structural changes, nursing staff numbers
increased, from 27 nurses routinely rostered on the wards to 34 nurses.
However, if a nurse was required to provide one-to-one supervision after
the change, this needed to occur within existing staff levels, whereas
previously this was not the case. The frequency of one-to-one
supervision pre- and post-change was not systematically recorded and is
not readily available for review.

The acute in-patient service routinely records data on unauthorised
absences, seclusions and violent incidents. Unauthorised absences
include patients who are under involuntary mental health legislation and
leave the ward without permission or fail to return from authorised
leave, and voluntary patients who leave the ward outside of their agreed
treatment parameters or fail to return from agreed leave. Nursing staff
follow procedures when absences occur, including filling out a form
documenting the absence which is then collated in a central database.

Violent incidents are assessed clinically and categorised into a number
of subcategories including verbal abuse, threats of violence and
assaults; all are recorded and collated centrally.

Seclusion is initiated by nursing staff as an intervention of last
resort for managing a situation of imminent or actual violence. In
response to international and New Zealand initiatives,\ :sup:`6`
seclusion reduction initiatives became embedded into the routine care
environment of the acute in-patient service from 2010 and the goal of
reducing seclusion occurred alongside the plan to provide a less
restrictive environment through the ward redevelopment. Although
seclusion rates are likely to be reduced by the seclusion reduction
initiatives, the change in ward environment had the potential to hinder
or assist the goal of reducing seclusion. As a consequence, we report
seclusion rates which are collated centrally on a database and are
therefore available for review.

The AWOL (absent without leave), violent incidents and seclusion
databases have all collected data over an extended period. In
de-identified form, they provided the opportunity to examine rates of
unauthorised absences, seclusions and violent incidents for 18 months
prior to the change in ward configuration and compare this to 18 months
following the change. The mean rates and standard deviations of the
monthly adverse events were calculated for the pre- and post-change
18-month intervals. As the data were non-parametric in nature, the
Mann-Whitney *U*-test was used to compare the 18 months prior to the
change with the 18 months following the change. The change in ward
environment was staggered during June and July 2013; this time period
was therefore not included in any data analysis as our goal was to
examine a longer-term impact of the policy change as opposed to
short-term effects during and following the transition.

We also report frequency and duration of the use of environmental
restraint to clarify whether or not the intended change to a largely
unlocked environment was successful or resulted in frequent locking of
the newly configured wards. The frequency of Safety Assessment Code
(SAC) 1 and 2 incidents (adverse events involving serious, major or
extreme harm to patients) involving psychiatric in-patients is also
provided pre- and post-change and examined for the possibility of a
change in more serious adverse events that would not be detected by
previous methods.

Ward occupancy data are routinely collected by means of a census taken
at midnight every 24 hours. Admission data to the acute in-patient
service and the forensic service are also recorded daily. Forensic
in-patients are predominantly admitted from forensic out-patient
services, courts and prisons, and not from general out-patient services.
However, we examined admission and occupancy data for these services to
test for the possibility that changes in outcome data were confounded by
variations in occupancy or transfer to the more secure environment of
the forensic service. The rate of monthly admissions pre- and
post-change was compared using the Mann-Whitney *U*-test.

Although this was a study of group data and individual files were not
accessed, ethics approval was sought and granted by the local University
of Otago ethics committee (reference number HD 14/21).

.. _S2:

Results
=======

Longitudinal data on monthly unauthorised absences are presented in
`Fig. 2 <#F2>`__. The mean rate for the 18 months prior to the new ward
configuration (December 2011-May 2013) was 16.9 (s.d. = 7.7) compared
with 26.7 (s.d. = 11.2) for 18 months following the change in ward
configuration (August 2013-January 2015). This represented a mean
increase of 9.7 unauthorised absences per month and a percentage
increase of 58% that was statistically significant (*P* = 0.005). As
some literature suggests unauthorised absences may be seasonal, means
were also calculated for the year pre- and post-change to ensure
identical calendar months were compared, and the results were similar
(16.6 (s.d. = 9.1) *v.* 29.6 (s.d. = 7.5), respectively).

.. figure:: 94f2
   :alt: Unauthorised absences before and after the change in ward
   configuration.
   :name: F2

   Unauthorised absences before and after the change in ward
   configuration.

Violent incidents were examined through the extraction of data recorded
under the category of aggression, which includes verbal abuse, verbal
threats, physical threats and physical assaults. Specific data were also
extracted on physical assaults to assess for more significant violence.
`Figure 3 <#F3>`__ shows the longitudinal data for all violent incidents
and the mean monthly rates for 18 months pre- and 18 months post-ward
changes, which were 72.3 (s.d. = 34.5) and 78.2 (s.d. = 43.1),
respectively. This represented a mean increase of 5.9 violent
incidents/month, or an 8% increase in incidents, which was not
statistically significant (*P* = 0.696). With regard to physical
assaults, the mean difference of 2.8 assaults/month, from 11.5 (s.d. =
5.9) before to 14.3 (s.d. = 10.1) after, was also not statistically
significant (*P* = 0.628) (`Fig. 3 <#F3>`__).

.. figure:: 94f3
   :alt: Aggressive incidents and physical assaults before and after the
   change in ward configuration.
   :name: F3

   Aggressive incidents and physical assaults before and after the
   change in ward configuration.

Another assessed variable was the longitudinal data on monthly seclusion
hours over the study period as well as the mean rates of monthly
seclusion (hours/month) (`Fig. 4 <#F4>`__). The mean length of seclusion
prior to the change was 391.5 (s.d. 203.0) compared with 185.2 (s.d.
135.6) following the change. This represented a mean drop of 206
hours/month or a percentage drop of 53% that was statistically
significant (*P* = 0.001).

.. figure:: 95f4
   :alt: Seclusion hours before and after the change in ward
   configuration.
   :name: F4

   Seclusion hours before and after the change in ward configuration.

Occupancy was recorded according to bed nights/month and converted to a
percentage of available bed nights. Occupancy varied between 80 and
101%, with a mean occupancy of 91% over the study period. It is likely
that the single month that experienced more than 100% occupancy was very
busy and included extra persons in rooms (e.g. partners, who do not
routinely stay) being entered in the census data. Percentage occupancy
data were largely stable over the study period and were without
systematic trends that could account for the significant increases in
unauthorised absences or significant reduction in seclusion hours. In
keeping with the occupancy data, the rate of new admissions to the acute
in-patient service was also largely stable over the study period (mean
monthly admissions for the 18 months pre-change 100.4 compared with
107.8 for the 18 months post-change, *P*\ =0.071). The mean number of
monthly admissions to the forensic service increased from 3.1 before the
new ward configuration to 4.4 after; however, the increase was not
caused by in-patients from the acute in-patient service as a total of 3
patients were transferred from the acute in-patient service to the
forensic service for the 18 months prior to the ward change compared
with 4 patients in the 18 months following the change.

The frequency of environmental restraint (locking of the high care areas
or whole wards) revealed that, on average, there were 16 times per month
when either a high care area or a whole ward was locked following the
change in ward configuration. This meant that on average, each of the
four wards had 4 periods each month in which part or the whole of the
ward was locked. The frequency of locked periods/month varied from 0 for
some wards to a maximum of 19, when the high care area of one ward was
locked on multiple occasions in response to a single patient's multiple
attempts to leave. In 37% of the environmental restraints, just the high
care areas were locked as opposed to whole wards (affecting only 1–3
patients at a time). The mean time an area was locked was 120 minutes,
and the range varied from 1 minute to 920 minutes. These results can be
compared with the period prior to the new ward configuration, which had
two wards (affecting up to 20 patients) constantly locked and occasional
periods when the two open wards were locked in response to clinical
pressure.

The total number of SAC1 and SAC2 events involving in-patients was 14
over the study period. Of these, 10 occurred before the change in ward
configuration, 0 occurred during the transition period, and 4 occurred
after the changes were made. For SAC1 incidents resulting in the death
of a patient, 7 occurred prior to the ward changes (4 deaths occurred on
the ward, 2 while patients were on granted leave, and 1 while on
unauthorised absence from the ward) and 4 deaths occurred following the
ward changes (3 on the ward and 1 while on granted leave). No SAC2
incidents occurred for patients who were on leave in the community or
during an unauthorised absence.

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

This study examined a range of adverse indicators over an extended time
period in order to clarify whether or not a change in ward environment
from two locked and two unlocked wards to a largely unlocked environment
was associated with an increase in adverse events. The principal finding
was that a significant increase in unauthorised absences occurred.
However, significant decreases in the use of seclusion and
non-significant increases in violent outcomes were also observed,
although the reduction in seclusion occurred alongside national and
local initiatives to minimise the use of seclusion.

The new ward configuration still made provision for the locking of
wards. However, this was only done for relatively short periods (mean
120 min) and less often than prior to the ward redevelopment, when 2
wards affecting 20 patients were continuously locked. In addition, in
37% of the occasions when locking occurred, only a high care area was
locked, meaning that 3 or fewer patients were affected. These numbers
suggest that the unlocking of two wards and the change in ward
environment did not result in wide-spread or prolonged locking of the
new ward configuration.

The occupancy and admission data were without systematic trends to
explain the changes noted. In addition, there was minimal flow of
patients from the acute in-patient service to the forensic service,
suggesting that more difficult patients who may be over-represented in
adverse incident data were not transferred to forensic services after
the wards were reconfigured.

Previous studies of unauthorised absences from psychiatric wards have
raised concerns about rare but serious adverse events that have occurred
while patients are absent.\ :sup:`7` Although the low base rate of these
events makes analysis difficult, it is reassuring for those considering
a transition to the provision of a largely unlocked environment that of
the 14 SAC1 and SAC2 events occurring over the study period, 10 occurred
prior to the ward change and only 4 occurred afterwards. In addition, of
the adverse events resulting in the death of a patient, 7 occurred
before the ward changes and 4 afterwards. Although total numbers of
unauthorised absences increased, there was only one death involving a
patient who had left the ward without being granted leave, and it
occurred prior to the ward change. All other community deaths over the
study period involving in-patients occurred for patients who had been
granted leave.

.. _S4:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

One strength of the study was the routine collection of outcome data by
hospital staff who were unaware that the data would later be used for
study purposes. As a consequence, changes in reporting behaviour could
not arise as a result of study influences because of the retrospective
nature of the study conception and design. A further strength is the
longitudinal nature of the data-set that allowed us to make
before-and-after comparisons and consider longer-term effects, as
opposed to solely focusing on the transition period during which staff
are adapting to changes. These longer-term effects were thought to be
more important in evaluating the impact of the change in environment and
can be taken into account by service leaders in other locations
considering similar changes. Although the longer-term outcomes were our
primary area of interest, it is also reassuring that the transition
period did not coincide with any SAC1 or SAC2 events, or a spike in the
other adverse events evaluated by the study.

Our main limitation was that the study design was not experimental in
nature. As the study was uncontrolled, our methodology allows comments
to be made on associations between adverse events and the ward changes,
but demonstrating causation is not possible. In particular, there was a
service initiative to reduce seclusion that started prior to the study
period. There were also increases in the numbers of routinely rostered
nursing staff on the acute in-patient service after the ward change.
This means that the relative influences of the change in ward
configuration, the seclusion-reducing initiatives and the changes in
nursing numbers on the adverse event rates are hard to quantify. It is
therefore possible that increases in seclusion might have been observed
if the changes in ward configuration had occurred in isolation. However,
it is also reassuring to note that no such increases were seen in the
presence of the seclusion reduction focus and nursing number changes
that also occurred over the study period.

.. _S5:

Final consideration
-------------------

Studies such as ours that have evaluated the impact of unlocking
psychiatric wards are rare. We were only able to identify 4 previous
studies over 7 decades in our literature review. These studies were
largely supportive of unlocking psychiatric wards, although the Molnar
*et al*\ :sup:`4` study also identified an increase in unauthorised
absences following changing ward policy. However, after the initial
increase, the rate subsequently decreased following an intervention to
better manage risk and absconding.\ :sup:`4`

As stated, the unlocking of our in-patient ward should not be viewed in
isolation. Although the findings were mixed with respect to adverse
outcomes, we suggest that clinical attention and adaptations to nursing
practice and clinical care have the ability to mitigate adverse outcomes
when changes in environment occur. This conjecture is supported by the
ability of some psychiatric units to markedly reduce seclusion
rates\ :sup:`8` in the presence of administrative and clinical support,
and scrutiny of seclusion practice. It is likely that the reduction of
seclusion hours demonstrated in this study occurred largely as a result
of nursing and management strategies already in place to reduce
seclusion in our service. However, seclusion hours continued to fall
despite the change in ward configuration, meaning that the less
restrictive environment did not have a negative impact on seclusion
rates or supported the continued reduction of seclusion. Further support
for the ability of service improvement initiatives to minimise adverse
outcomes is given by the studies of Bowers *et al*,\ :sup:`9,10` who
trialled anti-absconding interventions in acute psychiatric wards with
positive results, and the study by Nijman,\ :sup:`11` who demonstrated a
reduction in aggressive incidents through a systematic focus on
aggression alongside an intervention to reduce aggression. These studies
suggest the importance of nursing practice interventions in addition to
any environmental measures for reducing rates of absconding and
aggression.

Adverse outcomes varied after the change to a largely unlocked
environment, with increases in absconding, reductions in seclusion and
non-significant increases in violent incidents. The real-world nature of
this study does not allow clear inferences to be made regarding whether
or not the unlocking of the ward was causally linked to these changes in
adverse outcome rates. However, the longer-term nature of the database,
with the ability to scrutinise the adverse outcomes pre- and post-change
in ward configuration, strengthened the ability of this study to examine
the change. The change to a largely unlocked environment was stimulated
by a desire to provide care in the least restrictive way possible. Our
findings constitute a cautious endorsement of this approach. Although
unauthorised absences increased, other adverse outcomes were stable or
improved. Thus, providing acute in-patient psychiatric care in a largely
unlocked environment appears feasible, particularly in the presence of
other service improvement strategies.

.. [1]
   **Ben Beaglehole**, Senior Lecturer, Department of Psychological
   Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand; **John
   Beveridge**, Nurse Consultant, and **Warren Campbell-Trotter**, Nurse
   Coordinator, Canterbury District Health Board, Christchurch, New
   Zealand; **Chris Frampton**, Research Professor, Department of
   Psychological Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch, New
   Zealand.
