========================================================================
Civil and forensic patients in secure psychiatric settings: a comparison
========================================================================



Nuwan Galappathie
Sobia Tamim Khan
Amina Hussain

:Correspondence: Nuwan Galappathie
(ngalappathie@standrew.co.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2017-6

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To evaluate differences between male patients in
   secure psychiatric settings in the UK based on whether they are
   detained under civil or forensic sections of the Mental Health Act
   1983. A cohort of patients discharged from a secure psychiatric
   hospital were evaluated for length of stay and frequency of
   risk-related incidents.

   **Results** Overall, 84 patients were included in the study: 52 in
   the forensic group and 32 in the civil group. Civil patients had more
   frequent incidents of aggression, sex offending, fire-setting and
   vulnerability, whereas forensic patients had more frequent episodes
   of self-harm.

   **Clinical implications** Secure hospitals should ensure treatment
   programmes are tailored to each patient's needs. Civil patients
   require greater emphasis on treatment of their mental illness,
   whereas forensic patients have additional offence-related treatment
   needs. Regular liaison between forensic and general adult services is
   essential to help ensure patients can return to appropriate settings
   at the earliest opportunity in their recovery.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Further to the closure of the asylums and subsequent rare but
high-profile failures in community care, forensic psychiatry in the UK
has rapidly expanded, with the development of high, medium and low
secure in-patient services across the country as well as specialist
forensic mental health teams in the community.\ :sup:`1` Alongside its
expansion, an ongoing debate related to its interface with general
psychiatry has persisted.\ :sup:`2` In England and Wales, the forensic
*v*. general psychiatry divide extends to the subdivision of in-patients
detained under the Mental Health Act 1983 into those affected by civil
and forensic sections. Patients detained under Part II of the Act are
termed ‘civil patients’. They can be detained under Section 2 for
assessment and treatment for up to 28 days where there is suspicion of a
mental disorder. Section 2 can be converted to Section 3 for further
treatment. Alternatively, patients can be admitted directly under
Section 3 when there is a known mental disorder. Patients detained under
Part III of the Act are termed ‘forensic patients’, given their
involvement in the criminal justice system through the courts and
prisons.

While forensic units have expanded, there has been an overall reduction
of in-patient bed numbers in the UK, which have fallen from 155 000 in
1954 to just 18 166 as of 31 March 2014. The number of patients detained
in all settings under civil sections during 2013/2014 was 32 781, of
which 25 300 were under Section 2 and 7481 were under Section 3. During
2013/2014 there were 1847 detentions under forensic sections: 99 under
Section 35 or 36, which is admission for assessment or treatment via the
courts; 763 under Section 37 hospital orders, allowing detention in
hospital instead of a prison sentence; and 457 under Section 47, which
allows transfer of a serving prisoner to hospital.\ :sup:`2,3`

Secure psychiatric hospitals are generally geared towards providing
assessment, treatment and rehabilitation for forensic patients, since
they are the majority group in such hospitals. In particular, Coid *et
al* found that 69% of patients in medium security were detained under
forensic sections.\ :sup:`4` Despite this discrepancy in distribution,
research into whether there are differences between these groups is
limited. The only study we could identify was that by Reed
(2004),\ :sup:`5` who evaluated the differences between civil and
forensic in-patients in a low secure intellectual disability setting and
found, surprisingly, that the forensic patients were less likely to be
aggressive or use weapons but more likely to harm themselves.\ :sup:`5`
It is not known whether these findings are isolated to intellectual
disability settings. Therefore, we present findings from our evaluation
of male patients discharged from a secure psychiatric hospital
(excluding intellectual disability – the hospital does not cater for
such patients) and suggest recommendations on how to meet the differing
clinical needs identified in each group.

.. _S1:

Method
======

The study was conducted as part of a service evaluation into length of
stay at St Andrew's Healthcare, Birmingham, and registered with the St
Andrew's Clinical Audit Team. In keeping with previous similar
evaluations, ethical approval was not required as the study evaluated
retrospective, non-patient-identifiable data from health records as part
of service evaluation.\ :sup:`5` Data were retrospectively collected for
all discharges from the two medium and three low secure wards since the
opening of the hospital in March 2009 to the study end point of 30
December 2014. The source of data were patients' electronic health
records, including medical reports, Historical Clinical Risk
Management-20 (HCR-20) assessments, Care Programme Approach records,
electronically recorded risk incident logs and discharge summaries.

Summary statistics were calculated for all patients evaluated. Patients
were then grouped by whether they were initially detained under a civil
or forensic section at the start of their admission to St Andrew's
Birmingham. In order to evaluate illness severity between the two
groups, Health of the Nation Outcome Scales for Users of Secure and
Forensic Services (HoNOS-secure) assessment scores taken at admission
and discharge were noted.\ :sup:`6` A power calculation was not
performed but all available data were used in the analysis. The average
length of stay was calculated for each group. SPSS version 16 for
Windows was then used to calculate independent *t*-test statistics to
examine any between-group associations and frequency of various types of
incidents.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

In total, 93 male patients were discharged from the hospital during the
data collection period; 9 patients were excluded from the study: 7 were
excluded as their admission was less than 3 months and unlikely to be
representative of the treatment phase being evaluated, and discharge
would also have occurred prior to the standard Care Programme Approach
meeting held 3 months after admission, where a formal diagnosis would
have been made. One patient was excluded as they were informal during
the course of their admission and one was excluded due to death from
natural causes. Therefore, 84 patients were included in the study, with
32 in the civil group and 52 in the forensic group. In the civil group,
16 patients were admitted from general adult services, 1 from a police
station, 7 from low secure services and 8 from medium secure services.
The legal status of patients in the civil group remained unchanged
during the course of their admission, apart from one patient who became
informal in the days prior to discharge. None of the patients in the
civil group switched to being forensic patients following convictions in
court. Regarding the forensic group, 4 patients were admitted from
general adult services, 3 from low secure services, 16 from medium
secure services, 28 from prison and 1 from a high secure hospital. In
this group, 14 patients changed their legal status prior to discharge;
11 changed from being sentenced prisoners under Section 47/49 to being
detained under a notional Section 37, as they had gone past what would
have been their automatic release date from prison. Two patients
switched from being remanded prisoners under Section 48/49 to being
sentenced under a Section 37 hospital order at court and one patient
switched from Section 48/49 to a Section 37/41 hospital order with
restrictions after sentencing at court.

`Table 1 <#T1>`__ outlines the baseline characteristics of each group,
including diagnosis, age, ethnicity and Mental Health Act status on
admission. All patients were male, with a mean age of 37 years (range 20
to 63 years). `Table 2 <#T2>`__ shows the mean length of stay,
HoNOS-secure scores on admission and discharge, and frequency of
risk-related incidents.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Patient characteristics

   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      | Civil                | Forensic             |
   |                      | group\ `a <#TFN1>`__ | group\ `b <#TFN2>`__ |
   |                      | *n* (%)              | *n* (%)              |
   +======================+======================+======================+
   | Primary diagnosis    |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Psychosis        | 30 (94)              | 46 (88)              |
   | (schizophrenia,      |                      |                      |
   | schizoaffective      |                      |                      |
   | disorder, delusional |                      |                      |
   | disorder)            |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Personality      | 2 (6)                | 3 (6)                |
   | disorder             |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Affective        | 0 (0)                | 3 (6)                |
   | disorder             |                      |                      |
   | (depression, bipolar |                      |                      |
   | affective disorder)  |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Secondary diagnosis  |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Personality      | 5 (16)               | 11 (21)              |
   | disorder             |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Substance misuse | 18 (56)              | 33 (63)              |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Alcohol misuse   | 1 (3)                | 7 (13)               |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Ethnicity            |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Black            | 10 (31)              | 13 (25)              |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     White            | 18 (56)              | 27 (52)              |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Other            | 4 (13)               | 12 (23)              |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Legal status         |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Section 2        | 1 (3)                |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Section 3        | 31 (97)              |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Section 37       |                      | 8 (15)               |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Section 47       |                      | 5 (10)               |
   | (notional 37)        |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Section 37/41    |                      | 12 (23)              |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Section 48/49    |                      | 7 (13)               |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |     Section 47/49    |                      | 20 (39)              |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

   *n*\ =32.

   *n*\ =52.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Length of stay in secure care and frequency of risk-related
      incidents

   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                | Civil          | Forensic       | Independent    |
   |                | group\         | group\         | *t*-test\      |
   |                |  `a <#TFN3>`__ |  `b <#TFN4>`__ |  `c <#TFN5>`__ |
   +================+================+================+================+
   | Length of      | 587 (95–1396)  | 523 (105–1407) | *t* = 0.75,    |
   | stay, days:    |                |                | *P* = 0.96     |
   | mean (range)   |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Mean           |                |                |                |
   | HoNOS-secure   |                |                |                |
   | score:         |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     admission  | 25.31          | 24.62          | *t* = −0.39,   |
   |                |                |                | *P* = 0.07     |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     discharge  | 20.16          | 18.77          | *t* = −0.81,   |
   |                |                |                | *P* = 0.94     |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Risk incidents |                |                |                |
   | per 30 days,   |                |                |                |
   | mean           |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Violence   | 0.92           | 0.34           | *t* = 2.01,    |
   | (includes      |                |                | *P* = 0.02     |
   | assaults       |                |                |                |
   | against staff  |                |                |                |
   | or peers)      |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Self-harm  | 0.06           | 0.21           | *t* = −2.09,   |
   | (threats or    |                |                | *P* = 0.02     |
   | acts)          |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                | 0.22           | 0.05           | *t* = 1.17,    |
   |   Unauthorised |                |                | *P* = 0.44     |
   | leave          |                |                |                |
   | (attempts or   |                |                |                |
   | episodes of    |                |                |                |
   | absconding or  |                |                |                |
   | escape)        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Substance  | 0.06           | 0.12           | *t* = −1.14,   |
   | misuse         |                |                | *P* = 0.15     |
   | (intentions or |                |                |                |
   | incidents of   |                |                |                |
   | illicit drug   |                |                |                |
   | misuse)        |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                | 0.41           | 0.25           | *t* = 1.39,    |
   |   Self-neglect |                |                | *P* = 0.17     |
   | (poor          |                |                |                |
   | s              |                |                |                |
   | elf-care/diet) |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                | 0.08           | 0.02           | *t* = 1.76,    |
   |   Fire-setting |                |                | *P* = 0.002    |
   | (threats or    |                |                |                |
   | acts)          |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Sex        | 0.06           | 0.03           | *t* = 1.09,    |
   | offending      |                |                | *P* = 0.04     |
   | (sexual        |                |                |                |
   | comments or    |                |                |                |
   | contact        |                |                |                |
   | offences)      |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                | 2.10           | 0.29           | *t* = 4.88,    |
   |  Vulnerability |                |                | *P* = 0.00     |
   | (being         |                |                |                |
   | intimidated,   |                |                |                |
   | bullied or     |                |                |                |
   | assaulted)     |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Verbal     | 2.10           | 1.62           | *t* = 0.87,    |
   | aggression     |                |                | *P* = 0.36     |
   | (abusive       |                |                |                |
   | comments)      |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |     Other      | 1.85           | 1.99           | *t* = −0.33,   |
   | unspecified    |                |                | *P* = 0.36     |
   | risk incidents |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

   *n*\ =32.

   *n*\ =52.

   d.f=82.

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

The study found no significant difference in length of stay or severity
of illness based on HoNOS-secure scores at the start or end of admission
between the civil and forensic groups. However, it should be noted that
HoNOS-secure is not a specific measure of mental state, since it also
evaluates behavioural functioning and a range of security measures. This
study identified that civil patients in secure settings have more
frequent incidents of aggression, sex offending, fire-setting and
vulnerability, whereas forensic patients have more frequent episodes of
self-harm. This finding challenges the preconception that forensic
patients are more ‘dangerous’ and difficult to manage.\ :sup:`2` One
explanation for this may be that the civil patients in this study
represent a cohort of general adult patients that have been placed in
forensic services due to their frequency of aggressive and difficult to
manage behaviours, whereas the more stable forensic patients have been
admitted due to severe but more isolated offences.

The higher frequency of incidents in the civil group may make engaging
with specialist treatment programmes practically more difficult for this
group, which may in turn become a factor that limits their motivation to
engage. Secure hospitals should be aware that civil patients, due to
higher frequency of risk incidents, may have differing needs to forensic
patients. Therefore, we suggest that civil patients who present with a
high frequency of incidents will benefit from a greater emphasis on
treatment of their mental illness combined with behavioural
interventions, with less of a requirement to engage in specialist
treatment programmes or to complete formal psychological therapy
programmes that are often required in forensic settings. Further
research is needed to explore whether the higher frequency of incidents
among civil patients affects the therapeutic milieu on the ward and has
an adverse impact on outcomes for forensic patients engaging in
specialist treatment interventions. The higher frequency of
vulnerability incidents among civil patients highlights the difficulty
they experience in forensic settings and suggests a greater need for
vigilance and robust safeguarding for this patient group, who may be at
risk of reprisal assaults by their forensic peers. The findings of our
study must also be considered in light of the Schizophrenia Commission
report,\ :sup:`7` which comments that patients stay too long in secure
services, and highlights funding cuts and acute bed closures in general
adult services as part of the problem.

We conclude that our study supports the need to focus more on preventive
interventions, such as avoiding delays in assessment, ensuring early
treatment and supporting alternatives to admission such as crisis and
home-based treatment teams, to help avoid admissions. Regular liaison
between forensic and general adult services is essential to help ensure
patients can return to appropriate settings at the earliest opportunity
in their recovery. This may only be possible with careful consideration
when commissioning services at all levels of care.

The finding that forensic patients have a greater frequency of self-harm
incidents should be treated with caution as the numbers in this study
are small and self-harm is a rare outcome. One possibility is that
forensic patients may find the criminal justice system and their
conviction distressing, leading to a greater risk of self-harm and
potentially suicide. We suggest that clinical teams should be aware of
this risk in these patients and ensure careful monitoring, risk
management and support for patients during criminal proceedings.

.. _S4:

Limitations
-----------

This study has a number of limitations. Most significantly, it is a
comparison of forensic and civil patients conducted in a secure mental
health hospital and the findings cannot be used to compare differences
between forensic and general adult patients in non-secure settings. In
addition, the civil patients in the study are likely to represent
patients with greater treatment resistance whose aggressive behaviours
have led to them being transferred to secure settings. It remains
possible that the section status assigned to the patient on admission
may be misleading, as quite often patients who commit offences when
unwell are not prosecuted.\ :sup:`8` The study is reliant on accurate
recording of risk incidents in patients' records. Although some degree
of inaccuracy in recording of incidents may have occurred, it is
anticipated that this would have occurred evenly between both groups and
thus not affected the validity of the results. This study, in line with
previous work, evaluates data for a cohort of discharged patients in
order to evaluate comparable groups. It is possible that the study may
underestimate the severity of risk incidents, since the most challenging
patients would not have been included in the analysis as they have not
yet been discharged from hospital. It is anticipated that the impact of
this factor would be evenly distributed between each group.

.. _S5:

Practice recommendations
------------------------

Secure hospitals should ensure all treatment plans are based around the
individual. There should be an emphasis on managing the mental illness
of civil patients and tailoring treatments based on this goal, which
will help reduce risks and hopefully shorten length of admission.
Forensic patients are more likely to have additional offence-related
treatment needs which would require specific interventions. Regular
liaison between forensic and general adult services is essential to help
ensure patients can return to appropriate settings at the earliest
opportunity in their recovery. This can only be possible with careful
consideration when commissioning services at all levels of care.

We thank Catherine Clarke, Psychology student at the University of
Birmingham, for her help in the study.

.. [1]
   **Nuwan Galappathie** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist, St
   Andrew's Healthcare, Birmingham, and Visiting Researcher, Institute
   of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College, London;
   **Sobia Tamim Khan** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist, St
   Andrew's Healthcare, Birmingham, and honorary senior lecturer,
   University of Birmingham; **Amina Hussain** is a trainee forensic and
   clinical psychologist, St Andrew's Healthcare, Birmingham, and
   University of Birmingham.
