====================================================
Profile: Derek Summerfield – politics and psychiatry
====================================================



Julia Bland [1]_
:Date: 2017-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 294f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

Preparing for this interview, I was aware of Dr Summerfield's political
commitment. After all, he was the principal psychiatrist for Freedom
from Torture (Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture)
from 1991 until 2000. He is an outspoken critic of what he describes as
the complicity of the Israeli Medical Association (IMA) and Israeli
doctors posted to interrogation units in relation to the torture of
Palestinian refugees, which has led to him receiving many accusations of
anti-Semitism and becoming the subject of a libel suit by the President
of the IMA. He is a member of the Critical Psychiatry Network. Before
training in psychiatry, he worked as a government medical officer in
Zimbabwe to ‘repay his debt’ to Africa. This was clearly going to be an
encounter with a man of the left, passionate about social justice.

.. _S1:

The personal and the political
==============================

I was curious about how Dr Summerfield sees the personal and the
political. Can they ever be separated? What exactly is the role of the
psychiatrist in relation to social justice? Should what I will call
‘ethico-political awareness’ be part of psychiatric training, given the
huge relevance to mental health of the context in which our patients
live?

If senior psychiatrists should be leading the profession, can this
ethico-political thinking be encouraged by example only, or more
explicitly within the syllabus? And how does Derek Summerfield see his
role within the profession? Is he an individual firebrand, grit in the
oyster, provocateur, thinking iconoclast, leading by example and seeking
influence via publication, or does he have a more intergenerational
mission? (It emerges that he has recently canvassed the juniors at the
Maudsley Hospital and recommended they should not comply with trust
training in relation to the controversial government Prevent strategy of
2015, intended to detect early radicalisation in pupils, students or
patients, which he regards as outrageous state intrusion into clinical
confidentiality and a form of McCarthyism.)

More widely, in the recent climate of junior doctor strikes, dire
warnings from the British Medical Association, hot controversy over the
National Health Service as a public service, what, if any, are the
political obligations of (a) doctors in general and (b) psychiatrists in
particular? I got my answer loud and clear in a note he sent me a few
days after the interview: “‘There is the doctor as doctor, but also
(ethically imperative) the doctor as sentient citizen … To do with a
fundamental duty to attend not just to the particulars of the patient
sitting in front of us, but also to the political and socioeconomic
factors that produce distress and disease. Doctors have largely not done
this. End of sermon …’ .” Dr Summerfield is actually not preachy: he is
amusing, not pompous, but self-deprecating – yet utterly (and perhaps
unfashionably) serious. Of course he knows that not all doctors or
psychiatrists share his views. Indeed, he is realistic: “‘With
exceptions, doctors are not politically engaged. The average doctor
doesn't have a social activist bone in his body… as a profession we are
closer to those in power than those without it… medicine is basically an
entrenched profession, and we behave like one … after the revolutions in
places like Cuba, Mozambique, the vast majority of doctors left the
country …’ .” I wonder how he was viewed by the international and
non-homogeneous group of South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
(SLAM) junior psychiatrists when they received his open letter about the
Prevent strategy training. Is he admired as a model of the thinking
critical psychiatrist, or dismissed as eccentric or even dangerously
insurrectionist?

Derek Summerfield was born 68 years ago in Cape Town, South Africa, into
a non-medical family, but grew up in Bulawayo, the second city, after
Harare, of Zimbabwe (then Rhodesia). He studied physics initially (‘the
headmaster persuaded bright White boys to do science’), then worked in a
shipping company in Cape Town, and did some teaching. He always wanted
to be a journalist (and now thinks he'd do law and anthropology if he
was starting out again), but nevertheless began medicine, aged 24, at St
Mary's Medical School in Paddington, London.

   ‘I failed everything, and nearly left in the first year. I had no
   interest or feel for science in the preclinical years, but when I got
   onto the wards I felt an intellectual thrill at last.’

He did house jobs (i.e. FY1) in Oxford and Cambridge, and went on to
become a medical registrar with MRCP Part 1. During this period he did
several stints in Zimbabwe during and after the civil war, no walk in
the park. In Chiredzi, in the war-ravaged rural south-east, there were
200 beds and 2 doctors. He was the paediatrician, Vith 50 desperately
sick kids at any one time … 5 of whom died each day’. He saw up close
and personal the effect of poverty on health: ‘even measles was 80–100
times more fatal in these malnourished kids’.

He finally decided on psychiatry in 1982, now aged 34, and went to St
George's Hospital. While working there he met a beautiful and much
younger woman, now a consultant clinical psychologist and psychoanalyst
at the Tavistock, Francesca Huhne. They have a 20-year-old daughter, who
is reading History at university. He and Francesca subsequently studied
war-wounded men from both sides of the civil war in Nicaragua together.
He has been a consultant to Oxfam, and for many years was a research
associate at the Refugee Studies Centre, University of Oxford.

He joined Freedom from Torture (Medical Foundation for the Care of
Victims of Torture) full-time in 1991, where he treated around 800
patients, often seeking asylum in the UK: Bosnians, Sri Lankans, Iraqis,
Turkish Kurds, Africans and Palestinians, with 95% of consultations
requiring interpreters. But with his lifetime history of independent
thinking and acting on principle, this appointment did not end amicably:
he was ‘asked to leave’ Freedom from Torture in 2000 because the
organisation was concerned that his widely published questioning of the
category of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) might deter
funders.\ :sup:`1` He sees the diagnosis of PTSD in the context of
refugees as the ‘pseudo-scientific pathologising of people affected by
war … the medicalisation of their situation diminishes the importance of
work and the rebuilding of social networks … the broken social world is
the lot of the asylum seeker’.\ :sup:`2`

After leaving Freedom from Torture, he contacted Dr Maurice Lipsedge,
who suggested that he should consider applying for his job in SLAM, from
which he was retiring. This was in the HIV mental health team, initially
part time, then full time.

The HIV team at its zenith had four psychologists and acted as a
community mental health team with an HIV focus. He enjoyed the interest
of the ‘two different groups of patients … African women and British gay
men’. The service was greatly reduced in 2016, owing to both financial
constraints and the mainstreaming of HIV. He accepts this process as
reasonable, given the changes in HIV treatment and prognosis, with life
expectancy being almost normal now, if the medicines are taken reliably.
(And many African women don't always do this, and he would like to
understand why.)

He has no immediate plans to retire and is busy with a variety of work
outside the ‘day job’. He's involved with the new medical school in
Bulawayo, his home town, helping with the undergraduate curriculum, and
will teach there: ‘I still feel a debt to Africa’. He advises Oxfam: In
the 80s they suddenly got very interested in the mental health of
victims of war‘. Derek Summerfield helped evaluate their projects in
Bosnia, and steered Oxfam away from a PTSD-centred approach to victims
of that war: ‘I persuaded them not to go down the counselling route … if
you ask Muslim adolescents in Tuzla what they want, they want a bit of
normality. They actually requested some fabric so they could put on a
fashion show’.

.. _S2:

Problem with the concept of global mental health
================================================

He has published widely from the standpoint of a fundamental opposition
to the medicalisation of human distress and the assumption that Western
psychiatry is universally valid, which he sees as a kind of cultural
imperialism.\ :sup:`3,4`

He offers a critique and deconstruction of international attitudes to
the mental health of victims of war.\ :sup:`2` He stresses how the
global effects of wars are largely experienced by people living in
poverty, and he sees the danger of the PTSD diagnosis as pathologising
of the individual rather than attending to the effects of poverty and
the need for reconstruction of the social fabric.\ :sup:`2`

He makes a more general critique of the concept of ‘global mental
health’, highly critical of ‘taking depression into a country which has
no such concept, followed by the marketing of antidepressants … Western
cultural values parading as medical facts’.\ :sup:`3,4` His critique
extends to the cultural relativism of psychiatric diagnoses in general:
as if disease had an objective existence, independent of the gaze of the
diagnostician.

The origin of PTSD as a diagnosis was for disturbed Vietnam war veterans
in the USA with the benign intention of lobbying to get decent care for
them by emphasising the traumatogenic nature of war, thus legitimising a
position of victimhood, moral exculpation and receipt of disability
pensions. In Summerfield's view, the development of this concept of PTSD
needs to be understood in the wider social context of the ‘rise of
expressive psychologically minded individualism, personal rights,
entitlement and grievance,’ as opposed to the previously socially
sanctioned stiff upper lip self-management of trauma. Now PTSD has
become a ‘certificate of impairment’. It is the only diagnosis which
contains its aetiology within itself, while in fact, he claims,
premorbid factors such as psychiatric history or a negative thinking
style are more important than the actual event itself in the aetiology
of symptoms.\ :sup:`1`

Conflating normality and pathology ‘devalues the currency of true
illness’.

He is an old fighter, brave and almost proud of his battle scars:
‘No-one has been called an anti-Semite in the medical press more than
me’. He feels the campaign he convened against medical complicity with
torture in Israel is the ‘best thing I've done in my career’. So the
life and views of Derek Summerfield are a challenge to all doctors, even
those with different political views: is it acceptable for doctors to
absent themselves from political engagement as being outside their
remit, or are we ethically obliged to be properly aware of the
sociopolitical context of our work? People with unflinching integrity
have always made others uncomfortable: consider the unpopularity of
Jesus overturning stalls in the temple market.

If we take our ethical obligations as doctors seriously, we need
intellectually rigorous and dogged colleagues like Derek Summerfield to
point up our innate conservatism and political passivity.

.. [1]
   **Julia Bland**, honorary consultant psychiatrist, South London and
   Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, and consultant medical
   psychotherapist, DocHealth, British Medical Association, London, UK;
   email: julia.bland@hotmail.co.uk
