=========================================================================================
Caregiver burden and distress following the patient's discharge from psychiatric hospital
=========================================================================================



Veronica Ranieri
Kevin Madigan
Eric Roche
David McGuinness
Emma Bainbridge
Larkin Feeney
Brian Hallahan
Colm McDonald
Brian O'DonoghueCorrespondence to Brian O'Donoghue
(briannoelodonoghue@gmail.com)  [1]_
:Date: 2017-4

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** Caring for someone with a mental illness is
   increasingly occurring within the community. As a result, family
   members who fulfil a caregiving role may experience substantial
   levels of burden and psychological distress. This study investigates
   the level of burden and psychological distress reported by caregivers
   after the patient's admission.

   **Results** This study found that the overall level of burden and
   psychological distress experienced by caregivers did not differ
   according to the patient's legal status. However, the caregivers of
   those who were voluntarily admitted supervised the person to a
   significantly greater extent than the caregivers of those who were
   involuntarily admitted. Approximately 15% of caregivers revealed high
   levels of psychological distress.

   **Clinical implications** This study may emphasise a need for mental
   health professionals to examine the circumstances of caregivers,
   particularly of those caring for patients who are voluntarily
   admitted, a year after the patient's admission.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

One in four families worldwide is affected by mental illness.\ :sup:`1`
With the onset of illness, a family member may assume a caregiver role
for their unwell relative, which may result in positive and negative
experiences for the caregiver.\ :sup:`2` While caregivers convey a sense
of satisfaction and well-being from their caregiving relationship, they
also report feeling burdened.\ :sup:`3` Such burden may be characterised
by both objective difficulties, such as being unable to leave the family
home and work, and subjective difficulties, such as psychological
distress.\ :sup:`4`

Should a patient become severely unwell, it is often the caregiver who
intervenes to initiate emergency psychiatric treatment.\ :sup:`5`
Caregivers can experience significant obstacles in gaining the
assistance of a mental healthcare team for their relative\ :sup:`6` and
involuntary admission in particular can be associated with high levels
of caregiver burden.\ :sup:`7` This is important, as the level of burden
experienced by caregivers can significantly predict treatment adherence
and outcome in the patient.\ :sup:`8` Furthermore, caregivers who
experience high levels of burden reveal an increased incidence of
physical and mental health problems and health-related risk
behaviours.\ :sup:`8` However, less is known about the level of burden
or psychological distress that caregivers experience in the period
following admission. Additionally, the limited research to date has
focused on caregivers of involuntarily admitted patients and there is
very little known about the caregivers of those admitted voluntarily.

For this reason, we aim to determine the level of burden and
psychological distress reported by caregivers approximately 18 months
after the patient's admission to an acute mental health unit. We also
aim to determine whether clinical (specifically legal status) and
demographic factors were associated with the level of burden and
psychological distress reported by caregivers.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Participants
------------

Participants consisted of caregivers of either involuntarily or
voluntarily admitted patients. Caregivers were recruited from two
concurrent studies: the Service Users' Perspectives of their Admission
(SUPA) study\ :sup:`9` and the Prospective Evaluation of the Operation
and Effects of the Mental Health Act 2001 from the Viewpoints of Service
Users and Health Professionals study. The former was conducted in
south-east Dublin and North Wicklow and involved both involuntarily and
voluntarily admitted patients. The latter was conducted in Galway and
Roscommon and included involuntarily admitted individuals and
individuals who were brought to hospital under the Irish Mental Health
Act, 2001, but were not subsequently involuntarily detained (i.e. they
accepted a voluntary admission).

As patients were recruited before caregivers in these studies, our
inclusion and exclusion criteria for caregivers stemmed from those
applied to patients (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). Patients were excluded if they
could not provide informed consent, had a diagnosis of dementia or had a
moderate to severe intellectual disability that rendered them unable to
participate in the study. Patients who received a sole diagnosis of a
personality disorder or substance misuse were also excluded from
participating, as these individuals cannot be admitted involuntarily
under the Irish Mental Health Act, 2001. Caregivers who were younger
than 18 at the time of interview or who had a moderate to severe
intellectual disability that impeded their ability to consent were
similarly excluded from participation in the study.

.. figure:: 88f1
   :alt: Recruitment of participants, from patient interview to
   caregiver interview.
   :name: F1

   Recruitment of participants, from patient interview to caregiver
   interview.

.. _S3:

Informed consent
----------------

Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included
in the study. The consent process consisted of three steps. First,
patients were asked to consent to their caregiver being contacted and
informed of the study approximately 1 year after their discharge.
Second, caregivers were contacted by telephone by a researcher who
introduced the study and arranged a time of interview. Finally, informed
consent was sought from caregivers at interview.

.. _S4:

Psychometric instruments
------------------------

The Involvement Evaluation Questionnaire (IEQ) was employed as a measure
of caregiver burden and caregiving.\ :sup:`10` It consisted of 27 core
items divided into four sections: urging, supervision, tension and
worrying. Scores on the IEQ ranged from 0 to 108, with larger figures
representing a higher level of caregiver burden. The IEQ is a reliable
instrument, with Cronbach's alpha 0.74–0.85 for each subscale and 0.90
for the total score.\ :sup:`11` The IEQ also included a short, 12-item
General Health Questionnaire (GHQ-12) that measured psychological
distress. Scores on the GHQ-12 ranged from 0 to 12, with higher scores
indicating that the caregiver was experiencing emotional
difficulties.\ :sup:`12` The GHQ-12 is a reliable measure of
psychological distress with an alpha coefficient of 0.87.\ :sup:`13`
Finally, diagnostic and clinical information pertaining to the patient
was taken from a Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I
Disorders (SCID).\ :sup:`14`

.. _S5:

Setting
-------

The study included caregivers of individuals admitted to an acute mental
health unit in one of five hospitals in Ireland that covered a combined
urban and rural catchment population of over 590 000 individuals.

.. _S6:

Ethical approval
----------------

The study received ethical approval from the governing ethical
committees in all of the study sites: St John of God Hospitaller Order
Provincial Ethics Committee, Newcastle Hospital Ethics Committee and
University Hospital Galway Ethics Committee.

.. _S7:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

All data were entered into a Microsoft Access database and analysed
using SPSS Version 22 for Mac. As the data were not normally
distributed, multiple Mann–Whitney U and Kruskal–Wallis tests were used
to determine whether burden and psychological distress scores differed
between caregivers of involuntarily and voluntarily admitted
individuals, and according to clinical and demographic factors. Effect
sizes (*r*) were used to measure the magnitude of differences between
scores. A small, moderate or large effect size corresponded with values
equal to or less than 0.10, 0.30 and 0.50, respectively.

.. _S8:

Results
=======

.. _S9:

Demographic and clinical characteristics
----------------------------------------

Sixty-five caregivers participated in the study; 42 (65%) were female.
The mean age of caregivers was 54 years (s.d. = 15). The majority of
caregivers were married (*n* = 49, 75%), 5 (8%) were single, a further 5
(8%) were divorced and the remaining 6 (9%) were widowed. Most
caregivers were the person's parents (*n* = 37, 57%), 11 (17%) were
spouses or partners, 8 (12%) were siblings, 6 (9%) were children and 3
(5%) were other relatives. The mean length of time between caregiver and
patient interviews at baseline was 584 days (s.d. = 165). The median
duration of the index admission was 34 days (interquartile range (IQR)
17.5–50) and 24 (36.9%) patients were readmitted within 1 year of the
index admission.

Forty-six (71%) individuals were involuntarily admitted and 19 (29%)
were voluntarily admitted. The majority were male (*n* = 33, 51%). The
mean age of patients was 39 years (s.d. = 12). The majority of patients
were single (*n* = 41, 63%), 16 (25%) were married and the remaining 8
(12%) were divorced.

Caregiver characteristics across legal status are given in `Table
1 <#T1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Comparison of caregiver characteristics across legal status

   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   | Charac   | All      | Ca       | Ca       | Sta      | *P*  |
   | teristic | ca       | regivers | regivers | tistical |      |
   |          | regivers | of       | of       | test     |      |
   |          |          | invol    | vol      |          |      |
   |          |          | untarily | untarily |          |      |
   |          |          | admitted | admitted |          |      |
   |          |          | patients | patients |          |      |
   +==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+======+
   | Age,     | 54       | 54       | 54       | *U* =    | 0.94 |
   | years:   | (43–67)  | (43–66)  | (39–68)  | 340      |      |
   | median   |          |          |          |          |      |
   | (IQR)    |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   | Gender,  |          |          |          |          |      |
   | *n* (%)  |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |     Male | 23 (35)  | 14 (30)  | 9 (47)   | χ\       | 0.19 |
   |          |          |          |          | :sup:`2` |      |
   |          |          |          |          | = 1.7    |      |
   |          |          |          |          | d.f. = 1 |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          | 42 (65)  | 32 (70)  | 10 (53)  |          |      |
   |   Female |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   | Marital  |          |          |          |          |      |
   | status,  |          |          |          |          |      |
   | *n* (%)  |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |     In   | 49 (75)  | 34 (74)  | 15 (79)  | χ\       | 0.67 |
   | rela     |          |          |          | :sup:`2` |      |
   | tionship |          |          |          | = 0.2    |      |
   |          |          |          |          | d.f. = 1 |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |     Not  | 16 (25)  | 12 (26)  | 4 (21)   |          |      |
   | in       |          |          |          |          |      |
   | rela     |          |          |          |          |      |
   | tionship |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   | Ed       |          |          |          |          |      |
   | ucation, |          |          |          |          |      |
   | *n* (%)  |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |     P    | 16 (30)  | 12 (33)  | 2 (13)   | χ\       | 0.09 |
   | rimary/s |          |          |          | :sup:`2` |      |
   | econdary |          |          |          | = 2.8    |      |
   |          |          |          |          | d.f. = 1 |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          | 37 (70)  | 24 (67)  | 13 (87)  |          |      |
   | Tertiary |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   | Ho       |          |          |          |          |      |
   | usehold, |          |          |          |          |      |
   | *n* (%)  |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          | 37 (57)  | 23 (50)  | 14 (74)  | χ\       | 0.08 |
   |   Living |          |          |          | :sup:`2` |      |
   | together |          |          |          | = 3.1    |      |
   |          |          |          |          | d.f. = 1 |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          | 28 (43)  | 23 (50)  | 5 (26)   |          |      |
   |   Living |          |          |          |          |      |
   | se       |          |          |          |          |      |
   | parately |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   | Relat    |          |          |          |          |      |
   | ionship, |          |          |          |          |      |
   | *n* (%)  |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          | 34 (71)  | 25 (78)  | 9 (56)   | χ\       | 0.12 |
   |   Parent |          |          |          | :sup:`2` |      |
   |          |          |          |          | = 2.5    |      |
   |          |          |          |          | d.f. = 1 |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+
   |          | 14 (29)  | 7 (22)   | 7 (44)   |          |      |
   |  Partner |          |          |          |          |      |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+------+

   IQR, interquartile range.

.. _S10:

Caregiver burden
----------------

The median level of burden in the sample was 13.00 (IQR 6.00–22.00). The
median level of burden in caregivers of involuntarily admitted patients
was 11.50 (IQR 6.25–20.75) and in caregivers of those voluntarily
admitted it was 18.00 (IQR 5.00–34.00). Caregivers' overall scores of
burden did not significantly differ (*U* = 328, *P* = 0.18, *r* = 0.17).
However, caregivers of voluntarily admitted patients supervised the
person to a greater extent than caregivers of involuntarily admitted
patients (median IEQ supervision scores 2 *v.* 0, *U* = 258, *P* <
0.001, *r* = 0.38). The particular items of the subscale of supervision
on which caregivers of voluntarily admitted individuals scored higher
were ensuring that the person had enough sleep (*P* = 0.02) and that
they did not drink too much alcohol (*P* = 0.05).

.. _S11:

Factors associated with caregiver burden
----------------------------------------

There was no significant association between the level of caregiver
burden and the caregiver's gender, patient's gender, diagnosis, level of
functioning, relationship to caregiver or living in the same household
as the patient (`Table 2 <#T2>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Involvement Evaluation Questionnaire (IEQ) and General Health
      Questionnaire (GHQ-12) scores according to demographic and
      clinical characteristics

   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | IEQ     |         |         |         |         |         |
   +=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+
   | Ca      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | regiver |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | gender  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 9       | 3 (1–8) | 0 (0–2) | 2 (0–5) | 3 (1–7) | 1 (0–2) |
   |    Male | (5–22)  |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 14      | 4 (1–7) | 0 (0–1) | 3 (2–6) | 6 (3–8) | 1 (0–3) |
   |  Female | (8–23)  |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Patient |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | gender  |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 10      | 4 (1–9) | 0 (0–2) | 2 (1–4) | 5 (2–8) | 1 (0–2) |
   |    Male | (5–23)  |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 14      | 3 (1–8) | 0 (0–2) | 4 (2–7) | 5 (3–8) | 1 (0–3) |
   |  Female | (8–22)  |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Di      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | agnosis |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |     Af  | 11      | 3 (1–6) | 0 (0–2) | 3 (1–6) | 4 (1–7) | 1 (0–2) |
   | fective | (7–21)  |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |     Ps  | 14      | 5       | 0 (0–3) | 3 (0–6) | 6 (3–9) | 1 (0–3) |
   | ychotic | (8–21)  | (1–12)  |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | GAF     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | score   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 12      | 3 (1–8) | 0 (0–2) | 4 (0–7) | 5 (1–9) | 1 (0–2) |
   |  Higher | (5–23)  |         |         |         |         |         |
   | func    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | tioning |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 14      | 4 (1–9) | 0 (0–2) | 3 (1–6) | 5 (2–8) | 1 (0–3) |
   |   Lower | (7–21)  |         |         |         |         |         |
   | func    |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | tioning |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Relat   |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ionship |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | of      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | ca      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | regiver |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | to      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | patient |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 11      | 3 (1–6) | 0 (0–2) | 3 (1–6) | 5 (3–8) | 1 (0–3) |
   |  Parent | (5–21)  |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 21      | 6       | 1 (0–2) | 4 (2–7) | 4       | 1 (0–2) |
   | Partner | (7–28)  | (1–11)  |         |         | (2–10)  |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | Ho      |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | usehold |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 15      | 5       | 0 (0–2) | 4 (1–6) | 6 (2–9) | 1 (0–2) |
   |  Living | (       | (       |         |         |         |         |
   | t       | 6–24)\  | 2–10)\  |         |         |         |         |
   | ogether | `\* <#T | `\* <#T |         |         |         |         |
   |         | FN3>`__ | FN3>`__ |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   |         | 9       | 2 (1–5) | 2 (1–6) | 2 (1–6) | 4 (1–7) | 1 (0–3) |
   |  Living | (6–20)  |         |         |         |         |         |
   | sep     |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   | arately |         |         |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+

   GAF, Global Assessment of Functioning; IQR, interquartile range.

   *P* ⩾ 0.05. On applying a Bonferroni correction, no variable reached
   significance.

.. _S12:

Psychological distress
----------------------

Nine caregivers (15%) reported high levels of distress (defined as a
score of ⩾4 on GHQ-12). The median score of psychological distress was
1.00 (IQR 0.00–2.50): 1.00 (IQR 0.00–3.00) in caregivers of
involuntarily admitted patients and 0.00 (IQR 0.00–1.00) in caregivers
of voluntarily admitted patients. Caregivers of involuntarily or
voluntarily admitted patients did not significantly differ in their
levels of psychological distress (*U* = 302, *P* = 0.19).

.. _S13:

Factors associated with psychological distress
----------------------------------------------

No significant association was found between the caregiver's level of
psychological distress and the caregiver's gender, patient's gender,
diagnosis, level of functioning, relationship to caregiver or whether
they lived in the same household as the patient (`Table 2 <#T2>`__).

.. _S14:

*Post hoc* analysis
-------------------

We hypothesised that subsequent admissions from the index admission
could affect the burden and psychological distress of caregivers and
therefore further analysis examining this was performed. Caregiver
burden was higher when the patients had been readmitted (16.0 *v.* 9.5,
*U* = 281.5, *P* = 0.04) and there was a trend for a higher level of
distress (1.0 *v.* 0.0, *U* = 277, *P* = 0.06). Legal status for the
index admission was not associated with readmission (χ\ :sup:`2` = 0.28,
*n* = 61, *P* = 0.60).

.. _S15:

Discussion
==========

.. _S16:

Summary of findings
-------------------

The findings indicated that overall levels of burden and psychological
distress did not differ between caregivers of involuntarily and
voluntarily admitted patients at approximately 18 months after discharge
from an acute mental health unit. However, caregivers of voluntarily
admitted patients engaged in significantly higher levels of supervision
than caregivers of those involuntarily admitted. Such supervision
focused on, for example, ensuring that the patient slept sufficiently.
*Post hoc* analysis also suggested that caregiver burden is associated
with readmission to hospital.

.. _S17:

Comparison with previous research
---------------------------------

To our knowledge, no study to date has examined whether differences in
the patient's legal status at admission accounted for differences in
caregiver burden (objective and subjective) at more than 1 year
follow-up. Our findings, however, support those of Boydell *et
al*,\ :sup:`7` who also emphasised that overall burden was not linked to
involuntary admission in caregivers of patients with first-episode
psychosis. Our scores of burden and psychological distress are
substantially lower than those reported by other authors.\ :sup:`11`
Thus, the similarity in scores between caregivers in this sample may be
due to a reduction in overall caregiver burden following the person's
admission to hospital regardless of legal status.\ :sup:`15`

.. _S18:

Implications
------------

The finding that caregivers of voluntarily admitted individuals
supervised the person to a greater extent is interesting and warrants
discussion. It is possible that this additional supervision is a
positive experience and that it results in an earlier detection of
warning signs and prevents potential relapses from progressing to an
involuntary admission. This finding highlights the need for caregivers
of both voluntarily and involuntarily admitted individuals to receive
support and psychoeducation. Interestingly, the *post hoc* analysis
suggests that it may be the frequency of admissions that results in
higher burden, as opposed to the legal status of the admissions.
Furthermore, a longitudinal replication of this study assessing burden
at various time points may provide us with a clearer picture of the
caregiver's experience of burden.

.. _S19:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

The study encompassed a number of strengths and limitations. Our sample
included caregivers of involuntarily and voluntarily admitted
individuals from both rural and urban geographical locations. Another
strength of the study was that the caregivers did not self-select to the
study. Nonetheless, our process of consent may have introduced bias, as
those who consented for their caregiver to be interviewed may have had
closer family relationships. Additionally, there was a significant gap
between the index admission and the caregiver interviews, which
introduces a number of potential confounders, such as readmission to
hospital.

We thank Alastair Fetherston for designing the database for this study.

.. [1]
   **Veronica Ranieri** is a research assistant at University College
   London. **Kevin Madigan** is the Assistant Director of Nursing at
   Saint John of God Community Mental Health Services, Ireland. **Eric
   Roche** is a Senior Psychiatry Registrar at the North Dublin Mental
   Health Service, Ireland. **David McGuinness** is the Assistant
   Inspector of Mental Health Services in Ireland. **Emma Bainbridge**
   is a Senior Psychiatry Registrar in Galway, Ireland. **Larkin
   Feeney** is a consultant psychiatrist with the Cluain Mhuire
   Community Mental Health Service and Senior Lecturer with the Royal
   College of Surgeons in Ireland. **Brian Hallahan** is a Senior
   Lecturer in Psychiatry at the National University of Ireland, Galway.
   **Colm McDonald** is Professor of Psychiatry at the National
   University of Ireland, Galway. **Brian O'Donoghue** is a Consultant
   Psychiatrist at Orygen Youth Health and a Clinical Research Fellow
   with Orygen, the National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental
   Health, Melbourne, Australia.
