==============================================================================================================
Drug information update. Unconventional treatment strategies for schizophrenia: polypharmacy and heroic dosing
==============================================================================================================



Bret A. Moore
Debbi A. Morrissette
Jonathan M. Meyer
Stephen M. Stahl
:Correspondence: Stephen M. Stahl
(smstahl@neiglobal.com)  [1]_

:date: 2017-6

:Abstract:
   The majority of patients respond to antipsychotic monotherapy at
   standard doses, but a subset of patients will require more heroic
   measures that include antipsychotic polypharmacy and high-dose
   monotherapy. Indeed, research has shown that roughly 30% of patients
   with psychosis are prescribed multiple antipsychotic medications. We
   discuss the potential benefits and challenges of these approaches and
   provide a rationale for why and when they should be utilised.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Schizophrenia is one of the most challenging psychiatric disorders faced
by clinicians today, affecting roughly 1% of the population. :sup:`1`
Many out-patient clinics and virtually all in-patient facilities manage
these often complex clinical cases. Since the introduction of the
first-generation antipsychotics (FGA) and subsequent development of the
dopamine hypothesis, blockade of dopamine 2 (D\ :sub:`2`) receptors has
been the primary goal of pharmacological intervention. Even with the
development and proliferation of the second-generation antipsychotics
(SGA), D\ :sub:`2` blockade remains central to effective control of
positive symptoms whereas serotonin 2A (5-HT\ :sub:`2A`) plays an
important but secondary role in the modulation of dopamine,
theoretically improving negative symptoms while reducing the risk of
extrapyramidal symptoms. :sup:`2`

The term ‘dopamine hypothesis’ of schizophrenia is slowly being phased
out, as more sophisticated imaging studies have identified the nature of
the dopamine dysfunction and its locus within the striatum. The striatum
is a major component of the basal ganglia, and is divided functionally
into the dorsal sensorimotor portion, the central associative striatum,
and the ventral limbic striatum. Recently it has been found that the
best correlation between positive symptoms of psychosis in schizophrenia
and levels of D\ :sub:`2` activity is in the rostral caudate, a portion
of the central associative striatum. :sup:`3, 4` We thus have *in vivo*
confirmation of excessive D\ :sub:`2` neurotransmission and the
relationship to the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. In the limbic
striatum low dopamine release is directly related to the severity of
negative symptoms; the lower the dopamine levels, the greater the
negative symptom severity. :sup:`3`

While the goal of treatment is normalisation of D\ :sub:`2`
neurotransmission in the striatum, a subset of patients do not respond
to traditional treatment algorithms which include antipsychotic
monotherapy at dosing levels defined in registrational trials.
Consequently, many patients continue to exhibit uncontrolled positive
and negative symptoms as well as manifesting aggressive and impulsive
behaviours. :sup:`5` It has been argued that ‘unconventional’ strategies
for better management of treatment-resistant psychosis should be
employed. :sup:`6–8` The two primary methods we discuss in the following
pages include antipsychotic polypharmacy and high-dose monotherapy.

.. _S1:

Why do standard treatments sometimes fail?
==========================================

To effectively treat the positive symptoms of schizophrenia it is
important to achieve at least 60% striatal D\ :sub:`2` blockade with
antipsychotics. :sup:`9` The exception is clozapine, which has been
shown to have some antipsychotic effect at as little as 20% blockade.
:sup:`10` Beyond 80% D\ :sub:`2` occupancy, risk of extrapyramidal
side-effects (EPS) increases, leading to non-adherence and treatment
failure. Therefore, the ‘sweet spot’ of D\ :sub:`2` receptor blockade
for most patients is between 60 and 80%. :sup:`6` However, in some
treatment-resistant cases, particularly when aggression and impulsivity
are of concern, moving beyond 80% may be necessary. :sup:`6,8,11–14`
Moreover, there is significant evidence from the literature that a
substantial portion of patients tolerate plasma antipsychotic levels
consistent with >80% D\ :sub:`2` occupancy.

One of the early imaging studies from 1997 noted that a large fraction
of patients stabilised on low-dose oral haloperidol had plasma levels
associated with >80% D\ :sub:`2` occupancy; :sup:`12` however, prior
clinical studies found that even at a plasma haloperidol level of 6
ng/ml (predicted 90% D\ :sub:`2` occupancy), only 30% experienced
adverse effects. :sup:`13` A similar pattern is seen with risperidone.
The pivotal trials studied doses of 10 mg and 16 mg, which correlate
with a plasma active moiety level of 70 ng/ml and 112 ng/ml,
respectively. :sup:`15` The plasma level of 70 ng/ml would correspond to
a D\ :sub:`2` occupancy of 85%; :sup:`14` however, despite this high
level of predicted D\ :sub:`2` occupancy, the proportion of patients on
10 mg who required anti-Parkinsonian treatment was only 31%. :sup:`16`

.. _S2:

Pharmacokinetic failure
-----------------------

Pharmacokinetics is the umbrella term that covers drug absorption,
bioavailability, distribution, metabolism and excretion. The role of
pharmacokinetics in antipsychotic treatment failure is relatively
simple. Through abnormal pharmacokinetic processes such as poor
absorption, rapid metabolism and enzymatic polymorphisms, antipsychotic
plasma levels do not reach the threshold associated with 60% striatal
D\ :sub:`2` occupancy. This leads to continued psychotic symptoms. It
also leads to frustration and confusion for clinicians in that the
patient does not sufficiently respond to standard treatment algorithms.

.. _S3:

Pharmacodynamic failure
-----------------------

Pharmacodynamics encompasses receptor binding and sensitivity,
postreceptor effects, and chemical communication. Pharmacodynamic
treatment failure with regard to antipsychotics is the inability to
provide significant amelioration of psychotic symptoms in spite of
achieving plasma levels associated with at least 60–80% D\ :sub:`2`
occupancy. :sup:`17` Although adequate drug plasma levels are achieved,
patients with treatment-resistant psychosis present with continued
positive, cognitive and aggressive symptoms. The treatment failure
associated with pharmacodynamic influences is hypothesised to be related
to lack of D\ :sub:`2` receptor sensitivity or hypersensitivity. When
patients manifest a lack of extrapyramidal adverse effects or akathisia,
increasing drug doses to achieve plasma levels that are associated with
>80% D\ :sub:`2` blockade may be necessary to provide symptom control.
:sup:`18–20` The overriding principle is that there are a subset of
patients who both tolerate and require high levels of D\ :sub:`2`
antagonism for symptomatic relief.

.. _S4:

The importance of being patient
-------------------------------

While recent studies have demonstrated that minimal response after 2
weeks on a particular antipsychotic dose portends a low likelihood of
week 6 response on that dose, the full therapeutic effects of adequate
D\ :sub:`2` receptor blockade in schizophrenia may not be apparent until
many weeks or months later. :sup:`7` Therefore, patience in
pharmacological treatment of psychosis is critical when a patient
exhibits partial response. :sup:`7,11` For example, Robinson and
colleagues found that in a sample of 118 first-episode patients with
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder only 20% responded to
treatment at 4 weeks. The picture was quite different at 52 weeks;
roughly 87% responded to treatment. :sup:`21` Other studies of
ziprasidone, risperidone and olanzapine have shown continued improvement
over several months of treatment. :sup:`11`

.. _S5:

Strategies to use prior to heroic measures
==========================================

We believe polypharmacy and high dosing should not be the initial
approach to treating schizophrenia. However, considering that roughly
30% of patients with psychosis are on multiple antipsychotics, the
practice is far from rare. :sup:`22,23` In an effort to address the
growing practice of antipsychotic polypharmacy and high dosing of
antipsychotics in spite of little support in the literature, Stahl
provides 12 case-based recommendations. :sup:`7` We review several
below.

.. _S6:

Utilise monotherapy first to include clozapine
----------------------------------------------

Sequential trials of at least two SGAs are recommended. If both trials
fail, consideration of an FGA is appropriate. Also, it is important to
not overlook clozapine as monotherapy. The efficacy of clozapine in
treatment-resistant schizophrenia, particularly with regard to
aggression and violence, is well documented. :sup:`24–26` However, some
clinicians may be hesitant to initiate a trial of clozapine owing to
fear of side-effects such as agranulocytosis.

.. _S7:

Monitor blood levels
--------------------

Securing drug plasma levels is the only way to know whether treatment
failure is due to a pharmacokinetic issue such as rapid metabolism or a
cytochrome P450 polymorphism, or simply poor adherence with oral
therapy. Likewise, blood levels can alert you to pharmacodynamic
abnormalities which occur when treatment response does not correlate
with adequate dosing. Blood level monitoring of both FGAs and SGAs can
provide the clinician with important information which can guide the
treatment plan for patients with treatment-resistant psychosis. This is
supported by the recent work of Lopez & Kane as relevant to haloperidol,
fluphenazine, perphenazine, risperidone, olanzapine and clozapine.
:sup:`27`

.. _S8:

Time may not be on your side
----------------------------

As noted above, it takes some patients longer than others to respond to
antipsychotic treatments. Granted, it may not be possible to wait
several weeks (and certainly not months) in acute settings or when a
patient's behaviour is potentially harmful to self or others, but when
possible, allowing adequate time for full response may be all that is
needed when a patient has exhibited a partial response. The result of
impatience is that a second antipsychotic may be prescribed or a single
medication may be dosed in an unnecessarily aggressive manner.

.. _S9:

Double-check the diagnosis
--------------------------

It is common practice to rethink the primary diagnosis if the treatment
plan appears ineffective. Once pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic or
time-course failures have been ruled out, the presence of substance
misuse or a personality disorder or neurological illness should be
considered.

.. _S10:

Antipsychotic polypharmacy
==========================

Although a number of published treatment guidelines for schizophrenia
are available, some of which conflict with each other, it is clear that
clinicians should utilise a monotherapy approach to antipsychotic
medication use. :sup:`28` Multiple trials of antipsychotic medications,
generally SGAs to include clozapine, are recommended. In fact,
divergence from this sequential clinical progression has historically
been met with scepticism, caution and outright criticism. :sup:`29–36`
It is certainly understandable why this is the case. The literature is
replete with evidence supporting the efficacy of monotherapy for
schizophrenia. Furthermore, the pitfalls associated with combining
antipsychotics are well documented. Increased side-effects, higher
medication costs, scant information supporting efficacy, and suboptimal
outcomes are all problematic with regard to antipsychotic polypharmacy.
:sup:`29–36` So, why the need to even review the topic? The reality is
that patients included in research studies are generally those who are
able to give consent, exhibit less violence and less impulsivity, have
lower rates of chemical dependency, and are less likely to have
histories of sequential trials of antipsychotics at documented
therapeutic levels. :sup:`7,8` In other words, consistent with much of
psychiatry research, they are healthier and not mirror images of the
patients seen in clinical practice. Therefore, we believe a strict
adherence to a treatment guideline based on highly selective samples
does not necessarily translate well to community-based out-patient
clinics and in-patient facilities.

We acknowledge that antipsychotic monotherapy is sufficient for the
majority of patients with schizophrenia and that adherence to
established guidelines should generally occur. Indeed, recent studies
support this position. A 2004 study by Suzuki and colleagues revealed
that when patients with schizophrenia were switched from multiple
antipsychotics to monotherapy, roughly half maintained gains whereas a
quarter showed improvements. Another quarter of the sample
decompensated. :sup:`37` In a similar study by Essock and colleagues it
was found that patients switched to monotherapy maintained gains, but
also showed improvement in metabolic effects assumed to be caused by
antipsychotic polypharmacy. It should be noted that approximately a
third of patients required multiple antipsychotics. :sup:`23` However,
some evidence supports the use of antipsychotic polypharmacy. A recent
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials comparing antipsychotic
monotherapy and polypharmacy highlighted that polypharmacy may be
superior to monotherapy in certain clinical cases. :sup:`38`

In addition to achieving adequate D\ :sub:`2` occupancy, antipsychotic
polypharmacy also exploits other receptor-binding properties that could
lead to improvement in other schizophrenia symptom clusters. For
example, serotonergic, noradrenergic and histaminergic binding
theoretically ameliorate depression, anxiety, insomnia, impulsivity and
aggression. On the flip side, however, the patient is potentially
exposed to adverse side-effects from multiple receptor binding or
excessive binding via similar properties shared by antipsychotics (e.g.
excessive histaminergic binding leading to daytime sedation or appetite
stimulation and weight gain). Consequently, combining antipsychotics
should be done rationally based on their binding profiles. One clear
example is the need to avoid combining the partial D\ :sub:`2` agonism
of aripiprazole with antipsychotics with full D\ :sub:`2` antagonism.
The binding interference may lead to a worsening of symptoms due to
aripiprazole's high affinity for the D\ :sub:`2` receptor, and the fact
that even low doses such as 10 mg achieve 83% D\ :sub:`2` occupancy, and
thus may displace full antagonists. :sup:`6`

.. _S11:

High dosing of antipsychotics
=============================

Antipsychotic polypharmacy is not the only means of addressing the more
complex and treatment-resistant cases of schizophrenia. High-dose
monotherapy is a viable option as well. In fact, it has been argued that
if the goal is to occupy a greater degree of D\ :sub:`2` receptors in
order to address treatment-resistant positive and aggressive symptoms,
high-dose monotherapy is the preferred option when compared with
polypharmacy. High-dose monotherapy does, however, come at a greater
financial expense and the risk of increased metabolic and other
potential treatment-limiting side-effects. :sup:`11`

It is impossible to know what dose of a particular antipsychotic is
required to achieve the intended outcome. Therefore, the prudent action
is to start low within the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)- and
British National Formulary (BNF)-approved guidelines for the particular
medication. The medication can be gradually increased outside the
FDA-approved dosing window until therapeutic response occurs or the
patient develops intolerable side-effects. It is important that informed
consent is obtained and treatment rationale is well documented when this
occurs. Below we discuss the typical dosing ranges and special
considerations for high dosing of the antipsychotics. A more detailed
analysis can be found in Stahl & Morrissette's review of the topic.
:sup:`11`

.. _S12:

Clozapine
---------

Clozapine is typically only recommended after subsequent trials of other
antipsychotics have failed. This is primarily owing to its side-effect
profile. At typical dosing of 300–450 mg/day, clozapine binds to less
than 50% of D\ :sub:`2` receptors, but as noted earlier, the
antipsychotic benefits with this medication can be seen at as low as 20%
occupancy. :sup:`10` A meta-analysis by Davis & Chen revealed that
patients on high levels of clozapine responded more frequently than
those on low levels. :sup:`39` Clozapine can be dosed as high as 900
mg/day, but seizure risk does increase with higher plasma levels, so
titration to this dose should be done slowly. Furthermore, due to the
diverse binding profile of clozapine, improvement in multiple symptoms
clusters is possible.

.. _S13:

Quetiapine
----------

Quetiapine has a relatively weak affinity for D\ :sub:`2` receptors and
often requires high dosing to achieve intended outcomes. Only at the
upper range of 400–800 mg/day are the antipsychotic properties of the
medication seen. It is generally believed that a dose of 1200 mg/day is
no more effective than the typical dosing range and carries greater
incidence of metabolic effects; however, clinical practice has shown
that 1800 mg/day may be useful in treating violent patients.
:sup:`2,5,39`

.. _S14:

Olanzapine
----------

Doses of olanzapine between 10 and 20 mg/day equate to 60–80%
D\ :sub:`2` occupancy. Higher doses of 40–60 mg daily appear to be more
effective, particularly with aggressive patients and in some forensic
settings. :sup:`2,32,40,41` A note of caution is that as plasma levels
increase the risks of anticholinergic and metabolic effects also
increase. :sup:`5,10`

.. _S15:

Risperidone/paliperidone
------------------------

Risperidone reaches 70–80% of D\ :sub:`2` occupancy at doses between 2
and 6 mg/day. The risk of EPS is positively correlated with dose. Doses
above 8 mg/day are generally not considered beneficial for most
patients, but in some, the side-effects may not appear until higher
dosages. :sup:`5` As noted previously, even at 10 mg/day only 31% of
patients required anti-Parkinsonian medication in the pivotal trials,
again providing evidence that a subgroup may both require and tolerate
higher dosages and plasma levels. :sup:`16` Risperidone's active
metabolite paliperidone has less chance of drug–drug interactions as it
is not metabolised by the liver. Similar to risperidone, paliperidone
carries increased risk of EPS as the dose increases. :sup:`11`

.. _S16:

Ziprasidone
-----------

Data support the use of high doses of ziprasidone, particularly in
forensic settings at 360 mg/day. :sup:`2–5,40,41` It can be difficult to
achieve adequate plasma levels with ziprasidone in out-patient settings
as food is required to increase absorption. It has been reported that
ziprasidone has historically been under-dosed due to concern about
increased agitation and QTc prolongation.

.. _S17:

Aripiprazole
------------

Aripiprazole has a different mechanism of action compared with the
‘first wave’ of SGAs. Contrary to its predecessors, high doses of
aripiprazole may not result in increased efficacy in schizophrenia. This
is due to its partial agonist properties and high affinity for
D\ :sub:`2` receptors. :sup:`11` Doses of 40 mg/day are associated with
96.8% D\ :sub:`2` occupancy, so further increases will not have an
impact on D\ :sub:`2` neurotransmission to any considerable extent.

.. _S18:

Asenapine, iloperidone, and lurasidone
--------------------------------------

Asenapine, iloperidone, and lurasidone are newer atypical
antipsychotics. Consequently, there is limited information that supports
their use in high doses. Although doses of asenapine of 30–40 mg/day may
be effective for some treatment-resistant cases, there are virtually no
data supporting use at these higher doses, and the buccal absorption of
asenapine declines significantly for each 5 mg increase in the dose. As
with asenapine, there are limited to no data supporting the use of
iloperidone at high doses. One treatment-limiting issue with iloperidone
is orthostatic hypotension. Lurasidone is approved up to 160 mg/day for
schizophrenia, but higher dosages have not been studied for efficacy,
only for safety (e.g. thorough QT studies up to 600 mg). Similar to
ziprasidone, lurasidone should be taken with food to increase
absorption. :sup:`11`

.. _S19:

Summary
=======

Schizophrenia is a relatively common psychiatric disorder but it is
often difficult to treat. Although antipsychotic monotherapy at standard
dosing levels is sufficient for the majority of patients, a subset will
require ‘unconventional’ approaches such as antipsychotic polypharmacy
and higher than normal dosing. If done cautiously and rationally, these
approaches can provide much-needed benefit for those most in need of
relief.

.. [1]
   **Bret A. Moore**, Warrior Resiliency Program, U.S. Army Regional
   Health Command-Central, San Antonio, and University of Texas Health
   Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA; **Debbi A.
   Morrissette**, Neuroscience Education Institute, Carlsbad,
   California, and Department of Biology, Palomar College, San Marcos,
   California, USA; **Jonathan M. Meyer**, California Department of
   State Hospitals, Sacramento, California, and Department of
   Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, USA; **Stephen M.
   Stahl**, Neuroscience Education Institute, Carlsbad, California,
   Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego,
   California, USA, and Department of Psychiatry, University of
   Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
