==========================================================================================================================
New models of care: a liaison psychiatry service for medically unexplained symptoms and frequent attenders in primary care
==========================================================================================================================



Janine Bestall
Najma Siddiqi
Suzanne Heywood-Everett
Charlotte Freeman
Paul Carder
Mick James
Brendan Kennedy
Angela Moulson
Allan HouseCorrespondence to Janine Bestall (j.bestall@leeds.ac.uk)
 [1]_
:Date: 2017-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** This paper describes the process of setting up
   and the early results from a new liaison psychiatry service in
   primary care for people identified as frequent general practice
   attenders with long-term conditions or medically unexplained
   symptoms. Using a rapid evidence synthesis, we identified existing
   service models, mechanisms to identify and refer patients, and
   outcomes for the service. Considering this evidence, with local
   contingencies we defined options and resources. We agreed a model to
   set up a service in three diverse general practices. An evaluation
   explored the feasibility of the service and of collecting data for
   clinical, service and economic outcomes.

   **Results** High levels of patient and staff satisfaction, and
   reductions in the utilisation of primary and secondary healthcare,
   with associated cost savings are reported.

   **Clinical implications** A multidisciplinary liaison psychiatry
   service integrated in primary care is feasible and may be evaluated
   using routinely collected data.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Medically unexplained symptoms (MUS) and comorbid physical and mental
health conditions place a significant burden on individuals and the
economy.\ :sup:`1,2` Annual costs of MUS have been estimated at £3.1
billion\ :sup:`3` and of comorbid conditions at £18 billion.\ :sup:`4`
Policy makers suggest innovative approaches be deployed to improve care
for patients and make savings across the system.\ :sup:`5`

These patients frequently return to general practitioners (GPs) with
unresolved and new complaints. Despite being referred to specialist
services their problems remain, which is demoralising for all. Current
primary care configurations do not adequately provide for this
population. Standard secondary care mental health services rarely have
staff with relevant expertise and are insufficiently close to primary
care services to influence presentations. Improving Access to
Psychological Therapies (IAPT) services are unsuitable due to these
patients' high level of medical complexity. Access problems are further
compounded by patients not meeting the referral criteria for specialist
mental health services.

The skill base in liaison psychiatry services renders them an ideal
source of expertise. Until recently such services were hospital-based
but they can be integrated within primary care services.\ :sup:`6–8` We
report a novel pilot primary care liaison psychiatry service – the
Primary Care Wellbeing Service (PCWS) in Bradford and Airedale, West
Yorkshire. The service was targeted to frequent attenders with MUS or
psychological difficulties associated with their underlying long-term
conditions. This report is a description of the planning, set up and
evaluation and feasibility of the preliminary project.

.. _S1:

Method
======

A partnership board of clinical experts, academics and commissioners met
monthly to develop and have oversight of the service; the original
impetus came from local Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs).

A rapid evidence review helped identify service models, staffing and
skill mix, patient selection and outcome measures for the service.
Review findings in the context of local practitioner preferences and
resources were used to agree the service configuration. The Project
Board secured 15 months' funding for the preliminary project. An
evaluation by the Commissioning Support Unit (CSU) assessed the
feasibility of service design, implementation, collecting the data and
effectiveness.

.. _S2:

Data collection
---------------

Electronic patient health records (primary and secondary care and mental
health) and measures of patient-reported outcomes, experience, and staff
experience, were collected as follows: Healthcare utilisation: defined
as any patient event recorded in the electronic record system; a
specific Read code for the service was applied to the patient record at
each practice and anonymised data extracted for 12 months prior to and 9
months following referral for secondary care data, and 11 months
following referral for primary care and mental health data, providing
healthcare activity and costs.Clinical effectiveness: at referral and
then every 2 months during follow-up using the 9-item Patient Health
Questionnaire (PHQ-9),\ :sup:`9` 15-item Patient Health Questionnaire
(PHQ-15),\ :sup:`10` 7-item Generalised Anxiety Disorder scale
(GAD-7)\ :sup:`11` and the EuroQol 5-dimension, 5-level health status
measure (EQ-5D-5L).\ :sup:`12` A clinician-reported outcome measure
assessed perceived improvement in the patient's condition by referring
clinician.Staff experience: a referrer satisfaction scale, 6 months
after the referral or at patient's discharge from the PCWS; and a survey
administered at the end of the pilot.Patient experience: a brief
patient-reported measure at discharge comprising (a) patient
satisfaction with the service; (b) two questions asking what was good
about the service and what could be improved; and (c) would they
recommend the service?Case studies were used to illustrate individual
formulations and negotiations that took place.

.. _S3:

Data analysis
-------------

Feasibility of data collection was judged by the completeness of
measures, using summary descriptive statistics. For healthcare
utilisation and costs, a before-and-after ‘time series’ approach
provided an indication of service effectiveness. Data points were taken
from the 12-month period prior to the start of the PCWS and were
truncated at 9 months post intervention for secondary care data, giving
data points for months 1–21 and 11 months post intervention for primary
care and mental health service data at months 1–23. Qualitative data
were collated and themes reported.

.. _S4:

The service
-----------

The literature review confirmed there was no ‘off the peg’ solution,
providing information about key issues to consider when designing the
service.

.. _S5:

Service model and setting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An integrated service with specialist mental health professionals based
in and collaborating with three GP practices was established. Practices
were selected on the basis of expressions of interest, willingness to
commit time and resources. Practices were of average size and served
areas of high socioeconomic deprivation. One practice also had a high
minority ethnic population.

.. _S6:

Staffing
~~~~~~~~

The team comprised a team manager, mental health occupational therapist,
physiotherapist, psychology assistant, consultant psychiatrist,
consultant psychologist, psychologist and administrator. Specialist
advice was provided by the consultants. GP practices contributed both GP
and practice nurse time.

.. _S7:

Patient selection and referral
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Most studies in the published literature used some combination of
case-finding measures for mental disorder alongside frequency or cost of
healthcare to identify the target population. A preliminary study in a
local practice used the PHQ-9 and a search of GP electronic databases to
identify distressed patients and frequent attenders. Of the 100 patients
assessed with the PHQ-9, only 6 were identified who were not already in
contact with services and who also had significant mood symptoms. They
all declined referral. Using standardised case-finding measures failed
to identify relevant candidates for this service.

Instead, GPs identified patients using a combination of their own
knowledge of patients alongside a risk stratification tool. They focused
on those who had a presumed diagnosis of MUS or patients with long-term
conditions experiencing significant psychological difficulties, and who
were also frequent attenders in primary and secondary care. Attendance
was considered to be frequent when a patient had more than the average
number of primary care consultations or hospital admissions and when
patients' problems remained unresolved and were escalating in cost. A
discussion of potential candidates helped achieve consensus about
appropriate referrals and practices were then asked to refer ten
patients each, providing information on goals for referral and a summary
of the patient's health record.

.. _S8:

Outcomes
~~~~~~~~

Organisational level outcomes (health service use, healthcare costs,
medication use) and patient-level outcomes (mental and physical health,
physical functioning, and quality of life).

.. _S9:

Results
=======

In total, 28 patients were referred, with 27 appropriate referrals. One
was unsuitable due to alcohol dependency and substance misuse. There was
a delay of 6 months in receiving referrals from one practice, as the GP
lead for the pilot left the practice. Complete data for healthcare
utilisation and cost were available for 19/21 patients in 2 practices.

.. _S10:

Health issues
-------------

A range of difficulties were identified including neuro-developmental
problems; undiagnosed autism; significant health anxieties or
preoccupation with illness; chronic pain and overuse of opioids;
non-epileptic attacks and medically unexplained loss of movement and
pain; and other maladaptive behaviours (e.g. misuse of insulin). Most
patients had significant psychosocial difficulties including
relationship problems, recent and past life adversity. High levels of
physical morbidity such as ischaemic heart disease, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, arthritis and head injury were also found.

.. _S11:

Patient engagement
------------------

Patients were offered an initial joint assessment by two team members;
the choice of health professionals took account of referral information
about the presentation and degree of readiness to engage. For example,
patients reluctant to see a mental health specialist were contacted
first by the physiotherapist or occupational therapist. A flexible
approach to timing and location of appointments was taken. We were able
to engage with 22 of 27 patients either fully or partly with the
service.

.. _S12:

Interventions
-------------

Initial formulation developed for each patient was reviewed iteratively
as alternative interventions were trialled, focused on referral goals.
There were four components to interventions as follows: Taking stock and
formulating the problem: review of medical notes to reconsider evidence
for established diagnoses and medication reviews.Developing a
function-based approach, occupationally oriented and focused on
improving activities of daily living by accessing community resources;
adaptations to home and mobility; introducing non-medical ways of
managing pain.Psychological approaches included negotiation of a shared
formulation and approach to management, with basic stress and anxiety
management. Where indicated, specific therapies such as mindfulness, eye
movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR), trauma-focused work
and acceptance commitment therapy (ACT).Service-level approaches
included non-contingent access to practice staff to manage escalating
demands and avoid unscheduled hospital and Accident and Emergency
attendance; liaison with GPs and other specialists to agree a consistent
approach.

.. _S13:

Feasibility of data collection
------------------------------

Of the 19 patients for whom data could be collected there were only 8
complete data-sets for EQ-5D-5L, GAD-7 and PHQ-9, and 7 complete
data-sets for PHQ-15 and EQ-5D-5L.

Healthcare utilisation data from the clinical system were readily
available, although it was not possible to collect out-of-hours data.
However, gathering information on prescriptions and costs of medication
was prohibitively resource intensive.

.. _S14:

Feasibility and effectiveness of the service
--------------------------------------------

Across the whole patient cohort, secondary care activity reduced by an
average of nine events per month. In the 9 months after the
implementation of the PCWS, 177 fewer events occurred in secondary care
(`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__).

.. figure:: 343f1
   :alt: Secondary care activity: time series data. PCWS, Primary Care
   Wellbeing Service.
   :name: F1

   Secondary care activity: time series data. PCWS, Primary Care
   Wellbeing Service.

Nine months after implementation the total cost of activity was £63 950
less than the previous year (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). The cost of secondary
care activity reduced by an average of £3702 per month after the
implementation of the PCWS (`Fig. 2 <#F2>`__). Primary care activity had
also reduced across the whole patient cohort by an average of 11 events
per month.

.. figure:: 343f2
   :alt: Secondary care costs: time series data. PCWS, Primary Care
   Wellbeing Service.
   :name: F2

   Secondary care costs: time series data. PCWS, Primary Care Wellbeing
   Service.

.. _S15:

Primary care
------------

Time spent delivering care reduced by an average of 7 min per month. A
substitution effect was observed in primary care with GPs delivering an
average of 12 appointments and 127 min less to the patient cohort since
the implementation of the PCWS. In contrast, other clinical staff
delivered one additional appointment and 120 min more to the patient
cohort.

Primary care costs were reduced across the whole scheme by an average of
£171 per month for the cohort of 19 patients. In some cases,
interventions led to significant changes in symptoms and health-seeking
behaviours (`Box 1 <#box1>`__). In others, work is still ongoing and
longer-term intervention will be needed.

.. _S16:

Discussion
==========

What works in a research study does not easily translate into routine
clinical practice in the National Health Service (NHS). In this study,
academics and GP commissioners worked with specialist mental health
providers to consider the evidence and identify local resources to
design the best service configuration for patients with MUS, long-term
conditions and frequent attenders in primary care. There is no
short-term solution for these complex patients but a liaison psychiatry
service based within primary care and as part of a long-term care plan
shows great promise.

.. _S17:

Identifying the patient group for the service and managing complexity
---------------------------------------------------------------------

The service presented here addresses a common problem for GPs, which
traditional diagnostic categories do not describe well and standard
mental health services do not currently manage well. This is not the
first attempt at establishing primary care-based liaison services. The
service described, however, is unique because it eschews traditional
collaborative care approaches\ :sup:`13` and screening for anxiety and
depression widely described in the research literature.\ :sup:`13,14` In
clinical practice that type of screening does not identify the right
candidates to work with. The GPs and practice staff identified patients
for this study by focusing on those patients with MUS or long-term
conditions who were struggling to cope and that were returning with
unresolved physical and emotional problems with rising healthcare costs.
This was facilitated by a discussion of the case and the development of
the vignette prior to referral to the PCWS There was a level of detail
in identifying this type of patient that required consideration and
scrutiny by practice staff which could not be picked up by electronic
systems or case-finding measures alone.

Patients with such complex conditions cannot be managed in standard ways
following a protocol. They require a creative approach to person-centred
care that supports their identification and management. In almost all
cases the GPs were correct in identifying the right patients for the
service via their clinical presentation, the exception being someone who
required support from specialist addiction services.

**Box 1** Case study

Patient A was a frequent attender at Accident and Emergency, the GP
practice and mental health services, with a range of physical and
non-psychotic mental health symptoms. She had a suprapubic catheter due
to incomplete bladder emptying and detrusor overactivity; she found it
too distressing to self-catheterise using a urethral catheter because of
a history of sexual abuse. As she was struggling with the suprapubic
catheter, an operation was planned to create a conduit between the skin
and bladder to make catheterisation easier. However, there was concern
that this would not address the underlying reasons for her frequent
presentations, and would in fact increase her physical health problems,
for example, increasing her risk of urinary infection. Following
referral to the Primary Care Wellbeing Service (PCWS), a review of her
case notes revealed that her urodynamic studies had been normal. The
team liaised with the surgeon, who agreed to a trial of bladder
retraining. The team worked to engage patient A and to develop a shared
formulation with her about the reasons for her urological difficulties
and accept that her physical health difficulties could be managed in a
non-operative way. We recognised the importance that all staff conveyed
the same message to the patient and that care did not suddenly decrease
while other changes in care took place. With input from the practice
nurse and the PCWS team, she was able to start passing urine again
without the catheter.

.. _S18:

Challenges to service delivery and data collection
--------------------------------------------------

Our findings suggest that such services are feasible to deliver but that
practices can struggle without sufficient staff to deliver the service.
This accords with the literature\ :sup:`15` which suggests an assessment
of practice readiness be performed but this might not account for
unexpected changes in practice staffing and infrastructure. Patients and
staff that completed satisfaction measures were satisfied with the
service, although it is possible that those that did not complete
measures did not have such a positive experience. Further, it was not
possible to routinely collect self-reported outcome measures in routine
practice for this service. Given that these practices were highly
motivated to take part, it is unlikely that collecting self-report
measures, as part of an evaluation package, would be feasible in less
motivated practices. Feedback from staff suggested that they were not
able to collect this additional data. Any additional work to use
self-report measures in practice needs to consider the burden of
additional work for practice staff against the need to collect this
information. However, routinely collected data on service use and cost
proved to be feasible to collect as this is already part of the existing
monitoring systems. Again, out-of-hours information was not collected as
part of this. Case studies enabled practitioners to consider how well
the patient progressed helping to sustain the service in its early
phases using cases as a feedback loop as proposed in the
literature.\ :sup:`15`

.. _S19:

Implementing new service models requires a long-term view
---------------------------------------------------------

There are challenges in setting up and maintaining such services,
however. We cannot be sure that they will be cost-effective in the
longer term, as the full costs of the service were not examined here
only salary costs. This type of analysis would need to be evaluated in a
larger study of effectiveness taking account of the commissioning cycle
and utilising an economic evaluation. This pilot was only conducted in
one metropolitan district in England. Population demographics, health
service configurations and commissioning arrangements vary across the
UK, and our findings and experience may not be generalisable. Moreover,
GP practices taking part were selected for their willingness to engage
with the pilot, with one out of the three being unable to launch the
proposed service within the project time frame.

Findings from the evaluation are not definitive, but rather provide
important data to inform the next stages of service development and
evaluation. This pilot demonstrates that service developments can be
implemented using NHS resources and commissioning processes, and
evaluated using routinely collected data. However, including patient
self-report and staff measures, which are not part of usual care,
requires additional resources. Administering and collecting paper-based
measures for patients and staff proved onerous, with incomplete data
collection from all practices despite concerted efforts to collect these
by the team.

Questions of sustainability and scaling up need to be considered. In
this feasibility study, there were significant reductions in secondary
care activity and cost. If such a service could be extended then a
further study including full economic costs would be of interest. Such
transformation requires commissioners to take a long-term view and to
accept that cost savings may be negative or neutral in the first year or
more.

.. _S20:

Future proposals
================

To maintain the momentum and build on this project and other innovative
pilots in the UK,\ :sup:`6,7` we propose setting up a network of
interested colleagues to critically consider the future development of
primary care liaison psychiatry services. The purpose would be to share
experience and to inform further implementation projects and design
approaches to the particular problems of scaling up and managing the
needs of patients with complex problems who are prone to relapse and
likely to require repeated specialist help or longer-term care plans.

The Clinical Commissioning Groups of NHS Airedale, Wharfedale & Craven
and NHS Bradford Districts commissioned the Health Economics, Evidence
and Evaluation Service (HEEES) of Yorkshire and Humber Commissioning
Support to evaluate the Primary Care Wellbeing Service pilot.

.. [1]
   **Dr Janine Bestall**, Senior Research Fellow, Leeds Institute of
   Health Sciences. **Dr Najma Siddiqi**, Consultant Psychiatrist,
   Bradford District Care NHS Foundation Trust, and Clinical Senior
   Lecturer, University of York and Hull York Medical School. **Dr
   Suzanne Heywood-Everett**, Lead Consultant Clinical Psychologist,
   Bradford District Care Trust, and Visiting Research Fellow, Leeds
   Institute of Health Sciences. **Ms Charlotte Freeman**, Senior
   Associate Service Evaluation, eMBED Health Consortium, Bradford. **Mr
   Paul Carder**, Head of Research, NHS Airedale, Wharfedale & Craven
   Clinical Commissioning Group and NHS Bradford Districts Clinical
   Commissioning Group. **Mr Mick James**, Joint Commissioning Manager
   Adult Mental Health Services, NHS Airedale, Wharfedale & Craven
   Clinical Commissioning Group and NHS Bradford Districts Clinical
   Commissioning Group. **Dr Brendan Kennedy**, General Practitioner,
   NHS Airedale, Wharfedale & Craven Clinical Commissioning Group and
   NHS Bradford Districts Clinical Commissioning Group. **Dr Angela
   Moulson**, General Practitioner, NHS Airedale, Wharfedale & Craven
   Clinical Commissioning Group and NHS Bradford Districts Clinical
   Commissioning Group. **Professor Allan House**, Professor of Liaison
   Psychiatry, Leeds Institute of Health Sciences.
