==============
The Vegetarian
==============

Ginevra Read [1]_
:Date: 2017-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

This short novel, winner of the Man Booker International Prize 2016, is
translated from Korean and tells the story of Yeong-hye, a young woman
in modern day South Korea. It is a fascinating and thought-provoking
narrative that starts with Yeong-hye choosing to become vegetarian. This
seemingly unremarkable and straightforward choice turns out to be
nothing of the sort – vegetarianism is almost unheard of in Korea but,
more importantly, Yeong-hye is on the verge of serious mental illness.
Yeong-hye's stance is challenged by all of those around her, but she
remains steadfast. It transpires that becoming vegetarian is the
prodromal seed of an all-encompassing psychosis which will take
Yeong-hye on a journey from being vegetarian to believing that she is
vegetal in nature and therefore food is superfluous to her needs.

Clinicians will be acquainted with the somewhat perplexing process by
which this intricate and emotive story develops. Information appears not
in neat chronological order but in a tangle that needs some work to
unpick. Yeong-hye's story is told in three parts. We hear first from her
husband, then her brother-in-law and finally her sister, all the while
following the unravelling of Yeong-hye's internal and external world, in
a tale that deepens in complexity and darkness as it unfolds.
Interspersed italicised monologues allow us a brief glimpse of
Yeong-hye's muddled (and muddling) mind. By portraying thoughts that
mingle with dreams and memories in a way that confuses the reader as to
what is real and what is not, Kang elegantly conveys something of
Yeong-hye's mental state. We don't hear much about Yeong-hye's premorbid
adult life, other than through her husband, who says she was ‘ordinary’
and functioned to his liking. We can, however, sense the weight of the
oppression she is subject to and guess that although becoming vegetarian
may have marked an important transition point in her illness, it is
unlikely to have been the beginning of it. The husband's account of
Yeong-hye's condition reveals, through the lens of his own narcissism, a
shocking lack of concern for his wife beyond her role in satisfying his
immediate needs. He views Yeong-hye as an object and a possession, and
this is most apparent in his remorseless and matter-of-fact description
of raping her. A meal with her husband's boss tells us something about
society's inflexible expectations and demonstrates that the lack of
compassion experienced by Yeong-hye is multifaceted. We see Yeong-hye's
father in action and learn a little about her upbringing; as a result,
the degree to which she has been repressed and forced to endure
throughout her life becomes clearer, and the powerful, subversive
resistance enacted through her illness begins to make sense.

The second part of the book is equally disturbing and leads us to the
brother-in-law, a less than successful video-artist who becomes obsessed
with Yeong-hye's pre-pubertal appearance and whose paraphilic behaviour
uncomfortably exposes her vulnerability.

In the final part of the book, several years later, we join Yeong-hye's
sister In-hye as she visits her in a psychiatric hospital. In-hye now
faces the repercussions of preceding events and the resulting family
disintegration. We hear more about the sisters' childhood and the abuse
which they experienced; we learn that In-hye continues to suffer her own
anguish as a corollary and that she in some way envies her sister's
position.

This is an astonishing book. Strange, surreal and beautifully written.
The idea that people could find themselves surrounded by such brutal
inhumanity and lack of connection that they reject their current
existence and instead opt for transformation into a life form that does
not involve thought or feeling is indescribably sad, but probably not
beyond imagination for most psychiatrists. Readers will find that they
must piece together the jigsaw of Yeong-hye's life, and as hard as they
try, the image is not clear and the final pieces can never be found – an
experience to which most of us surely relate.

.. [1]
   **Ginevra Read**, Specialist Registrar in Medical Psychotherapy,
   Bristol (Severn Deanery), Avon Wiltshire NHS Partnership Trust;
   email: ginevra.read@nhs.net
