====================================================================================================
Improving the quality of mental health services using patient outcome data: making the most of HoNOS
====================================================================================================



Mike J. Crawford
Mo Zoha
Alastair J. D. Macdonald
David Kingdon
:Correspondence: Mike J. Crawford
(m.crawford@imperial.ac.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2017-6

:Abstract:
   Efforts to assess and improve the quality of mental health services
   are often hampered by a lack of information on patient outcomes. Most
   mental health services in England have been routinely collecting
   Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS) data for some time. In
   this article we illustrate how clinical teams have used HoNOS data to
   identify areas where performance could be improved. HoNOS data have
   the potential to give clinical teams the information they need to
   assess the quality of care they deliver, as well as develop and test
   initiatives aimed at improving the services they provide.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

A commitment to improving the quality of healthcare is central to the
aims of the National Health Service (NHS). :sup:`1` This commitment
involves developing and evaluating new interventions and treatments,
obtaining feedback from patients and learning from mistakes. :sup:`2` It
also involves monitoring and improving patient outcomes. Despite
repeated calls for greater use of patient outcome measures in mental
health, available evidence suggests that very few services use them to
monitor change over time. :sup:`3` There are a number of important
barriers which make it difficult to implement systems for monitoring
patient outcomes, including access to reliable and valid measures, the
need to protect patient confidentiality and the time and money needed to
collect, analyse and report data. :sup:`4,5`

While many initiatives aimed at improving the quality of NHS services
have been ‘top-down’, it is widely acknowledged that front-line
clinicians have a key role in efforts to improve service quality.
:sup:`6,7` However, unless clinical teams have access to information
about patient outcomes, they cannot assess their performance or identify
areas where performance could be improved.

For the past 20 years the Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS)
have provided a means of assessing the health and social functioning of
people who use mental health services. :sup:`8` HoNOS is a
clinician-rated outcome measure comprising 12 scales covering symptoms,
functioning, social relationships and environmental issues. Each domain
is rated by the treating clinician on the scale of 0 to 4: 0 means no
problem, 1 means a problem that probably requires no intervention and 2,
3 and 4 correspond to ‘mild’, ‘moderate’ and ‘severe’ problems. They are
rated by staff using all available information – not as a questionnaire
or interview – based on the worst state in the reference period, usually
2 weeks. There is a glossary, and training in their use is generally
recommended. :sup:`9` Although it is possible to calculate a total HoNOS
score for a patient, individual scores on each of the 12 scales provide
a better guide to the problems they are experiencing and targets for
future interventions and treatments. Originally developed to measure the
health and social functioning of working-age adults with severe mental
illness, the scales have been modified to assess mental health of older
adults (HoNOS65+), :sup:`10` children and adolescents (HoNOSCA),
:sup:`11` people with intellectual disability (HONOS-LD), :sup:`12` in
secure settings (HoNOS-Secure) :sup:`13` and with acute brain injury
(HoNOS-ABI). :sup:`14`

Use of HoNOS in mental health services in England was patchy until work
started on the development of a commissioning tariff based on a Mental
Health Clustering Tool, which needed HoNOS scores to be completed on all
patients who are in scope of the mental health tariff. :sup:`15` While
these plans are still in development, this initiative has led to
widespread use of HoNOS throughout the country. In recent years
clinicians have begun to consider how these data might be used to assess
and improve the quality of care they provide. In the next section we
present how clinical teams in three trusts have used HoNOS data to
identify problems with the care they provide and plan ways to improve
it.

.. _S1:

HoNOS use – examples of application
===================================

.. _S2:

Example 1: using HoNOS to examine reasons for admission
-------------------------------------------------------

Reasons for admission to hospital or to crisis resolution/home treatment
(CRHT) teams are poorly understood yet very important in terms of
ensuring that available resources are used effectively. As the number of
beds decreases, thresholds for admission are becoming increasingly
important to assess at a service level.

A team in Southampton used routine HoNOS data to explore mental health
problems (such as psychotic symptoms, suicidality and aggression)
experienced by adults who were admitted to in-patient units and people
referred to CRHT services. They compared the proportion of people who
had problems requiring intervention (a score of 2 or more on different
HoNOS items) among 3409 people admitted to hospital and 2991 referred to
local crisis teams (`Table 1 <#T1>`__). The most prevalent problems
among people referred to either service were suicidality and agitation,
with levels of agitation higher among those admitted to hospital.
Nonetheless, clinicians were surprised to see that only around half of
patients admitted to hospital and 39% taken on by crisis teams scored as
requiring intervention for suicidality and/or agitation. Even when
people with significant problems with psychosis or accommodation status
were included, a significant minority did not appear to have major
problems requiring intervention.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      HoNOS scale differences between hospital and crisis team
      admissions

   =============================== ========== ===========
   Scores > 2 on HoNOS items       Hospital   Crisis team
                                   *n* = 3409 *n* = 2991
                                   %          %
   =============================== ========== ===========
   1: Agitation                    29         16
   \                                          
   2: Suicidality                  22         27
   \                                          
   3: Accommodation                6          5
   \                                          
   4: Delusions and hallucinations 13         9
   \                                          
   1 or 2                          47         39
   \                                          
   1 or 2, 3 or 4                  66         53
   =============================== ========== ===========

When these findings were discussed within teams, clinicians raised the
possibility that people may be being referred to in-patient or CRHT
services because of a combination of different problems at less severe
level or that staff were under-scoring these items. It also led to
discussions about the level of severity at which people were being
referred to these services. Discussions based on this information led to
a review of in-patient services (numbers of beds in the area were higher
than in other comparable catchment areas), :sup:`16` and a review of
thresholds for access to CHRT services.

.. _S3:

Example 2: outcomes of patients treated by assessment and brief treatment teams
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Community mental health teams in central London used routine data from
HoNOS to examine outcomes of treatment. Changes in mean HoNOS scores
were calculated for patients under the care of assessment and brief
treatment teams between April 2013 and September 2014 by comparing the
mean severity from initial review with that from a follow-up. Scores of
3 (moderate) or 4 (severe) were categorised as ‘high’ and scores of 0
(absent), 1 (minimal) or 2 (mild) were categorised as ‘low’, and
proportions of people moving between low and high scores were plotted
(`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). In `Fig. 1 <#F1>`__ differences in severity of each
subscale of HoNOS are presented for people in clusters 1–5 (single
non-psychotic episode), clusters 6–8 (enduring non-psychotic) and
clusters 10–15 (psychosis). The data showed that a smaller proportion of
people in clusters 6 to 8 had made progress during their time with
teams; among people in clusters 6 to 8, fewer who had high scores at
baseline had lower levels at follow-up, especially compared with people
in clusters 10 to 15. When data were examined from four other sector
services in the trust a similar pattern emerged, with a greater
proportion of patients in clusters 6 to 8 failing to show evidence of
improvement or problems becoming more severe between the two time points
compared with people in clusters 10 to 15.

.. figure:: 174f1
   :alt: Changes in HoNOS scores among people treated by assessment and
   brief treatment teams. (a) Clusters 1–5; (b) Clusters 6–8; (c)
   Clusters 10–15.
   :name: F1

   Changes in HoNOS scores among people treated by assessment and brief
   treatment teams. (a) Clusters 1–5; (b) Clusters 6–8; (c) Clusters
   10–15.

When these data were presented to front-line staff they commented that
it can be difficult to help meet the needs of people in clusters 6–8
(predominately people with personality disorder) through the types of
interventions available to staff working in assessment and brief
treatment teams. Although staff working in these services are able to
refer patients to a local specialist personality disorder service, many
do not want the group-based psychological treatment offered by this
service or are too chaotic and poorly motivated to engage in
psychological treatment. Discussions prompted by a review of these data
led to the development and piloting of a six-session brief intervention
package for people with personality disorder offered by members of the
local specialist team (details available from the authors on request).
This package of treatment is based on National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines :sup:`17` and focuses on
psychoeducation and skills training. It is hoped that some people who
initially reject the offer of longer-term psychological treatment can be
engaged through this extended assessment and that others will benefit
more from this approach than they do from the care they are currently
receiving.

.. _S4:

Example 3: comparing outcomes of older adults admitted to in-patient units
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Staff working on an in-patient mental health unit for older adults with
dementia and other organic conditions used routine HoNOS65+ data to
examine outcomes of people admitted to their service. It was noted that
over a 3-year period the mean percentage improvement in scores on the
depression scale of the HoNOS65+ declined (`Fig. 2 <#F2>`__). Outcomes
can only be properly understood with reference to context and
interventions. These data were therefore compared with those from a
similar unit in the same trust with the same operational policy, lengths
of stay, diagnostic and demographic characteristics, and initial
severity scores. Data from this unit showed that mean percentage
improvement on the depression scale over the same period was
approximately 50%. The team did not have and still do not have direct
data on interventions, but in 2001 there was a pilot study of the
systematic recording of care plans, and these data were linked to
outcomes data. It transpired that in the unit with the poorer outcomes,
all patients with dementia were automatically given night-time
benzodiazepine hypnotics. Furthermore, there was a strong association
between being given night-time benzodiazepines and poor outcomes. During
discussion with the teams it was agreed that routine use of
benzodiazepines was a plausible explanation of poor outcomes and this
policy was revoked. Over the course of the next year mental health
outcomes of patients admitted to the unit improved (`Fig. 2 <#F2>`__).

.. figure:: 174f2
   :alt: Mean percentage improvement in HoNOS65+ depression scale among
   patients admitted to an older adult mental health unit.
   :name: F2

   Mean percentage improvement in HoNOS65+ depression scale among
   patients admitted to an older adult mental health unit.

.. _S5:

Discussion
==========

The examples given above illustrate how front-line clinical teams have
used routinely collected HoNOS data to examine and to try to improve the
outcomes of the patients they treat. While changes to mental health
services will continue to be made in response to new national policy
directives, new research findings and new technologies, we believe that
one of the most effective ways to improve service quality is
‘bottom-up’: through local teams using local data to drive change.
However, front-line clinicians face a number of significant challenges
when trying to assess and improve the quality of the care they provide.
Chief among these are limited time and other resources needed to collect
data on patient outcomes. We are aware of numerous occasions when
clinical teams have made changes to the services they provide but have
not had the resources to examine whether these changes led to
improvements in patient care. In other instances, baseline audits are
conducted that identify problems in a service that teams try to correct,
but staff have not had time to assess whether these changes benefited
patients. To fulfil the NHS promise to patients to continuously work to
improve service quality, clinical teams need to be able to access data
on patient outcomes. Yet the experience of participants in the UK
Routine Clinical Outcomes Network (`www.ukrcom.org <www.ukrcom.org>`__)
suggests that very few services provide outcomes data to their teams.
Embarking on new efforts to collect patient- and staff-rated outcomes is
expensive and time consuming. By contrast, routinely collected HoNOS
data in England provide an important source of clinician-rated patient
outcomes that do not require additional resources to be spent and can be
used to assess and improve the quality of care that teams provide.

.. _S6:

Challenges to widespread HoNOS use
----------------------------------

While the vignettes above illustrate how HoNOS data have been used by
front-line clinical teams, a number of obstacles need to be overcome if
this approach is to become more widespread.

First, concerns have been raised about the quality of routine HoNOS
data. :sup:`18` Available evidence suggests that if staff are provided
with appropriate support and training, HoNOS can be used to generate
reliable information that can be used to compare different services and
examine changes in patient outcomes over time. :sup:`19` Second, IT
systems in trusts need to be able to generate reports on outcome data in
a form that clinical teams find useful. Third, data from HoNOS and other
routine outcomes scales need to be interpreted cautiously. Random
variation and subtle changes in practice and case-mix may have led to
changes in patients outcomes over time. Separating real and spurious
differences can be difficult. :sup:`20` Finally, teams need to be given
time and space to examine their data, learn from them and use them to
evaluate their efforts to improve service quality. If staff are
supported to generate reliable data and systems are available to deliver
data to front-line clinical teams, then these data have the potential to
be used in clinical audit and in alternative models for improving
service quality, such as Plan–Do–Study–Act cycles. :sup:`21` The latter
approach may have some advantages over traditional audits because it
allows the impact of changes in practice to be examined more frequently
and provides a more iterative approach to developing changes aimed at
improving patient outcomes. :sup:`22,23`

At present, most staff see collecting outcome data as an ‘invisible
task’, in which time is spent collecting and entering data for no
purpose. :sup:`24` If systems can be implemented that deliver feedback
to staff on service-level patient outcomes, staff are more likely to
value collecting these data. For instance, in South London and Maudsley
NHS Foundation Trust and Central and North West London NHS Foundation
Trust, clinicians have organised meetings for staff in which HoNOS data
are presented and discussed. Feedback from staff attending these
meetings has shown they value getting this information and their
comments have been used to refine the way that data are collated and
presented (most staff indicated a preference for the categorical change
model presented in `Fig. 1 <#F1>`__ rather than changes in total HoNOS
scores).

While HoNOS scores collected through the current mental health payment
initiative :sup:`15` provide a rich source of routine data on patient
outcomes, the timing of assessments is unlikely to be optimal for
evaluating the impact of treatments and services. Further work is needed
to establish when outcome assessments are best undertaken in different
settings to compare services and assess the impact of quality
improvement initiatives.

HoNOS data are not the only form of evidence that mental health services
collect. For instance, psychiatric in-patients are asked to complete the
‘friends and family test’ (a two-item short patient-rated experience
measure). :sup:`25` However, there is very little evidence that these
data are being fed back to clinicians to allow them to reflect on
differences in levels of patient satisfaction over time or between
different teams. :sup:`26` Such data also have the potential to
stimulate bottom-up efforts to assess and improve service quality if
steps are taken to use them in this way. One of the great strengths of
HoNOS data is that they provide a summary of mental health, behavioural
problems and social factors. Although this means that HoNOS can be used
under circumstances where poor mental health or impaired cognition may
limit the value of patient-rated data, there are drawbacks to relying
solely on clinician-rated outcomes. The possibility that outcome data
could be used to pay services based on patient outcomes could
paradoxically reduce their value as a means to assess and improve
service quality. :sup:`27` This is commonly known as Goodhart's law
after the British economist Charles Goodhart: ‘When a measure becomes a
target, it ceases to be a good measure’. :sup:`28`

Mental health trusts in England are currently collecting large amounts
of outcome data using HoNOS. We believe that efforts by mental health
services to use HoNOS data and other routinely collected patient
outcomes have the potential to make better use of available resources
and engage front-line clinicians in efforts to improve patient outcomes.

.. [1]
   **Mike J. Crawford**, Director, College Centre for Quality
   Improvement, Royal College of Psychiatrists, London, and Central and
   North West London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; **Mo Zoha**,
   Consultant Psychiatrist, Central and North West London NHS Foundation
   Trust, London, UK; **Alastair J. D. Macdonald**, Professor of Old Age
   Psychiatry, Trust Clinical Outcomes Team, South London and Maudsley
   NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; **David Kingdon**, Clinical
   Services Director, Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton,
   UK.
