============================================================================================================
Update on the Improving Access to Psychological Therapies programme in England: author's reply\ `† <#fn1>`__
============================================================================================================



Sami Timimi

:Correspondence: Sami Timimi (stimimi@talk21.com)  [1]_

:date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   Fonagy & Clark confirm in their rebuttal that they have an
   ideological commitment to the failed technical model of understanding
   and intervening in mental health problems that dominates current
   service provision. They fail to acknowledge the limitations and
   problems associated with Improving Access to Psychological Therapies
   (IAPT) and Children's and Young People's IAPT (CYP-IAPT) and offer an
   unconvincing explanation for why they did not allow some of the vast
   tax payers' money that they had at their dispoal to be used to
   implement evidence supported relational models.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

I will mainly comment on professors Fonagy and Clark's article\ :sup:`1`
as they have attempted an evidence-supported rebuttal. Dr Law's
letter\ :sup:`2` calls for more dialogue, which by itself will not
change the implementation fundamentals, whereas Ms Swaile's
letter\ :sup:`3` points out the obvious – that if you spend more on
psychological therapies, more of them will be available – whereas my
editorial\ :sup:`4` was critiquing how this extra available money was
spent.

Fonagy & Clark's article reminded me why I initially got excited about
Children and Young People's Improving Access to Psychological Therapies
(CYP-IAPT), with its desire to engage with the evidence and talk of
improving access, collaborative working, focusing on outcomes, local
learning and so on. My original enthusiasm was misplaced as there is a
fatal flaw, which they seem unable to get past – their belief that the
poor outcomes and inefficiencies of mainstream services happen because
we are not rigorous enough in the way we enforce technical aspects of
care. Their ideological intransigence on this matter has created a
cartel-like monopoly where existing and successful alternative models
have no opportunity to be tried.

Their critique of relational/contextual models (they refer to as ‘common
factors’) is unconvincing. The most rigorous meta-analyses of evidence
from randomised controlled trials (RCTs) note that of course papers can
be found showing some model differences, but the overall evidence base
finds that across presentations by far the biggest factors influencing
outcomes have little to do with what we do – so called extra-therapeutic
factors (the real-life contexts, beliefs and histories), whereas within
therapy it is the therapeutic alliance.\ :sup:`5` Therapeutic alliance
is not a one-dimensional construct and includes, for example, the degree
of ‘engagement’ – a two-way process including understanding what is
meaningful to the patient. Thus, if a computer program provides a
meaningful methodology for a patient, then that is where their
‘alliance’ may form.

The authors predictably avoid bigger issues with National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE)-guideline-derived
evidence-based-therapies (EBTs). In mental health (unlike the rest of
medicine), NICE guidelines are eminence not evidence based, in other
words they rely more on who was on the guideline group than what the
evidence says.\ :sup:`6,7` NICE guidelines focus on process adherence,
but have little to say about outcomes. They derive from diagnostic
constructs that have done little to advance scientific knowledge or
clinical practice, and have no capacity to match treatments to
aetiology, thus failing the basics required of a technical
model.\ :sup:`8` Mental health treatment RCTs use exclusion criteria,
which often means the sort of multi-problem, diagnostic overlap patients
typical of those who attend our clinics are not adequately represented.
Like me, Fonagy & Clark want to do something about the dreadful record
for outcomes that real-world mental health services have. Their solution
is to ‘beef up’ existing diagnosis-based NICE-guideline EBTs that we
have been using for years, but using more manualised process adherence.
But the fantasy that expertise in technique is king is what got us into
this mess in the first place. This ideological commitment seems to have
by-passed simple logic. If the outcomes with a patient show improvement,
does it matter what model you use to help achieve this? If an outcome is
not improving, then it surely does matter and irrespective of what your
manual says you may need a rethink what you are doing altogether.

As far as their concept of ‘relational’ is concerned, they describe a
collaborative ‘light’ model. In the primacy of the technical model,
‘collaborative’ essentially amounts to convincing the patient that the
expert knows what is wrong with them and what the right treatment is.
Prioritising the relational means that therapy is potentially
‘co-constructed’ at every step. In a proper relational model we are
constantly encountering ‘experts by experience’ whose insights, skills,
choices, autonomy and resources should be harnessed to help shape
therapy session by session.

Fonagy & Clark's article does little to dent the critique that CYP-IAPT
has not, thus far, managed to develop patient-empowering,
outcomes-focused, collaborative practice. Tellingly, after 4 years of
implementation they were unable to reference any patient outcome data
for CYP-IAPT. In the 3 years of our local Outcomes Orientated Child and
Adolescent Mental Health Services (OO-CAMHS) project, we have amassed a
database with over 4000 discharged cases with outcome ratings where a
reliable clinical improvement and/or ‘recovered’ rate of 75% is being
recorded. It is time for CYP-IAPT to stop being frightened of relational
models and give them a seat at their table. If Fonagy & Clark wish to
maximise the chances of having services that can improve the lives of
many more people, then they should embrace the opportunity to include
alternative models such as the Partners for Change Outcome Management
System/OO-CAMHS that have a proven track record in real-world services,
to keep open possibilities for discovering ways of designing services
that are most effective and efficient. If they remain ideologically
belligerent (as they have thus far), every word of my critique stands.

.. [1]
   **Sami Timimi** FRCPsych, is a consultant child and adolescent
   psychiatrist for Child and Family Services at the Horizon Centre,
   Lincoln.
