=============================================================
Services for adults with ADHD: work in progress\ `† <#fn1>`__
=============================================================
------------------------------------------------------------------
: Commentary on . . . Specialist adult ADHD clinics in East Anglia
------------------------------------------------------------------



David Coghill

:Correspondence: David Coghill (d.r.coghill@dundee.ac.uk)
 [1]_  [2]_

:date: 2015-6

:Abstract:
   Magon and colleagues highlight a number of relative strengths and
   weaknesses very reminiscent of those we have seen over the years in
   the development of similar services for children and adolescents. It
   is clear that we all have a lot of work to do to improve our approach
   to the transition from child to adult services. There was clear
   evidence that adult services can adapt to manage ADHD, but there is
   also a clear need for increased upskilling of clinicians in the
   practical management of medication and other treatments. I disagree
   with Magon and colleagues about the role of primary care and believe
   that treatment initiation and ongoing monitoring should, for the time
   being, remain in secondary care and that, because of the volume of
   work that will come our way, this will need to become a core rather
   than specialist task. As with other aspects of psychiatric care,
   there is a clear role for specialist nurses in delivering a
   significant proportion of the core care.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Magon and colleagues :sup:`1` are to be congratulated for conducting
what I believe is the first evaluation of the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommendations on services for adults
with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Their audit
highlights several of the important, and sometimes controversial, issues
that face commissioners, practitioners and patients.

This is a field of clinical work that is constantly evolving. Many of
the changes that we are seeing mirror those that have taken place over
the past two decades within child and adolescent mental health services
(CAMHS). It will therefore be important that the lessons learnt there
are not ignored. However, there are also many differences between the
needs of people still experiencing ADHD and its related impairments as
adults and those that they had while growing up and these too need to be
respected. It is an important starting point to acknowledge that ADHD
does not arise *de novo* in adulthood. There are of course some
individuals with ADHD who were provided with ample scaffolding and
support at home and school during childhood and adolescence and whose
ADHD-related impairments may only have become clear when they left home
and/or moved to less supported educational or work situations in early
adulthood. But for most, their ADHD will have been causing significant
problems throughout life and will have had an impact throughout their
lives on their educational achievements, ability to form and sustain
relationships, personality development and mental well-being.

.. _S1:

ADHD diagnosis rates in the UK
==============================

Unfortunately, in the UK at least, many of those with ADHD will not have
received a diagnosis or any treatment during childhood or adolescence.
Recent figures from Scotland suggest that despite increases in
recognition over the past 20 years ADHD is still significantly
under-diagnosed. Even in the regions with the highest rates of
recognition only around one in five of those with ADHD are currently
being diagnosed. :sup:`2` There is also very significant variation
between regions and in the most densely populated areas of Scotland the
rates of recognition are even lower, with diagnosis and treatment rates
running between 6 and 13% of the epidemiological prevalence. :sup:`2`
This same situation, both with respect to under-recognition and regional
variability, is almost certainly replicated across the rest of the UK.

As a consequence, it seems very likely that those individuals who are
being identified, diagnosed and treated are those with the most severe
symptoms and impairments. They are also the group that is most likely to
need continuing services and the greatest support during transition. It
comes as no surprise to me to hear that transition was generally not
well managed in either of the services covered in the audit and I
recognise many of the comments in the discussion about the problems of
transition only too well from my own clinical experience. From the CAMHS
perspective it is often difficult to have the conversation about what
the young person should expect from adult services when you are fully
aware that in reality this depends a great deal on who picks up the
case. It is much easier to hold on to cases well past the official
transition date but this is neither good clinical practice – the needs
of young adults are different and deserve to be treated by
adult-oriented services – nor a good way to develop these much needed
services.

.. _S2:

Guidelines for service transition
=================================

Acknowledging the challenges of developing these, essentially new,
services, we have produced guidance for the establishment of transition
services. :sup:`3` These built on NICE recommendations :sup:`4` and
include suggestions that:

a planned transfer to an appropriate adult service should be made if the
young person continues to have significant symptoms of ADHD or other
coexisting conditions that require treatment; transition should be
planned in advance by both referring and receiving services; transition
between teams should be a gradual process, e.g. lasting a minimum of 6
months; clear transition protocols should be developed jointly by
commissioners, CAMHS/paediatric services, adult mental health services
(AMHS) and primary care to facilitate transition and ensure that
standards of care are maintained during the transition period;
pre-transition: young people with ADHD should be reassessed at
school-leaving age by the service managing their care; they should be
informed of the outcome of this assessment and transitioned according to
need; during transition, child and adult services should ideally have a
joint transition appointment; during these meetings both services must
ensure the needs of the young person will be appropriately met, which
may involve further discussion and collaboration with educational and/or
occupational agencies; post-transition: a comprehensive assessment
should be carried out by the receiving service and this should include a
reassessment for comorbid conditions; shared-care arrangements between
primary and secondary care services for the prescription and monitoring
of ADHD medications should be continued into adulthood.

Admittedly, these may seem to be relatively demanding recommendations,
but the ongoing burden will be considerably lessened if they are
underpinned by good-quality commissioning and planning. Getting the
transition arrangements right should help to set the right tone for
broader service planning. It should also strengthen the relationships
between the child and adult services and facilitate joint learning,
protocol development and planning.

.. _S3:

ADHD pharmacological treatment: competence issues
=================================================

In contrast to the clear issues hindering transition, it was very
encouraging to see that both audited services were generally doing very
well with respect to the assessment of not only the core ADHD symptoms
but also the physical needs and coexisting conditions as well as in the
initiation of medication treatment. This clearly indicates that it is
possible for adult services to develop the required skills and integrate
them into day-to-day practice. Although I do not believe this was ever
in doubt, it is not uncommon to hear colleagues say that they feel out
of their depth when dealing with these patients. There are now
increasing opportunities for training in the assessment and management
of adults with ADHD. In particular, the UK Adult ADHD Network (UKAAN;
`www.ukaan.org <www.ukaan.org>`__) has developed, and can deliver,
high-quality training within the UK and has produced a helpful handbook
for clinicians. :sup:`5` There are also recently updated guidelines from
the British Association of Psychopharmacology. :sup:`6`

It has become clear in recent years that the pharmacological management
of ADHD is a skilled task and that whereas the basic principles of
treatment are relatively simple, it is not so easy to ensure that
treatment is first optimised and then continues to work well over time.
:sup:`7,8`

.. _S4:

Primary- *v.* secondary-care management
---------------------------------------

Various opinions have been proposed about why it is difficult to
maintain treatment results over time, but it would seem that continuing
to provide ongoing high-quality care may be one important part of the
puzzle (e.g. see Langley *et al* :sup:`9` ). This certainly seems to be
the case in our own clinic and has led to us developing a nurse-led
clinical pathway that focuses on providing high-volume, high-quality
continuing care. :sup:`10` This highlights the one area where I think I
may disagree with Magon *et al*. I do not believe that primary care
services in the UK have yet acquired the skills to manage ADHD
independently of specialist services. I certainly fully support the use
of shared-care arrangements whereby (post-stabilisation) prescribing and
possibly some physical monitoring is managed in primary care. I strongly
believe, however, that symptom monitoring, monitoring of impairment and
functioning and monitoring of comorbid conditions should at present
remain within secondary care. These are skilled tasks and take time to
do properly, and even if general practitioners (GPs) acquire the skills
they are unlikely to be able to spend enough time to ensure outcomes are
optimised.

.. _S5:

Specialist ADHD management teams: (not) a perfect approach?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Although I do not currently support primary care-led services, it is
still an open question as to which secondary care service model is best
suited to the delivery of services for adults with ADHD in the National
Health Service (NHS). Several different models have been put forward,
ranging from all-age specialist teams, through specialist services
limited to adults (such as those described in Magon *et al*\ ’s audit),
to services using a standardised protocol to deliver care via general
AMHS. It is easy to see the allure of specialist teams, whether they be
all-age or separate teams for children and adolescents and adults. There
are, however, risks with this specialist team model. These include
continued marginalisation of ADHD with specialist teams being seen as
elitist and allowing those who are sceptical about ADHD to continue to
ignore it as a valid clinical entity. Indeed, within such a model even
those who may be somewhat interested but have not been placed on the
team will often feel deskilled and left out.

Specialist teams often depend on a small group of individuals often
centred around a charismatic and motivated leader. This makes them
vulnerable when someone retires or leaves for another post. If
successful, such teams will need to either become very big or only
manage a small area. If they are large they can be very difficult to
manage, if small one often gets postcode prescribing. On the other hand,
expecting all adult psychiatrists to accept and manage ADHD alongside
their other duties from the outset is almost certainly unrealistic and
would be very likely to result in a huge variability in services. It
would therefore seem parsimonious to accept that, as recommended by
NICE, specialist services for adults with ADHD should be encouraged in
the short to medium term, but that in the longer term it should be
expected that managing ADHD will become a core skill for adult
psychiatry, as it has over the past 20 years for child and adolescent
psychiatry.

.. _S6:

A new way of delivering services
================================

While the optimal configuration of services is still being debated, I
strongly support the use of multidisciplinary skills in the delivery of
care. It is certainly not the case that all clinical care needs to be
delivered by a doctor. In Dundee we have successfully developed a
pathway that is primarily delivered by trained nursing staff, most of
whom are not prescribers. These skilled nurses run parallel clinics,
often as many as five at a time, supported by a senior medical staff
member (usually a consultant), who works as a ‘floating doctor’ across
the clinics providing support as required and overseeing changes in
medication. I am aware that several adult services have also been
successful in adopting a similar nurse-led service model and believe
this is the way forward for ADHD services across the age range. Clinical
psychologists, occupational therapists, dieticians, a range of
psychological therapists and voluntary sector staff can also play a very
important role in providing holistic care and their involvement should
be encouraged wherever possible. It is not essential, or often
desirable, for everyone to be part of a physical team and there can be
great benefits from adopting a ‘virtual team’ approach with a clear and
shared clinical pathway.

Another important point raised by the audit is the current difficulty
accessing non-pharmacological treatments. It is true that we do not yet
have a solid evidence base for non-pharmacological approaches to the
management of ADHD in adults, nevertheless I believe that NICE was
correct to highlight the potential importance of broader approaches to
treatment. As pointed out by Magon and colleagues, there are now a range
of psychological therapies, most of which use a cognitive–behavioural
therapy (CBT) approach. The problem seems to be getting those with the
skills to deliver such programmes actually interested in doing so.
Similar problems have arisen in effectively delivering behavioural
parenting approaches. Here one solution has been to engage partners from
outside the healthcare spectrum, often third-sector voluntary agencies,
in delivery. It is not yet clear how this will work out for adult
services. It may be the case that we have to wait until more clinical
psychologists and/or appropriately trained nurse practitioners are ready
to step up to the plate and start to provide a sound base of practice
skills from which work can expand. Or it may be that, as suggested by
Magon and colleagues, opportunities will arrive through the development
of stronger and more active local ADHD support groups working in
partnership with the voluntary sector.

The last point I would like to pick up on is that there were quite a few
instances where the practice of the two audited services differed
considerably. This is in line with the clear geographic differences in
provision of services to children and young people. However, even though
some degree of variability between services is of course inevitable, in
ADHD very high levels seem to be the norm. Some of this variability will
represent historical differences based on individual or service-level
beliefs about the validity of ADHD and the use of medication to treat it
and will have predated the provision of clear clinical guidelines.
However, the introduction of guidelines does not seem to have led to
increased uniformity in service delivery for child services :sup:`2,11`
and I suspect it will take a lot of hard work to ensure greater
uniformity in the development of services for adults. Audits such as
this are a good starting point and I again thank Magon and colleagues
for getting the ball rolling.

.. [1]
   **David Coghill** MB ChB, MD, FRCPsych is Reader and honorary
   consultant in child and adolescent psychiatry, Division of
   Neuroscience, Medical Research Institute, University of Dundee,
   Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, UK.

.. [2]
   See pp. 136–40, this issue.
