=================================================================
Mental health clustering and diagnosis in psychiatric in-patients
=================================================================



Liam Trevithick
Jon Painter
Patrick Keown

:Correspondence: Patrick Keown (patrick.keown@ncl.ac.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2015-6

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** This paper investigates the relationship between
   cluster (Mental Health Clustering Tool, MHCT) and diagnosis in an
   in-patient population. We analysed the diagnostic make-up of each
   cluster and the clinical utility of the diagnostic advice in the
   Department of Health’s *Mental Health Clustering Booklet*.
   In-patients discharged from working-age adult and older people’s
   services of a National Health Service trust over 1 year were
   included. Cluster on admission was compared with primary diagnosis on
   discharge.

   **Results** Organic, schizophreniform, anxiety disorder and
   personality disorders aligned to one superclass cluster. Alcohol and
   substance misuse, and mood disorders distributed evenly across
   psychosis and non-psychosis superclass clusters. Two-thirds of
   diagnoses fell within the MHCT ‘likely’ group and a tenth into the
   ‘unlikely’ group.

   **Clinical implications** Cluster and diagnosis are best viewed as
   complimentary systems to describe an individual’s needs. Improvements
   are suggested to the MHCT diagnostic advice in in-patient settings.
   Substance misuse and affective disorders have a more complex
   distribution between superclass clusters than all other broad
   diagnostic groups.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

A set of needs-based clusters were originally developed as a
classification system to aid service improvement in secondary care
mental health services.\ :sup:`1` There are a total of 21 clusters
grouped into three superclasses: non-psychosis, psychosis and organic.
Each cluster describes a particular type, combination and severity of
needs. This Care Pathways and Packages approach
(`www.cppconsortium.nhs.uk <www.cppconsortium.nhs.uk>`__) was
subsequently adopted as the heart of a move away from block contracts
towards a new mental health payment system.

The first 12 scales of the Mental Health Clustering Tool (MHCT) are
Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS) items.\ :sup:`2` The HoNOS
tool was originally developed by the Royal College of Psychiatrists’
Research Unit as an outcome measure. The Care Pathways and Packages
Project developed the remaining six MHCT scales to support the
classification of patients based on their level of need.\ :sup:`1` The
*Mental Health Clustering Booklet* provides likely diagnoses for each
cluster. Added to version 3.0 of the booklet were unlikely diagnoses for
each cluster based on the ICD-10 classification system used in the
National Health Service (NHS).\ :sup:`3,4`

.. _S1:

Aims
====

The study had two aims. The first was to analyse the diagnostic make-up
of each cluster from an in-patient population and to investigate the
clinical utility of the advice in the MHCT booklet regarding likely and
unlikely diagnoses. The second aim was to investigate the distribution
of diagnoses across both superclass cluster groups and individual
clusters.

.. _S2:

Method
======

All discharges from working-age adult or older people’s in-patient
services in Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust (NTW)
between 1 April 2012 and 31 March 2013 were included in the study (each
discharge refers to one treatment episode rather than one patient).
Working-age adult services included psychiatric intensive care units
(PICUs), acute adult and rehabilitation wards. Older people’s wards
included functional, organic and long-term/complex need wards.

The cluster on admission was taken as cluster assigned on date of
admission or up to 3 days after admission, or nearest cluster prior to
admission. Cluster superclass groups used are those given in the MHCT
booklet: non-psychosis clusters 1–8; psychosis clusters 10–17; and
organic clusters 18–21. Patients were assigned to cluster 0 if they were
not adequately described by another cluster but required secondary care
services.

We considered the diagnosis on discharge because diagnosis is more
likely to be recorded on discharge and is more likely to be related to
the current episode than diagnosis on or prior to admission. The ICD-10
code was sourced from electronic patient records. The broad diagnostic
groups used were F00–09 (organic and dementia), F10–19 (substance
misuse), F20–29 (schizophrenia and related disorders), F30–39 (affective
disorders), F40–48 (neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders),
F60–69 (personality and behaviour disorders), and ‘other’ diagnoses.
‘Other’ diagnoses included F50–59 (behavioural syndromes associated with
physiological disturbances and physical factors), F70–79 (mental
retardation), F80–89 (disorders of psychological development), other
developmental disorders, G00–99, H00–95, R00–99, S00–T98 and Z00–99. The
next diagnostic level used to analyse the data was at the ‘three
character’ level, for example F32 depressive episode or F33 recurrent
depressive disorder. Within affective disorder the four-character level
was used to distinguish conditions with and without psychosis.

To empirically validate the MHCT ‘likely’ and ‘unlikely’ advice, a
threshold of 65% was set for the cumulative proportion of discharges in
a cluster which were attributed to the ‘likely’ diagnoses. In other
words, all of the ‘likely’ diagnoses for a cluster should account for
65% or more of discharges. An acceptable threshold of 10% was set for
the ‘unlikely’ diagnoses, meaning that all ‘unlikely’ diagnoses for a
cluster should not account for more than 10% of discharges. Diagnoses
not in the likely or unlikely groups were put in the ‘other’ group.

All analysis of the data was performed using SPSS version 19 for Windows
and Microsoft Excel.

This study was part of a service evaluation of clinical activity in NTW
which focused on the use of in-patient services across the trust. This
was within the Transforming Services Programme which had approval of the
trust board and included ongoing work to evaluate the use of MHCT within
the trust. Data were provided by the trust informatics department. We
used routinely collected data for this study.

.. _S3:

Results
=======

In total, there were 2830 discharges between 1 April 2012 and 31 May
2013. Primary discharge diagnosis was available for three-quarters of
these (*n* = 2094): half were accounted for by affective disorders (*n*
= 552, 26%) and schizophrenia and related disorders (*n* = 533, 25%).
The remaining diagnostic groups were: personality disorders (*n* = 283,
14%); alcohol and substance misuse (*n* = 260, 12%); neurotic,
stress-related and somatoform disorders (*n* = 253, 12%); dementia and
organic disorders (*n* = 131, 6%); other (*n* = 82, 4%).

Over 90% of discharges (*n* = 2570) had an admission cluster. Of those,
almost half (45%, *n* = 1145) were non-psychosis clusters 1–8, 42% (*n*
= 1091) were psychosis clusters 10–17, 11% (*n* = 287) were organic
clusters 18–21 and 2% (*n* = 47) were cluster 0.

There were 1937 discharges with both a cluster on admission and
diagnosis on discharge. The diagnostic make-up of clusters 1, 2 and 21
was not analysed due to low numbers. In 11 of the remaining 17 clusters,
the likely diagnoses made up more than 65% of the cases. This figure was
highest for clusters 13, 16 and 17 where the likely diagnoses accounted
for more than 80% of the cases. In 6 of the 17 clusters the likely
diagnoses accounted for less than 65% of the cases and made up half or
less of cases in clusters 3, 4, 10, 15 and 18. These same five clusters
had high rates of ‘other’ diagnoses.

In the majority of clusters the ‘unlikely’ diagnoses made up around 10%
of cases. In four of the clusters in the psychosis superclass (clusters
11, 12, 15 and 16) the ‘unlikely’ diagnoses accounted for between 11 and
17%.

Highlighted in `Table 1 <#T1>`__ are five clusters which have low
numbers of ‘likely’ diagnoses and relatively high numbers of ‘other’
diagnoses. There were a number of unexpected diagnoses for some
clusters, particularly within non-psychosis clusters. Alcohol misuse was
the primary diagnosis in more than 10% of those in clusters 3, 4 and 5.
Personality disorder was the primary diagnosis in more than 10% of
cluster 3; similar figures were found for recurrent depression in
clusters 6 and 15, and organic disorders (F04–09) in clusters 18 and 19.
More than a third of those in cluster 15 had an F20–29 diagnosis.
Alcohol and substance misuse was the primary diagnosis for a fifth of
cluster 10, whereas depression accounted for 10%.

`Table 2 <#T2>`__ shows the distributions of broad diagnostic groupings
among the cluster superclasses. There was a significant relationship
between cluster and diagnosis: F00–09 largely falling within the organic
superclass; F20–29 largely falling within the psychosis superclass;
F40–48 and F60–69 largely falling within the non-psychosis superclass.

Substance misuse and affective disorders were split between the
psychosis and non-psychosis superclass clusters. `Table 3 <#T3>`__ shows
a significant relationship between different types of substance misuse
and superclass. Two-thirds of F10 diagnoses fell in the non-psychosis
supercluster and nearly half were classified as having alcohol
dependence (F10.2). In contrast, 67% of the F11–18 diagnoses fell within
the psychosis supercluster. Multiple substance misuse diagnoses were
equally split between these two superclass clusters.

A marked distinction between mania and bipolar disorders and the
remaining affective disorders was observed (`Table 3 <#T3>`__). There
was a non-significant trend towards clustering bipolar disorder in the
psychosis clusters, regardless of whether the patient exhibited
psychotic symptoms or not. Patients with depression were significantly
more likely to be assigned to non-psychosis clusters than to psychosis
clusters. The only exception to this was depression with psychosis
(`Table 3 <#T3>`__).

.. _S4:

Discussion
==========

The results show that the diagnostic advice in the clustering booklet
holds true for ‘likely’ diagnoses in 11 of the 17 clusters analysed and
in 13 clusters for ‘unlikely’ diagnoses. In five clusters (3, 4, 10, 15
and 18) the ‘likely’ diagnoses accounted for half or less of discharges
from hospital and there were particularly high rates of other diagnoses.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Discharges from each cluster and the percentage in the likely,
      unlikely and other diagnoses from the Mental Health Clustering
      Tool advice. Individual clusters with low rates of ‘likely’
      diagnosis and high rates of ‘other’ diagnoses in bold

   =================== ======= ============ ====== ======
   \                           Diagnoses, %        
   =================== ======= ============ ====== ======
   Non-psychosis (1–8) 896     59           9      32
       1               4       N/A          N/A    N/A
       2               17      N/A          N/A    N/A
       **3**           **72**  **46**       **7**  **47**
       **4**           **189** **49**       **9**  **42**
       5               151     68           7      25
       6               67      75           9      16
       7               157     65           10     25
       8               239     62           10     28
   \                                               
   Psychosis (10–17)   899     73           10     17
       **10**          **133** **52**       **0**  **48**
       11              111     74           17     9
       12              169     76           15     9
       13              102     83           6      11
       14              220     74           10     16
       **15**          **28**  **29**       **11** **60**
       16              80      81           15     4
       17              56      93           4      3
   \                                               
   Organic (18–21)     113     66           3      31
       **18**          **21**  **52**       **5**  **43**
       19              50      68           0      32
       20              32      78           0      22
       21              10      N/A          N/A    N/A
   \                                               
   Total               1908    66           9      25
   =================== ======= ============ ====== ======

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Broad ICD-10 diagnostic groups at discharge and superclass cluster
      group at admission

   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          | Su       |          |          |          |          |
   |          | perclass |          |          |          |          |
   |          | cluster  |          |          |          |          |
   |          | groups   |          |          |          |          |
   +==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+
   | F00–09   | 5 (4)    | 10 (8)   | 14 (12)  | 92 (76)  | 121      |
   | Dementia |          |          |          |          | (100)    |
   | and      |          |          |          |          |          |
   | organic  |          |          |          |          |          |
   | d        |          |          |          |          |          |
   | isorders |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | F10–19   | 3 (1)    | 128 (56) | 93 (40)  | 6 (3)    | 230      |
   | S        |          |          |          |          | (100)    |
   | ubstance |          |          |          |          |          |
   | misuse   |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | F20–29   | 6 (1)    | 31 (6)   | 445 (92) | 2 (0)    | 484      |
   | Schiz    |          |          |          |          | (100)    |
   | ophrenia |          |          |          |          |          |
   | and      |          |          |          |          |          |
   | related  |          |          |          |          |          |
   | d        |          |          |          |          |          |
   | isorders |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | F30–39   | 7 (1)    | 255 (49) | 254 (49) | 1 (0)    | 517      |
   | A        |          |          |          |          | (100)    |
   | ffective |          |          |          |          |          |
   | d        |          |          |          |          |          |
   | isorders |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | F40–48   | 3 (1)    | 199 (82) | 40 (17)  | 0 (0)    | 242      |
   | N        |          |          |          |          | (100)    |
   | eurotic, |          |          |          |          |          |
   | stress   |          |          |          |          |          |
   | -related |          |          |          |          |          |
   | and      |          |          |          |          |          |
   | so       |          |          |          |          |          |
   | matoform |          |          |          |          |          |
   | d        |          |          |          |          |          |
   | isorders |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | F60–69   | 2 (1)    | 235 (87) | 34 (13)  | 0 (0)    | 271      |
   | Per      |          |          |          |          | (100)    |
   | sonality |          |          |          |          |          |
   | and      |          |          |          |          |          |
   | b        |          |          |          |          |          |
   | ehaviour |          |          |          |          |          |
   | d        |          |          |          |          |          |
   | isorders |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Other    | 2 (3)    | 39 (54)  | 19 (26)  | 12 (17)  | 72 (100) |
   | d        |          |          |          |          |          |
   | iagnoses |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Missing  | 19 (3)   | 248 (39) | 192 (30) | 174 (27) | 633      |
   | di       |          |          |          |          | (100)    |
   | agnostic |          |          |          |          |          |
   | data     |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Total    | 47 (2)   | 1145     | 1091     | 287 (11) | 2570     |
   |          |          | (45)     | (42)     |          | (100)    |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          | χ\       |          |          |          |          |
   |          | :sup:`2` |          |          |          |          |
   |          | =        |          |          |          |          |
   |          | 1622.7,  |          |          |          |          |
   |          | d.f. =   |          |          |          |          |
   |          | 14, *n*  |          |          |          |          |
   |          | = 2523,  |          |          |          |          |
   |          | *P* <    |          |          |          |          |
   |          | 0.001    |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+

Caution must be taken when interpreting some of these findings due to
low sample numbers in some of the clusters. Further analysis in both
in-patient and out-patient populations is necessary. Our findings
indicate that the diagnostic advice holds true for the majority of
clusters. However, the low rates of ‘likely’ diagnoses among a few
clusters suggest that the current advice for those clusters does not
hold true for a subsection of the in-patient population. These findings
are supported by previous research which found high rates of mismatch
between ICD-10 diagnoses and clusters 3, 4, 15 and 18.\ :sup:`5`

| Clinical practice issues could partly explain these findings, but if
  further in-depth analysis in other trusts reveals similar trends, then
  changing the ‘likely’ diagnosis advice will increase the MHCT booklet’
  clinical usefulness. Our results indicate that the following diagnoses
  could be added to the ‘likely’ diagnoses group: alcohol misuse for
  clusters 3 to 5; recurrent depression for cluster 6 and 15; Table 3The
  distribution of F10–19 substance misuse and F30–39 affective disorder
  diagnoses across the non-psychosis and psychosis superclass groups.
  Cluster 0 and organic superclass are not shown separately, but are
  included in total numbersMHCT groupsICD-10 diagnostic groupTotal
  cluster 1–8Total cluster 10–17TotalF10–19 alcohol and substance
  misuse128 (56%)93 (40%)230 (100%)    F10 alcohol80 (67%)31 (26%)119
  (100%)    F11–18 opioids, cannabinoids, sedatives, stimulants etc.7
  (29%)16 (67%)24 (100%)    F19 multiple drug use41 (47%)46 (53%)87
  (100%)χ\ :sup:`2` = 20.41, d.f. = 2, *n* = 221, *P* < 0.001F30–39
  affective disorder255 (49%)254 (49%)517 (100%)    F30–31 mania and
  bipolar disorder49 (20%)192 (78%)245 (100%)    F32–33 depression196
  (76%)59 (23%)259 (100%)    F34–39 persistent mood disorders, other
  mood disorders
| and mood disorders unspecified10 (77%)3 (23%)13 (100%)χ\ :sup:`2` =
  162.22, d.f. = 2, *n* = 509, *P* < 0.001F31 bipolar disorder    with
  psychotic symptoms8 (19%)34 (79%)43 (100%)    without psychotic
  symptoms20 (29%)48 (69%)70 (100%)    mixed episode2 (15%)11 (85%)13
  (100%)    unspecified16 (14%)97 (85%)114 (100%)χ\ :sup:`2` = 6.46,
  d.f. = 2, *n* = 236, *P* = 0.09F32 and F33 depression    with
  psychotic symptoms22 (38%)35 (60%)58 (100%)    without psychotic
  symptoms93 (86%)13 (12%)108 (100%)    unspecified81 (88%)11 (12%)92
  (100%)χ\ :sup:`2` = 60.45, d.f. = 2, *n* = 255, *P* < 0.001
  schizophrenia and related disorders to cluster 15; organic conditions
  (F04–09) to clusters 18 to 21.

There were two diagnostic areas that are worth discussing further. The
first was personality disorder. A number of diagnoses of personality
disorder were found in cluster 8. However, there were also some found in
other non-psychosis clusters including clusters 3 and 4. It may be that
these were incorrectly diagnosed or clustered. Alternatively, it may be
that those with complex and severe personality disorders are allocated
to cluster 8 whereas those with simple personality disorders are
clustered lower down within the non-psychosis superclass.\ :sup:`6`

A further area of concern was the high proportion of ‘other’ diagnoses
in cluster 10, a substantial proportion of which were alcohol and
substance misuse diagnoses. This is at odds with the finding that the
prevalence of drug-induced psychosis is relatively low in
England.\ :sup:`7` It may reflect a reluctance of some early
intervention psychosis services to give a formal diagnosis early on in
an individual’s contact with services.\ :sup:`8`

Whereas dementia and organic disorders, neurotic and stress-related and
somatoform disorders, and schizophrenia and related disorders aligned to
one superclass cluster group, affective disorders and substance misuse
disorders did not. At one diagnostic level down, depression mainly fell
within the non-psychosis superclass while mania and bipolar disorder
fell within the psychosis superclass. The only exception to this was the
diagnosis of psychotic depression. Local trust policy, in line with
Royal College of Psychiatrists advice, was to cluster patients with
bipolar disorder to the psychosis clusters, regardless of whether
psychotic symptoms were present.\ :sup:`9`

Department of Health guidance currently being drafted suggests that
patients with bipolar disorder diagnoses may be allocated to either
psychotic or non-psychotic clusters depending on presenting
needs,\ :sup:`10` supporting the view that cluster and diagnosis should
best be viewed as complementary. These findings also have implications
for the proposed reorganisation of services. If there is to be a
division between psychosis and non-psychosis, it is evident that both
teams will require expertise in the management of affective disorders.

Further analysis showed that F10–19 alcohol/substance misuse accounted
for 14% of all clusters 2–8 and was largely uniform across each cluster
individually. This highlights that patients with a primary diagnosis of
alcohol/substance misuse experience a wide range of problems and have
varying levels of need. This can be seen as supporting the previous
decision to disaggregate the original generic substance misuse cluster
9.\ :sup:`11`

.. _S5:

Limitations
-----------

There are a number of limitations of this research which need to be
highlighted. First, the accepted thresholds used for ‘likely’ and
‘unlikely’ diagnoses were set by the research team. No previous research
was available in which to benchmark against. Second, only in-patient
discharges were included, but the MHCT was developed for use in both
community and in-patient services. To acquire a fuller understanding of
the cluster–diagnosis relationship, the research should be extended to
community patients. Third, for low-need non-psychosis and organic
clusters in particular, there were low numbers, meaning that reliable
and valid conclusions could not be drawn. Fourth, it is important to
note that during the first analysis, we grouped together all ‘likely’
diagnoses and did not separate out the relative contributions of each
diagnosis. It is possible that a ‘likely’ diagnosis occurred rarely and
was offset by a more frequent one. Fifth, audits established that
cluster accuracy for the period from January to June 2012 was at 68%
(CAPITA, personal communication, 2013). However, assignment to
superclass cluster was highly accurate; only one service user (2%) was
assigned to the wrong supercluster. It is important to note that this
audit was conducted using 63 patients who had been clustered to a
psychosis cluster only. This suggests that findings of associations at
the superclass level are likely to be more robust than at the individual
cluster level. Finally, we used clinical diagnoses and due to the nature
of the study it was not possible to check accuracy or interrater
reliability.

This paper provides further information on the relationship between
cluster and diagnosis in an in-patient setting. It supports the notion
that cluster and diagnosis are best seen as complementary systems to
describe an individual’s needs, rather than there being a 1:1
relationship. This particularly applies to affective and substance
misuse disorders. The data identified different skill sets required for
the management of in-patients in the psychosis, non-psychosis and
organic clusters if services are to further specialise in these areas.
Results suggest some of the interventions that would need to be
delivered within these services. Future work should extend this research
into community teams.

.. [1]
   **Liam Trevithick** is a senior research assistant at Academic
   Psychiatry, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Northumberland, Tyne and
   Wear NHS Foundation Trust. **Jon Painter** is a project manager at St
   Nicholas Hospital, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation
   Trust. **Patrick Keown** is a consultant psychiatrist in
   rehabilitation and recovery at Tranwell Unit, Queen Elizabeth
   Hospital, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust.
