=====================================================
Exit examination: a survey of UK psychiatrists' views
=====================================================



Nicholas S. Hughes
Angela Haselgrove
Matthew S. Tovey
Waqqas A. Khokhar
Muj Husain
Victoria C. Osman-Hicks

:Correspondence: Nicholas Hughes
(nickhughes1@nhs.net)  [1]_

:date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** The Royal College of Psychiatrists is considering
   how best to introduce a post-MRCPsych-examination assessment (‘exit
   examination’) in anticipation of external pressures to ensure patient
   safety through the use of such assessments. The Psychiatric Trainees'
   Committee conducted an online survey to gather the views of
   psychiatrists regarding the possible format and content of this
   examination in the hope that this information can be used to design a
   satisfactory assessment.

   **Results** Of the 2082 individuals who started the survey, 1735
   completed all sections (83.3%). Participants included consultants and
   trainees from a range of subspecialties. There was general agreement
   that the content and structure of the exit examination should include
   assessment of clinical and communication skills.

   **Clinical implications** UK psychiatrists believe that an exit
   assessment should focus on clinical and communication skills. It
   should assess both generic and subspecialty-specific competencies and
   incorporate a mixture of assessment techniques.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The General Medical Council (GMC) is currently undertaking a review of
the training and assessment of doctors in the UK, with a view to making
a number of recommendations to improve the quality of
training.\ :sup:`1` One of the main aims of the GMC in the area of
training and education, as defined in their education strategy for
2011–2013, is that: “‘To ensure consistency and clarity, we will define
clear outcomes which must be met by students and trainees on the
completion of different stages of training.’\ :sup:`1`” Although higher
specialist training examinations are not explicitly mentioned, the
introduction of a clear means of ensuring that all doctors have been
assessed as competent to practise independently before they are granted
a Certificate of Completion of Training (CCT) is an important aspect of
the GMC document. There is also inference that a final annual review of
competence progression alone is not sufficiently rigorous and that some
form of final, standardised assessment (an exit examination) is
necessary. It has been acknowledged that an exit examination must be
relevant and knowledge based, but its form and content has been left for
individual medical Royal Colleges to decide.

Since 2008, psychiatric trainees have been required to sit three written
papers and undertake one clinical examination (Clinical Assessment of
Skills and Competencies, CASC) before gaining Membership of the Royal
College of Psychiatrists (MRCPsych).\ :sup:`2` Before 2008, trainees
would sit two written papers, an Objective Structured Clinical
Examination (OSCE) and a long case examination. This increase in written
papers was also accompanied by raising examination fees. These changes
were viewed negatively by many trainees as it placed them under greater
time and financial pressures.\ :sup:`3` Further disquiet was caused
among trainees in 2011, when it was revealed that the College had made a
financial surplus from examination fees.\ :sup:`4` In response to
trainee concerns, the College has reduced the number of written papers
to two and also cut exam fees.

In this historical context, there are fears that the introduction of an
exit examination might be perceived unfavourably. With this in mind, the
Psychiatric Trainees' Committee (PTC), an elected group of psychiatric
trainees from across the UK supported by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, established an Examinations Working Group in 2012, which
set the following priorities: to ensure that the exit examination
assesses what is really important for new consultants to ensure safe and
effective care of patientsto ensure the views of trainees have a major
role in informing what the examination will look like and what it will
assess.

Gaining the views of current trainees and consultants was seen as the
necessary first step in working towards these priorities.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Questionnaire development
-------------------------

A questionnaire was created by members of the PTC Examinations Working
Group (see online supplement DS1). The first draft was piloted by an
opportunistic sample of PTC members to determine where modifications
were needed. Advice was obtained from senior officers within the Royal
College of Psychiatrists and further modifications were made. In May
2013, the survey was uploaded to
`www.surveymonkey.com <www.surveymonkey.com>`__, an online survey
hosting website.

A range of free-text responses were available. Owing to the unexpectedly
large volume of such comments received, it was retrospectively agreed
that they would be reported separately.

.. _S3:

Recruitment of participants
---------------------------

An email was sent to all Members and Pre-Membership Psychiatric Trainees
included in a mailing list held by the College (see online supplement
DS2). In addition, PTC members were encouraged to pass on details of the
survey to trainees and consultants locally. The survey commenced on 22
May 2013; responses were accepted up until 29 July 2013 (the initial
deadline of 21 June was extended because the rate of responses remained
high). All those who opted in to completing the survey were included in
the final analysis.

.. _S4:

Analysis
--------

Data were separated with respect to participant seniority and by
subspecialty. Subspecialty groups comprised both higher trainees and
consultants. Given the categorical nature of the data collected,
chi-squared tests were applied to identify differences between groups;
calculations were performed on GraphPad, an online data analysis tool
(http://graphpad.com/quickcalcs). It was anticipated that not all those
who commenced the survey would complete all sections due to time
constraints or distractions. It was agreed beforehand that all who had
responded to any given question would be included in the analysis of
that part of the survey.

For sample data to be accurate, they need to be representative of the
population under consideration. Unfortunately, we were not able to
ensure this because of governance difficulties. The mathematical
theorems which justify standard statistical procedures apply only to
random samples and so our statistical findings cannot be accepted as
exact.

.. _S5:

Results
=======

.. _S6:

Grade and specialty of survey respondents
-----------------------------------------

Overall, 10 298 consultants and trainees were sent an email inviting
them to take part in the survey. No email address was available for an
additional 371 (3.6%) consultants and trainees in the College database.
About a fifth of those contacted (*n* = 2082) started the survey and
1735 completed all sections (83.3%). These respondents included 487 core
trainees (23.4%), 509 higher trainees (24.5%), 297 consultants with less
than 5 years' experience (14.3%) and 788 consultants with more than 5
years' experience (37.9%).

Among higher trainees and consultants, there was a range of responses
across the psychiatric specialties: 222 child and adolescent (10.7%),
146 forensic (7.0%), 810 general adult (38.9%), 117 intellectual
disability (5.6%), 275 old age (13.2%) and 53 psychotherapy (2.5%)
specialists.

.. _S7:

Preferred content of assessment
-------------------------------

In general, respondents considered clinical and communication skills to
be the most important items to be assessed in an exit examination (*n* =
1896; `Fig. 1 <#F1>`__); research methods, medico-legal issues, teaching
and education and management were considered of lesser importance.

.. figure:: 255f1
   :alt: Mean ranking score of exam content components across all survey
   participants (lower score indicates stronger preference); *n* = 1896.
   :name: F1

   Mean ranking score of exam content components across all survey
   participants (lower score indicates stronger preference); *n* = 1896.

.. _S8:

Examination content preferences by grade
----------------------------------------

There was little variability in the overall ranking of examination
content when the data were separated with respect to seniority of survey
participant. Clinical and communication skills were ranked first and
second across all groups. Professionalism, team-working skills and
leadership skills accounted for the next three components across all
grades, although there were minor variations in their order, with senior
consultants uniquely rating team-working skills above professionalism.
In all groups, management skills, teaching skills and medico-legal
issues were the next three components. Senior consultants considered
teaching skills to be more important than the other two components, but
consultants with less than 5 years' experience considered teaching
skills less important, with a greater emphasis on management and
medico-legal skills. In all groups, research skills were considered to
be the least important component of any proposed exit examination.

Consultants and trainees differed in their views regarding whether the
exit examination should be specialty specific, general or a mixture of
the two (*P*\ <0.001; `Fig. 2 <#F2>`__). The majority of trainees (*n* =
472; 52.3%), including 58.4% of higher trainees, thought that an exit
examination should be unique to each psychiatric subspecialty, whereas
consultants were predominantly of the opinion that it should comprise
both subspecialty and general components (57.3% of all consultant
participants).

.. figure:: 256f2
   :alt: Preferences about subspecialty specificity by grade (%)
   :name: F2

   Preferences about subspecialty specificity by grade (%)

.. _S9:

Examination content preferences by subspecialty
-----------------------------------------------

Despite the fact that the general pattern of rankings of examination
content was similar to the overall ratings across subspecialties, there
were some notable differences between specialty groups.

Clinical and communication skills were again ranked first and second in
terms of importance for inclusion in an exit examination across all
specialties. As was the case when the item rankings were separated by
grade, professionalism, team-working and leadership were ranked in
positions 3–5 across all specialties, although team-working skills were
considered particularly important by those from the general adult, old
age and medical psychotherapy Faculties.

Management and teaching skills were the items considered next by all
groups except forensic psychiatrists. Forensic psychiatrists rated
medico-legal skills higher than all other subspecialties at 6th *v*. 8th
by all others. There was again a consistent view that research skills
were the least important item to assess as part of an exit examination.

All subspecialties were consistent in favouring a mixture of
subspecialty and general components to any proposed exit examination,
with the exception of child and adolescent psychiatry, where 63.6% of
respondents favoured a subspecialty-specific exit examination
(*P*\ <0.001).

.. _S10:

Structure preferences
---------------------

Across the whole sample (*n* = 1818) the majority of respondents (*n* =
922, 50.7%) were in favour of a mixture of practical, written and oral
components; 361 (19.9%) favoured an oral examination alone, 285 (15.7%)
opted for a practical examination and for 250 (13.8%) a written
examination was the preferred option.

There were no significant differences between core and higher trainees
in the overall distribution of responses given (*P* = 0.65). A mixture
of practical, written and oral examination components was the preferred
option across all groups regardless of grade, but significantly more
popular with consultants (with a clear majority in favour) than trainees
(*P*\ <0.0001). On the other hand, a purely written examination was
significantly more popular with trainees than with consultants
(*P*\ <0.001; `Fig. 3 <#F3>`__).

.. figure:: 257f3
   :alt: Percentage of respondents preferring each type of exit
   examination structure by grade.
   :name: F3

   Percentage of respondents preferring each type of exit examination
   structure by grade.

A mixture of all three examination components was favoured by
participants from all subspecialties. More than half of all participants
preferred this option in all subspecialties except for intellectual
disability psychiatry and there was a significant difference in the exam
structure preferred by intellectual disability psychiatrists compared
with the other subspecialties (*P* = 0.003). No significant differences
were noted between the preferred exit examination structure of the other
disciplines (*P* = 0.25).

.. _S11:

Preferences for a written examination
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We received 1818 responses about preferences regarding the format of the
written component of any proposed exit examination. The most popular
option overall was a reflective report about a clinical scenario and
associated *viva* (37.2%). Short-answer questions and multiple choice
questions (MCQs) were less popular, representing 23.3% and 23.2% of
responses respectively. The least popular options were extended matching
questions (EMQs; 10.1%) and essay writing (6.2%).

There was evidence of a clear difference in the preferred format of a
written examination between trainees and consultants (*P*\ <0.0001).
Overall, trainees preferred MCQs (36.2%); however, core trainees were
significantly more likely to favour MCQs than higher trainees (*P* =
0.001). The opposite was true with EMQs, with higher trainees being
significantly more in favour of their use than core trainees (*P* =
0.009). Among consultants, only 11.5% favoured the use of MCQs;
reflective report accompanied by a *viva* was the most popular option
for the written component of the exit examination (44%). Essays were the
least popular form of assessment by those of all grades, although
consultants were nevertheless significantly more in favour of their use
than trainees (*P* = 0.007).

There was a significant difference in views about how written
examination components should be structured across the subspecialties
(*P* = 0.001). Significantly more psychotherapists (*n* = 31, 70.5%)
preferred the use of reflective writing and an associated *viva* than
the other subspecialties (*P*\ <0.0001). Excluding psychotherapy, there
were no significant differences between subspecialties regarding their
views about the use of MCQs (*P* = 0.98), EMQs (*P* = 0.1), brief
assessment questions (*P* = 0.12) and essay writing (*P* = 0.21). There
was evidence of a significant difference with regard to views about
reflective practice (*P* = 0.03): this was popular among intellectual
disability psychiatrists (48.1%) yet less favoured by forensic
psychiatrists (30.1%).

.. _S12:

Preferences for a practical examination
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For two-thirds of respondents (*n* = 1197, 65.8%) assessments in the
workplace (workplace-based assessments, WPBAs) were the preferred option
for a practical examination; 621 (34.2%) were more in favour of the OSCE
format. Higher and core trainees expressed a strong preference for the
use of WPBAs over OSCEs, with a strong preference in both groups (80% of
higher trainees (*n* = 353) and 80.4% of core trainees (*n* = 336)).
Consultant psychiatrists favoured WPBAs over OSCEs and no significant
difference between less experienced and more experienced consultants was
found (*n* = 147, 58.1% *v. n* = 361, 51.1%; *P* = 0.067). On the other
hand, there was greater support among trainee psychiatrists for WPBAs
than among consultants (*n* = 689, 80.2% *v. n* = 508, 53.0%); this was
a highly significant difference (*P*\ <0.0001).

.. _S13:

Preferences for an oral examination
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Across all participants in the survey (*n* = 1818), 677 (37.2%)
considered a structured *viva* to be the best option for an oral
examination; 434 (23.9%) chose patient management problems (PMPs) and
707 (38.9%) opted for a combination of the two. There was no significant
difference between the views of core and higher trainees (*P* = 0.38),
who overall favoured the use of a structured *viva* alone (334 of 859
responses, 38.9%). Among consultants, the most popular type of oral
examination was a combination of both structured *viva* and PMPs (427 of
959 responses, 44.5%), with no difference between consultants with more
than 5 or less than 5 years' experience (*P* = 0.79). There was,
however, a significant difference in the consultants' and trainees'
preferences regarding any proposed oral exit examination components
(*P*\ <0.0001).

A mixture of PMPs and structured *viva* was the most popular oral
examination structure for specialists in child and adolescent psychiatry
(43.1%, *n* = 197), forensic psychiatry (45.9%, *n* = 133), general
adult psychiatry (40.8%, *n* = 701) and intellectual disability
psychiatry (42.6%, *n* = 108). Specialists in old age psychiatry and
psychotherapy both preferred a structured *viva* alone (43.6%, *n* = 243
and 36.4%, *n* = 44). The differences between specialty groups did not
reach statistical significance (*P* = 0.39).

.. _S14:

A question of awarding a diploma or certificate
-----------------------------------------------

Across the whole sample, there was a small majority in favour of
awarding a certificate or diploma for any proposed exit examination
(50.2%, *n* = 1818); 10.3% were against and 39.5% were unsure or
considered this matter unimportant. The numbers decreased with
seniority, with 61% (*n* = 418) of core trainees, 56.5% (*n* = 418) of
higher trainees, 45.5% (*n* = 253) of junior consultants and 41.5% (*n*
= 706) of senior consultants considering a diploma to be necessary
following successful completion of the proposed exit examination. The
views of trainees and consultants were significantly different
(*P*\ <0.0001).

.. _S15:

Discussion
==========

The prospect of an exit examination to be taken by all psychiatric
trainees before they are deemed eligible for a CCT is not new. Even
before most current psychiatric trainees were born, Kendell\ :sup:`5`
wrote of his disapproval regarding the possible introduction of an exit
examination at a time of major changes in the structure of postgraduate
medical education in the UK. Kendell identified potential problems,
including likely trainee dissatisfaction and the implications for
recruitment into psychiatry. He expressed particular concern about the
possible outcomes for those trainees who were unsuccessful in such exit
examinations.

In the early 1990s, after the publication of the Calman
report,\ :sup:`6` both the then president of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists\ :sup:`7` and the Collegiate Trainees Committee\ :sup:`8`
(the predecessor to the PTC) spoke out strongly against the possibility
of introduction of an exit examination.

Ten years ago, Tyrer & Oyebode\ :sup:`9` discussed the need for changes
to the College membership examinations. They acknowledged that political
and other external factors would continue to have an influence on how
doctors training to be psychiatrists would be assessed, predicting the
likelihood of an exit examination being introduced at some point in the
future. Around that time, major changes to the role and function of the
GMC were proposed following the publication of the 5th report of the
Shipman Inquiry\ :sup:`10` and an associated growing public interest in
the training and monitoring of doctors in the UK. In the intervening
decade, there have been a number of reports highlighting concerns about
patient safety and quality of care provided under the auspices of the
National Health Service.\ :sup:`11,12`

This paper presents one of the first psychiatry trainee- and
consultant-wide surveys into exit examination of UK psychiatrists. The
survey had a very large number of responses, giving insight into the
views of about 2000 consultants and trainees from across the country.
This no doubt reflects the understandable anxiety raised by the prospect
of an exit examination. Owing to the number of responses we received,
free-text comments were not included within this paper, nevertheless
they are likely to provide an invaluable range of views that will
further assist the College in ensuring that any future exit examination
reflects the views of the College members and pre-membership trainees.

It is perhaps surprising that clinical and communication skills were
considered the most important factors to be assessed, given that
previous studies have demonstrated that these are the areas in which
most new consultants feel relatively confident; resource management and
supervision have been shown as areas in which new consultants feel
underprepared by their training and might therefore be considered more
important to assess towards the end of training.\ :sup:`13` This may
reflect the fact that trainees consider an ‘examination’ to be a
concrete test of clinical or communication skill or knowledge and may
not have considered other assessments, such as reflective writing, to be
an ‘examination’. An example of such an alternative assessment is the
piloted Wessex advanced training professionalism programme.\ :sup:`14`

The degree to which an exit assessment should be generic for all
trainees or should concentrate on testing subspecialty-specific
knowledge varied significantly depending on the participant's status.
Trainees were significantly more in favour of subspecialty-specific
examinations, whereas consultants, particularly those with more
experience, favoured a greater mixture of general and specialty-specific
assessments. This may reflect the fact that on completion of the
MRCPsych examinations, trainees feel confident with general psychiatry
and that they consider a detailed knowledge of their subspecialty to be
the primary goal of higher training. Those with more experience may
value maintaining a broader skills base across the psychiatric
disciplines. However, the recent publication of the *Shape of Training*
review\ :sup:`15` and its suggestion of broad-based training and
post-Certificate of Specialty Training credentialing may complicate the
issue of both when this assessment should take place in training and
whether or not there is value in it being general across all psychiatric
subspecialties.

Overall, the participants leaned towards a mixture of several different
assessment styles for an exit examination. This finding could be
explained by a perception that multi-modal assessment techniques
increase the fairness, reliability and validity of an examination.
Concerns have been expressed in the past by both trainees and
consultants that changes made to psychiatric examinations (such as the
introduction of CASC in 2008) did little to improve the validity and
reliability of clinical examination.\ :sup:`16`

Exploration of views about the awarding of a diploma or similar
certificate following successful completion of the exit examination
revealed differences between trainees and consultants. A significant
majority of trainees thought that such a reward should be provided, yet
consultants differed markedly in their view. Given the potential
difficulties in marketing the introduction of an exit examination to
trainees, this difference in opinion might be something that the College
should consider carefully.

.. _S16:

Limitations
-----------

Despite the many strengths of this study, it is important to note that
in pursuit of a wide range of responses, we were obliged to accept a
number of methodological weaknesses that should be considered when
interpreting the results. A study of this type is difficult to undertake
in such a way as to encourage responses from a broad and representative
audience; one of our principal goals was to gain the views from as many
relevant individuals as possible. Given the subject investigated, it was
essential to allow anonymous responses to the survey and this further
limited our ability to control the recruitment of participants. Any
sampling technique that would ensure a more demonstrably representative
selection of views would have been associated with markedly fewer
participants and might have led to the study being unfeasible, because
of the difficulties in negotiating the relevant information governance
arrangements of the Royal College of Psychiatrists. On balance, we
agreed that the best way to obtain as representative a sample as
possible in an acceptably efficient fashion would be to accept all
responses from an open survey sent to all consultant psychiatrists and
trainees known to the College. Consultants comprised 70% of those who
were invited to participate, but only 52% of those who participated in
the survey. It is perhaps unsurprising that this study would be of
greater interest to those more likely to be directly affected by the
introduction of an exit examination, but the possibility of bias should
be borne in mind when considering results relating to the sample as a
whole. We anticipated that the concerns about randomisation were likely
to be magnified with regard to the data provided regarding the
subspecialties. However, after comparing the survey data with a
breakdown of the workforce as detailed in the most recently published
census of the College membership,\ :sup:`17` the distribution of survey
respondents and the census data were broadly similar with respect to
subspecialty, although the relatively small number of responses from
psychotherapy and intellectual disability consultants might make their
comments less representative.

In summary, this survey provides an interesting insight into the views
of a wide range of trainee and consultant psychiatrists on the nature of
any future exit examination. It suggests that overall trainee and
consultant psychiatrists consider that if introduced, an exit
examination should primarily focus on clinical and communication skills,
should assess both generic and subspecialty-specific skills, and should
be undertaken using a mixture of different assessment techniques.

.. [1]
   **Nicholas S. Hughes** (MA (Cantab), MB BChir, MRCPsych) is a
   specialty trainee year 6 in forensic psychiatry, Rohallion Clinic,
   NHS Tayside, and member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists
   Trainees' Committee (PTC). **Angela Haselgrove** (BA, MBChB,
   MRCPsych) is a locum consultant psychiatrist, Royal Edinburgh
   Hospital, NHS Lothian, and PTC member. **Matthew S. Tovey** (BMedSci,
   BM BS, MRCPsych) is a specialty trainee year 4 in forensic
   psychiatry, Reaside Clinic, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health
   Foundation Trust, and PTC member. **Waqqas A. Khokhar** (MBBS, DMHS,
   MSc, MRCPsych) is a consultant general adult psychiatrist with
   Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust and PTC member. **Muj Husain**
   (MA (Cantab), MB BChir, MRCPsych) is chair of the Academy of Medical
   Royal Colleges' Trainee Doctors' Group (ATDG) and in 2012–2013 was
   chair of PTC. **Victoria C. Osman-Hicks** (MBChB(Hons), MSc,
   MRCPsych, PGCertHE) is a specialty trainee year 6 in old age
   psychiatry, Southern Health Foundation Trust, and in 2012–2013 was
   PTC secretary
