============================================================================================
Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in mental healthcare: do the benefits outweigh the risks?
============================================================================================



Rashmi Patel
:Correspondence: Rashmi Patel (rcpsych@rpatel.co.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2015-4

:Abstract:
   Venous thromboembolism is an important cause of morbidity and
   mortality. In recent years, growing awareness has led to the
   development of strategies to prevent venous thromboembolism in
   individuals admitted to hospital who are deemed to be at high risk.
   However, there remains a considerable degree of uncertainty over
   whether these strategies are of overall benefit and there are few
   published studies on people who are admitted to psychiatric
   hospitals. In this editorial I review current clinical practice and
   areas of uncertainty with respect to venous thromboembolism
   prophylaxis and its implementation in mental healthcare settings.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Previous estimates have suggested that venous thromboembolism is
responsible for around 60 000 deaths in the UK each year. :sup:`1` It is
thought that individuals admitted to hospital may be at increased risk
of developing deep vein thrombosis and/or pulmonary embolism as a result
of reduced mobility or intercurrent illness. Other important risk
factors include older age (over 60 years), active malignancy,
dehydration, inherited or acquired thrombophilia, obesity, previous
venous thromboembolism or family history of venous thromboembolism, oral
contraceptive pill use, hormone replacement therapy, pregnancy and
varicose veins with phlebitis. :sup:`2, 3` These risk factors may be
applicable to individuals admitted to hospital for medical, surgical or
psychiatric care. For these reasons, current clinical guidelines
recommend a risk assessment for all people who are admitted to hospital
and prescription of a low-dose anticoagulant such as low molecular
weight heparin (LMWH) and/or mechanical prophylaxis for those thought to
be at high risk. :sup:`2` The decision as to whether to offer venous
thromboembolism prophylaxis should be balanced against potential risks,
particularly the risk of bleeding with LMWH.

.. _S1:

Evidence base for venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in acute general hospitals
===============================================================================

Numerous interventional studies have investigated the role of mechanical
and pharmacological prophylaxis in reducing the risk of venous
thromboembolism among those admitted to an acute general hospital.
Studies have principally focused on patients undergoing orthopaedic
surgery, non-orthopaedic surgery or no surgery. Interventional studies
have demonstrated a reduction in symptomatic deep vein thrombosis among
patients undergoing orthopaedic surgery who receive LMWH (relative risk
(RR) = 0.50, 95% CI 0.43–0.59 :sup:`4` ). The use of LMWH in this group
is not associated with a significant increase in major bleeding (RR =
0.81, 95% CI 0.38–1.72 :sup:`4` ). Prophylactic LMWH is also associated
with a reduction in non-fatal symptomatic venous thromboembolism in
patients who are undergoing non-orthopaedic surgery (RR = 0.31, 95% CI
0.12–0.81 :sup:`5` ) and possibly a reduction in symptomatic deep vein
thrombosis (RR = 0.47, 95% CI 0.22–1.00 :sup:`6` ) and pulmonary
embolism (odds ratio (OR) = 0.70, 95% CI 0.56–0.87 :sup:`7` ) in
patients who are not undergoing surgery. However, this is balanced with
a significantly increased risk of major bleeding (OR = 1.28, 1.05–1.56
:sup:`7` ). Furthermore, when considering fatal pulmonary embolism or
overall mortality, prophylactic LMWH is not associated with significant
benefit in any group. :sup:`4–7`

.. _S2:

Evidence base for venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in mental healthcare settings
==================================================================================

In contrast to studies in acute general hospitals, there is relatively
little published evidence investigating venous thromboembolism incidence
and the role of pharmacological or mechanical prophylaxis in mental
healthcare settings. A recent observational study that included
systematic venous ultrasonography identified deep vein thrombosis in 10
out of 449 participants (2.2%) following 10 days of admission to a
psychiatric hospital. :sup:`8` A total of 16 out of 458 (3.5%) had
experienced an episode of venous thromboembolism by 90 days following
admission. Of these, three had a non-fatal pulmonary embolism. The study
also showed that venous thromboembolism was more likely in older people
(8.6% of those aged over 75 years), which may relate to greater exposure
to risk factors such as immobility. Another study based on a review of
hospital records revealed 17 confirmed cases of venous thromboembolism
among 1495 people (1.1%) admitted to an in-patient mental health service
for older people. :sup:`9` This contrasts with an incidence of 2.4%
within 91 days among people undergoing total hip arthroplasty surgery
:sup:`10` and 1.45 per 1000 person years in the general population.
:sup:`11`

There is growing evidence from observational studies that suggests a
possible association between antipsychotic medications and venous
thromboembolism, particularly for clozapine and first-generation
antipsychotics. :sup:`12` However, it has been difficult to establish
whether this association could be a direct pharmacological consequence
of antipsychotics (leading to a prothrombotic state) or if it is
mediated through other risk factors that are consequences of
antipsychotics, such as obesity or sedation leading to reduced mobility.
:sup:`13` Some studies have also pointed towards physical restraint as a
potential risk factor for venous thromboembolism in mental healthcare
settings. :sup:`14–16`

.. _S3:

Areas of uncertainty
====================

A recent meta-analysis has led to increasing controversy over the
potential benefits of pharmacological or mechanical measures to prevent
venous thromboembolism among hospital patients who are not undergoing
surgery. :sup:`7` Although a reduction in non-fatal symptomatic venous
thromboembolism was seen with LMWH prophylaxis, this is balanced with an
increased risk of bleeding and no overall benefit in terms of reduced
mortality. Furthermore, the relative benefit of prophylaxis only
translates to a modest reduction in absolute risk; for every 1000
in-patients treated with LMWH, only three cases of pulmonary embolism
are prevented balanced with four additional cases of major bleeding.
:sup:`7`

There is also continued uncertainty about the true incidence of
clinically significant venous thromboembolism. :sup:`17` Although data
from epidemiological modelling suggests that venous thromboembolism is
responsible for around 60 000 deaths each year in the UK, :sup:`1` data
from postmortem studies suggest a much lower rate of around 5680 per
year. :sup:`18` Whether pharmacological and mechanical prophylaxis could
prevent all deaths from venous thromboembolism is also unclear.

.. _S4:

Do people who develop venous thromboembolism always need treatment with anticoagulants?
=======================================================================================

Some observational studies have employed systematic ultrasound screening
to identify asymptomatic as well as symptomatic deep vein thrombosis.
Although deep vein thrombosis was identified in 10 out of 449
participants following admission to a psychiatric hospital, seven cases
were of distal deep vein thrombosis of which only one case was
symptomatic. :sup:`8` The extent to which asymptomatic deep vein
thrombosis predisposes an individual to increased risk of mortality
remains uncertain, particularly with respect to asymptomatic distal deep
vein thrombosis. :sup:`19`

The advent of computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) has led
to a substantial increase in the radiological diagnosis of pulmonary
embolism. :sup:`20` However, uncertainty is growing over the optimum
treatment particularly with respect to whether all those with a
radiological diagnosis of pulmonary embolism would benefit from
anticoagulation. :sup:`21` It is thought that small subsegmental emboli
may not necessarily be associated with adverse clinical outcomes and
that the risks of bleeding from treatment with anticoagulants may
outweigh any benefits within this group. :sup:`22`

.. _S5:

Benefits and risks of venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in mental healthcare settings
======================================================================================

There are no published interventional studies that have investigated the
potential benefits of venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in mental
healthcare in-patient settings. Despite this, there is ongoing interest
in developing and utilising risk-screening tools to identify individuals
at increased risk of venous thromboembolism for prophylaxis. :sup:`23`
Furthermore, there is no published evidence that has investigated the
potential harms of venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in this setting.
Although risks of bleeding have been well characterised for people
admitted to acute general hospitals, it is not clear whether the same
risks apply elsewhere. In particular, prolonged use of LMWH can
predispose to thrombocytopenia leading to an increased risk of bleeding.
:sup:`24` The mean length of stay in an in-patient mental healthcare
setting (adult: 52.1 days, older people: 93.2 days) is substantially
greater than that of an acute medical unit (5.5 days). :sup:`25` With
the exception of those taking clozapine, full blood count monitoring is
not routinely performed in the mental healthcare in-patient setting. The
extent to which staff in mental healthcare settings are trained to
administer prophylaxis and recognise potential adverse complications is
also unclear. :sup:`3` For these reasons, it is possible that the risk
of thrombocytopenia from LMWH may be greater for those who receive it
for venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in the mental healthcare setting.

Balancing the potential risks of bleeding and the potential benefits of
preventing venous thromboembolism with pharmacological prophylaxis is
problematic. Cost–utility analysis is a method by which the benefits and
risks of an intervention may be balanced with respect to quality of life
measures. A study investigating the application of cost–utility analysis
to venous thromboembolism found that there was a wide degree of
variation in individual estimates of cost–utility of both acute venous
thromboembolism and bleeding complications from pharmacological
prophylaxis. :sup:`26` However, in the mental healthcare in-patient
setting, it is sometimes not possible for patients to weigh up benefits
and risks of an intervention because of lack of mental capacity.
Furthermore, there is little evidence to estimate the potential benefits
and risks of venous thromboembolism prophylaxis among individuals who
lack capacity as randomised controlled trials have excluded these
individuals. :sup:`17`

.. _S6:

Discussion
==========

Venous thromboembolism remains an important cause of mortality in people
who are admitted to hospital. However, in recent years, there has been
ongoing uncertainty over the efficacy and risks of prophylaxis among
in-patients who are not undergoing surgery :sup:`6,7` and whether
everyone with established venous thromboembolism would benefit from
anticoagulant treatment. :sup:`21,22` Although prophylaxis appears to
reduce the incidence of non-fatal venous thromboembolism, there is no
robust evidence that supports a reduction in mortality. :sup:`4–7` This
may be because of the balance with risk of bleeding for pharmacological
prophylaxis. :sup:`7,24` There is even less evidence to support its use
in mental healthcare in-patient settings where no interventional studies
have been published.

Despite this, substantial resources (over £30 million per year in
England) have been invested into venous thromboembolism prevention
programmes that claim to ‘save lives’. :sup:`27` Although it is claimed
these investments have resulted in a modest overall saving (a yield of
2.7% :sup:`28` ), it is possible that there is a greater opportunity
cost in mental healthcare settings where there is currently no evidence
for the cost-effectiveness of venous thromboembolism prophylaxis.

It is clear that there is an ongoing need to improve the overall
physical health of individuals with mental illness, particularly those
with severe mental illness who have been shown to have a substantially
lower life expectancy than the general population. :sup:`29` Although
venous thromboembolism is an important cause of mortality, a greater
degree of impact could be achieved by investing resources into improving
detection and treatment of new cases :sup:`3` as well as preventative
strategies in mental healthcare for cardiovascular disease in general.
:sup:`30` In summary, there is little evidence to support current
strategies for venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in mental healthcare
settings. Further study to develop and evaluate the effectiveness of
novel venous thromboembolism prevention and early detection strategies
is therefore warranted.

.. [1]
   **Dr Rashmi Patel** is an MRC Clinical Research Training Fellow at
   the Department of Psychosis Studies, King’s College London, UK.
