=====================================================================================================================
Dementia in a Black and minority ethnic population: characteristics of presentation to an inner London memory service
=====================================================================================================================

Rosalyn Tuerk
Justin SauerCorrespondence to Rosalyn Tuerk (rosalyn.tuerk@slam.nhs.uk)
 [1]_
:Date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To examine data on referrals to an inner-city
   London memory service to explore any differences in referral rates,
   cognitive assessments and stages of dementia at presentation between
   ethnic groups.

   **Results** African–Caribbean patients were well represented in the
   memory service. They were diagnosed with dementia on average 4.5
   years younger than their White British counterparts and were more
   likely to be diagnosed with a vascular or mixed type dementia.
   However, scores on initial cognitive testing were significantly lower
   in the African–Caribbean group, possibly representing more advanced
   disease at presentation.

   **Clinical implications** Initiatives to access Black and minority
   ethnic populations earlier in the course of their illness should be
   considered. Professionals need to consider the potential for cultural
   bias in memory testing and diagnosing dementia in these populations,
   and the importance of cultural competency in assessments.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The number and proportion of Black and minority ethnic (BME) people with
dementia is set to increase sharply over the coming
years.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` As the ‘most ethnically diverse area’ across
England and Wales,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` memory assessment services in London
must be able to meet this challenge and address the needs of people from
BME backgrounds. Established in 2010, the Southwark and Lambeth Memory
Service (SLMS) provides memory assessment services in two inner London
boroughs, to people over the age of 18 with mild to moderate memory
problems and without an existing diagnosis of dementia. Patients are
offered a comprehensive assessment, with initial cognitive testing using
the Standardised Mini-Mental State Examination (SMMSE) and Addenbrooke's
Cognitive Examination III (ACE-III). Patients are also offered brain
neuroimaging and, where indicated, additional neuropsychological
testing. Diagnoses are considered within a multidisciplinary team and
appropriate treatment and follow-up are agreed with patients and carers.

The National Dementia Strategy\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` prioritises early
diagnosis and intervention in people with dementia. Current research,
however, suggests that people from BME backgrounds present to memory
assessment services later in the course of their
disease.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` This prevents them from benefiting from
intervention and treatment as early as their White British
counterparts.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` This study examines the stage at which the
BME population presents to SLMS and their rates of dementia diagnosis,
and considers subsequent areas for service development to better meet
the needs of different ethnic groups.

.. _S1:

Method
======

The study received approval from the shared research and development
office of the Institute of Psychiatry and Maudsley Hospital. The
analysis used anonymised data from a referrals database, maintained for
the purposes of service monitoring, and includes patients referred
during the first 2 years of the SLMS's operation. Information on
patients' ethnicity, age at the time of referral, scores on initial
cognitive testing and the diagnosis given by the service was collated.
Data are drawn from the SLMS's use of earlier versions of the cognitive
tests cited above (the Mini-Mental State Examination
(MMSE)\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` and Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination Revised
(ACE-R)\ :sup:`(n.d.g)`). In cases where patients' diagnostic
classification changed during the course of their involvement with the
service (e.g. from mild cognitive impairment to dementia), the initial
diagnosis is used. To avoid bias, people unable to fully complete the
two cognitive tests were excluded from the analysis.

We used the harmonised ethnic group categorisations from the 2001 UK
census\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` to allow for comparisons between the SLMS sample
and data on the ethnic composition of the local population. For the
purpose of data analysis, patients were divided into two groups: White
British (WB) and Black and minority ethnic (BME). Definitions of BME are
wide-reaching and may include anyone with a ‘cultural heritage which is
differentiated from that of the White majority of the
UK’.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` Owing to the very small number of patients from
some ethnic groups in the SLMS sample, only patients from Caribbean and
African backgrounds were included in the BME group. Comment is made in
the discussion section on the relevance of the findings to people from
other BME backgrounds.

Differences in the stage of presentation to the memory service were
analysed by comparing patients' ages at the time of referral and MMSE
and ACE-R scores on initial cognitive assessment. The prevalence of
dementia diagnoses within each of the two groups was compared using
Pearson's chi-squared test. Scores on cognitive testing for patients
receiving a diagnosis of dementia were also compared. Unless otherwise
stated, all means were compared using Student's *t*-test, having first
satisfied the criteria for Levene's test of equality of variances;
*P*\ =0.05 were deemed to be significant.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

Overall, 460 patients referred between January 2011 and December 2012
completed the assessment process and received a diagnosis from the
service. Of these, 384 were from White British, Black Caribbean and
Black African ethnic groups (WB: *n* = 239, 68.7%; BME: *n* = 109,
31.3%). Then, 290 patients completed cognitive testing in full;
proportions of patients from each group able and/or willing to complete
full cognitive testing were similar (WB: *n* = 199, 83.3%; BME: *n* =
91, 83.5%).

The majority of SLMS patients were over 60 years of age. `Table
1 <#T1>`__ compares the most common ethnic groups within the SLMS sample
and the local population of people over the statutory retirement age.
These are notably different in distribution, with the SLMS sample
comprising a smaller percentage of White British patients and larger
proportions of the other featured ethnic groups.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Comparison of most common ethnic groups in the SLMS sample and
      local population

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Ethnicity   | Patients in | Percentage  | Local       | Percentage  |
   |             | SLMS        | of total    | population  | of local    |
   |             | sample      | SLMS        | over        | pop         |
   |             | (*n*)       | sample\ `a  | 60 years of | ulation\ `a |
   |             |             |  <#TFN2>`__ | age         |  <#TFN2>`__ |
   |             |             |             | (*n*)\ :su  |             |
   |             |             |             | p:`(n.d.j)` |             |
   +=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
   | White:      | 239         | 52.0%       | 36 100      | 63.4%       |
   | British     |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Black or    | 86          | 18.7%       | 6300        | 11.1%       |
   | Black       |             |             |             |             |
   | British:    |             |             |             |             |
   | Caribbean   |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | White: any  | 47          | 10.2%       | 3500        | 6.2%        |
   | other white |             |             |             |             |
   | background  |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | White:      | 38          | 8.3%        | 3800        | 6.7%        |
   | Irish       |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Black or    | 23          | 5.0%        | 2400        | 4.2%        |
   | Black       |             |             |             |             |
   | British:    |             |             |             |             |
   | African     |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Asian or    | 12          | 2.6%        | 1300        | 2.3%        |
   | Asian       |             |             |             |             |
   | British:    |             |             |             |             |
   | Indian      |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | All other   | 15          | 3.3%        | 3500        | 6.2%        |
   | BME groups  |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

   SLMS, Southwark and Lambeth Memory Service.

   Percentages may not add up to 100 owing to rounding.

At referral to the service, BME patients (mean age 77.19 years, s =
7.094) were significantly younger than WB patients (mean age 80.23
years, s = 8.777; *t*\ (212.729) = 3.132, *P* = 0.002). In this case,
Levene's test could not conclude equality of variances (*P* = 0.026),
therefore a *t*-test appropriate to samples with potential unequal
variances was used. The age gap increases in patients subsequently
diagnosed with dementia (mean age: BME patients 78.69 years, s = 6.208,
WB patients 83.25 years, s = 6.599; *t*\ :sub:`(187)` = 4.685,
*P*\ <0.001).

Patients in the BME group scored significantly lower on both the ACE-R
and the MMSE: ACE-R total possible score 100; mean score: WB patients
66.2, s = 16.652, BME patients 54.5, s = 14.482; *t*\ :sub:`(288)` =
5.768, *P*\ <0.001,MMSE total possible score 30; mean score: WB patients
23.4, s = 4.917, BME patients 21.7, s = 4.573, *t*\ :sub:`(288)` =
2.759, *P* = 0.006.

In patients subsequently diagnosed with dementia, there was a
significant difference in scores on the ACE-R (WB mean score 57.4, s =
13.464; BME mean score 48.7, s = 11.226; *t*\ :sub:`(187)` = 4.431,
*P*\ <0.001). BME patients with a new diagnosis of dementia also scored
lower on the MMSE, but this difference was not found to be significant
(WB mean score 21.0, s = 4.613; BME mean score 20.1, s = 4.166,
*t*\ :sub:`(187)` = 1.294, *P* = 0.197).

Three-quarters of the BME group (75.2%, *n* = 82) were diagnosed with
dementia, compared with 65.7% of the WB group (*n* = 157). There was no
significant relationship between ethnic group and the likelihood of
receiving a diagnosis of dementia (χ\ :sup:`2`\ :sub:`(1, N = 348)` =
2.739, *P* = 0.098). When dementia subtypes were considered,
significantly more patients from the BME group were diagnosed with a
dementia with a vascular component (either vascular dementia or mixed
Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia) (χ\ :sup:`2`\ :sub:`(1, N =
348)` = 4.531, *P* = 0.033).

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

Ethnic identity is multifaceted, subjective, can change over
time\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` and may be based on collective identity, common
ancestry, heritage, religion, culture, nationality, language and
territory.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Individual beliefs may be influenced by
culture, and thus culture can shape the meaning which individuals
ascribe to dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Beliefs about dementia, such as it
being part of normal ageing,\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` may create barriers to
help-seeking and influence when individuals present to memory
services.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` Current research suggests that BME older
people access services at a more severe stage of cognitive impairment
than White British people,\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` which may account for their
lower cognitive scores in this study. In BME populations, the decision
to seek formal help tends to be precipitated by a health or behavioural
crisis\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` or the emergence of neuropsychiatric symptoms and
problems with basic activities of daily living.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` It may
also be influenced by varying knowledge of Alzheimer's disease and
dementia across ethnic groups (although all groups hold significant
misperceptions).\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` All ethnic groups attach stigma to
dementia, although the extent and nature of this
varies;\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.p)` family concerns about previous negative
experiences of psychiatric services may, however, be particularly
significant to BME groups.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

Cultural bias in cognitive testing may also explain the difference in
scores. African–Caribbean patients have consistently been found to score
lower than White British patients on the MMSE\ :sup:`(n.d.q)–(n.d.r)`
and the standard cut-off of 24 may have a high rate of false positive
screening for dementia in BME groups.\ :sup:`(n.d.s),(n.d.t)` Adjusting
for factors such as educational attainment did not always explain these
differences;\ :sup:`(n.d.q),(n.d.u)` scores may also have been affected
by unfamiliarity with the language and culture of the test setting, and
higher levels of anxiety during testing.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` The idea of
cultural bias is particularly supported by one study which found that
White British participants scored equally well on both the traditional
version of the MMSE and a version validated for use with older
African–Caribbean people,\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` while African–Caribbean
participants scored significantly better on the culturally modified
version.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)`

The ACE-R differs from the MMSE in its greater sensitivity to detect
early dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` Modifying and validating it for other
cultural contexts has required more than straightforward translation,
including adaptations to cater for study participants with lower levels
of education,\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` cut-off scores stratified by educational
background\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` and modified cut-offs to account for
variations in structure and difficulty between
languages.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` This demonstrates the difficulty of
administering the test to a sample as culturally diverse as that found
at the SLMS. Studies validating the ACE-R's diagnostic accuracy fail to
mention ethnic diversity within their
samples\ :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.x),(n.d.ab),(n.d.ac)` and tested a
clinic-based population with a notably younger mean age than the SLMS
sample, therefore their findings may not be transferable. A study
carried out in another area of the UK required lower cut-offs to
preserve diagnostic accuracy,\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)` although again the ethnic
breakdown of participants is unknown.

Most studies carried out in the UK to date have also found a higher
prevalence of dementia among African-Caribbean older
people,\ :sup:`(n.d.q),(n.d.r),(n.d.ae)` although one found differences
only between English and non-English-speaking members of BME
groups.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` The current study found no overall difference
in dementia diagnosis rates, but revealed an increased prevalence of
dementia with a vascular component in the African–Caribbean group.
Although most of the studies cited did not explore dementia subtypes,
one linked an increased incidence of conditions such as hypertension and
diabetes to a higher prevalence of vascular dementia in their
African–Caribbean sample.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` Another found an equal
prevalence of hypertension in the African–Caribbean and British-born
groups, but that awareness of it was reduced among African–Caribbean
people, who were significantly more likely to have dementia if
hypertension was not correctly treated.\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` Health
education about risk factors for vascular dementia could therefore
potentially benefit BME groups, especially given the earlier age of
presentation to the SLMS.

Patients access the SLMS through their general practitioner (GP),
therefore GPs influence the stage at which patients access specialist
help. A suspicion of emerging dementia is often followed by ‘watchful
waiting’ in primary care rather than immediate referral to a
specialist.\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)` People from BME backgrounds access primary
care at a similar rate to White British people,\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.ai)`
however, there appears to be little research into factors which may
influence this wait for specialist referral. Difficulties in cognitive
screening in primary care may be further compounded when assessing older
BME people, where culture and the language used to describe problems may
influence presentation.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)`

.. _S4:

International evidence
----------------------

This is a UK-based study at a local level, however, its findings are
consistent with research carried out abroad. A survey of clinical
dementia centres across Europe found varying levels of access by BME
patients and that where these patients did access services, diagnostic
evaluation was more challenging owing to language barriers and the
availability only of cognitive assessment tools validated in Western
cultures.\ :sup:`(n.d.aj)` Older Chinese and Vietnamese patients in
Australia were believed to present to memory services at a more advanced
stage of cognitive impairment\ :sup:`(n.d.ak)` and linguistic and
cultural complexities may have contributed to longer waits for diagnosis
in primary care.\ :sup:`(n.d.al)` BME populations were diagnosed with
dementia at an earlier age in one Danish study,\ :sup:`(n.d.am)` and
similar barriers to help-seeking for carers of BME patients with
dementia were evident in research from both
Australia\ :sup:`(n.d.ak),(n.d.al)` and the USA.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` Given
the international recognition of the growing need for culturally
sensitive memory services (including throughout
Europe,\ :sup:`(n.d.aj),(n.d.am)` the USA\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` and
Australia\ :sup:`(n.d.ak),(n.d.al)`), the findings of this study are
likely to be relevant to those working in such settings.

.. _S5:

Limitations
-----------

This study is limited in its use of data collected in the course of
routine clinical practice. Assessments were carried out by a variety of
clinicians and although all were trained in the cognitive tools used,
the question of interrater reliability remains. Standardised data on the
educational background of participants are also unavailable. In
addition, only patients who consented to and completed the assessment
and diagnosis process were included in this study. There is no data on
the ethnicity of the patients who refused assessment or who were unable
to complete the process for other reasons, thus we cannot speculate on
whether ethnicity may influence this. Some ethnic groups, such as South
Asian people, were not represented in our analysis. The issues
influencing presentation to memory services may be similar for these
groups; for example, a study on Gujarati populations also found lower
MMSE scores and a lower median age in the Gujarati group of a community
screening programme.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)` The small numbers of patients from
other BME populations indicates the need for further research into the
extent to which they are accessing the SLMS, and limits the ability of
this study to draw wider conclusions about the experiences of BME
people.

.. _S6:

Clinical implications
---------------------

Compared with local population figures, the SLMS sample includes a
higher proportional representation of African–Caribbean-born people than
might be expected. While this finding may seem positive, our results
show a more marked degree of cognitive impairment in the BME group,
despite the younger age at presentation. This indicates a need to work
with local stakeholders to ensure a lower threshold for referring
African–Caribbean patients to the service, and to investigate ease of
access for patients from other BME groups.

Culturally sensitive assessment is also required. This includes
reflection on the way cognitive impairment is assessed in a population
with varied cultural and educational backgrounds\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)` and an
avoidance of stereotypical beliefs.\ :sup:`(n.d.ap)` Culturally
sensitive cognitive tools should be used where they exist, and cognitive
testing should not be the only means of determining
diagnoses.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` The SLMS should continue the approach of
considering cognitive test scores in the context of patient and carer
accounts, brain neuroimaging, screening for affective disorders and
additional neuropsychological testing to ensure accurate diagnosis. GPs
also need to be aware of potential differences in age at onset of
dementia and vascular risk differentials, to ensure effective
cardiovascular preventative measures and arrange appropriate and early
onward referral to secondary care.

Further analysis of similar data from a range of local memory services
would be useful in detecting whether the trends evident in this study
are reflected in the local population and other BME groups. It would be
useful to include non-mental health services diagnosing dementia (e.g.
geriatricians' clinics and neurology) in this analysis. The analysis
into severity of impairment at presentation could be expanded by
combining cognitive scores with other rating scales assessing
neuropsychiatric symptoms and activities of daily living. Differences in
other aspects of service provision and quality of life, such as
assessment refusal rates, treatment with cognitive enhancer medications
and the role of support networks in encouraging or discouraging
help-seeking could also be explored.

Caution must be applied to the interpretation of these results. Although
the term BME may imply homogeneity, it encompasses a wide variety of
unique individual and collective experiences\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` and the
diversity both within and between ethnic groups must not be overlooked.
Ethnicity may play an important role in influencing presentation to
memory services, but this is only one part of the picture, and
consideration for individual difference must always remain paramount.

We thank Martin Scott for his assistance with statistical analysis.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R29

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R31

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R32

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R33

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R34

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R35

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R36

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R37

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R38

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R39

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R40

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R41

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R42

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R43

      n.d.ap.

.. [1]
   **Rosalyn Tuerk** is a community practitioner, South London and
   Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, and King's Health Partners, London,
   UK. **Justin Sauer** is a consultant psychiatrist, South London and
   Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, King's Health Partners, and Honorary
   Lecturer, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London.
