======================================================================
Reforming the culture of healthcare: the case for intelligent kindness
======================================================================



Penelope Campling 
:Correspondence: Penelope Campling
(pennycampling@btconnect.com)  [1]_

:date: 2015-2

:Abstract:
   There has been increasing interest in the culture of healthcare in
   the light of the two reports by Robert Francis into the care at Mid
   Staffordshire. This editorial encourages a comprehensive exploration
   of the conditions that promote a benign caring culture and make
   outbreaks of cruel neglect and abuse of patients less likely.
   Creating and sustaining such a culture is dependent on being honest
   and realistic about the forces that threaten to undermine it. The
   editorial argues that being able to confidently articulate the
   positive values that should define healthcare culture is particularly
   important at this time. The case is made for a conscious focus on the
   concept of intelligent kindness.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Robert Francis’ two reports into the Mid Staffordshire scandal, :sup:`1,
2` other inquiry reports such as Winterbourne View :sup:`3` and, most
recently, Julia Neuberger’s inquiry into the Liverpool Care Pathway
:sup:`4` face us with the reality that healthcare organisations and the
healthcare workers within them are capable of neglectful and abusive
behaviour that can justifiably be described as cruel. The outrage
presses towards sackings and resignations, to a ‘never again’ attitude,
or, in various quarters, towards further denigration of the National
Health Service (NHS) as a public enterprise. The determination to do
something directs us towards yet more regulation and hundreds of other
initiatives. Many of these actions may make a difference, but there is a
risk that they will become yet another ‘programme’ of activity, on top
of an already toppling tower of initiatives, and vulnerable to becoming
a mechanical activity rather than keeping their purpose (securing
kindness and compassion) in mind.

There has been a general call to address the culture of the NHS. Again,
there are signs that this will become another programme – split off from
or, at best, sitting alongside, others like the drive for efficiency,
promoting choice, etc., rather than a comprehensive consideration of the
totality of the conditions in which the NHS works, a genuine exploration
of how the NHS culture promotes kindness, or cruelty.

As part of this enterprise, this editorial makes the case for a more
conscious and active focus on the concept of intelligent kindness in all
parts of the healthcare system. It starts, however, by exploring the
forces that create perverse dynamics that can pull in the opposite
direction.

.. _S1:

The emotional task
==================

Why do seemingly caring staff behave unkindly? This question can be
looked at from many perspectives, starting at the level of the
individual. :sup:`5` While it is clearly important to think carefully
about recruitment criteria and to encourage people to think clearly
about their motivation to work in healthcare, studies suggest that the
majority of healthcare students are motivated by the wish to make things
better, but during their training become more distanced from patients
and less empathic. :sup:`6,7`

Raymond Tallis, British philosopher and retired professor of geriatric
medicine, comments on the enormity in the history of civilisation of the
imaginative and moral step involved in engaging with the realities of
illness. :sup:`8` He describes a challenging process of cognitive
self-overcoming on the part of humanity and reminds us that humans found
it easier to assume an objective attitude towards the stars than towards
their own inner organs. This self-overcoming – surely one of humanity’s
greatest achievements – has to be done on an individual level by
thousands of NHS staff every day as they muster the will, the necessary
balance of kindness and professional detachment, to perform the most
intimate tasks imaginable. It is easy to forget the appalling nature of
some of the jobs carried out by healthcare staff day in, day out – the
damage, the pain, the mess they encounter, the sheer stench of diseased
human flesh and its waste products.

Contact with emotional distress and disturbance can be equally, if not
more, harrowing. Existential questions about identity, suffering,
madness and death are raised and may put people in touch with extreme
feelings of confusion, pain and loss. :sup:`9` The struggle with
feelings of helplessness and hopelessness in the face of suffering
cannot be avoided, and individuals, depending on their personality and
past experience, protect themselves in different ways from the
emotionally traumatic environment. :sup:`10` Psychological defence
mechanisms are evoked frequently. Problems can arise if staff are
exposed to frequent emotional trauma, without space to process their
feelings. Defensive styles of coping then become entrenched. :sup:`11`
As defensive walls build up, feelings of vulnerability and sadness
become more deeply buried and the capacity for empathy recedes.

.. _S2:

Problematic team-working
========================

Attachment to a well-functioning group can help to contain disturbed
feelings and facilitate a healthy focus on the emotional task, but
groups can also be the scene of disturbed – often unconscious –
dynamics. :sup:`12` There is evidence that the quality of the team one
is working within makes a lot of difference to staff experience, can
buffer the effects of a wider dysfunctional organisation :sup:`1` and
enhances functioning generally. :sup:`13` Unfortunately, many hospital
teams are not highly evolved in their functioning as teams. They tend to
have unclear boundaries and conflicting objectives, with different
professions approaching the task from different perspectives and
tensions sometimes arising between professional and organisational
hierarchies. In addition, many staff are on rapid training rotations or
can be moved without consultation to cover shortages in other teams. The
breakdown of close-knit medical ‘firms’ means patients often complain
that they see a series of junior doctors and do not know the name of
their consultant. Many staff, particularly senior staff, have a
peripatetic role and belong in many different ‘teams’. Although most
hospital staff say they belong to a team, Borrill *et al* :sup:`14` show
that more than 60% are in what they call pseudo-teams, with no obvious
cohesion or boundary. Responsibility-shifting, driven by fending off
anxiety between team members or between teams in wider system, is a
particularly prevalent dynamic in health and social care. :sup:`15,16`

.. _S3:

Problematic organisations
=========================

Menzies Lyth’s famous study of nurses in the 1950s sought to understand
why nurses resigned from their profession in such high numbers.
:sup:`17` It showed that the stresses of nursing, and the intimate
relationship it demanded with patients, made an impact on the
organisation of care, leaving those closest to patients exposed to
emotional pressures that most senior staff and managers were defended
against. Menzies Lyth felt that the work of nursing – what she called
the objective situation – because it involves physical and emotional
contact with illness, pain, suffering and death, arouses feelings and
associated thoughts linked to the deepest and most primitive levels of
the mind. She proceeded to show how the organisation of the hospital can
be seen as consciously and unconsciously structured around the evasion
of this anxiety.

Menzies Lyth proposed that the success and viability of a social
institution are intimately connected with the techniques it uses to
contain anxiety. In the intervening years, these ideas have been
developed, looking at the goodness of fit between organisation
structures on the one hand, and the emotional demands of healthcare work
on the other. There is little sign that the system as a whole has
developed effective structures to support frontline staff process the
emotional disturbance inherent in their interactions with sick patients;
in fact, evidence from the annual staff surveys suggests the opposite
(`www.nhsstaffsurveys.com <www.nhsstaffsurveys.com>`__). Moreover, there
is little understanding or attempt to contain the primitive anxieties
that pervade the system and affect all involved, including decision
makers at government level. If anything, there is more disconnection
between the policy level of the organisation and the emotional reality
of clinical encounters. :sup:`18`

Whereas much of Menzies Lyth’s 1959 study could be describing the health
service of today, there is one important difference. Menzies Lyth noted
the resistance to change in the NHS of the 1950s and saw it as a
significant part of the social defence system. I suggest here that it is
the uncritical promotion of constant change and imposition of new
ideologies that is the main social defence system in the modern health
service, :sup:`19` overloading and fragmenting the system and
distracting from the task of caring for the sick and dying. :sup:`20–23`

.. _S4:

Perverse dynamics
=================

The health service sits within a broader society that shapes its rules,
agreements and unconscious social pacts. The spirit of cooperation that
was around in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War provided a
fertile value base for implementing the NHS, but has been steadily
encroached upon by individualism, consumerism and the hegemony of market
forces. Susan Long describes and gives evidence for this in her book
*The Perverse Organisation and Its Deadly Sins*. :sup:`24` A basic
premise of her book is that there has been a move in society generally
from a culture of narcissism to elements of a culture of perversion.
Perversion flourishes where instrumental relations have dominance – in
other words, where people are used as a means to an end, as tools and
commodities rather than respected citizens. It is these relations that
Long sees predominating increasingly. Her book considers large private
corporations rather than the public sector. However, the fashion to
idealise large private sector corporations and the subsequent
corporatisation of the public sector means much of the thinking in her
book is relevant to the modern health service.

It is important to realise that Long’s emphasis is on perversity
displayed by institutions rather than by their leaders or members. There
is no suggestion that individual NHS workers, as people, are any more
perverse than workers in any other organisation. Nevertheless, in
reality, an organisation and its members are entwined: the decisions and
actions of individuals are influenced by organisational culture and, in
turn, reinforce it, for good or ill. The concept of perversion sheds
light on frankly exploitative behaviour, helps explain how many people
in positions of trust end up abusing those positions and how people may
be collectively perverse despite individual attempts to be otherwise.

.. _S5:

Corrupting forces?
==================

There appear to be four closely intertwined processes at work. None of
them is perverse in itself, but separately and together they can create
perverse dynamics in the context of healthcare. The first is the active
promotion of a competitive market economy, on the basis of a commodified
view of need, skills and service. Such an economy works against the idea
of an integrated service that prioritises the needs of vulnerable
patients, and can insidiously affect the attitudes, feelings and
relationships of staff. :sup:`25,26` The second is the process of
industrialising healthcare. :sup:`27,28` This enterprise has the
potential to undermine healthcare as work undertaken by skilled
individuals in relationships with patients and to turn it into the
mechanical delivery of processes and systems. The third is the framework
and currency of specification, regulation and performance management.
How services are specified, monitored and evaluated – and funded – has a
profound effect on the day-to-day clinical work. :sup:`29–31` The fourth
is the inexorable rise of consumerism and the promotion of patient
‘choice’. These four elements are of course interrelated and, some would
say, reflect inevitable trends in society at large. But of particular
concern is the way these processes have taken hold without proper debate
and understanding of the unintended consequences for the system as a
whole.

.. _S6:

Focusing on compassion and kindness
===================================

In the light of the present crisis in the culture of our healthcare
system, it is particularly important to be able to talk in terms of
positive values, to have a clear vision of how we would like to see our
organisations function, how we wish to encourage society – and the
organisations that serve society – to relate to the sick and vulnerable.
The NHS was founded at a particular point in history when there was a
strong motivation to create a better future based on the idea of the
common good – a concept that may be out of fashion but is still
enshrined in the NHS constitution. :sup:`32`

If our public organisations are to flourish, we need to be able to
articulate our aspirations in ways that resonate with today’s citizens.
A number of writers and philosophers have attempted to address the
worrying narrowing of the moral universe in organisational life: Paul
Ricoeur refers to the loss of ethical intention in public life;
:sup:`33` Onora O’Neil talks about the growing culture of suspicion
linked to increasingly excessive accountability regimes and urges us to
free professionals and their public services to serve the public;
:sup:`34` Michael Sandel talks about the squeezing out of altruism and
argues that we put limits on the current encroachment of market thinking
into every sphere of life; :sup:`35` and Tony Judt made an appeal before
he died that we rediscover a language around which we can be motivated
collectively, whether on the issue of justice, inequality, cruelty or
unethical behaviour – a language that will bind us together.
:sup:`36,37`

There has been a focus recently on compassion in healthcare.
:sup:`38,39` Although the popular press tends to see this as a nursing
issue, there is wider acknowledgement that creating a more compassionate
culture will need a systemic approach. There has been a growing interest
more generally in compassionate leadership and the ‘compassionate
organisation’
(`www.compassionateleadership.com <www.compassionateleadership.com>`__;\ http://instituteforcompassionateleadership.org).
:sup:`40`

It is clear – and understandable from an evolutionary perspective – that
if a person is feeling under threat, it is likely that the compassionate
components of the mind are turned off and instead the mind has a pattern
of motivation and ways of feeling that are about protecting oneself from
danger. This is of obvious relevance to the NHS workforce and points to
the creation of a culture that feels safe and affirming rather than
unsettled and threatening. :sup:`41`

Clearly, there is a large overlap between the concept of compassion and
the concept of kindness. Both words are defined in relation to other
people: compassion literally meaning ‘suffering with’ whereas kindness
is linked to the concept of kin and kinship. Kindness is a word very
commonly used by patients. Many people’s stories about their experience
of healthcare centre around the degree and quality of kindness they have
(or have not) experienced. Often these accounts are complaints about the
absence of kindness, the thoughtlessness, the lack of humane care.
Sometimes they describe the power of small, but highly relevant, acts of
kindness to transform an otherwise miserable experience of suffering
(`www.patientopinion.org.uk <www.patientopinion.org.uk>`__).
:sup:`42,43`

Kindness is a word with an interesting history. It is also a word that
needs rescuing for it can evoke mixed feelings in the modern world and
easily become a mere synonym for individual acts of generosity,
sentiment and affection, for a general fuzzy ‘kindliness’. The warping
and obscuring of what kindness is about have been extensively discussed
by psychoanalyst Adam Philips and historian Barbara Taylor in their
recent book, *On Kindness*. :sup:`44` They explore the way in which a
philosophy and culture of competitive individualism and the pursuance of
self-interest has challenged the value, and negatively influenced the
meaning, of kindness. Kindness, they say, is not a temptation to
sacrifice ourselves, but to include ourselves with others – kindness is
being in solidarity with human need. They describe a process in which
what had been a core moral value, with a subversive edge, at centre
stage in the political battles of the Enlightenment, became something
sentimentalised, marginalised and denigrated through the 19th and into
the early 20th century.

.. _S7:

‘Intelligent kindness’
======================

Kindness has its roots in the Old English word *cynd* – meaning nature,
family, lineage – kin. Kindness implies the recognition of being of the
same nature as others, being of a kind, in kinship. It implies that
people are motivated by that recognition to cooperate, to treat others
as members of the family, to be generous and thoughtful. The word can be
understood at an individual and at a collective level, and from an
emotional, cognitive, even political point of view. Adding the adjective
‘intelligent’ signals, first that it is possible to think in a
sophisticated way about the conditions for kindness, and second that
clinical, managerial, leadership and organisational skills and systems
can be brought to bear purposively to promote compassionate care.
Intelligent kindness, then, is not a soft, sentimental feeling or action
that is beside the point in the challenging, clever, technical business
of managing and delivering healthcare. It is a binding, creative and
problem-solving force that inspires and focuses the imagination and
goodwill. It inspires and directs the attention and efforts of people
and organisations towards building relationships with patients,
recognising their needs and treating them well. Kindness is not a ‘nice’
side issue in the project of competitive progress. It is the ‘glue’ of
cooperation required for such progress to be of most benefit to most
people.

To illustrate how such behaviour is nurtured in the wider system a
virtuous circle is envisaged, where there is not only a compassionate
connection between the clinician and the patient, but the potential for
something to happen in the wider system (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__).

There is a body of evidence that supports this virtuous circle, cited
elsewhere. :sup:`45` Simply put, the more attentively kind staff are,
the more their attunement to the patient increases; the more that
increases, the more trust is generated; the more trust, the better the
therapeutic alliance; the better the alliance, the better the outcomes.
The result of all this is a reduction in anxiety, improved satisfaction
(for staff and patient), less defensiveness and improved conditions for
kindness. This system will flourish if individuals and the system as a
whole are driven by a sense of kinship. This can be expressed as simply
as seeing oneself in the patient – or as the King’s Fund put it, seeing
the person in the patient and delivering the sort of care you would like
for your family and friends. :sup:`46` This sense of kinship will
promote the feeling and expression of kindness which then directs
attention, and so on.

These dynamic processes can also contribute to productivity, a key
challenge for all health services. A useful concept in the industrial
model is that of ‘getting it right first time’ as a key driver for
eliminating waste – of Fig. 1 Intelligent kindness: a virtuous circle.
time and resources. All stages and the combined effect of this cycle
contribute to such effective activity. The more work is founded on
kinship, motivated by kindness and expressed through attentiveness and
attunement to the patient’s needs, the more it is likely to be timely
and ‘right first time’.

.. _S8:

Conclusion
==========

Kindness rooted in kinship is a powerful concept – ethically,
politically, socially and clinically – in the project of improving
healthcare. It increases patient satisfaction, staff morale, clinical
effectiveness and efficiency. But virtuous circles are vulnerable and we
know from history how quickly a benign culture can become malignant. The
first part of this editorial described some of the difficulties inherent
in the healthcare task that make a benign culture difficult to sustain
if they are not properly understood and managed.

Menzies Lyth’s work on social defence systems in healthcare was
published over 50 years ago. In general, though, there has been a
failure to create organisations that are fit for purpose and able to
facilitate the emotional work that is such an important component of the
healthcare task. There has been a failure to acknowledge and get to
grips with the way overwhelming anxiety – largely unconscious – can
unhelpfully drive and undermine the system. Moreover, it is suggested
that some of the changes in society over this time period have had an
impact on the health service in a way that has amplified the amount of
anxiety in the system, pulling the culture in a direction where perverse
behaviours become more likely. Many would say the system has already
become a vicious circle where so-called ‘solutions’ involve overloading
the system and creating ever more dangerous levels of anxiety. Virtuous
circles unravel so easily; vicious circles, on the other hand, are
extremely difficult to break.

It is more important than ever to have an explicit value base
underpinning the work of both individual staff members and healthcare
organisations, and to understand what that value base looks like ‘in
action’. The virtuous circle described here earlier could provide a
basis for thinking about this, strengthening relationships between
colleagues and with patients, and counteracting the pressures to adopt
instrumental attitudes to the work that are all too prevalent at the
present time. The possibility emerges of a kinder culture developing as
all aspects of the NHS – evidence, skill, new technologies, where money
is spent, how people are managed – are scrutinised in terms of how they
support this virtuous circle.

At an anecdotal level, individuals report that the concept of
intelligent kindness properly embedded in reflective practice has
‘reconnected them to their altruism’; and teams from ward to board level
have found the virtuous circle a helpful focus when thinking about
culture change. There is scope for adapting the model for research and
audit purposes, building on the evidence base for relational science to
influence the organisation of healthcare delivery and outcome.

.. [1]
   **Penelope Campling** is a medical psychotherapist, formerly a
   clinical director at the Leicestershire Partnership Trust.
