============================================================================================
Impact of involuntary out-patient commitment on reducing hospital services: 2-year follow-up
============================================================================================



Laura Castells-Aulet
Miguel Hernández-Viadel
Jesús Jiménez-Martos
Carlos Cañete-Nicolás
Carmen Bellido-Rodríguez
Roman Calabuig-Crespo
Pedro Asensio-Pascual
Guillem Lera-Calatayud

:Correspondence: Laura Castells Aulet
(lcastells@hospitalbenitomenni.org)  [1]_

:date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To evaluate whether involuntary out-patient
   commitment (OPC) in patients with severe mental disorder reduces
   their use of hospital services. This is a retrospective case-control
   study comparing a group of patients on OPC (*n* = 75) and a control
   group (*n* = 75) which was composed of patients whose
   sociodemographic variables and clinical characteristics were similar
   to those of the OPC group. Each control case is paired with an OPC
   case, so the control case must have an involuntary admission in the
   month that the index OPC case admission occurred. Emergency room
   visits, admissions and average length of hospital stay over a 2-year
   follow-up after the initiation of OPC were compared.

   **Results** No statistically significant evidence was found in the
   use of mental healthcare services between the two groups. Different
   reasons for admission found between the groups limit similarity when
   comparing the two.

   **Clinical implications** The findings cast doubt over the
   effectiveness of this legal measure to reduce emergency visits, the
   number of admissions and the length of stay in the hospital.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Involuntary out-patient treatment was introduced into North America and
Australia in the early 1980s as a measure intended to benefit persons
with severe mental disorder who need ongoing psychiatric care due to
their poor adherence to treatment and lack of insight.\ :sup:`1` Several
publications confirm that adherence to pharmacological treatment in
disorders such as schizophrenia diminishes relapses and, consequently,
hospitalisations (revolving-door syndrome) and the progressive
deterioration that successive recurrences bring about.\ :sup:`2-5` In
recent decades, there has been a gradual introduction of various forms
of out-patient commitment (OPC). Nowadays, it is a reality in many
countries, among them Australia, Israel, England, New Zealand and the
USA.\ :sup:`6` In Spain, although there is currently no specific
legislation on OPC, it is used in some cities (e.g. Valencia, Alicante,
Barcelona and San Sebastian).

Application of OPC has caused a sharp debate at both the legal and
medical levels. Its defenders believe that it is a less restrictive
measure than hospitalisation,\ :sup:`7-12` ensures adherence to
treatment facilitating clinical stability,\ :sup:`13` and thus provides
more freedom for patients. Opponents however believe that OPC does not
respect human rights. It destroys the therapeutic relationship,
discriminates against the psychiatric patient and increases their risk
of stigmatisation.\ :sup:`14` They base their argument on the lack of
scientific evidence supporting the efficacy of OPC.

.. _S1:

OPC effectiveness data
======================

Non-randomised studies have reported conflicting results. Some have
found a statistically significant association with a reduced rate of
admission\ :sup:`9,12,15-17` and a reduced length of hospital
stay.\ :sup:`9,12,15,16` Swartz *et al*\ :sup:`9` evaluated the
effectiveness of the OPC programme in New York and found that while
under OPC there is a reduction in the number of admissions and length of
hospital stay. They also evaluated the perceptions of stigma, coercion
and satisfaction with treatment during the OPC and found no changes.
Once the OPC was terminated, there was a sustained improvement (lower
rates of hospitalisation and medication non-adherence) in those patients
who received intensive treatment or whose treatment lasted for more than
6 months. Another noteworthy result is that patients who were subject to
an OPC combined with assertive community treatment (ACT) had a lower
risk of hospitalisation than did those who received ACT alone, but the
first group had greater resources at their disposal.

Van Dorn *et al*\ :sup:`10` showed that reduced admission rates were
maintained for 6 months after the OPC had ended. Nakhost *et
al*\ :sup:`17` evaluated the effectiveness of OPC in Canada, discovering
an association between patients under an OPC and a reduction in the
number of readmissions. In addition, they found evidence that this
positive effect on the rate of hospitalisation remained after the OPC
had ended. This was most notable in patients who had no admissions or
who had only one admission prior to the implementation of the OPC. They
found no association with the length of hospital stay. By contrast,
other studies\ :sup:`18-20` have shown an association between an
increase in the rate of admissions and length of hospital stay.

In a recent randomised controlled trial (RCT) in the UK with 12 months'
follow-up, Burns *et al*\ :sup:`21` found no significant difference in
the rate of admission and length of hospital stay in individuals under
OPC. These results are consistent with two RCTs from the USA in which no
significant differences were found in the use of health services, social
functioning or quality of life between the OPC and treatment as
usual.\ :sup:`22,23` These three RCTs are the only ones we found in the
literature on community treatment orders. Despite being in different
jurisdictions with different mental health systems and different laws,
the consistency of performance is significant.

A recent systematic review by Maughan *et al*\ :sup:`24` which looked at
effectiveness of OPC concluded that it has no significant effect on
other outcomes of hospitalisation and use of community services. These
results are consistent with previous reviews of international
experience, for example by Churchill *et al*\ :sup:`25` and Kisely *et
al*.\ :sup:`6`

.. _S2:

Aims
====

Most previous studies have been performed in Anglo-Saxon countries so
the aim of the present study is to provide information about the
effectiveness of this legal measure to reduce the use of hospital
services in other countries. Previous observational studies at Valencia
(Spain) concluded that involuntary out-patient treatment might be useful
for certain patients with severe mental disorder.\ :sup:`26` Because of
the weakness of observational studies, our team previously conducted a
retrospective study of cases and controls during 1 year follow-up, but
the results indicated that OPC wasn't more effective than standard
treatment.\ :sup:`27` We consider that the information offered by the
present study can be of interest given the long period studied.

If one considers that OPC increases commitment to the achievement of
clinical stability in patients with severe mental illness, then it is
expected that the application of this legal measure will decrease both
the number of emergency room visits and the number of hospital
admissions, as well as shorten the length of hospital stay.

.. _S3:

Method
======

This is a retrospective study of cases and controls where we compare a
group of patients under an OPC with a control group.

The study population consisted of all patients in the city of Valencia
who had been under an OPC for at least 2 years at the time of the
study's initiation in August 2009. The admission which prompted the
request for OPC was considered the index admission.

The control group consisted of a sample of patients admitted to the
psychiatric unit of the Hospital Clínico de Valencia. Each control case
was paired with an OPC case, so each had to have an involuntary
admission in the same month as the index OPC case. Moreover, the control
case must have had the same clinical diagnosis, the same
sociodemographic variables (age, gender, place of residence) and the
same clinical characteristics (the same number of admissions during the
2 years before the index admission) as the paired OPC case. Both groups
received a standard treatment consisting of out-patient psychiatric
follow-up medication monitoring, and community-based treatment, such as
day centres. The only difference between the two groups was that the
control group was not under OPCs.

The study compared the number of psychiatric emergency visits, the
number of admissions and length of stay in the hospital for the OPC and
control groups over a 2-year follow-up once the OPC had been initiated.

We recorded the following for each patient: age, gender, place of
residence, psychiatric diagnosis according to the DSM-IV-TR,\ :sup:`26`
number of psychiatric emergencies, number of hospital admissions, main
reason for admission and average length of hospital stay for 2 years
before and 2 years after the initiation of the OPC. Emergencies included
psychiatric emergencies only. Admissions included all admissions,
voluntary and involuntary, registered in the psychiatric services during
the study period.

.. _S4:

Results
=======

The two groups comprised 75 patients - 50 males (66.7%) and 25 females
(33.3%) - each. The average age was 41.4 years for the OPC group and
41.7 years for the control group.

Diagnoses on Axis 1 are shown in `Table 1 <#T1>`__. In both groups
schizophrenia was the most common diagnosis, affecting approximately 3
out of 4 patients with OPC (73%). Bipolar disorder was the second most
frequent diagnosis (12%), followed by schizoaffective disorder and
delusional disorder.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Diagnosis on Axis I (DSM-IV-TR)\ :sup:`23`

   ======================== ======== ========
   \                        *n (%)*  
   ======================== ======== ========
   Schizophrenia            55 (73)  57 (75)
   \                                 
   Bipolar disorder         9 (12)   8 (11)
   \                                 
   Schizoaffective disorder 6 (8)    5 (7)
   \                                 
   Delusional disorder      5 (7)    5 (7)
   \                                 
   Total sample             75 (100) 75 (100)
   ======================== ======== ========

   OPC, out-patient commitment.

There are differences in the motives for index admission between the
groups (`Table 2 <#T2>`__). In the involuntary OPC group the main
reasons were clinical decompensation because of non-adherence to
treatment (78%) and aggressive behaviour (22%). In the control group,
admission occurred mostly due to clinical decompensation without a clear
non-adherence to treatment (47%), for example inconsistent use of
medication, changes in the pharmacological pattern or substance misuse.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Main reason for index admission

   =============================== ======== ========
   \                               *n (%)*  
   =============================== ======== ========
   Aggressive behaviour            16 (22)  10 (16)
   \                                        
   Abandonment of treatment        56 (78)  16 (26)
   \                                        
   Suicide attempt                 0        7 (11)
   \                                        
   Clinical decompensation without 0        29 (47)
   clear treatment drop-out                 
   \                                        
   Total                           72 (100) 62 (100)
   =============================== ======== ========

   OPC, out-patient commitment.

The number of emergency visits, number of admissions and average length
of hospital stay in the 2 years leading up to the start of the OPC index
admission did not reach significant difference between the OPC group and
the control group (`Table 3 <#T3>`__). These results have led us to
conclude that they were two ‘similar’ groups using healthcare services.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Use of hospital mental health services in the 2 years before and
      in the 2 years during out-patient commitment (OPC)

   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+-----+
   |         | 2 years |         | 2 years |         |         |     |
   |         | before  |         | of OPC, |         |         |     |
   |         | OPC,    |         | mean    |         |         |     |
   |         | mean    |         |         |         |         |     |
   +=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=====+
   | Admi    | 2.16    | 2.4     | 0.6     | 1.69    | 1.34    | 0.4 |
   | ssions, |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   | *n*     |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+-----+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+-----+
   | Em      | 1.84    | 1.77    | 0.7     | 0.77    | 0.53    | 0.2 |
   | ergency |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   | visits, |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   | *n*     |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+-----+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+-----+
   | H       | 21.94   | 21.33   | 0.7     | 16.41   | 19.55   | 0.3 |
   | ospital |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   | stay,   |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   | days    |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+-----+
   |         |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+-----+
   | Pa      | 75      | 75      |         | 31 (41) | 24 (32) |     |
   | tients, | (100)   | (100)   |         |         |         |     |
   | *n* (%) |         |         |         |         |         |     |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+-----+

Regarding the number of admissions in the 2 years before the index
admission in both groups, more than half of the patients (52%) had one
hospital admission (*n* = 39), 27% had two admissions (*n* = 20), and
the rest (21%) had more than 2 admissions (between 3 and 6 in the
previous 2 years).

At 2 years after the index admission, the same three variables were
checked. A significant decrease in the number of emergency visits and
admissions and a decrease in the average length of hospital stay were
found in both the OPC and the control group when compared with the
results for the previous 2 years. There were, however, no statistically
significant differences found when comparing the OPC group with the
control group (`Table 3 <#T3>`__).

Overall, 41% of patients on an OPC and 32% of controls had a hospital
admission during the 2 years after the index admission. Of the patients
in the OPC group, 20% (*n* = 5) and of those in the control group 17%
(*n* = 13) had only one admission, whereas the remainder (21% in the OPC
group and 15% in the control group) had more than two admissions.

.. _S5:

Discussion
==========

In the present work, and in agreement with the medical literature, OPC
is applied with greater frequency to persons with schizophrenia (73%).
Like other authors,\ :sup:`6,21,22,27-29` we found no significant
differences between the control and OPC groups in the use of healthcare
services: number of emergency visits, number of hospital admissions and
average length of hospital stay.

The results of this work cast a shadow of doubt on the effectiveness of
OPC as a measure of compulsory treatment in the community. No
statistically significant differences were found between the number of
emergency visits (mean 0.77), admissions (mean 1.69) and the length of
hospital stay (mean 16.41 days) for the OPC group and for the control
group (0.53, 1.34 and 19.55 respectively) (`Table 3 <#T3>`__). If
efficacy is defined by the reduced use of hospital services as examined
in this study, our results indicate that this legislation is not more
effective than standard treatment.

.. _S6:

Limitations of the study
------------------------

On the one hand, the differences found between the reasons for admission
for the OPC group and for the control group undermine the similarity of
the two study groups and, therefore, the suitability for comparison. On
the other hand, there are the general limitations of retrospective
case-control studies (such a study cannot rule out selection bias nor
confounding bias given the impossibility of performing a random
assignment of the participants).

It is striking that despite evidence in the literature that OPC has no
significant effects on hospital service use outcomes, there is a
remarkable consistency in the characteristics of patients who should
undergo this intervention.\ :sup:`22,26` The application of OPC should
not be a generalised measure, but should be limited to those patients
with severe mental disorders in whom a lack of therapeutic adherence
will lead to a severe deterioration of the illness or the appearance of
violent behaviour and, therefore, seriously compromise the patient's
ability to live in the community.

One important question is whether OPC improves outcomes in services that
are already offering a good quality of care. The answer at present
appears to be no judging by the balance of evidence. Nevertheless, even
if intensive follow-up programmes such as ACT are provided, it may be
necessary in some cases to apply OPC.\ :sup:`30`

The effectiveness of OPC can be estimated using other outcomes, for
example patient satisfaction or adherence to treatment during or after
the application of OPC. Further studies are required to provide more
information about the effectiveness of this treatment strategy and to
clarify the contradiction between negative scientific evidence and its
use in clinical practice.

.. [1]
   **Laura Castells-Aulet** is a consultant psychiatrist, Subacute
   Psychiatric Hospitalization, Benito Menni CASM, Sant Boi de
   Llobregat, Barcelona; **Miguel Hernández-Viadel** is a consultant
   psychiatrist, **Jesús Jiménez-Martos** is a psychiatric registrar and
   **Carlos Cañete-Nicolás** is a consultant psychiatrist, Psychiatry
   Department, University Clinic Hospital, Valencia; **Carmen
   Bellido-Rodríguez** is a forensic physician, Medical-Legal Institute
   of Valencia; **Roman Calabuig-Crespo** is a consultant psychiatrist
   and chief of the Psychiatry Department, Doctor Peset University
   Hospital, Valencia; **Pedro Asensio-Pascual** is a consultant
   psychiatrist, Mental Health Center of Yecla, Murcia; **Guillem
   Lera-Calatayud** is a consultant psychiatrist, Psychiatry Department,
   La Ribera Hospital, Valencia.
