========================================================================================================
Trauma exposure and refugee status as predictors of mental health outcomes in treatment-seeking refugees
========================================================================================================



Jeroen W. Knipscheer
Marieke Sleijpen
Trudy Mooren
F. Jackie June ter Heide
Niels van der Aa

:Correspondence: Jeroen W. Knipscheer
(j.w.knipscheer@uu.nl)  [1]_

:date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** This study aimed to identify predictors of
   symptom severity for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and
   depression in asylum seekers and refugees referred to a specialised
   mental health centre. Trauma exposure (number and domain of event),
   refugee status and severity of PTSD and depression were assessed in
   688 refugees.

   **Results** Symptom severity of PTSD and depression was significantly
   associated with lack of refugee status and accumulation of traumatic
   events. Four domains of traumatic events (human rights abuse, lack of
   necessities, traumatic loss, and separation from others) were not
   uniquely associated with symptom severity. All factors taken together
   explained 11% of variance in PTSD and depression.

   **Clinical implications** To account for multiple predictors of
   symptom severity including multiple traumatic events, treatment for
   traumatised refugees may need to be multimodal and enable the
   processing of multiple traumatic memories within a reasonable
   time-frame.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Refugees and asylum seekers have been shown to be at substantially
higher risk of developing post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD)\ :sup:`1` and comorbid mental health problems than the general
population,\ :sup:`2` compatriots who have stayed in the refugees' home
country,\ :sup:`3` and economic migrants.\ :sup:`4` Exposure to a high
number of potentially traumatic events, involvement in asylum-seeking
procedures and forced migration are stressors that set refugees apart
from other populations and increase their psychological vulnerability.
In Western psychiatric practice, insight in the determinants of PTSD and
comorbid disorders in refugees may be helpful in guiding treatment
interventions. Meta-analyses have shown that torture and cumulative
traumatic events are the main predictors for development of PTSD in
refugees.\ :sup:`5` Additionally, researchers have begun to investigate
whether different symptom profiles in refugees are related to different
traumatic experiences. In a sample of Bosnian refugees, Momartin *et
al*\ :sup:`6` found that life threat and traumatic loss were related to
PTSD and depression. In a sample of Mandean refugees, Nickerson *et
al*\ :sup:`7` found that PTSD and prolonged grief disorder were
predicted by traumatic loss, whereas PTSD only was predicted by
difficulties related to loss of culture and support.

While these findings are highly relevant to treatment-seeking refugees,
similar analyses have not yet been carried out in large,
treatment-seeking refugee samples. In this study we examine whether
symptom severity of PTSD and depression is predicted by refugee status
as well as accumulation and specific domains of traumatic events in a
sample of refugees seeking specialised mental healthcare.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Participants
------------

Participants were asylum seekers and refugees referred for treatment at
Foundation Centrum '45, a specialised Dutch centre for diagnosis and
treatment of complex psychological trauma. Refugees are individuals who
have been granted temporary or permanent refugee status in The
Netherlands whereas asylum seekers are those still awaiting a final
decision. In 2001, Foundation Centrum '45 started to routinely monitor
treatment outcomes by administering questionnaires to patients at intake
and annually during treatment. For the present study, data collected at
intake were used. Complete data with regard to refugee status, traumatic
experiences and symptom severity of PTSD and depression were available
for 688 asylum seekers and refugees. Characteristics for the total
sample are presented in `Table 1 <#T1>`__. Participants came from three
main regions: 58% from the Middle East (e.g. Afghanistan, Iraq, Egypt,
Libya), 17% from Sub-Saharan Africa (e.g. Burkina Faso, Eritrea, Congo)
and 16% from Balkan Europe (Bosnia, former Yugoslavia, Croatia).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Demographic characteristics of the total sample and the main
      regions of origin

   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          | Total    | Middle   | Sub      | Balkan   | Other    |
   |          | sample   | East     | -Saharan | Europe   | regions  |
   |          | (*n* =   | (*n* =   | Africa   | (*n* =   | (*n* =   |
   |          | 688)     | 397)     | (*n* =   | 111)     | 66)      |
   |          |          |          | 114)     |          |          |
   +==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+
   | Male,    | 488 (71) | 306 (77) | 66 (58)  | 70 (63)  | 45 (68)  |
   | *n* (%)  |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Age,     | 40.4     | 41.3     | 32.2     | 45.2     | 41.4     |
   | mean     | (10.4)   | (9.9)    | (8.5)    | (9.1)    | (11.2)   |
   | (s.d.)   |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | P        | 585 (85) | 361 (91) | 73 (64)  | 107 (96) | 44 (67)  |
   | ermanent |          |          |          |          |          |
   | refugee  |          |          |          |          |          |
   | status,  |          |          |          |          |          |
   | *n* (%)  |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+

.. _S3:

Measures
--------

Traumatic experiences and PTSD symptom severity were assessed using the
Harvard Trauma Questionnaire (HTQ).\ :sup:`8` The HTQ consists of three
parts, the first two of which were used in this study. In the first part
participants were asked to indicate which of the 19 traumatic events
they experienced, witnessed or heard of, and only self-experienced
traumatic events were used in the study. For each participant a total
number of different self-experienced traumatic events was calculated
(range 0-19). In the second part of the HTQ the severity of DSM-IV PTSD
symptoms was assessed by asking participants how much they were bothered
by 16 PTSD symptoms during the past week, rated on a 4-point scale
ranging from 1, not at all to 4, extremely. PTSD symptom severity was
computed by averaging responses (range 1-4). The HTQ recommends a
cut-off score of 2.5 to identify clinically significant PTSD. Internal
consistency of the scale was high (Cronbach's α 0.86).

Symptom severity for depression was assessed with the Hopkins Symptom
Checklist (HSCL-25).\ :sup:`9` Participants were asked to indicate how
distressed they were by rating 10 symptoms of anxiety and 15 symptoms of
depression during the past week on a 4-point scale ranging from 1, not
at all to 4, extremely. Symptom severity of depression (range 1-4) was
computed by averaging responses on the 15 depression items. The HSCL-25
recommends a cut-off score of 1.75 to indicate clinically significant
depression. Internal consistency was high (Cronbach's α 0.89).

The HTQ and HSCL-25 are self-report questionnaires that are widely used
with refugees and are available in many different languages.
Questionnaires were administered in the patient's native language if
possible and interpreters were used when necessary. Both instruments
have good psychometric properties.\ :sup:`10`

.. _S4:

Statistical analyses
--------------------

Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 20. To
investigate whether specific domains of traumatic events could be
identified, a principal component analysis with oblique rotation (direct
oblimin) was conducted on the total set of self-experienced traumatic
events. An initial analysis was run to obtain eigenvalues for each
factor in the data and to evaluate the substantive contribution of each
item to the extracted factors. Stevens\ :sup:`11` recommends
interpreting factor loadings greater than 0.4 as substantive. The
analysis was rerun without the items that did not contribute
substantively to the extracted factors. For each participant a total
score was computed on each of the extracted domains of traumatic events
by counting the total number of self-experienced traumatic events within
the domain.

Hierarchical regression analyses were used to test whether refugee
status, total number of self-experienced traumatic events and the
domains of traumatic events predicted symptom severity of PTSD and
depression. These variables were independently added to the regression
models, together with the gender and age covariates, as these have been
found to predict PTSD in refugee samples.\ :sup:`12` Scores on the
extracted domains of traumatic events were recoded into dummy variables
before being added to the hierarchical regression models. To allow for
multiple tests the alpha level of significance was set to 0.01.

.. _S5:

Results
=======

First, it was investigated whether specific domains of traumatic events
could be identified by conducting a principal component analysis. In the
initial analysis, four factors had eigenvalues greater than 1. Four
traumatic events (combat situation, brainwashing, rape or sexual abuse,
and being close to death) did not contribute substantively to any of the
four extracted factors and the analysis was rerun without these items.
Four factors were retained with eigenvalues greater than 1.0, which
together accounted for 56.7% of the total variance. `Table 2 <#T2>`__
presents the factor loadings after rotation. The traumatic events that
cluster on the same factor suggest that the first factor represents
human rights abuses (31.1% of the total variation), the second factor
traumatic loss (10.0% of the total variation), the third factor a lack
of necessities (8.7% of the total variation), and the fourth factor
separation from others (6.9% of the total variation).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Summary of principal component analysis for traumatic
      experiences\ `a <#TFN1>`__

   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   | Rotated factor    |          |          |       |
   |                   | loadings          |          |          |       |
   +===================+===================+==========+==========+=======+
   | Threatened to be  | **0.78**          | 0.13     | −0.13    | 0.09  |
   | executed          |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Physical torture  | **0.77**          | −0.10    | −0.03    | −0.12 |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Threatened to be  | **0.77**          | −0.03    | −0.10    | −0.08 |
   | physically        |                   |          |          |       |
   | tortured          |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Threatened to     | **0.66**          | 0.04     | 0.07     | −0.04 |
   | watch torturing   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Serious injury    | **0.50**          | 0.01     | 0.21     | 0.11  |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Lost or kidnapped | **0.46**          | 0.15     | 0.13     | −0.04 |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Imprisonment      | **0.46**          | −0.04    | 0.16     | −0.28 |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Murder of family  | 0.02              | **0.85** | −0.04    | 0.01  |
   | or friend         |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Unnatural death   | −0.12             | **0.79** | 0.04     | −0.11 |
   | of family or      |                   |          |          |       |
   | friend            |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Murder of         | 0.15              | **0.63** | 0.03     | 0.02  |
   | stranger or       |                   |          |          |       |
   | strangers         |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Lack of shelter   | −0.03             | 0.05     | **0.79** | 0.12  |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Lack of food or   | −0.07             | 0.03     | **0.78** | −0.15 |
   | water             |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Ill health        | 0.13              | −0.03    | **0.68** | −0.07 |
   | without access to |                   |          |          |       |
   | medical care      |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Forced separation | −0.04             | 0.09     | −0.02    | −0.85 |
   | from family       |                   |          |          |       |
   | members           |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   |                   |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+
   | Forced isolation  | 0.14              | 0.03     | 0.06     | −0.75 |
   | from others       |                   |          |          |       |
   +-------------------+-------------------+----------+----------+-------+

   Factor loadings over 0.40 appear in bold.

Mean symptom severity was 3.1 (s.d. 0.5) for PTSD and 2.9 (s.d. 0.6) for
depression both within the clinical range. A clinical level of symptom
severity for PTSD and depression was reported by, respectively, 84% and
95% of participants. Participants reported a mean of 11.2 different
self-experienced traumatic events (s.d. 4.7). The most commonly reported
events were being close to death (80%), forced separation from family
members (74%), murder of family or friend (72%), threatened to be
physically tortured (72%), and unnatural death of family or friend
(66%). With regard to the trauma domains, human rights abuses were
reported by 90% of participants, traumatic losses by 83%, lack of
necessities by 77%, and separation from others by 81%.

Hierarchical regression analyses were used to test whether possession of
refugee status, the total number of different self-experienced traumatic
events, and different domains of self-experienced traumatic events
predicted symptom severity of PTSD and depression. Results of the
hierarchical regression models are shown in `Table 3 <#T3>`__. First,
symptom severity of PTSD and depression was adjusted for gender and age
by adding them to the model in step 1. Refugee status was added to the
model in step 2. Lack of refugee status was significantly associated
with increased symptom severity for PTSD and depression. Refugee status
accounted for 2% of the variation in symptom severity of those
disorders. Total number of different self-experienced traumatic events
was added to the model in step 3. Increased number of different
self-experienced traumatic events was significantly associated with
increased symptom severity for PTSD and depression. Total number of
different self-experienced traumatic events accounted for 8% of the
variation in PTSD symptom severity and for 7% of the variation in
symptom severity for depression. To test the unique effect of different
domains of self-experienced traumatic events to symptom severity of PTSD
and depression, human rights abuses, traumatic loss, lack of necessities
and separation from others were added to the model in step 4. None of
these domains were significantly associated with symptom severity.
Adding the different domains of self-experienced traumatic events to the
model accounted for an additional 1% of the variation in symptom
severity.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Hierarchical regression models of predictors of symptom severity
      with regard to PTSD and depression\ `a <#TFN3>`__

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | PTSD  | Depre |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   |       | sym   | ssive |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   |       | ptoms | sym   |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   |       |       | ptoms |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+======+======+=======+=======+
   | Step  |       |       |       | 0.00  |      |      |       | 0.01  |
   | 1     |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 3.05  | 0.03  |       |       | 2.88 | 0.03 |       |       |
   |   Con |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | stant |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |     G | 0.04  | 0.05  | 0.03  |       | 0.11 | 0.05 | 0.08  |       |
   | ender |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.02  | 0.02  | 0.03  |       | 0.03 | 0.02 | 0.05  |       |
   |   Age |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   | Step  |       |       |       | 0.02\ |      |      |       | 0.02\ |
   | 2     |       |       |       |  `\*  |      |      |       |  `\*  |
   |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |      |      |       | <#TFN |
   |       |       |       |       | 4>`__ |      |      |       | 4>`__ |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 3.02  | 0.03  |       |       | 2.84 | 0.03 |       |       |
   |   Con |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | stant |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |     G | 0.04  | 0.05  | 0.04  |       | 0.12 | 0.05 | 0.09  |       |
   | ender |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.04  | 0.02  | 0.07  |       | 0.06 | 0.02 | 0.09  |       |
   |   Age |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.21  | 0.06  | 0.14\ |       | 0.28 | 0.07 | 0.16\ |       |
   |    Re |       |       |  `\*  |       |      |      |  `\*  |       |
   | fugee |       |       | <#TFN |       |      |      | <#TFN |       |
   | s     |       |       | 4>`__ |       |      |      | 4>`__ |       |
   | tatus |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   | Step  |       |       |       | 0.08\ |      |      |       | 0.07\ |
   | 3     |       |       |       |  `\*  |      |      |       |  `\*  |
   |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |      |      |       | <#TFN |
   |       |       |       |       | 4>`__ |      |      |       | 4>`__ |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 3.00  | 0.03  |       |       | 2.82 | 0.03 |       |       |
   |   Con |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | stant |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |     G | 0.09  | 0.04  | 0.08  |       | 0.18 | 0.05 | 0.13\ |       |
   | ender |       |       |       |       |      |      |  `\*  |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |      |      | <#TFN |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |      |      | 4>`__ |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.04  | 0.02  | 0.07  |       | 0.06 | 0.02 | 0.09  |       |
   |   Age |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.20  | 0.06  | 0.13\ |       | 0.26 | 0.07 | 0.15\ |       |
   |    Re |       |       |  `\*  |       |      |      |  `\*  |       |
   | fugee |       |       | <#TFN |       |      |      | <#TFN |       |
   | s     |       |       | 4>`__ |       |      |      | 4>`__ |       |
   | tatus |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.15  | 0.02  | 0.28\ |       | 0.17 | 0.02 | 0.28\ |       |
   |  Trau |       |       |  `\*  |       |      |      |  `\*  |       |
   | matic |       |       | <#TFN |       |      |      | <#TFN |       |
   | ex    |       |       | 4>`__ |       |      |      | 4>`__ |       |
   | perie |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | nces, |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   | Step  |       |       |       | 0.01  |      |      |       | 0.01  |
   | 4     |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.82  | 0.11  |       |       | 2.58 | 0.13 |       |       |
   |   Con |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | stant |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |     G | 0.09  | 0.04  | 0.08  |       | 0.17 | 0.05 | 0.12\ |       |
   | ender |       |       |       |       |      |      |  `\*  |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |      |      | <#TFN |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |      |      | 4>`__ |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.04  | 0.02  | 0.07  |       | 0.06 | 0.02 | 0.09  |       |
   |   Age |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.20  | 0.06  | 0.13\ |       | 0.26 | 0.07 | 0.15\ |       |
   |    Re |       |       |  `\*  |       |      |      |  `\*  |       |
   | fugee |       |       | <#TFN |       |      |      | <#TFN |       |
   | s     |       |       | 4>`__ |       |      |      | 4>`__ |       |
   | tatus |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.11  | 0.03  | 0.21\ |       | 0.12 | 0.04 | 0.18\ |       |
   |  Trau |       |       |  `\*  |       |      |      |  `\*  |       |
   | matic |       |       | <#TFN |       |      |      | <#TFN |       |
   | ex    |       |       | 4>`__ |       |      |      | 4>`__ |       |
   | perie |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | nces, |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | *n*   |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.15  | 0.08  | 0.09  |       | 0.09 | 0.09 | 0.05  |       |
   | Human |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | right |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | a     |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | buses |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.01  | 0.06  | 0.00  |       | 0.07 | 0.07 | 0.04  |       |
   |  Trau |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | matic |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | loss  |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.05  | 0.06  | 0.04  |       | 0.04 | 0.07 | 0.03  |       |
   |  Lack |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | of    |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | basic |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | human |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | needs |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+
   |       | 0.01  | 0.06  | 0.01  |       | 0.09 | 0.07 | 0.06  |       |
   | Separ |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | ation |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | from  |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | o     |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   | thers |       |       |       |       |      |      |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+------+-------+-------+

   B, Unstandardised regression coefficient; Beta, standardised
   regression coefficient; PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder.

   Dependent variables: symptom severity with regard to PTSD and
   depression.

   *P*\ <0.01

   Δ\ *R*\ :sup:`2`, change in *R*\ :sup:`2` compared with previous
   step.

.. _S6:

Clinical implications
---------------------

In a large sample of asylum-seeking and refugee patients seeking
treatment within a specialised Western mental health setting, PTSD
symptom severity and depression was predicted by lack of refugee status
and cumulative traumatic events, but not by specific domains of
traumatic experience. Refugee status, total number of self-experienced
traumatic events, domains of traumatic experiences, and gender and age
together accounted for only 11% of variation in symptom severity of PTSD
and depression. These results are in stark contrast with earlier
findings among non-treatment-seeking refugee populations, which showed
that torture and cumulative traumatic events accounted for 34.4% of
variance in PTSD prevalence rates and for 33.4% of variance in
depression prevalence rates.\ :sup:`5`

Clearly, PTSD symptom and depression severity among asylum seekers and
refugees seeking specialised treatment is influenced by multiple
factors, including some that were not measured in this study. To map
predictors for PTSD and depression in refugee patients, assessment may
need to focus on a broader range of both stressors and resources,
including stressors and resources related to forced migration, such as
safety of family in the home country and social support. Rather than
traumatic stress, it may be the burden of current stress and lack of
resources that leads to PTSD and depression, prompting refugees to seek
mental healthcare. This finding implies that clinically, in this
severely traumatised population, an exclusive focus on processing of
traumatic experiences as prescribed in PTSD treatment guidelines may
result in only limited symptom reduction. Consequently, for refugee
patients with severe psychopathology treatment may need to be multimodal
rather than trauma-focused only.

In addition, in contrast to other studies, which showed an association
between life threat and traumatic loss on the one hand and PTSD and
comorbid disorders on the other, in our treatment-seeking sample no such
associations were found. In our sample, the number rather than domain of
traumatic events was associated with symptom severity. This implies that
trauma-focused treatments for refugees should be designed to enable the
processing of a large number of traumatic events within a reasonable
time-frame. Treatments such as narrative exposure therapy and
trauma-focused cognitive therapy may enable that to a greater extent
than *in vitro* exposure therapy or eye movement desensitisation and
reprocessing therapy, which in refugees may require several sessions for
the processing of a single memory.

Although our findings can be generalised to mental healthcare-seeking
refugees and asylum seekers only and the range of questionnaires was
limited, merits of this study lie in the satisfactory cultural validity
of the questionnaires and the large sample size. Future studies using a
broader range of instruments are needed to identify predictors for PTSD
and depression in treatment-seeking refugees.

.. [1]
   **Jeroen W. Knipscheer** is a psychologist and senior researcher and
   **Marieke Sleijpen** is a psychologist and PhD student, both at Arq
   Psychotrauma Expert Group, Diemen/Oegstgeest, The Netherlands and
   Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, Utrecht University;
   **Trudy Mooren** is a clinical psychologist and senior researcher,
   **F. Jackie June ter Heide** is a clinical psychologist and PhD
   student and **Niels van der Aa** is a senior researcher and
   methodologist, all with Arq Psychotrauma Expert Group,
   Diemen/Oegstgeest.
