============================================================
Commissioning neuropsychiatry services: barriers and lessons
============================================================

Rahul Bhattacharya
Hugh Rickards
Niruj AgrawalCorrespondence to Niruj Agrawal
(niruj.agrawal@swlstg-tr.nhs.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method**

   Previous studies have shown variations in commissioning of
   neuropsychiatry services and this makes access to neuropsychiatric
   services a post-code lottery. In this survey, we approached all
   mental health and neuropsychiatric service commissioners within
   London to map current funding and commissioning arrangements, and
   explored perceived barriers to neuropsychiatric service
   commissioning.

   **Results**

   83% of commissioners within London responded. There was significant
   variability between neuropsychiatric services commissioned through
   the mental health stream. Contracting arrangements were variable.
   Lack of earmarked fund for neuropsychiatry and disjointed funding
   stream for such services were identified by commissioners as a
   barrier, as was the critical mass of neuropsychiatric cases.

   **Clinical implications**

   Neuropsychiatric service development continues to be hindered by lack
   of clear commissioning process. Strategic drive is needed to promote
   more equitable neuropsychiatric services. National or regional
   commissioning covering a large population will provide a better model
   for neuropsychiatric services to be commissioned.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Neuropsychiatry lies at the interface between neurology and
psychiatry.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` It is often debated that the narrow focus of
neurology and psychiatry services fails to meet the need of patients
from a broader neuropsychiatric perspective.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` The
Cartesian belief of the dualism of mind and body has had repercussions
for neuropsychiatric training as well as service provision including
commissioning.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Being at the interface of neurosciences,
neuropsychiatry services are commissioned through both physical health
funding stream and mental health commissioning, though there is lack of
clarity around this. This leaves this complex discipline vulnerable to
falling between different funding streams.

In the UK, mental health services underwent significant growth under the
*National Service Framework* (NSF) initiative for mental health, where
the predominant focus was around community services.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`
Although community models were recommended, neuropsychiatry services
remained largely based within academic institutions.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` At
the height of the NHS expansion, a national survey of neuropsychiatry
services revealed them to be ‘patchy’ and ‘grossly inadequate’, and
discovered that most of the neuropsychiatry services existed from
pre-NSF days.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` Historically, neuropsychiatry services
developed at certain national or regional centres, such as a national
hospital, significantly before NSF or current commissioning
arrangements. They continued to serve or were developed at certain
regional centres in an *ad hoc* way dependent on local clinical
enthusiasm or leadership. At times, such developments were not
accompanied by specific commissioning initiatives. There were no
systemic drivers or a comprehensive plan to meet the population need.
Consequently, patients were often referred ‘out of area’ and services
often struggled to meet demand, resulting in long waiting times. The
reasons for lack of neuropsychiatry service development in recent years
has not been examined, despite increasing recognition of need and demand
for neuropsychiatry services and its impact on patients' quality of
life. Commissioning arrangements and awareness of neuropsychiatry among
commissioners and managers could be one of the reasons behind
this.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

The aim of this study was to explore commissioning arrangements for
neuropsychiatry and perceived barriers for neuropsychiatry commissioning
from the perspective of managers responsible for commissioning
neuropsychiatry services. We based this study in London as the city is
unique in having a significant concentration of neuropsychiatric
services along with recognised variability in service
provision.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.g)` At the time of carrying out the
study, the Greater London area came under the regional commissioning
unit or strategic health authority (SHA), which also made London a
regional unit. Therefore, London provided a unit of regional
commissioning that could be studied and compared with previous
literature. Primary care trusts (PCTs) are local units within the SHA
that cover well-defined geographical areas, usually within an
administrative unit called a borough. In London there were 31 boroughs
and 30 PCTs during our survey. Two boroughs collaborated and acted as
one unit.

Apart from mapping current practice, the survey explored perceived
barriers for neuropsychiatry service provision from commissioners and
providers.

.. _S1:

Method
======

Two surveys were carried out. One approached all mental health
commissioners based at the 30 PCTs in London and the other was a
separate survey of neuropsychiatry service providers. See the
accompanying paper for details.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`

All local mental health commissioners (within the PCTs) were contacted
electronically with the survey questionnaire and this was followed up by
a telephone call. The commissioners were asked whether they were aware
of a different route of commissioning neuropsychiatry in their PCT. We
were directed to the specialist commissioning unit for
neurorehabilitation for the London area and they were contacted for the
survey. The specialist neurorehabilitation commissioning forms a
non-mental health commissioning route. We were not directed to any other
funding or commissioning stream for neuropsychiatry.

The survey mapped commissioning arrangements for neuropsychiatry and
provision of services. It was factor-analysed for emerging themes from
providers' and commissioner' responses for ‘perception of
neuropsychiatry’ and ‘perceived barriers to neuropsychiatry service
commissioning’.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

Overall, 30 mental health commissioners from 25 PCTs responded. There
was no information from 5 PCTs; response rate for commissioners was
therefore 83%. The specialist mental health commissioner for
neurorehabilitation for London also responded. There was response from
all 9 mental health trusts (specialist mental health providers),
although 1 returned an incomplete response; thus, response rate for
providers was 100%. Data were also gathered from a tertiary
neuropsychiatry centre embedded within an acute hospital trust and one
in the voluntary sector catering to patients from London but based
outside London. Two independent-sector specialist neurorehabilitation
centres were identified and contacted with provider questionnaire, and
one of them responded.

The commonest mode of commissioning of neuropsychiatry services was to
tertiary services followed by local services. This was followed by
‘national’ services which are essentially tertiary services which are
open to referrals from across the country. Funding streams for certain
conditions were identified to be other than mental health. Although
neuropsychiatry services were tertiary services, they were often also
open to direct referral from primary care. Brain injury or
neurorehabilitation was commissioned through pan-London specialist
commissioning group, i.e. from a ‘specialist’ commissioner across a
larger geographical area and services provided by specialist tertiary
providers. Commissioning for young-onset dementia and cognitive
difficulties was often aligned with other health services for ‘older
adults’.

`Figure 1 <#F1>`__ describes different modes of purchasing
neuropsychiatry services. Block contract was the most popular method,
closely followed by commissioning per patient but needing approval for
all the patients. In only a small minority of cases referrals did not
require commissioners' approval. Interestingly, the mode of
commissioning was unclear in 4 cases. Some of the commissioners were
using more than one method of purchasing neuropsychiatry services.

.. figure:: 292f1
   :alt: Modes of purchase of neuropsychiatry services.
   :name: F1

   Modes of purchase of neuropsychiatry services.

A whole range of neuropsychiatry services were commissioned and provided
(`Fig. 2 <#F2>`__). There appears to be a significant disparity in the
range of provision and commissioning. This may indicate that some
neuropsychiatry services were commissioned as part of a larger service
without specific earmarked funding. There was a lack of clarity of
commissioning processes in such cases.

.. figure:: 293f2
   :alt: Types of neuropsychiatry services provided and commissioned.
   ADHD, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.
   :name: F2

   Types of neuropsychiatry services provided and commissioned. ADHD,
   attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Overall, commissioning interest and service provision for specific
neuropsychiatric services did not mirror each other. The nine mental
health trusts in London were asked about whether they provided
neuropsychiatry services. Among them, five identified themselves as
providing some form of neuropsychiatry service while four reported not
providing any neuropsychiatry service. One of the trusts that no longer
provided neuropsychiatry service had a brain injury rehabilitation unit
that was closed the year before the survey. There was significant
interest in commissioning neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism
spectrum and adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (80%
and 68% of responding commissioners, respectively), but only 33% of
mental health trusts had provision for autism spectrum disorder and 22%
provided service for adult ADHD. One of the commissioners reported they
commissioned services for sleep disorder but none of the providers had
service provision for sleep disorder. Similarly, one of the providers
had service provision for stroke-related neuropsychiatry, though none of
the commissioners we were able to contact were commissioning such a
service.

Both service providers and commissioners identified lack of funds in
general and lack of funds specifically earmarked for neuropsychiatry as
a barrier to neuropsychiatric service development. Both identified the
disjointed nature of commissioning funding streams for neuropsychiatry
and lack of national strategic drive for neuropsychiatry as further
barriers to commissioning such services. But there were variations in
perceptions of commissioners *v.* providers. Of the 30 commissioners who
responded, 23 perceived there was a barrier to commissioning
neuropsychiatry services (77%). Commissioners were more concerned about
lack of critical mass (*n*\ =8; 35%) of individual neuropsychiatric
disorders in their commissioning units or areas (`Fig. 3 <#F3>`__, `Box
1 <#box1>`__).

.. figure:: 293f3
   :alt: Perceived barriers to neuropsychiatry funding (commissioner
   perspective).
   :name: F3

   Perceived barriers to neuropsychiatry funding (commissioner
   perspective).

Providers often perceived a ‘lack of interest’ in commissioning
neuropsychiatric services as a barrier to setting up or providing
neuropsychiatry services (`Fig. 4 <#F4>`__).

.. figure:: 294f4
   :alt: Perceived barriers to neuropsychiatry funding (provider
   perspective).
   :name: F4

   Perceived barriers to neuropsychiatry funding (provider perspective).

Commissioners were asked if they were aware of new neuropsychiatry
services that were commissioned (expansion) in the past 10 years. There
were only 8 responses, suggesting some of the local mental health
commissioners were unaware of how services had evolved in the past 10
years locally. We also explored whether there were plans for expansion
for neuropsychiatry services locally in the future. From the responses
we received, there were services being considered for certain
conditions: adult autism spectrum disorder (6; 27%), adult ADHD (4;
18%), young-onset dementia (4; 18%), memory clinic/dementia services (2;
9%), other specific conditions in individual areas (3; 14%); 4
commissioners reported there were no plans to develop new services (18%)

**Box 1** Some comments on neuropsychiatry services from commissioners:

-  ‘The numbers of patients requiring these types of services are small
   in comparison to other psychiatric services and the challenge is
   therefore being able to provide affordably and locally for this
   group.’

-  ‘Economies of scale for larger areas (e.g. across west London) are
   needed given that the service may not be sustainable at a borough
   level’

-  ‘The low volume affects local commissioning.’

-  ‘Neuropsychiatry is a relatively small field and not high up on the
   national agenda’.

Two of the nine mental health trusts reported expansion of generic
neuropsychiatry services over the past 10 years; two trusts reported no
expansion and two other trusts did not know whether there was any
expansion. One trust reported there was some patchy development of adult
ADHD and young-onset dementia services without commissioning support,
largely led by the ‘individual’ interest of clinicians. Another trust
also reported patchy (not across all boroughs) development of
young-onset dementia, adult autism spectrum disorder and ADHD services.
One of the trusts closed down a brain injury rehabilitation service. One
of the specialist providers reported developing an adolescent brain
injury rehabilitation unit while another reported expansion in the
services for medically unexplained neurological symptoms, including
in-patient facilities and services for Tourette syndrome.

Commissioners were also asked about future planning in the field of
neuropsychiatry services. A third responded that there were no plans for
expansion (11/30; 37%). Medically unexplained neurological conditions
(along with generic medically unexplained symptoms) were being
considered for commissioning in two PCTs while three more PCTs would
‘review’ their current commissioning in this field. Adult ADHD services
were being considered in three PCTs while one borough was reviewing
their commissioning in the field. Adult autism spectrum disorder service
commissioning was being considered by one borough.

Three trusts (one with existing neuropsychiatry services, two without)
were unsure whether there would be further expansion of neuropsychiatry
services. Two of the mental health trusts had plans of developing
generic neuropsychiatry services. One trust reported plans to enhance
psychological therapy (cognitive-behavioural therapy) services within
the existing neuropsychiatry services. One of the trusts reported plans
to develop services for adult ADHD. Two mental health trusts and one of
the specialist providers had no further plans to develop neuropsychiatry
services in the near future.

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

This is the first detailed study of commissioners' and providers' views
on neuropsychiatry services commissioning. Data were gathered from all
the providers and 83% of commissioners, making a robust data-set.

This study shows significant variations and inconsistencies in
commissioning of neuropsychiatry services. There is evidence of a
disjointed approach towards commissioning neuropsychiatry, despite
London being a relatively small geographical area. Certain themes
emerged as major barriers which may have contributed to the current
state of affairs.

.. _S4:

Critical mass for commissioning neuropsychiatry services
--------------------------------------------------------

Commissioners identified a lack of ‘critical mass’ as a common barrier
to neuropsychiatry service commissioning. Providers also reported this
to be a big barrier. In the UK, commissioning is changing radically. As
the current structure of purchasing healthcare is reorganised, it can be
replaced by a more localised and potentially fragmented system,
mirroring the current system. This would be detrimental for
neuropsychiatry commissioning as it may mean lower numbers of
neuropsychiatry patients per neuropsychiatric condition per
commissioning unit and further aggravate the problem of the lack of
‘critical mass’. The barrier of critical mass can be addressed by
commissioning neuropsychiatry services for a larger population. We
believe a regional or national specialist commissioning panel would best
achieve this purpose. This already exists for services such as
neurorehabilitation. The specialist commissioning panel mentioned
previously reduced variability in neurorehabilitation when compared with
borough-based commissioning of neuropsychiatry services.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`
With the current restructuring of health services in the UK, PCTs and
regional commissioning units (SHAs) have been abolished and from 2013
neuropsychiatry is being commissioned by NHS England, although this is
going to be reviewed in a few years' time. This might provide
commissioners the critical mass to commission neuropsychiatry services
more effectively, reduce variability and address unmet needs.

.. _S5:

Knowledge and expertise of commissioners and integrated commissioning
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Historically, neuropsychiatry has fallen between neurosciences and
mental health commissioning.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` The vast majority of
providers reported a perceived lack of knowledge and expertise among
commissioners, disjointed or unclear commissioning processes, and lack
of earmarked funds for neuropsychiatry as challenges to setting up
neuropsychiatry services. Commissioners also found a lack of earmarked
funds and negotiating multiple funding streams confusing.

Disjointed commissioning and fragmented funding streams without any
clear resources earmarked for neuropsychiatry leaves neuropsychiatry at
the periphery of multiple streams of funding, for example mental health,
older adults' health, neurosciences, specialist neurorehabilitation. It
has been hypothesised that there is a lack of adequate understanding of
neuropsychiatry among commissioners and service managers, be it of
mental health or physical health.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` To expect a high level
of specialised expertise at every local commissioning unit for a range
of neuropsychiatric disorders, each of which have a small local
population, is unrealistic. Current restructuring also provides the
opportunity for neuropsychiatry services to be commissioned through
‘specialist commissioners’ with earmarked funding. Specialist
commissioning covering a substantial geographical area will address
concerns of lack of understanding through specialist knowledge as well
as ensure there are sufficient patient numbers (critical mass).

From our survey we gathered that very few mental health providers, apart
from a few large neuropsychiatry centres, provided care for the vast
range of neuropsychiatric conditions. We hypothesise that conditions
such as sleep disorder or neuropsychiatric input into neurodegenerative
conditions and epilepsy may be closely aligned with acute healthcare,
which was possibly not wholly captured in this survey, as they are both
far removed from mental health commissioning or mental health trusts and
do not have earmarked funding stream that can be reliably traced. There
was indirect evidence that the commissioning of these services was
possibly linked with generic acute hospitals and funded through physical
health funds or a specialist neurosciences funding panel (`Fig.
2 <#F2>`__).

Commissioning in neuropsychiatry needs to be integrated and streamlined.
Funding and resources for neuropsychiatry need to be transparent and
ring-fenced to allow services to be equitable across the country.

.. _S6:

Need for strategic drive in neuropsychiatry
-------------------------------------------

Commissioners and providers identified a lack of strategic drive as a
barrier for neuropsychiatry commissioning. The study shows that where
strategic drive exists, even if the condition is rare, it improved
standardisation and access to services. The two conditions where this
survey found a good degree of shared understanding from provider and
commissioning perspectives were brain injury neurorehabilitation and
young-onset dementia. Both were supported by the presence of strategic
drive, for example the NSF for long-term conditions,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` a
House of Lords report,\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` the Department of Health's
dementia strategy,\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` or the National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines on dementia.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`
Services for medically unexplained neurological conditions in London
were possibly helped by the recognition of medically unexplained
conditions as one of the four streams for which Healthcare for London
started working on care pathways in 2008, which later evolved into the
Darzi care pathways (the work has been summarised by the report from the
Commissioning Support London).\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` Unlike the NSF for mental
health, the NSF for long-term conditions provided an opportunity to
foster neuropsychiatric service development.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` It was
recognised by neuropsychiatrists as a potential strategic
driver,\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` but so far its impact has been arguably limited.
Adult ADHD and autism spectrum disorder services were boosted by their
respective national clinical guidelines.\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.q)`

We believe there is an imminent need for a strategic drive for generic
neuropsychiatry, both nationally and internationally. The Royal College
of Psychiatrists' working group consensus paper provides an ideal
platform to develop strategic drivers to foster neuropsychiatry
services' development to meet population needs.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)`

.. _S7:

Developing a shared understanding of what is neuropsychiatry
------------------------------------------------------------

Different definitions and interpretations of the core neuropsychiatric
territory are damaging to the development of neuropsychiatric services
globally.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` This confusion is not new. In 2005, the
International Neuropsychiatric Association identified ‘defining of
neuropsychiatry’ as one of the key priorities and ‘first and the most
difficult challenge’ to help identifying ‘the legitimate territory of
neuropsychiatrist’.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` This confusion around the remits of
the discipline spills over to neuropsychiatry service provision. There
was a significant variation in the familiarity of the different
conditions and their commissioning and service provision (`Fig.
2 <#F2>`__).

The perception of what constitutes neuropsychiatry varied significantly
among both commissioners and providers. Assessment of local need for
commissioning is affected by this uncertainty around prevalence of
‘neuropsychiatric cases’. Through our survey we obtained direct and
indirect evidence that neuropsychiatry services were highly non-uniform
in what they provided.

It is important to look at neuropsychiatry as a discipline with more
clear boundaries and foster development of specific drivers that promote
uniform service provision that is both adequate and equitable.
Neurodevelopmental disorders (such as autism spectrum disorder and adult
ADHD), young-onset dementia and psychiatry of intellectual disability
often require skill-sets similar to neuropsychiatry, but traditionally
have not been considered its core business. In fact, they do not form
part of the core Specialised Services National Definitions Set
definition of neuropsychiatry.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)`

We believe the nature of the difficulties seen by neuropsychiatry
services is by definition complex and beyond the service provision that
could be delivered by either neurology services or mental health
services alone. We suggest a basic model with four categories to define
the core boundaries of neuropsychiatric disorders (`Box 2 <#box2>`__).

.. _S8:

Limitations
-----------

The study was carried out within the Greater London SHA. One can
therefore argue that the results might not be generalisable to other
areas. However, London was chosen as it had a high concentration of
neuropsychiatry centres within a well-circumscribed geographical area
located within an SHA where previous service mapping had been carried
out.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.g)` We believe that the problems identified in
London can only be an underestimate of commissioning barriers across the
country. This can be taken as a pilot study, as information and
literature in this field nationally or internationally is very limited.

**Box 2** Core neuropsychiatric disorders

Broadly speaking, neuropsychiatry services provide assessment,
investigation and treatment for patients with: a neuropsychiatric
disorder (cognitive, behavioural or psychiatric symptoms) associated
with a recognised neurological condition or organic brain lesion such as
Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, acquired brain injurya neuropsychiatric
disorder or mental illness with a yet unrecognised neurological
condition or probable organic aetiology (e.g. psychosis related to as
yet undiagnosed epilepsy or encephalitis)functional neurological
disorders (e.g. dissociative seizures, dissociative memory disorder or
conversion disorder) excluding primary presentation with general
somatoform disorders without prominent neurological symptoms, chronic
fatigue and chronic pain disordersother neuropsychiatric conditions may
include specific conditions such as neuropsychiatric sleep disorders,
complex neurobehavioural disorders or neuropsychiatric manifestations of
extracranial physical conditions.

The study looked into commissioning from the mental health
commissioners' perspective and incorporated neurorehabilitation
specialist commissioning. However, neuropsychiatry services are located
at the interface of neurology and psychiatry and therefore the study may
have failed to capture any neuropsychiatry services that are
commissioned through and embedded within acute or psychical healthcare
setting.

The study surveyed service providers and commissioners and can only
comment on the responders' understanding, knowledge and perception of
how services were aligned. For the purpose of this study these responses
were taken to be proxy measures of the reality of service provision on
the ground and the process of their commissioning. The data collected
may have been contaminated due to confusion over ‘caseness’ of
neuropsychiatry patients.

Neuropsychiatry commissioning remains disjointed and variable. This
study identifies barriers for neuropsychiatry commissioning and service
development. This makes a case for neuropsychiatry to be commissioned in
its entirety through a national specialised commissioning group in the
future. This should help to reduce inconsistent provision nationally and
help respond to unmet need. There is urgent need for increasing
collaborative working between national commissioners and national bodies
of neuropsychiatric expertise such as the Royal College of
Psychiatrists' Faculty of Neuropsychiatry in the UK. Such a joined-up
approach is necessary to develop universally acceptable strategic drives
that can foster real improvements in services and benefit patients with
neuropsychiatric conditions. We must learn the lessons of the past to
break the barriers we continue to encounter.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.s.

.. [1]
   **Rahul Bhattacharya** MBBS, DPM, MSc, MRCPsych, Consultant
   Psychiatrist, East London NHS Foundation Trust, Honorary Clinical
   Senior Lecturer, Barts and the London School of Medicine and
   Dentistry, London; **Hugh Rickards** MD, FRCPsych, Consultant in
   Neuropsychiatry, Honorary Reader in Neuropsychiatry, Department of
   Neuropsychiatry, University of Birmingham; **Niruj Agrawal** MBBS,
   MD, MSc, Dip CBT, FRCPsych, Consultant Neuropsychiatrist and Honorary
   Senior Lecturer, St George's Hospital, London.
