===============================================================================
Do psychiatry and neurology need a close partnership or a merger?\ `† <#fn1>`__
===============================================================================



Michael Fitzgerald

:Correspondence: Michael Fitzgerald
(profmichaelfitzgerald@gmail.com)  [1]_  [2]_

:date: 2015-6

:Abstract:
   Advances in neuroscience in recent years have blurred the boundaries
   between psychiatry and neurology. They now have more in common than
   what divides them and this signals a return to their origins. Many
   have called for a merger of the two disciplines, which would offer a
   more holistic approach, whereas others vigorously reject such a move.
   Limiting neurology to the study of the nervous system and psychiatry
   to the social brain or affect and its disorders is no longer
   sustainable. The ongoing separation of the disciplines has had an
   impact on diagnosis and treatment, on professional isolation and on
   funding psychiatric research.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The relationship between psychiatry and neurology remains a
controversial topic, with strong voices opposing a merger, whereas
others point out that the future lies with the neurologist/psychiatrist
or neuropsychiatrist. :sup:`1` Either way, it highlights the growing
disparity in how the disciplines are currently defined and the many
areas of overlap.

.. _S1:

History of the relationship between neurology and psychiatry
============================================================

The term ‘neurology’ originated with English physician Thomas Willis
following his study of brain anatomy in the 1660s, according to Millon.
:sup:`2` Subsequently in 1808, Johann Christian Reil, a German physician
and philosopher, gave us the term ‘psychiatrie’. However, the two
disciplines had common origins. Krishnamoorthy :sup:`3` points out that
the ancients, including Hippocrates, believed that all psychopathology
arose in the brain and that this is clearly reflected in writings well
into the nineteenth century. On the other hand, this was not a
universally held view and some of the ancients believed that hysteria
was because of a wandering womb. Even so, the 1845 seminal work on
mental illness by Wilhelm Griesinger in *Mental Pathology and
Therapeutics* still has a modern ‘ring’ to it in the 21st century. He
was a major clinical and academic researcher in a number of hospitals in
Europe at the time. The one-time unity of the disciplines was also
reflected in the title of the journal Griesinger founded in 1867,
*Archives of Psychiatry and Neurology*. For Griesinger, mental diseases
were essentially brain diseases, according to Millon.

Over the years there has been considerable opposition to Griesinger. In
an interview with Poole, :sup:`4` William Alywn Lishman was severely
critical of Griesinger because he ‘tried to make the whole of psychiatry
brain science’. I would concur with Lishman that Griesinger went too far
and especially ignored environmental influences. I believe the
biopsychosocial model of psychiatry can only operate via the brain and
Johansson :sup:`5` is correct in his assertion that all mental life will
eventually be mapped onto ‘a neuronal substrate’. The split between
medicine and psychiatry was lamented by Silas Weir Mitchell as early as
1894. He expressed the view that when the ‘treatment of the insane’
passed completely out of the hands of the profession at large and ‘into
those group of physicians (psychiatrists) who constitute a sect apart...
what evil this has wrought, what harm it has done to us’, as noted by
Andreason. :sup:`6` This split became even more pronounced in the USA
between 1935 and 1975, when psychoanalysis largely took over psychiatry
there, further increasing the gap between neurology and medicine
generally. Ironically, psychoanalysts are now trying to reconnect with
neurology through neuropsychoanalysis, according to Solms. :sup:`7`

The advent of diagnostic imaging has brought a certain degree of clarity
to the field. Kandel points out that had imaging been available in 1895
when Freud wrote *Project for a Scientific Psychology* he might have
directed psychoanalysis along very different lines, keeping it ‘in close
relationship with biology as outlined in that essay’. :sup:`8` It is
worth noting that Freud was a superb neuropathologist and neurological
scientist, as evidenced in the very ambitious but highly relevant
*Project for a Scientific Psychology*. :sup:`9` However, the work also
signalled his subsequent move away from traditional science.

.. _S2:

Why are psychiatry and neurology separate?
==========================================

Many views have been expressed on why psychiatry and neurology are
separate. In response to White e\ *t al*\ ’s :sup:`10` assertion that it
is time to end the distinction between mental and neurological
illnesses, Ikkos points out that neurology’s expertise is the nervous
system and its disorders, whereas psychiatry’s expertise is affect and
its disorders. :sup:`11` Furthermore, he argues that, conceptually,
neurology is necessarily at a different level of abstraction from the
nervous system. This argument, however, is not the least bit persuasive
to me. Miller notes that ‘psychiatry was neurology without physical
signs’, :sup:`12` whereas Holmes points out that ‘only psychiatry can
encompass the social brain’. :sup:`13` There is absolutely no reason why
neurologists cannot embrace the social brain and indeed many do today. I
believe the split between neurology and psychiatry is in fact
artificial.

The chorus of disapproval against neuropsychiatry has certainly grown.
Pies argues that psychiatry and neurology cannot simply merge because
they use ‘significantly different narratives or... discourses’.
:sup:`14` He also claims that psychiatry is grounded in human
subjectivity and existential concerns and is a ‘discourse of interlacing
and multi-layered meanings’ and a ‘narrative about narratives’.
Neurology, on the other hand, he believes is fundamentally ‘a discourse
of neuroanatomical and neurophysiological relationships’. When a
neurologist examines a patient with symptoms not corresponding to known
neurological pathways, which Pies sees as ‘functional, supratentorial or
psychogenic’, then the patient should be deferred or referred to the
psychiatrist. Essentially, Pies’ description of psychiatry has echoes of
psychoanalysis. For example, he asserts that psychiatry’s discourses
should be understood as a dialectic between a text and a presumed
subtext – ‘not unlike the dialectic between *p’shat* and *d’rash* in
Talmudic exegesis. That is, beneath the literal words or surface meaning
of a biblical text (*p’shat*), there lies a realm of figurative,
allegorical, and mystical meanings that must be explicated (*d’rash*)’.
:sup:`14` Indeed, his description of psychiatry relates to that of the
mid-nineteenth century, in my view.

An editorial by Baker *et al* in the *BMJ* in 2012 stated that it is
time to tear down the wall between neurology and psychiatry advances in
neuroscience. :sup:`15` In response to this editorial, Bailey *et al*
presented the orthodox psychiatric reaction. They point out that most
mental disorders, given our current state of knowledge, have no
unequivocal biomarkers and classification has to rely, however
imperfectly, on clinical signs and symptoms. :sup:`16` They were against
a merger of neurology and psychiatry, but in favour of a close working
relationship.

The advances in neuroscience prompted Stone & Sharpe to pose a key
question: will greater understanding of neuroscience mean that
psychiatry will simply follow neurology in abandoning the patients that
fail to fit into a reductionistic paradigm? :sup:`17` However, I believe
that if there were a merger, patients would be less likely to fall
through the ‘cracks’. Excessive specialisation is the greatest reason
for bringing neurology and psychiatry together. Indeed, even at a
research level progress is more likely to occur at the interfaces
between specialties and subspecialties. One reason for the lack of
progress in psychiatric research in recent years has been because of the
excessive specialisation and subspecialisation.

.. _S3:

Why bring neurology and psychiatry together?
============================================

One of the most compelling arguments for bringing the two disciplines
together is that their boundaries are becoming increasingly blurred.
Ramachandran observed this fact and declared it was only a matter of
time before psychiatry becomes just another branch of neurology.
:sup:`18` I would dispute that aspect of the argument; there is no
question of one discipline ‘swallowing’ up the other. Instead it would
be a merger of two equal partners: neurology and psychiatry. If it were
to occur, both disciplines would enrich each other enormously.

The separation of the two disciplines has had a somewhat negative impact
on diagnosis and treatment. Kanner points out that, in neurology, the
separation from psychiatry has led to comorbid disorders being
underrecognised and undertreated. :sup:`19` In effect, the separation of
neurology from psychiatry has led to a separation of the brain from the
mind – the physical from the mental – which has been unhelpful for both
disciplines. If a merger did occur, the neuropsychiatrist could provide
a more holistic approach to the diagnosis and treatment of a patient. In
fact, all neurologists and psychiatrists practise basic counselling and
brief therapy to varying degrees. It is noteworthy that there are
similar brain changes after the treatment of obsessive-compulsive
disorder with either medication or behaviour therapy. This increases the
link somewhat between neurology and psychiatry.

Aarli points out that psychiatry and neurology have a common route and
both share a common basis in neuroscience. :sup:`20` He also notes that
there is much more that unites neurology and psychiatry than divides
them. Neurobiological conditions like epilepsy, autism, dementia,
delirium, Tourette syndrome, intellectual disability, dyspraxia, speech
and language problems are all overlapping. Between neurology and
psychiatry Henningsen favours overcoming ‘dualistic’ and often
‘irrational splits’ in the classification and in the practice of
medicine. :sup:`21` He agrees with the idea of subsuming mental
disorders under ‘disorders of the brain’ because this gives greater
clarity and simplicity. Kandel finds it useful to consider that
psychiatry and psychoanalysis work at the level of individual nerve
cells and their synaptic connections. :sup:`8` Neurology and psychiatry
are simply two ‘sides of the same coin’. Certainly in the area of neural
plasticity, neurology and psychiatry overlap.

The overlap is also evident in medical journals relevant to the
disciplines. In a study of papers published in *Neurology* and the
*American Journal of Psychiatry*, Price :sup:`22` found that less than
5% of papers in the *American Journal of Psychiatry* were on meningitis,
epilepsy and headache and that less than 5% of papers in *Neurology*
focused on schizophrenia, panic and mania. The proportions for
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder were 23% in *Neurology* and 77%
in the *American Journal of Psychiatry*; for autism 30% in *Neurology*
and 70% in the *American Journal of Psychiatry*; for ‘mental
retardation’ 70% in *Neurology* and 30% in the *American Journal of
Psychiatry*. As one can see, there is considerable overlap. Similarly,
Raja showed that neurological disease affected 13.05% of acute and 68.9%
of chronic psychiatric patients. :sup:`23`

.. _S4:

Professional isolation from medicine
====================================

The question of professional isolation has also emerged. The separation
of psychiatry from neurology has led Levine to comment that, over the
past 30 years, psychiatry has become professionally, geographically and
managerially separate from the rest of medicine. :sup:`24` In many
places this isolation has seriously damaged psychiatry and caused major
recruitment and funding problems.

In a paper entitled ‘Wake-up Call for British Psychiatry’, Craddock *et
al* were concerned about the evolution of unclear responsibility in
psychiatry, which reduces medical student interest because of not being
‘proper doctors’, and modern psychiatry, diminishing the value of
careful diagnosis and reducing psychiatry to a ‘nonspecific
psychological support’. :sup:`25` Combining neurology and psychiatry
would reduce these problems. It is well-known that medicine and
psychiatric illness are closely allied. The merger of neurologists and
psychiatrists would improve the care of the patient at the interface and
moreover may reduce stigma. Bullmore *et al* :sup:`26` believe that the
merger would reduce stigma, however Jorm & Oh :sup:`27` did not find
that brain *v.* social aetiology affected stigma in their formal study.
Read *et al*, :sup:`28` in their review paper, said that biological
psychiatry increases stigma, whereas Bullmore *et al* :sup:`26`
suggested the opposite. This issue remains controversial and opinions as
described vary.

There is a great deal of similarity in the training of neurologists and
psychiatrists from medical school onwards. At the present time, all
psychiatrists are required to spend a minimum of 6 months to a year
working in neurology and vice versa. Joint training in neurology and
psychiatry would be helpful. These individuals would be dual trained and
would require both Royal Colleges to come together to produce this
dual-trained neurologist/psychiatrist, as happens in the USA and
Germany. Indeed, it may be easier to recruit this
neurologist/psychiatrist in the future. In a study of trainers and
trainees in psychiatry/neurology, Schon *et al* :sup:`29` found that
psychiatrists were even keener on links between neurology and psychiatry
training than neurologists, with psychiatric specialist registrars
significantly more in favour.

In conclusion, psychiatrists should return home to neurology and
medicine and leave non-medical interventions to non-medical
practitioners, for example in relation to specialist or long-term
psychotherapy. Neurologists and psychiatrists need to merge into
neuropsychiatry or some acceptable title. The merger would admittedly
not be easy, but it would be beneficial to both fields in the long term
and to patients at a clinical level.

.. [1]
   **Michael Fitzgerald** was Henry Marsh Professor Of Child And
   Adolescent Psychiatry at Trinity College, Dublin.

.. [2]
   See pp. 134–5, this issue.
