=============================
Our Encounters with Self-Harm
=============================

Elizabeth J. F. Hunt [1]_
:Date: 2015-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 54f2
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

When I was working as a junior doctor in accident and emergency, one of
my favourite jobs was suturing. A pleasant break from the constant
decision-making, an opportunity to do something practical and almost
artistic, and most of all a chance to just sit down and chat with the
patient as I stitched. Despite this, one of my least favourite tasks was
patching up those who had self-harmed. Something about the sight of the
self-inflicted wounds upset me far more than the most horrendous
accidental injuries; I tried to still be warm and not allow the distress
and disgust I felt show, but I did not know what to say and we would
often sit in silence as I worked. I had never been taught about
non-suicidal self-harm, what it serves, how to approach it, anything. It
was not until I began my psychiatric training that I began to understand
it, and became retrospectively frustrated with how I had felt and
responded to it earlier in my career. I now ensure I cover this subject
in some depth with my medical students, to try to avoid them feeling
about self-harm the way that I used to. Alternatively, I could just make
them read this book.

*Our Encounters with Self-Harm* is made up of 37 pithy chapters by
different authors. The majority are written by those who have, or still
do, self-harm, and others are by family members and professionals (the
last of which I found the least educational; an interesting reminder not
to dismiss personal accounts in an era where quantitative research often
feels the only thing that counts). Most take the form of a piece of
prose about the writer’s personal experience, followed by a short
bullet-point list of thoughts that they would like the reader to take
away from it.

These pieces are brave, articulate, occasionally harrowing, and
frequently illuminating. Since it is an anthology, unsurprisingly there
is a certain amount of repetition within the book. This is no complaint;
it serves to reinforce the most common themes such as: accept that this
is my coping mechanism, find out what it means to me, look beyond the
act of self-harm to treat the person behind it with kindness. Meanwhile,
the divergences remind us of other key points such as not making
assumptions and remembering that ‘everyone who self-harms is an
individual, so everyone’s self-harm has individual meaning’.

Buy this book and force every medical and nursing student you encounter
to read a chapter from it. I suspect it would significantly improve in
the future the care that patients presenting to accident and emergency
with self-harm receive. While you are at it, share it with your
psychiatric colleagues; a reminder of empathy and a deepening of our
understanding of our patients can never go amiss. As one of the
contributors writes, ‘whatever you learn, get it out there, you never
know who might benefit from your own experiences’.

.. [1]
   **Elizabeth J. F. Hunt** is ST4 in liaison psychiatry, Department of
   Psychological Medicine, King’s College Hospital, London, UK, email:
   elizabeth.hunt@slam.nhs.uk
