=========================================================================================
Preventing Mental Ill-Health: Informing Public Health Planning and Mental Health Practice
=========================================================================================



Benjamin Bouquet [1]_

:date: 2015-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 54f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

This book covers an ambitious breadth of material concerning the
definition, determinants and interventions for prevention of mental ill
health. The sheer scale of material covered means that the reader should
not expect an in-depth critique of all the evidence presented and this
can pose questions around the methodology and conclusions of studies.
The author notes that she is an agnostic entering the houses of such new
religions as biological psychiatry and positive psychology. Their
differing perspectives occasionally lead to a conflict in argument,
which is not always resolved. Psychiatric labels are defended for their
contribution to research, while later it is reported that improved
understanding of schizophrenia has derived from breaking the diagnosis
down into constituent symptoms.

My favourite statistic from the book is the reported finding that 2.4%
of women from a Basque-speaking rural area screened positive for
depression compared with 11% of women in a Spanish-speaking village in
the Basque region. The degree of integration in each community is cited
as an explanation, echoing the famous theories of Emile Durkheim around
suicides and social cohesion.

Despite a thought-provoking chapter on ‘society, status and
participation’, the focus of the book is very much on the individual’s
place within society. There is a good discussion of negative
consequences of housing policy and a look at unemployment and
inequality, but in terms of social determinants of mental health, I was
left wondering how to build societies with the kind of integration that
seems so protective. For the individual, the take-home message is that
what matters is to feel loved, safe, valued and in control.

.. [1]
   **Benjamin Bouquet** is public health registrar in South West London,
   email: benbouquet@gmail.com
