===============================================================================================================
Providing free heroin to addicts participating in research – ethical concerns and the question of voluntariness
===============================================================================================================



Edmund Henden
Kristine BærøeCorrespondence to Edmund Henden (edmund.henden@hioa.no)
 [1]_
:Date: 2015-2

:Abstract:
   Providing heroin to people with heroin addiction taking part in
   medical trials assessing the effectiveness of the drug as a treatment
   alternative breaches ethical research standards, some ethicists
   maintain. Heroin addicts, they say, are unable to consent voluntarily
   to taking part in these trials. Other ethicists disagree. In our
   view, both sides of the debate have an inadequate understanding of
   ‘voluntariness’. In this article we therefore offer a fuller
   definition of the concept, one which allows for a more flexible,
   case-to-case approach in which some heroin addicts are considered
   capable of consenting voluntarily, others not. An advantage of this
   approach, it is argued, is that it provides a safety net to minimise
   the risk of inflicting harm on trial participants.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In the bioethics literature, there has been considerable debate as to
whether giving heroin addicts legal access to free heroin in connection
with research on the effectiveness of heroin prescription as a treatment
alternative constitutes a breach of ethical research standards. The
ethical issue here is that the researcher must obtain the informed
consent of the study participants. For their consent to be valid,
individuals must give it voluntarily. The question is whether consent
can be said to have been given voluntarily if the person has heroin
addiction (we are assuming, of course, that they are neither intoxicated
nor experiencing withdrawal symptoms at the time of giving consent).
Those who claim that it cannot argue that it is in the nature of heroin
addiction for individuals to lose their ability to resist their desire
for heroin. Since a loss of ability means heroin addicts cannot refuse
offers of free heroin, neither can we presume that they can give
voluntary consent to take part in research that involves giving them a
choice of free heroin. :sup:`1` According to those who maintain that
consent given by heroin addicts can be valid, this argument is flawed.
Several studies show that financial concerns, fear of arrest, values
regarding parenthood and many other factors influencing decisions in
general often persuade a person addicted to heroin to cease their
drug-oriented behaviour. :sup:`2` That heroin addicts frequently respond
to such incentives means that they cannot have lost the ability to
resist their desire for heroin. We can presume, therefore, that heroin
addicts have the competence to give voluntary consent to take part in
trials involving the drug.

We want to argue that both sides in this debate are mistaken. Although
it is plausible that many – perhaps even most or all – heroin addicts
have the ability to resist their desire to take heroin, the degree to
which their consent is voluntarily given greatly depends on the wider
social and psychological circumstances under which they choose whether
to consent or not. Focusing on these circumstances rather than universal
and hard-to-verify claims about abilities of resistance allows for a
more flexible, case-to-case approach, one that does not rule out the
possibility that while some heroin addicts might be competent to give
voluntary consent, some might not. One advantage of this approach
compared with the alternatives is that it provides a safety net to
minimise the risk of inflicting harm on the individuals who participate
in these kinds of studies.

Before presenting our argument, a note of caution is in order: we do not
want to claim that the answer to the ethical question raised by research
on heroin prescription as a treatment alternative is alone sufficient to
determine whether or not such research should be carried out. Even if
the issue of voluntary consent in heroin trials was problematic, it does
not follow that prescribing heroin as a treatment alternative should
necessarily be banned. If, for example, the risks to the participants
were small or non-existent while the benefits outweighed such risks,
strategies that circumvent the normal standards of consent should indeed
be considered. One such strategy could be to appoint some surrogate
authority who is not involved in the study (e.g. a family member) to
ensure the best interests of the participant, or perhaps to relax
competence-defining criteria. :sup:`1` Whether prescribing heroin
therapeutically is an effective way of treating heroin users needs to be
determined empirically and will not be discussed here.

.. _S1:

Two concepts of ‘voluntariness’
===============================

What does it mean to say that a consent is voluntary? In the bioethics
literature it is widely agreed that a person acts voluntarily if he or
she wills the action (performs it intentionally) without being under the
controlling influence of another person or condition. :sup:`3`
Controlling influences are divided into ‘external’ and ‘internal’
depending on whether they are caused by the intentional actions of other
persons (such as different forms of coercion or manipulation) or lack of
internal self-control, an incapacity typically associated with mental
illness. Although this characterisation of voluntary action is both
plausible and, no doubt, helpful in many situations in which clinicians
have to assess a person’s capacity, we believe it is ill suited to
explaining how certain social circumstances and the beliefs they inform
might sometimes constrain choices. This is because the circumstances and
beliefs might exert a controlling influence on the person, causing them
to feel pressured into performing certain actions (like enrolling in
clinical trials, for example), without necessarily removing their
internal capacity for self-control. In fact, we believe research on the
effectiveness of heroin prescription as a treatment alternative provides
an illustration of this, as we try to show in this article. First,
however, we need to introduce another concept of ‘voluntariness’ that
comes from political and legal philosophy. :sup:`4` This will allow us
to explain how social circumstances and the beliefs they inform could
deprive a person of their voluntariness without removing their internal
capacity for self-control. We introduce it here with a view to
suggesting an alternative – and, we believe, important – perspective on
the effects addiction might be thought to have on the voluntariness of
heroin addicts’ consent that has been largely ignored in the debate
about this issue. It is worth noting that it relies on a
consequentialist ethical theory, which some readers may have objections
about. We cannot provide a full conceptual defence of this notion or its
ethical foundations here. Consequentialism, however, is a widely used
approach in much ethical analysis in the field of healthcare.

Very briefly, this alternative concept of voluntariness begins by
distinguishing between three types of options in terms of
‘acceptability’, where the standard for the acceptability of options is
an objective standard of well-being. First, there are options that one
strongly dislikes, which one holds to be ‘unacceptable’ in the sense
that they bring one’s well-being below a certain threshold. These are
options that are thoroughly bad because they involve losses it would be
unreasonable to expect anyone to bear. Second, there are options that
are undesirable but not thoroughly bad, which one holds to be
‘acceptable’ in the sense that they bring one’s well-being above a
certain threshold. These are options that have sufficient value to be
choiceworthy. Finally, there are options that bring one’s well-being up
to a high level and that one likes so much that one chooses them.
Consider then the following plausible definition of voluntary choice: a
choice is voluntary if it is not made because no other acceptable
alternative options are available. This negative definition implies the
existence of two types of situations in which a person makes a voluntary
choice. First, there are situations in which she has at least two
acceptable options and chooses one of them because, all things
considered, she prefers one option to the other. Second, there are
situations in which she has at least one option that she likes so much
that she chooses it because of that, whether or not there are any
acceptable alternative options. In neither of these cases is her reason
for making her choice not having other acceptable alternative options.
One implication of this concept of voluntariness is that whether a
choice is voluntary or not depends not just on the person’s internal
capacity for self-control, but crucially also on her *beliefs* about her
options and hence actual motivation for making the choice. As we argue
in the next section, we cannot rule out that the social circumstances
typical of many chronic heroin addicts affect their beliefs about their
options in a way that undermine the voluntariness of their consent even
if they retain their capacity for self-control (for an extended version
of this argument, see Henden, 2013). :sup:`5`

.. _S2:

Why the circumstances of heroin addicts might undermine the voluntary nature of their consent
=============================================================================================

To determine whether heroin addicts are able to give voluntary consent,
assuming the understanding of voluntariness just outlined, we need to
know something about their beliefs about their options. Of course, one
difficulty is that heroin addicts are not all alike. Their individual
circumstances including social and personal resources are likely to
differ, and their beliefs about their options are therefore likely to
differ as well. That being said, there is widespread consensus that
heroin treatment is suited to a minority of heroin users as a
second-line treatment for those individuals who do not respond to
methadone or buprenorphine treatment delivered under optimal conditions.
:sup:`6` Thus, heroin trials have essentially sought to determine the
therapeutic value of prescribing heroin to high-risk heroin users for
whom such benefits cannot be expected or achieved by existing treatment
options. :sup:`7` When discussing the competence of heroin addicts to
consent to participation in heroin trials we should therefore focus
primarily on chronic addicts with a history of repeated treatment
failure. The prevalence of health and social problems in this group of
addicts is widely acknowledged. :sup:`7` Major psychopathological
studies of heroin users report rates of comorbidity that far exceed
those of general population estimates. In addition to having high rates
of comorbidity, it is well known that many individuals with chronic
heroin addiction lead marginalised, impoverished lives, often associated
with criminal activity, anxiety and high levels of risk. Can it be ruled
out that such circumstances might create situations of constrained
choice? We believe that it cannot. To see how such a situation could
arise, consider first the option of obtaining heroin from the street.
Many individuals reach a point in their chronic heroin addiction history
in which their current lifestyles do not seem to them to be sustainable
any longer; evidence of this is that many eventually seek help for their
addiction. Presumably the costs of maintaining this lifestyle begin to
exceed the benefits. Put in the terminology introduced in the last
section, we might say that they come to consider a life centred on the
procurement of heroin to be ‘unacceptable’ in the sense of no longer
bringing their well-being above a certain threshold. Consider next the
option of abstaining from heroin. For an action to be an acceptable
option, it is not sufficient to have the ability or power to perform it.
One must also *believe* one has that ability or power. There are many
studies showing that mood disorders such as depression and anxiety lower
belief in the person’s capabilities or perceived self-efficacy. :sup:`8`
Since there is a strong correlation between mood disorders and chronic
heroin addiction, it is reasonable to assume that many heroin addicts
harbour a low sense of self-efficacy and lack confidence in their
ability to abstain from heroin. :sup:`9` Chronic heroin addiction is
associated with hopelessness about the future and a sense of
powerlessness to influence the direction one’s life is going –
reinforced by a history of failed attempts to abstain. Now, a lack of
belief in one’s own ability is clearly detrimental to one’s will. Thus,
according to a standard philosophical view, intentions involve plans of
action and such plans, in order to be rational, require the belief that
one has an acceptable chance of changing the world in ways one believes
are for the better. :sup:`10` Given this view, it would not be rational
to form intentions one believes one is not going to carry out. The
implication is that individuals with heroin addiction who have little
belief in their capacity to abstain are likely to find it extremely
difficult to form the intention to abstain. That is, since they believe
they are going to fail if they try, they are likely to lack the will to
abstain. Consequently, their commitment to changing their way of life
may be low. Since believing one has reasons not to make an effort to
exercise an ability (since one thinks it is futile) is not equivalent to
lacking the ability, the problem here is not a lack of ability. The
problem rather is an impairment of rational will due to a lack of belief
in self-efficacy. It cannot be ruled out that such impairments of the
will may lead some chronic heroin addicts to falsely believe abstinence
is a non-option.

If this is correct, everything depends on the option of taking part in
research. Will a person with chronic heroin addiction consider this
option to have a high value, not just as an acceptable way of avoiding
the hassle on the street or to get free heroin from a legal source, but
as a way of improving their well-being so much that they choose it
*because* of that? In fact, there appears to be little reason to think
so. Many heroin addicts actually refuse to take part in these studies.
In heroin trials in Switzerland, only a third of participants decided to
take part when given the choice. :sup:`11` One reason, presumably, is
that they find the costs of keeping regular appointments with healthcare
professionals too high. Chronic heroin addicts who do consent must judge
these costs as less important than the benefits associated with
obtaining free heroin. Presumably, they consider the value of obtaining
free heroin to be sufficient to make participation in research
acceptable, even if they do not consider the combined value of obtaining
free heroin and taking part in research to be very high.

To sum up, it cannot be ruled out that many chronic heroin addicts for
whom the problems of procuring the drug on the street are unacceptable,
but for whom abstinence is not an option, believe they have only one
option, which is to consent to research involving the medical provision
of heroin. Since there is evidence to suggest that they might choose
this option not because they like it very much, but because they have no
acceptable alternative options, their consent could be construed as
non-voluntary. What constrains their choice is not their desire for
heroin, but the wider social and psychological circumstances of their
heroin addiction and the beliefs about the options these circumstances
create.

Our reasoning here is, of course, hypothetical. We have no empirical
evidence of the contents of the decision-making processes in individuals
with heroin addiction (nor do we know whether any such evidence exists).
However, if it is a plausible reconstruction of what these processes
might look like given the situational constraints and our current state
of knowledge, it suffices, we believe, for our current purpose, to
provide a reason why we should not take the voluntariness of their
consent for granted.

.. _S3:

Voluntary consent and risk-minimising ethical analysis
======================================================

As we have argued, given a certain plausible conception of
voluntariness, we cannot rule out that the beliefs held by individuals
with heroin addiction about their options and hence their motivation for
action might undermine the voluntariness of their consent even if they
have the ability to resist their desire for heroin. One important reason
for this is that the wider social circumstances typical of many such
individuals may shape their beliefs about their capacity to make choices
(such as making abstinence seem impossible) and these beliefs (which may
be false) could then impair their will to abstain from heroin use. This
suggests that paying special attention to these circumstances should
form an integral part of the assessment of whether or not the person’s
consent is voluntary. However, the argument may perhaps strike some as
overly philosophical. On what basis can we decide between different
conceptions of voluntariness? Let us end with some more general
considerations in favour of the view we have presented.

According to the World Medical Association’s declaration on ethical
principles for medical research involving human subjects (the Helsinki
Declaration), the participation of human subjects in research requires
the voluntary consent of individuals who are considered competent to
give their consent
(`www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/ <www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/>`__).
What makes it so ethically challenging to assess whether, in the case of
heroin research, a person is competent to give their consent voluntarily
is, of course, that we have no uncontroversial concept of voluntariness
that applies to the specific circumstances of heroin addicts, and we
have no direct access to the mental processes of the consenting
individual to accurately appraise whatever conception we lean towards.
This means that judgements about voluntary consent will always involve
uncertainty. How can we best deal with this uncertainty? An ethical way
of justifying why one approach is chosen over another might be to
compare the potential harm these approaches may inflict on the research
participants. Such an overall account of harm will have to reflect the
inherent uncertainty of the assessment and also include considerations
of harm potentially caused by a flawed assessment.

In this article we have identified three different approaches to consent
in individuals with heroin addiction:

a person’s desire for heroin rules out any ability to choose freely
between receiving heroin or not, hence we should presume that no heroin
addict can voluntarily consent to medically prescribed heroin; heroin
addicts have the ability to choose freely between receiving heroin or
not, hence we should presume that all heroin addicts can voluntarily
consent to medically prescribed heroin; the social and psychological
circumstances of some individuals with heroin addiction might be such
that we cannot presume that they can voluntarily consent to medically
prescribed heroin.

Which of these approaches would minimise the harm inflicted on the
person if they were used to inform an assessment of their competence to
give voluntary consent?

Consider (a). There may be circumstances in which it might be better for
some individuals with heroin addiction to receive free heroin under
medical supervision than getting it on the street. That is, the harm
inflicted on these addicts by obtaining heroin on the street might
greatly exceed the potential harm resulting from participation in heroin
trials, because of mistaken assumptions about valid consent. Thus, these
addicts might end up worse off than if (a) had not been used as the
basis for an assessment of voluntary consent. Ironically, the protective
safety net of the ethical standard of valid consent breaks down in this
case, and in fact inflicts more harm than if the standard were ignored.
Next, consider (b). The circumstances of many individuals addicted to
heroin might suggest that they have some chance of succeeding in
abstinence-based drug treatment programmes. However, this option of
trying to achieve a life free of heroin is effectively ruled out if they
receive heroin medication on a regular basis. Consequently, the harm
these individuals may suffer could be considerable if their consent is
accepted as valid without further questioning. Again, they could end up
worse off than if we had not used (b) as the basis of the assessment of
voluntary consent. Finally, consider (c). This approach differs from (a)
and (b) by focusing on the particular person’s social and psychological
circumstances (including motivating beliefs) as the basis of the
assessment, rather than on universal and hard-to-verify claims about
abilities of resistance of persons with heroin addiction. It therefore
allows for a more flexible, case-to-case approach, one that neither
rules out competence to consent voluntarily nor rules it in. This option
would minimise the risk of inflicting more harm than if (c) had not been
applied. Consequently, the potential of inflicting harm by assuming this
approach is smaller compared with (a) and (b).

.. _S4:

Conclusion
==========

Philosophy and medicine are inherent to mental healthcare. Clinical
assessments of mental non-observable categories rely on adequate
philosophical conceptualisations. Since the adequacy of these
conceptualisations cannot be settled *a priori* and uncertainty will
always be involved whenever attempts are made to confirm or reject their
appropriateness *a posteriori*, philosophy offers a means of identifying
the most apt conceptualisation according to a risk-minimising ethical
analysis. An assessment of capacity for voluntary consent in individuals
with heroin addiction should be based on an approach that minimises the
risk of harming them more than if the approach were not applied.
According to our argument, focusing on addicts’ social and psychological
circumstances (including motivating beliefs) as the basis of an
assessment rather than their abilities of resistance is the most apt
approach in this regard. We therefore suggest that this approach to the
assessment of participant consent should guide and inform an ethical
practice of including and excluding heroin addicts in research on heroin
provision.

.. [1]
   **Edmund Henden** is a philosopher and professor at the Centre for
   the Study of Professions (SPS), Oslo and Akershus University College
   of Applied Sciences, Norway and researcher at the Centre for the
   Study of Mind in Nature (CSMN), University of Oslo, Norway;
   **Kristine Bærøe** is an ethicist and Associate Professor at the
   Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, Faculty of
   Medicine and Dentistry, University of Bergen, Norway.
