==========================================================
Newspaper reporting of homicide-suicide and mental illness
==========================================================



Sandra Flynn
Linda Gask
Jenny Shaw
:Correspondence: Dr Sandra Flynn
(sandra.m.flynn@manchester.ac.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method**

   To explore the portrayal of homicide-suicide in newspaper articles,
   particularly how mental illness was reported. We carried out a
   qualitative study in England and Wales (2006-2008). Data from
   newspaper articles obtained via the LexisNexis database were used to
   examine a consecutive series of 60 cases.

   **Results**

   A fascination with extreme violence, vulnerable victims and having
   someone to blame made homicide-suicides newsworthy. Some offenders
   were portrayed in a stereotypical manner and pejorative language was
   used to describe mental illness. The findings showed evidence of
   inaccurate and speculative reference to mental disorder in newspaper
   reports.

   **Clinical implications**

   The media should avoid speculation on people's mental state. Accurate
   reporting is essential to reduce stigma of mental illness, which may
   in turn encourage people to seek help if they experience similar
   emotional distress.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Homicide-suicide refers to an individual who commits homicide and
subsequently takes their own life. There is no standardised definition
regarding the time between the two incidents. A 3-day period has
previously been taken as a cut-off point, the rationale being that a
24-hour cut-off is too restrictive. Mental state is likely to remain the
same over a period of days and the two events are therefore connected,
but reasons for the suicide may begin to change in excess of 3
days.\ :sup:`1,2` These incidents attract widespread coverage in local
and national newspapers. Consequently, the way they are reported informs
both the general public's understanding of these incidents and their
attitude towards offender and victim.\ :sup:`3-5` Therefore, it is
important that the circumstances are reported accurately, particularly
when incidents involve people with mental illness. For instance, there
is an association between certain methods of reporting suicide and
increased suicide risk in young people and vulnerable adults (i.e.
contagion).\ :sup:`6-8` In addition, it has been uncovered that 14% of
articles in the print media in 2011 referred to people with mental
illness as a ‘danger to others’,\ :sup:`9` reinforcing the stereotype
that people with mental illness are violent. Speculating on a person's
mental state without evidence is as stigmatising as the use of
derogatory language. The UK ‘Time to Change’ campaign, led by the
charities Mind and Rethink Mental Illness, aims to encourage the media
to promote positive attitudes towards mental illness.\ :sup:`10` If
successful, this may encourage people to seek help.

This is the first study to examine newspaper reporting of mental illness
in homicide-suicide. We aimed to explore how UK newspapers reported
incidents of homicide-suicide and how mental illness was reported in
relation to these cases.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Study design
------------

The findings presented are from a larger, mixed-method study of
homicide-suicide undertaken by the National Confidential Inquiry into
Suicide and Homicide by People with Mental Illness (NCISH) (details
available from the authors on request). In brief, 60 cases of
homicide-suicide were reported to NCISH by the Home Office Statistics
Unit of Home Office Science and by individual police services. The
offences occurred between 1 January 2006 and 31 December 2008 in England
and Wales. The inclusion criteria for these incidents were that the
suicide occurred within 3 days of the homicide and that a coroner
returned a verdict of unlawful killing for the victim and suicide/open
verdict for the offender. Additional information on each case was sought
from coroner's files, police records, newspapers, general practitioner
medical records and mental health service records. A diagnosis of mental
disorder was determined from the offender's medical records.

.. _S3:

Data collection and sample
--------------------------

A search was undertaken for newspaper articles pertaining to the 60
cases of homicide-suicide. The LexisNexis database
(`www.lexisnexis.com <www.lexisnexis.com>`__) was consulted to locate
articles published between January 2006 (the date of the first offence)
and September 2012 (the date when analysis commenced), allowing time for
the legal process to be concluded and reported in the media.

Searches of all local and national UK newspapers were undertaken,
including tabloid and broadsheet publications, which ensured the data
were representative and encapsulated a range of journalistic styles and
biases. The victims' and offenders' names were used as search terms
rather than the generic phrase ‘homicide-suicide’. In instances where
individual searches yielded thousands of returns owing to common names,
the term ‘suicide’ or ‘homicide’ was added to the search. In instances
where there were no returns or the count was low, alternative spellings,
name variants or known aliases were used. In six incidents where no
articles were returned on LexisNexis, an additional search of online
news media was undertaken.

.. _S4:

Missing data
------------

After an extensive search, newspaper reports were obtained on 54
incidents (90%); no articles were found on 6 incidents (10%). It is
possible that these events were not reported in the media; a previous
study found only 62% of homicide-suicides were reported in national
newspapers.\ :sup:`11` Consequently, we felt that 10% missing data was
within an acceptable range that would not bias the findings and would
retain the generalisability of the results.

.. _S5:

Quantitative analysis
---------------------

Descriptive statistics were generated to provide context for these
homicide-suicide incidents and limited information has been presented.
The results were reported using 95% confidence intervals. The analysis
was undertaken using Stata version 12. If an item of information was not
known for a case, the case was removed from the analysis of that item;
the denominator in all estimates was the number of valid cases for each
item and it indicates the number of missing cases per item.

.. _S6:

Qualitative analysis
--------------------

The analysis of documents was undertaken in accordance with the
principles set out by Hodder (2003).\ :sup:`12` A systematic and
comprehensive approach was adopted by applying framework analysis which
involves five key stages: familiarisation, identifying a thematic
framework, indexing, charting, and mapping and
interpretation.\ :sup:`13` Each article was read and an iterative coding
process was undertaken until saturation was reached. The themes were
subsequently refined into three domains. The coding was carried out by
S.F. and themes were discussed with L.G. and J.S.. Data were analysed
using MAXQDA version 10 (`www.maxqda.com <www.maxqda.com>`__). The
approach differs from other qualitative analysis methods in stages four
and five as it enables the data to be managed into a series of matrices
whereby the data can be explored by theme and by case.\ :sup:`14` This
systematic, yet flexible, approach was preferred to other methods owing
to the volume of data collected. Alternative methods to analyse media
coverage used in previous research, such as content analysis with
predetermined ‘deductive’ coding structures,\ :sup:`15` latent class
analysis\ :sup:`16` or multivariate analysis,\ :sup:`17` were not
considered appropriate for this data.

.. _S7:

Confidentiality and anonymity
-----------------------------

The main data source were newspaper articles. Details of these incidents
are therefore in the public domain.

.. _S8:

Ethical approval
----------------

The study received the Medical Research and Ethics Committee (MREC)
approval on 9 April 2008 and is registered under the Data Protection
Act. The study was granted exemption under section 251 of the National
Health Service Act 2006 (formerly Section 60 of the Health and Social
Care Act 2001), enabling access to confidential and identifiable
information without informed consent in the interest of improving
patient care (approved 23 October 2008).

.. _S9:

Results
=======

.. _S10:

Description of the sample
-------------------------

Over a 3-year period (2006-2008), 60 incidents of homicide-suicide were
identified in England and Wales. Newspaper articles were obtained on 54
(90%) of these cases. Overall, 16 323 articles were found on these
incidents. Duplicate articles (repeated in later editions) were excluded
and the content was filtered for relevance. A total of 1163 articles
were used in the analysis, an average of 22 per incident (range 0-115).
The characteristics of offenders and victims are presented in `Table
1 <#T1>`__. Most offenders were male, with a median age of 44, and over
a quarter were from a Black and minority ethnic group. The victims were
most commonly the offenders' spouse/partner or ex-spouse/partner, or
their child. Nearly two-thirds of the offenders had a history of mental
disorder.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Characteristics of offenders and victims

   ======================================= ======== ======
   \                                       *n* (%)  95% CI
   ======================================= ======== ======
   Offender (*n* = 60)                              
     Median age, years (range): 44 (18–85)          
     Gender: male                          53 (88%) 80–97
     Black and minority ethnic group       17 (29%) 17–41
     History of mental illness             33 (62%) 49–76
     from medical records                           
   \                                                
   Victim (*n* = 70)                                
     Median age, years (range): 38 (1–85)           
     Gender: female                        54 (77%) 67–87
     Black and minority ethnic group       14(18%)  10–30
     Relationship to the offender:                  
       Spouse/partner or ex-spouse/partner 45 (64%  53–76
       Child                               20 (29%) 18–39
   ======================================= ======== ======

Three themes emerged from the qualitative analysis: characteristics that
made these incidents newsworthy: how homicide-suicides were reported and
the accuracy of newspaper reports of mental illness compared with the
information contained in the deceased's medical records (`Table
2 <#T2>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Themes emerging from newspaper analysis

   +----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
   |                                  | Sub-theme                        |
   +==================================+==================================+
   | Theme 1: What makes              | Fascination with extreme         |
   | homicide-suicide newsworthy?     | violence and personal            |
   |                                  | tragedyCharacteristics of        |
   |                                  | victims and offendersHaving      |
   |                                  | someone to blame                 |
   +----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
   | Theme 2: How are                 | Offender stereotypesThe          |
   | homicide-suicides reported?      | offender's personalityMental     |
   |                                  | illness                          |
   +----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
   | Theme 3: Accuracy of newspaper   | Speculation that the incident    |
   | reports of mental illness        | was motivated by mental illness  |
   +----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

.. _S11:

What makes homicide-suicide newsworthy?
---------------------------------------

.. _S12:

Fascination with extreme violence and personal tragedy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tabloid newspapers exhibited a fascination with the level of violence
involved in the incident. More often this referred to the violence
against the victim in the homicide rather than the suicide. Graphic
descriptions were used in the headlines, presumably in an attempt to
attract readers. An example of a headline that illustrates the
sensationalist nature of the reporting is: ‘CRAZED; EXCLUSIVE: Dad hacks
toddler son to death and then kills himself’ (*The Mirror*, 2 September
2006).

.. _S13:

Characteristics of victims
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The newsworthiness of these incidents was also associated with the
characteristics of the victim. The deaths of vulnerable or innocent
victims added a further tragic element to the story. In addition to
labelling the victims and offenders as good or evil, the status of the
victim was elevated due to their profession. When reporting on the
deaths of two police officers, one in the line of duty while responding
to a serious incident, the language used emphasised the bravery of the
victim while simultaneously showing disdain for the offender: “HERO cop
[victim] was shot dead yesterday when a gunman went berserk during a
furious row with his girlfriend. [The victim] was part of a police armed
response unit called out to a domestic dispute after crazed [offender]
armed himself with a hunting rifle (*The Sun*, 4 October 2007).”

.. _S14:

Apportioning blame
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was increased newspaper coverage when the details of the
homicide-suicide were used to highlight failure by services. In one
article, the offender's personal responsibility was marginalised and the
focus turned towards perceived institutional failings, for which the
newspaper blamed the prime minister: “‘Perhaps our PM and members of his
government might like to imagine some inept social services bod bursting
into THEIR home uninvited and removing their partner by force, saying:
“It'll be better for everyone.” What's better for old people is that
they feel safe and secure, and how the hell can they feel that when
social-services Nazis tear them away from the one person left in the
world who loves and understands them? The only person who remembers them
as they were – strong and vibrant – not dependent on a state that
doesn't give a stuff about them?’ (*News of the World*, 18 May 2008)”

.. _S15:

How are the homicide-suicides reported?
---------------------------------------

We found markedly different styles of reporting between broadsheet and
tabloid newspapers. A considerable number of articles reported short,
factual accounts of the incident. By contrast, where the reports were
opinion-based, these articles provided valuable insight as to how the
offenders were perceived and portrayed to the general public.

.. _S16:

Offender stereotypes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The portrayal of homicide-suicide in the media seemed to reinforce
stereotypes and oversimplify the context of these events. For example,
it was common for elderly couples with declining health to be described
as being ‘devoted to each other’. Journalists assumed an empathic
attitude toward the offender and the couple's situation in general.
Commonly referred to as ‘mercy killings’, a similar sympathetic tone was
observed in cases of filicide by mothers where a child was killed for
perceived altruistic reasons. However, fathers who killed their children
did not receive the same level of sympathy, even when they experienced
similar emotional distress before the homicide. In one article, the
newspaper reported a mother's defence of her son's actions, in which two
of her grandchildren died. This sentiment was subsequently criticised in
the article, presumably to reinforce the message to the reader that
there was no excuse for the offender's actions and he did not deserve
any sympathy.

.. _S17:

The offender's personality
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Direct quotations from family and friends were commonly used to generate
a profile of the offender. These descriptions provided insight into how
the person was perceived, and consequently, the image created of the
offender in the media. Each case of homicide-suicide generated numerous
articles in a range of publications. The witness descriptions of the
perpetrator differed depending on the newspaper and the informant
quoted. The contrast in the portrayal of the same offender is
demonstrated: “‘Everyone is stunned and no one can believe it. He was
such a nice bloke, he'd do anything for anyone and was very helpful and
he absolutely loved his children.’ (*Daily Telegraph*, 23 September
2008)‘There was something weird about him. I knew [he] wasn't right in
the head. He was an attention-seeking control freak who had a thing
about teenage girls.’ (*News of the World*, 28 September 2008)”

.. _S18:

Mental illness
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Comments regarding the offender's perceived mental state were prominent
in several newspaper headlines. Whereas most descriptions were written
with sensitivity, there were some exceptions to this, notably from the
tabloid press: ‘Nut free to kill for 3rd time’ (*The Sun*, 18 March
2006), ‘PSYCHO DADDY; Father strangled mum of his 4 kids then hung
himself at home’ (*The Mirror*, 12 March 2009).

.. _S19:

Accuracy of newspaper reports of mental illness
-----------------------------------------------

.. _S20:

Speculation that the incident was motivated by mental illness
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Newspapers are produced for commercial reasons and articles are written
for specific audiences. We found the majority of the homicide-suicide
incidents involving people with a history of mental illness were
reported responsibly and newspapers did not stigmatise the offender.
However, it was observed that some newspapers published speculative
comments concerning the offender's mental state, without being able to
substantiate these claims: “‘She must have had a very troubled mind to
do what she did. We can't imagine why she said to people she had cancer;
she may have been suffering from some sort of mental illness. We are not
aware of any mental health issues but that is something we shall be
looking into.’ (*Birmingham Evening Mail*, 12 December 2007)‘I would
describe him as a psychopath. I saw him attack his brother with a hammer
then run after him with a knife in the street.’ (*Yorkshire Post*, 9
March 2009)” In addition to the speculation regarding diagnoses,
reporters often seemed to select quotations from witnesses that provided
a default assumption of mental illness when there was seemingly no other
plausible explanation. For example, they referred to the offender having
‘cracked’, ‘snapped’, ‘flipped’ or ‘gone berserk’. Although these terms
appear in direct quotations from witnesses who knew the offender, the
words imply the offender had experienced a mental health crisis at the
time of the offence, yet no supporting evidence was provided to
substantiate this.

.. _S21:

Discussion
==========

.. _S22:

Newspaper interest in homicide-suicide
--------------------------------------

We found that homicide-suicides were highly newsworthy, with 90%
reported in national and local newspapers, an average of 22 articles per
incident. There are aspects of these offences which made them of public
interest, notably they involved multiple victims, the majority of whom
were intimate family members, consistent with previous
research.\ :sup:`18` Our data showed that extreme violence towards the
victim, characteristics of the victim and the perceived failure of
services to intervene in certain circumstances added to their media
appeal. Emotive language, particularly in headlines, was used to attract
the attention of the reader, which was consistent with findings from
previous studies.\ :sup:`17,19`

.. _S23:

Reporting mental illness responsibly
------------------------------------

In this study, we found the complexity of the events was often lost in
the reporting. People who committed these acts were often assigned
labels and portrayed in a stereotypical manner. We found evidence of
derogatory language used to describe mental illness, such as ‘nut’ or
‘psycho’, although the majority of articles referred to people with
mental illness more sensitively. This finding is consistent with a
recent study undertaken by researchers at the Institute of Psychiatry in
the UK which showed a decrease in the number of articles using
pejorative language and referring to people with mental illness as being
dangerous. The data also showed a simultaneous increase in
anti-stigmatising newspaper articles and positive mental health
promotion. However, the research reported no overall change in the
proportion of stigmatising articles between 2008 and 2011.\ :sup:`15`

.. _S24:

Speculating on offender's mental state
--------------------------------------

Evidence of newspaper speculation on an individual's mental state
without any corroborating medical evidence was an important finding of
this study. Labelling offenders as ‘psychopaths’ not only stigmatises
the deceased, it also causes distress to the surviving family members.
Previous research has shown how relatives of people who carried out a
homicide or suicide experienced additional anguish due to the person's
portrayal in the media.\ :sup:`20,21` Even where the evidence is
lacking, reporters chose to reinforce the perception that mental illness
is the only credible explanation for the offender's actions. This
conjecture promotes a widespread belief that ‘all’ people who commit
homicide-suicide must have been mentally ill, when in many cases mental
illness was not a feature. Data from the larger study of
homicide-suicide have shown that 38% of offenders had no history of
mental illness, consistent with a similar study in the USA.\ :sup:`22`
Guidance published by the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention and
partners suggests that careful newspaper coverage could help to change
these misconceptions.\ :sup:`23` Similarly, guidance for the media by
Time to Change\ :sup:`10` suggests to journalists: ‘Don't speculate
about someone's mental health being a factor in the story unless you
know it to be 100% true’. A further ‘reporting tip’ asks journalist to
consider: ‘Who are your sources? Can you rely on eyewitnesses or
neighbours to provide facts or has an assumption been made about
someone's mental health status?’ Examples of language that should or
should not be used to avoid the perception of dangerousness are also
detailed.

.. _S25:

Limitations
-----------

Newspaper databases such as LexisNexis have been criticised for not
being comprehensive and have been described as inconsistent and
incomplete.\ :sup:`24` Previous research has shown that content (i.e.
news wire stories) could have been removed before archiving;
consequently, the original news content could be different from the
archived version, which can introduce error.\ :sup:`24` Restrictive
search terms could also lead to articles being missed. However, in this
study the use of the individuals' names in the search in conjunction
with terms such as homicide or suicide made missing data less likely.

It is possible that mental illness was underreported, either through the
reporter's lack of interest in the offender's mental health history or
because they were unable to access medical information. Websdale &
Alvarez\ :sup:`25` suggested that at the time of the incident the
pivotal features of an article for journalists are ‘the crime-scene, the
victims, and the aftermath of these killings’.

Homicide-suicide attracts a disproportionate amount of media attention.
Although the number of incidents per year may be relatively small, the
excessive and prominent newspaper reporting will inevitably influence
our perception of these incidents and inform our understanding of the
motivation for these acts. Previous research has shown an association
between mental illness and homicide-suicide and this remains an
important risk factor.\ :sup:`18` Consequently, we would encourage the
accurate reporting of mental illness in the media and advocating
help-seeking behaviour in people who may be experiencing similar
emotional distress. This is particularly important for men following the
breakdown of a long-standing intimate relationship.\ :sup:`26`

The study was carried out as part of the National Confidential Inquiry
into Suicide and Homicide by People with Mental Illness. We acknowledge
the help of HM Coroners, Police Services, particularly Greater
Manchester Police, and primary care trusts for providing access to data.

.. [1]
   **Dr Sandra Flynn** PhD is a Research Fellow and **Professor Jenny
   Shaw** PhD, FRCPsych is Professor of Forensic Psychiatry, National
   Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide by People with Mental
   Illness, Centre for Mental Health and Risk, Institute of Brain
   Behaviour and Mental Health, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences,
   University of Manchester, Manchester. **Professor Linda Gask** PhD,
   FRCPsych, FRCGP is Honorary Professor of Primary Care Psychiatry,
   National Primary Care Research and Development Centre (NPCRDC),
   Institute of Population Health, Faculty of Medical and Human
   Sciences, University of Manchester.
