================================================================
The application of mental health legislation in younger children
================================================================



Victoria Thomas
Barry Chipchase
Lisa Rippon
Paul McArdle

:Correspondence: Victoria Thomas
(victoria.thomas@ntw.nhs.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   We review a case history of a young child who was admitted to an
   in-patient mental health unit due to extremely challenging behaviour
   and review the legal issues that had to be considered in ensuring
   that there was appropriate legal authority for the child's admission
   and treatment. In this particular case, the patient was detained for
   assessment under section 2 of the Mental Health Act 1983. This case
   demonstrates that all clinicians working in this area require a good
   understanding of the law in relation to treatment of children with
   mental disorder, which is extremely complex.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _S1:

Competence, parental responsibility and zone of parental control
================================================================

Much of the debate around consent to treatment by young children has
focused on competence. ‘A child who has attained sufficient
understanding and intelligence to be able to understand fully what is
involved in the proposed intervention will be regarded as competent to
consent’.\ :sup:`1` This concept is known as Gillick
competence.\ :sup:`2`

However, especially for younger children, persons with parental
responsibility are, in general, responsible for treatment decisions.
Parental responsibility is defined by the Children Act 1989 as ‘all the
rights, duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which by law a
parent of a child has in relation to the child and his property’. The
Code of Practice for the Mental Health Act\ :sup:` [2]_` advises that
the person responsible for the care and treatment of the patient must
determine whether a person with parental responsibility has the
capacity, within the meaning of the Mental Capacity Act 2005, to make a
decision about the child or young person's treatment and whether the
decision is within the ‘zone of parental control’.\ :sup:`3` The ‘zone
of parental control’ is a concept derived largely from European Court of
Human Rights case law and has become central to parent-related
decision-making.\ :sup:`3,4`

Although not a clearly defined concept,\ :sup:`5` there are guidelines
in the Code about whether a particular decision falls within the zone of
parental control. There are two key questions.\ :sup:`3` First, ‘is the
decision one that a parent would be expected to make, having regard both
to what is considered to be normal practice in our society and to any
relevant human rights decisions made by the courts’? Second, ‘are there
no indications that the parent might not act in the best interests of
the child or young person’? The less confident a professional is that
they can answer ‘yes’ to both questions, the more likely it will be that
the decision falls outside the zone.

.. _S2:

The zone of parental control and deprivation of liberty
-------------------------------------------------------

The Code acknowledges that the parameters of the zone will vary from one
case to the next, but the following factors should be considered: the
nature and invasiveness of what is to be done to the patient (including
the extent to which their liberty will be curtailed); whether the
patient is resisting; the general social standards in force at the time
concerning the sort of decisions it is acceptable for parents to make;
the age, maturity and understanding of the child or young person; and
the extent to which a parent's interests may conflict with those of the
child or young person. Certain treatments that could be considered
particularly invasive or controversial, for example electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT), are likely to be considered to fall outside the zone of
parental control.\ :sup:`3`

Decisions that would result in a deprivation of liberty will be outside
the zone, as detention engages the article 5 rights of the child
(Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
right to liberty and security) and a parent may not lawfully detain or
authorise the detention of a child.\ :sup:`6` There is no specific
definition of deprivation of liberty, but various factors have been
identified that are likely to be relevant; for example, the use of
restraint (including sedation) to admit a person to an institution where
that person is resisting admission; staff exercising complete and
effective control over the care and movement of a person for a
significant period; and the person being unable to maintain social
contacts because of restrictions placed on their access to other people.
A recent judgment from the Supreme Court,\ :sup:`7` commonly referred to
as the Cheshire West case, has provided a clear ‘acid test’ on the
meaning of deprivation of liberty. The Supreme Court has made it clear
that, for a person to be deprived of their liberty, they must be subject
both to continuous supervision and control and not be free to leave. The
Supreme Court also held that, in all cases, the following are not
relevant to the application of the test: (1) the person's compliance or
lack of objection; (2) the relative normality of the placement (whatever
the comparison made); and (3) the reason or purpose behind a particular
placement.

One of the matters the Court considered in the Cheshire West case was
whether children could be deprived of their liberty in the family home.
It was noted that all children are (or could be) subject to some level
of restraint. The necessity for this adjusted with their maturation and
change in circumstances. The Court expressed the view that ‘very young
children … because of their youth and dependence on others, have – an
objectively ascertainable – curtailment of their liberty but this is a
condition common to all children of tender age. There is no question,
therefore, of suggesting that infant children are deprived of their
liberty in the normal family setting.’ In the case of children living at
home with either birth or adoptive parents, Lord Neuberger said that:
‘what might otherwise be a deprivation of liberty would normally not
give rise to an infringement of article 5 [of the Convention] because it
will have been imposed not by the state, but by virtue of what the
Strasbourg court has called “the rights of the holder of parental
authority”.’ Foster placements were viewed differently because children
would generally have been placed in this environment by local
authorities and therefore if there was a deprivation of liberty it would
be ‘imputable’ to the state.

Prior to the Cheshire West case, many clinicians viewed the level of
supervision in place in a hospital environment as amounting to a
restriction, rather than a deprivation, of liberty. Since the case,
there have not been any reported cases specifically considering the
position of children and young people in hospital. It is inevitable
however that, in the wake of the judgment, a number of children and
young people who lack competence or capacity to consent to their
admission to hospital and who are being treated on an informal basis
will need to be assessed to evaluate whether they are being deprived of
their liberty.

Hence, there will be situations where neither the consent of the patient
nor parental consent may be relied on and an alternative legal authority
for treatment will be necessary. The following case example demonstrates
how clinicians working with children and young people are now required
to manage difficult clinical scenarios within a complicated legal
framework. Here we describe the reasoning behind the use of the Mental
Health Act 1983 in an unusually young patient. We have been unable to
find a published example of use of the Act in such a young child.

.. _S3:

Case study
==========

B was an eight-year-old boy admitted to a child and adolescent mental
health in-patient unit as an emergency, because of extremely challenging
behaviour. He had been referred to his local community child and
adolescent mental health service several months previously and was
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. He also exhibited features of
hyperkinetic conduct disorder. He was subject to a child protection plan
and accommodated by the local authority on a voluntary basis at the time
of admission. Because of episodes of extreme unprovoked aggression and
sexualised behaviour B had been excluded from a special school and two
foster placements had broken down.

On admission, B received a comprehensive package of care, which included
assessments and interventions by nursing and medical staff,
psychologists and other therapists. He received a carefully structured
intervention involving nurses experienced with younger children, play
therapy, education appropriate to his developmental level and medication
(methylphenidate). B was nursed away from the older adolescents within a
self-contained children's area of the in-patient ward. He had two
members of nursing staff with him at all times because of his
challenging behaviours, including highly sexualised behaviour, physical
aggression and destruction of property. He required regular, difficult
restraints involving up to four members of staff at a time, and
occasional use of seclusion to maintain his own safety and the safety of
others.The Code of Practice for the Mental Health Act advises that
seclusion of an informal patient should be taken as an indication of the
need to consider formal detention.\ :sup:`3`

With legal advice from trust and local authority solicitors, it was
agreed that as long as B met criteria for detention under the Mental
Health Act 1983, this was the preferred route. The ‘least restriction’
principle of the Act suggests that detention under the Act should be the
last resort. However, it is undoubtedly necessary in cases where the
option for informal admission is not appropriate or the risks in
managing the child informally are too great. A patient may be detained
under section 2 of the Mental Health Act 1983 for a period of assessment
of up to 28 days. The application is based on the recommendations of two
medical doctors, and an approved mental health practitioner is the
applicant. The professionals must be satisfied that the following
grounds are met: the person is suffering from a mental disorder of a
nature or degree which warrants their detention in hospital for
assessment (or for assessment followed by treatment) for at least a
limited period; andthe person ought to be so detained in the interests
of their own health or safety or with a view to the protection of others
(para. 4.2).\ :sup:`3` In this case, B both had mental disorder (autism
spectrum disorder and hyperkinetic conduct disorder) and was presenting
in a way that put his own safety, and that of others, at risk.

Following a Mental Health Act assessment and close consultation with
local authority and trust legal services, B was detained under section
2. B appealed to the mental health tribunal with the assistance of his
independent mental health advocate and solicitor. His detention was
upheld. During the period of detention, the local authority obtained an
interim care order and acquired parental responsibility. The local
authority questioned whether it would be able to agree to B being in
hospital informally, however, the clinical team felt that the treatment
decisions about restraint and seclusion required fell outside of the
zone of parental control, regardless of who had parental responsibility.
B's behaviours did begin to settle and he gradually ceased to require
the restraint and seclusion that he had earlier in his admission. He was
therefore discharged from section 2 shortly before the end of the 28-day
period and remained on the ward as an informal patient while an
appropriate community placement could be identified. Following several
months' intervention it was possible to discharge B safely to a
children's home, where he has not required restraint.

.. _S4:

Discussion
==========

Detention of such a young child using the Mental Health Act 1983 is
unusual and we could find no published case that would discuss this,
although, anecdotally, others have faced similar decisions.

In this case, the team was confident that B's age and immaturity
prevented him from being regarded as Gillick competent and therefore he
could not provide authority for his own admission and treatment. Both of
B's parents had parental responsibility and were supportive of his
admission to hospital. Initially, the clinical team had relied on their
agreement. However, in the light of B's deprivation of liberty parental
consent to treat him could not be relied upon. In addition, the child
protection plan raised concerns about the parents' ability to act in the
best interests of the child. The team therefore decided that the
decisions that now needed to be made about B fell outside of the zone of
parental control.

In emergency situations, a doctor can lawfully treat a child even if
there is no time to obtain valid consent.This is known as the doctrine
of necessity. The Code of Practice for the Mental Health Act advises
that: ‘In such cases, the courts have stated that doubt should be
resolved in favour of the preservation of life, and it will be
acceptable to undertake treatment to preserve life or prevent
irreversible serious deterioration of the patient's condition’ (para.
36.51).\ :sup:`3` In B's case, incidents of extremely challenging
behaviour required urgent intervention, but these were frequent and
repetitive and therefore the clinical team was unable to rely on the
doctrine of necessity.

If a child is subject to a care order or emergency protection order
under the Children Act 1989, the local authority acquires parental
responsibility (Children Act 1989 s 33(3)(a) and s 44(4)(c),
respectively). Section 25 of the Children Act 1989 can be used to detain
a person with mental disorder under a secure accommodation order, but
only if the primary purpose of detention is not to provide treatment for
mental disorder, for example, if detention is required to maintain the
safety of someone who exhibits severe behavioural disturbance. A child
subject to a section 25 order does not have to be subject to an interim
care order. The Children Act 1989 does not, however, specifically
address mental disorder, does not provide specific powers to enforce
treatment, and does not provide specific safeguards for the rights of
the detained patient.\ :sup:`8` B needed to be in hospital for further
treatment of his mental disorder and therefore a secure accommodation
order was not judged appropriate at that time.

In some situations, particularly if there are disputes between the
family and the treating clinician or between family members, or if other
authorities for treatment are not appropriate, there should be recourse
to the courts. The High Court can use its inherent jurisdiction to make
decisions that it considers to be in the child's best interests. Some
issues may be resolved by section 8 orders made under the Children Act
1989. B met the criteria for detention under section 2 of the Mental
Health Act and therefore the legal authority for B's assessment and
treatment was provided without a court application needing to be made.

Detention under the Mental Health Act 1983 provides the child with a
number of important safeguards, such as the right to appeal against
detention. The 2007 amendments to the Act have resulted in greater
protections for the rights of children and young people, for example the
duty to ensure an age-appropriate environment (s 131A) and further
safeguards for ECT (s 58A).

It is important that clinicians working with children with mental
disorders equip themselves with a good understanding of the law and its
application, in order that the appropriate legal authority for admission
and treatment is used, taking into account all of the needs of the
patient and the relevant factors of each case. The Mental Health Act
1983 can be appropriately applied to children, as this case illustrates.

We are grateful to B's parents for giving their consent for this paper,
to the Redburn nursing staff, and to Camilla Parker and Anthony Harbour
for their comments on an early draft of this paper.

.. [1]
   **Victoria Thomas** is a specialty doctor, **Barry Chipchase**,
   **Lisa Rippon** and **Paul McArdle** are consultant psychiatrists,
   all at Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, Ferndene,
   Prudhoe, Northumberland, UK.

.. [2]
   This article was completed before the publication of the new Code of
   Practice for the Mental Health Act 1983.
