=================================================================================================
Lurasidone: a novel antipsychotic agent for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar depression
=================================================================================================

Antony Loebel
Leslie CitromeCorrespondence to: Leslie Citrome
(citrome@cnsconsultant.com)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   Lurasidone is a novel antipsychotic agent approved for the treatment
   of schizophrenia in a number of countries including the UK, and is
   also approved in the USA and Canada for the treatment of major
   depressive episodes associated with bipolar I disorder as either a
   monotherapy or adjunctive therapy with lithium or valproate. In
   addition to full antagonist activity at dopamine D\ :sub:`2`
   (*K*\ :sub:`i(D2)` = 1 nM) and serotonin 5-HT\ :sub:`2`\ A
   (*K*\ :sub:`i(5-HT\ 2\ A)` = 0.5 nM) receptors, the pharmacodynamic
   profile of lurasidone is notable for its high affinity for serotonin
   5-HT7 receptors (*K*\ :sub:`i(5-HT\ 7)` = 0.5 nM) and its partial
   agonist activity at 5-HT\ :sub:`1`\ A receptors
   (*K*\ :sub:`i(5-HT\ 1\ A)` = 6.4 nM). Long-term treatment of
   schizophrenia with lurasidone has been shown to reduce the risk of
   relapse. Lurasidone appears associated with minimal effects on body
   weight and low risk for clinically meaningful alterations in glucose,
   lipids or electrocardiogram parameters.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Lurasidone is a second-generation antipsychotic agent that initially
received regulatory approval for the treatment of adults with
schizophrenia in the USA in 2010.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` In March 2014,
it received marketing authorisation for this indication by the European
Medicines Agency and has also been approved for the treatment of
schizophrenia in Switzerland, Canada and Australia. Additionally,
lurasidone recently received US and Canadian regulatory approval for the
treatment of adults with major depressive episodes associated with
bipolar I disorder (bipolar depression), as either a monotherapy or
adjunctive therapy with lithium or valproate. Detailed systematic
reviews of the overall efficacy, tolerability, safety and place in
therapy of lurasidone can be found elsewhere,\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.d)`
including analyses of number needed to treat (NNT) and number needed to
harm (NNH).\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)`

The published literature has used the US convention of describing the
dose of lurasidone as the combined weight of the active drug moiety
(lurasidone) plus the hydrochloride (HCl) salt, with tablet strength
expressed in multiples of 20 mg. In the European Medicines Agency
*Summary of Product Characteristics*,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` tablet strength
refers to the weight of active drug only, excluding the contribution
from the HCl salt (`Table 1 <#T1>`__ shows the dose equivalence), and
this dose convention will be used in the current review.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Lurasidone dose equivalents in the European Union (EU) and the USA

   ============================ =======================
   EU doses (mg, active moiety) US doses (mg, HCl salt)
   ============================ =======================
   18.5                         20
   \                            
   37                           40
   \                            
   56\ `a <#TFN1>`__            60
   \                            
   74                           80
   \                            
   111\ `a <#TFN1>`__           120
   \                            
   148\ `a <#TFN1>`__           160\ `b <#TFN2>`__
   ============================ =======================

   Tablet strength not available in the EU.

   Tablet strength not available in the USA.

The purpose of this overview is to describe the pharmacodynamics and
pharmacokinetics of lurasidone, and to summarise its efficacy and safety
for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar depression based on
results from both short-term and longer-term controlled clinical trials.
Relevant information regarding switching and extension studies is
reported, including functional and cognitive outcomes.

.. _S1:

Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics
=====================================

Similar to most other second-generation antipsychotic agents, lurasidone
is a full antagonist at dopamine D\ :sub:`2` and serotonin
5-HT\ :sub:`2`\ A receptors, with binding affinities *K*\ :sub:`i` = 1
nM and *K*\ :sub:`i` = 0.5 nM, respectively.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` In
addition, lurasidone is distinguished by its high affinity for serotonin
5-HT\ :sub:`7` receptors (*K*\ :sub:`i` = 0.5 nM; comparable with
dopamine D\ :sub:`2` and 5-HT\ :sub:`2`\ A receptors) and by its partial
agonist activity at 5-HT\ :sub:`1`\ A receptors (*K*\ :sub:`i` = 6.4
nM).\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` The serotonin 5-HT\ :sub:`7` receptor is a target
of interest that may be associated with the potential for both
pro-cognitive and antidepressant effects,\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.i)`
whereas the 5-HT\ :sub:`1`\ A receptor may have a role in the treatment
of major depressive disorder\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` and
schizophrenia.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` Lurasidone lacks affinity for histamine
H\ :sub:`1` and muscarinic M\ :sub:`1` receptors.

The pharmacokinetic profile of lurasidone is consistent with once-daily
administration, with an elimination half-life of 20–40
h.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Mean C\ :sub:`max` and area under the curve (AUC) for
lurasidone were approximately threefold and twofold greater,
respectively, in a comparison of administration with food *v.*
fasting.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Based on these data, and results from clinical
trials, it is recommended that lurasidone be taken once daily in the
evening, with a meal or within 30 min after
eating.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` Lurasidone absorption is independent of
food fat content.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`

.. _S2:

Metabolisation
--------------

Lurasidone is metabolised primarily via CYP3A4 and, consequently, its
use is contraindicated in the presence of strong inducers and inhibitors
of CYP3A4. In the presence of moderate inhibitors of CYP3A4, the
recommended starting dose of lurasidone is 18.5 mg/day instead of the
usual recommended 37 mg/day, and the highest recommended dose is 74
mg/day instead of the regular maximum recommended dose of 148 mg/day.
Lurasidone does not affect the pharmacokinetics of other drugs including
lithium, valproate or agents that are metabolised by the CYP3A4
pathway.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`

Examination of population subgroups based on gender, age and ethnic
background did not reveal any clear evidence of differential response to
lurasidone,\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` however, Asian subjects had
one-and-a-half-fold increased exposure to lurasidone compared with White
subjects.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Clinical studies with lurasidone did not
include sufficient numbers of patients aged 65 and older to establish
whether dose adjustment is necessary on the basis of age alone. In
patients with moderate or severe renal or hepatic impairment, the
recommended starting dose is 18.5 mg/day; the maximum dose should not
exceed 74 mg/day in moderate to severe renal impairment or moderate
hepatic impairment and 37 mg/day in severe hepatic impairment.

.. _S3:

Efficacy in schizophrenia
=========================

.. _S4:

Acute treatment
---------------

Based on a robust registration programme that included five informative
and similarly designed 6-week, fixed-dose, placebo-controlled
studies,\ :sup:`(n.d.n)-(n.d.o)` lurasidone is approved for the
treatment of schizophrenia within a dose range of 37–148 mg/day.
Reductions in the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` or
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS)\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` total
scores were consistently greater for lurasidone compared with placebo
across the approved dose range. A starting dose of 37 mg/day has
demonstrated significant efficacy, thus no initial dose titration is
necessary. Subsequent dose increases can be made based on clinician
judgement, typically in increments of 37 mg at approximately weekly
intervals. Patients with suboptimal symptom control at lower doses of
lurasidone may benefit from higher doses. The NNT of lurasidone (*v.*
placebo) for a ≥30% reduction in PANSS total score was 4 (95% CI 3–5)
for lurasidone 148 mg/day compared with 6 (95% CI 5–10) at 37
mg/day.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`

The short-term effectiveness of lurasidone has also been evaluated in a
study in which clinically stable but symptomatic out-patients with
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder were switched from their
current antipsychotic medication to lurasidone in a 6-week study that
examined the efficacy and tolerability of three different dosing
strategies (starting at 37 mg/day for 2 weeks, *v.* starting at 74
mg/day for 2 weeks, *v.* starting at 37 mg/day for 1 week followed by 74
mg/day the second week).\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` The primary outcome was time to
treatment failure, defined as any occurrence of insufficient clinical
response, exacerbation of underlying disease or discontinuation due to
an adverse event. No clinically relevant differences were observed among
the three groups in efficacy or tolerability outcomes; treatment failure
rates were low for all three switch groups (~8%).

.. _S5:

Long-term treatment
-------------------

Longer-term data for lurasidone in patients with schizophrenia are
available based on randomised, double-blind, 12-month trials that
include comparisons with risperidone in a safety study,\ :sup:`(n.d.s)`
and quetiapine extended-release (XR) in a double-blind extension to one
of the short-term pivotal trials.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` In the risperidone
comparator study, treatment with lurasidone was associated with
comparable improvement in efficacy, with similar relapse rates at 12
months. In the quetiapine XR comparator study, lurasidone was
non-inferior to quetiapine XR in risk for relapse. At 12 months,
treatment with lurasidone (modal daily dose 111 mg) was associated with
a significantly greater improvement in PANSS total score compared with
quetiapine XR (modal daily dose 600 mg), numerically lower risk of
relapse (23.7% *v.* 33.6%; *P* = 0.280; `Fig. 1a <#F1>`__),
significantly lower risk of re-hospitalisation at 12 months (9.8% *v.*
23.1%; log-rank *P* = 0.049; `Fig. 1b <#F1>`__) and significantly higher
rates of remission (61.9% *v.* 46.3%; *P* = 0.043; `Fig. 1c <#F1>`__).
In the same study, a computerised cognitive battery (Cogstate;
http://cogstate.com) was administered at the end of 6 weeks of acute
double-blind treatment and after 6 months of double-blind extension
treatment. At both time points, treatment with lurasidone was associated
with significantly greater improvement in cognition compared with
quetiapine XR, with a moderate effect size.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)`

.. figure:: 239f1
   :alt: Kaplan–Meier estimates of the risk of relapse and
   rehospitalisation during 12 months of treatment with lurasidone *v*.
   quetiapine extended release (XR): a. probability of relapse; b.
   probability of rehospitalisation; c. cumulative remission.
   :name: F1

   Kaplan–Meier estimates of the risk of relapse and rehospitalisation
   during 12 months of treatment with lurasidone *v*. quetiapine
   extended release (XR): a. probability of relapse; b. probability of
   rehospitalisation; c. cumulative remission.

The long-term effectiveness of lurasidone in the treatment of
schizophrenia has also been evaluated in two open-label extension
studies. In the first, a 6-month extension of the switch study
summarised above,\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` the mean PANSS total score continued
to show improvement. Moreover, low rates were observed for both
psychiatric emergency services utilisation (mean: 0.8% per month) and
contact with the criminal justice system (mean: 1.8% per
month).\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` In a second open-label extension study in which
patients received 6 months of treatment with lurasidone, antipsychotic
efficacy was maintained, with further reduction observed in mean PANSS
total scores, in patients who had initially received lurasidone,
olanzapine or placebo during the acute treatment phase.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)`

Preliminary results of a double-blind, randomised withdrawal study
examining the maintenance of efficacy of lurasidone treatment in
patients with chronic schizophrenia have been presented.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)`
Patients experiencing an acute exacerbation of schizophrenia received
flexible doses of lurasidone (37 or 74 mg/day) during a 12- to 24-week
open-label stabilisation phase. Those who maintained clinical stability
for ≥12 weeks entered a 28-week, double-blind withdrawal phase and were
randomised to receive either lurasidone (at the same dose they were
receiving at completion of the stabilisation phase) or placebo.
Lurasidone significantly delayed time to relapse compared with placebo
(log-rank test *P* = 0.039) and was associated with a 34% reduction in
risk of relapse (Cox proportional hazard model ratio 0.66 (95% CI
0.45–0.98); *P* = 0.041).

.. _S6:

Tolerability and safety
-----------------------

Commonly observed adverse reactions in short-term trials in
schizophrenia (incidence on lurasidone ≥5% and twofold greater than
placebo) were somnolence (17% *v.* 7%; NNH = 10), akathisia (13% *v.*
3%; NNH = 10), nausea (10% *v.* 5%; NNH = 20) and extrapyramidal
symptoms (excluding akathisia and restlessness) 14% *v.* 6% (NNH =
13).\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` Akathisia and extrapyramidal symptoms
appear dose related within the dose range of 18.5 to 111
mg/day.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` The frequency of akathisia in patients with
schizophrenia was 5.6% for 18.5 mg, 10.7% for 37 mg, 12.3% for 74 mg and
22.0% for 111 mg. In a study where lurasidone was administered in the
evening,\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` akathisia was reported by 7.4% of patients
receiving lurasidone 148 mg/day. It is possible that evening dose
administration is associated with more favourable tolerability overall
relative to morning dosing. Adverse event frequencies (including
movement disorders) reported in the bipolar depression programme, where
lurasidone was dosed at night in all studies, were generally lower than
observed in patients with schizophrenia.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` The mean change
in weight observed across 6-week trials in schizophrenia was +0.43 kg
for lurasidone *v.* −0.02 kg for placebo.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` In contrast,
mean change in weight was +4.15 kg for olanzapine and +2.09 kg for
quetiapine XR in 6-week trials where these agents served as active
controls.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.y),(n.d.o)` In 6-week trials, the
proportion of patients with a clinically meaningful (≥7%) endpoint
increase in body weight was 4.8% for lurasidone *v.* 3.3% for placebo
(NNH = 67; not significant).\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` In contrast, the proportion
of patients with clinically significant weight gain during short-term
treatment in one comparator study with olanzapine *v.* placebo was 34%
*v.* 7% (NNH = 4);\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` and the proportion of patients with
clinically significant weight gain in a second comparator study with
quetiapine XR *v.* placebo was 15% *v.* 3% (NNH = 8).\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`
The proportion of patients with clinically significant weight gain on
lurasidone was similar to the rate for placebo in both comparator
studies (NNH>55).\ :sup:`(n.d.y),(n.d.o)`

Longer-term studies for lurasidone are consistent with short-term
findings regarding changes in body weight; in a long-term study
lurasidone was associated with a mean change in weight of +0.73 kg at
month 12, compared with +1.23 kg on quetiapine XR.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`

The short-term effect of lurasidone on metabolic variables appears
minimal.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` In pooled short-term (6-week) clinical trials,
the mean last observation carried forward (LOCF)-endpoint change in
total fasting cholesterol was −0.15 mmol/L for lurasidone and −0.16
mmol/L for placebo;\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` for fasting triglycerides it was
−0.15 mmol/L for lurasidone and −0.17 mmol/L for
placebo;\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` and for fasting glucose it was +0.07 mmol/L for
lurasidone and +0.03 mmol/L for placebo.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` Long-term data
regarding metabolic outcomes extending out to 12 months are consistent
with the short-term data.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.z)` In long-term
studies,\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` mean LOCF-endpoint change on lurasidone was
−0.08 mmol/L for total fasting cholesterol, −0.08 mmol/L for fasting
triglycerides and +0.11 mmol/L for fasting glucose.

A moderate dose-dependent increase in prolactin was observed in patients
treated with lurasidone, with more pronounced effects in female than in
male patients; however, the increase was lower than what is observed
with risperidone and haloperidol. In a randomised, 12-month,
double-blind safety study comparing lurasidone with risperidone, mean
change from baseline to endpoint in serum prolactin levels in men was
+2.51 ng/ml for lurasidone and +9.45 ng/ml for risperidone, and in women
it was +5.16 ng/ml for lurasidone and +33.90 ng/ml for
risperidone.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)`

Serial electrocardiograms during short-term and long-term trials
indicate that lurasidone, at doses as high as 558 mg/day, does not have
a clinically meaningful impact on the QT interval.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`

.. _S7:

Bipolar depression
==================

There is an unmet need for efficacious and tolerable treatments for
bipolar depression. Patients with bipolar disorder spend most of their
symptomatic time in the depressed phase of their
illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` While multiple agents are approved for the
treatment of bipolar mania, there is a paucity of approved medications
for the treatment of bipolar depression.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` The older
interventions (quetiapine and olanzapine–fluoxetine combination) are as
likely to provide therapeutic benefit as adverse
effects.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` Cross-study comparisons in populations with
bipolar depression suggest that treatment with lurasidone is associated
with less sedation than quetiapine and less weight gain than the
olanzapine–fluoxetine combination.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)`

Lurasidone, in the dose range of 18.5–111 mg/day, demonstrated
superiority *v.* placebo in two 6-week, randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, flexibly-dosed acute studies in patients with major
depressive episodes associated with bipolar I disorder, one using
lurasidone monotherapy and the other using lurasidone adjunctive with
lithium or valproate.\ :sup:`(n.d.ac),(n.d.ad)` As reported by Citrome
and colleagues,\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` monotherapy treatment with lurasidone
(*v.* placebo) was associated with an NNT of 5 (95% CI 4–8) for
treatment response, defined as ≥50% reduction from baseline on
Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` (MADRS) total
score; adjunctive therapy with lurasidone was associated with an NNT of
7 (95%, CI 4–24). NNT for remission, defined as a final MADRS total
score ≤12, was 7 (95% CI 4–14) for lurasidone monotherapy and 7 (95% CI
4–23) for adjunctive lurasidone. These results are comparable with NNT
values reported for quetiapine (6 for response, 6 for remission) and
olanzapine-fluoxetine combination (4 for response, 5 for remission).

Lurasidone was not associated with clinically meaningful mean weight or
metabolic changes compared with placebo in these bipolar depression
studies. This is in contrast to olanzapine-fluoxetine combination where
the NNH (*v.* placebo) was 6 for clinically meaningful weight gain (≥7%
from baseline).\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` The three most frequently occurring
adverse events with the largest difference in incidence for lurasidone
*v.* placebo were nausea (NNH = 17 for monotherapy, NNH = 16 for
adjunctive therapy), akathisia (NNH = 15 for monotherapy, NNH = 30 for
adjunctive therapy) and somnolence (NNH = 25 for monotherapy, NNH = 19
for adjunctive therapy).\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` The high NNH of lurasidone for
somnolence compares favourably with the NNH of 3 (95% CI 2.2–2.7)
reported for quetiapine in studies of bipolar depression, regardless of
formulation or dose.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

Overall, the results of double-blind trials indicate that lurasidone has
a highly favourable benefit/risk ratio for the treatment of bipolar I
depression, with ‘single-digit’ NNT (indicating significant efficacy)
and ‘double-digit’ or higher NNH (indicating high tolerability).

.. _S8:

Summary
=======

Lurasidone represents a new addition to the pharmacological
armamentarium available for the treatment of serious mental disorders.
It has demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of schizophrenia, within
the dose range of 37–148 mg/day, and bipolar depression, within the dose
range of 18.5–111 mg/day. Across both indications, treatment with
lurasidone appears associated with minimal effects on body weight and
low risk for clinically meaningful alterations in glucose, lipids or ECG
parameters. Lurasidone's combination of efficacy in schizophrenia and
bipolar depression with minimal metabolic disturbance and little effect
on movement disorders and prolactin represents a potentially important
clinical advance.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)`

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R29

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R31

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R32

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R33

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R34

      n.d.af.

.. [1]
   **Antony Loebel** MD is Chief Medical Officer at Sunovion
   Pharmaceuticals, Fort Lee, New Jersey, USA, and **Leslie Citrome** MD
   MPH is Clinical Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at
   New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA.
