===========================
Profile: Morgan David Enoch
===========================



Roxanne Keynejad [1]_  [2]_

:date: 2015-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

A benchmark of fame in the modern world, a quick Google search for Dr
Morgan David Enoch brings up an intriguing set of results. These range
from a BBC article, ‘Spotting the Royal stalkers’, :sup:`1` a *BMJ* case
report on ‘Exorcism for schizophrenia’ :sup:`2` and Ian McEwan’s
*Enduring Love*, :sup:`3` to Mersey Regional Health Authority’s
implementation of care in the community and books, including *I Want a
Christian Psychiatrist* :sup:`4` and *Uncommon Psychiatric Syndromes*:
:sup:`5` now out of print, the paperback fourth edition is currently
available from online sellers, second-hand, for over £1000.

The spectrum of today’s search results for this 88-year-old emeritus
consultant psychiatrist of Royal Liverpool University Hospital, fellow
of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, member of its Council for over 20
years and Court of Electors for 8, due shortly to publish his
autobiography, offers just a glimpse of the diverse tales Dr Enoch might
relate, should you be lucky enough to meet him.

.. _S1:

Waziristan
==========

With a surname meaning ‘he who walks with God’, Morgan David Enoch was a
sixth-form student due to read theology at the end of World War II.
David’s mother, who worried about his sister attending a hairdressing
course in Swansea, 8 miles from the family home, was shocked when, after
a letter from the King of England, he was soon serving with the British
army in India’s north-west frontier, ‘facing the forces of the Faqir of
Ipi at the very place where fighting has been heaviest for the [past] 10
years’, aged 18. Later, following a War Office Selection Board, he
trained at the Indian Military Academy, ‘the Sandhurst of India’ at
Dehra Dun, was commissioned into the Royal Artillery and posted to the
second Indian (Sikhs) Field Regiment in 1947.

During this time, he says ‘while angry with God for obstructing my
chosen path, I had four exciting years in India. I heard Jawaharlal
Nehru and Mohammed Ali Jinnah address vast crowds: I witnessed the birth
of two great nations and the process of India’s violent partition’.
Playing rugby for the British Army in India, David returned to Woolwich
Arsenal on leave, expecting to continue playing but was indignant to be
ordered back to India to complete his outstanding months’ National
Service. He says the physical and mental suffering he observed during
his army career is what called him to medicine. After eventual military
discharge, he ‘went around the London teaching hospitals and liked St
Thomas’ Medical School. I think the uniform helped at interview’.

.. _S2:

Medical training
================

Qualifying in 1954, following house jobs Dr Enoch returned to Wales to
work at St David’s Mental Hospital, Camarthen, as his father, ‘a hewer
of coal in 2 feet 9 inches’ was dying of silicosis. Of his first years
in psychiatry, he recalls the routine use of the hypnotic paraldehyde at
night, prescribing ‘quite effective’ Drinamyl (amobarbital and
dextroamphetamine, later known as ‘purple hearts’), deep insulin coma
therapy and, for the first time, an antipsychotic: chlorpromazine.

Following his father’s death in 1958, he returned to London, then ‘the
supreme place to train’, obtaining a medical registrar post at
University College Hospital, working for Professor Baron Max Leonard
Rosenheim, Dr Roger Tredgold and Dr Desmond Pond, later president of the
Royal College of Psychiatrists. In the mid-fifties, after the Institute
of Psychiatry course and obtaining his Diploma in Psychological
Medicine, Dr Enoch witnessed the introduction of antidepressants,
beginning with imipramine and amitriptyline. He later obtained a senior
registrar post divided between the London Hospital (now the Royal London
Hospital) and Runwell Mental Hospital, Essex, which opened after World
War II in response to shell shock – the last mental hospital built in
Britain. :sup:`6`

Dr Enoch recalls Runwell’s physician superintendent, Dr Rolf
Ström-Olsen, as ‘one of the best physicians I ever met. He was
Norwegian, abrupt and highly intelligent’. He recollects Runwell’s units
divided into neurosis and psychosis, conferences clouded in cigarette
smoke, treating patients for the first time with out-patient
electroconvulsive therapy and the introduction of newer antipsychotics,
like haloperidol. This dynamic clinical, educational and research
environment was to prove instrumental in inspiring his future writing,
yielding a lifelong dedication to evidence-based improvement in clinical
practice.

.. _S3:

Uncommon Psychiatric Syndromes
------------------------------

Dr Enoch recalls presenting a patient at Runwell Hospital, whose
complaint was that ‘my wife’s an impostor’. Phrases began to occur to
him describing the psychodynamic processes at work: ‘His wife was ”the
fallen idol”, hence the delusion of doubles. How do you resolve loving
and hating someone at the same time? By splitting. Is apperception not a
wonderful word? To perceive with feeling. That is the essence of Capgras
psychopathology.’

After further research, Dr Enoch’s paper on Capgras syndrome won the
bronze medal and prize of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association in
1962 and was published in *Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica* in 1963,
:sup:`7` the same year he won the Gaskell Prize. He developed an
increasing interest in rare presentations, from De Clérambault’s
syndrome, to folie à deux, Tourette’s and more, which yielded his first
book. The first edition of *Some Uncommon Psychiatric Syndromes*, a
bestseller, was published in 1967, with further editions in 1979, 1991
and 2001. Dr John Pollitt, President of the Section of Psychiatry of the
Royal Society of Medicine, predicted that it ‘well deserves to be placed
as a classic’; :sup:`8` it has been translated into French, German,
Turkish and Japanese.

Dr Enoch expected his ‘uncommon syndromes’ to remain rare and was
surprised by their later *cause célèbre* status. ‘I never thought, for
example, that patients with Munchausen syndrome by proxy would become so
important. They became huge’. The diagnosis was questioned publicly,
after several child killing convictions were overturned, including that
of lawyer Sally Clark. In these cases, the diagnosis was used
inappropriately for paediatric assessment, without involvement of a
psychiatrist. By contrast, high-profile cases incorporating psychiatrist
assessment, such as that of nurse Beverley Allitt, now detained at
Rampton Secure Hospital, demonstrated the contemporary relevance of the
diagnosis.

To this day, Dr Enoch receives telephone calls from readers of *Uncommon
Psychiatric Syndromes* from around the world; he remains fascinated by
delusional disorders. ‘I’d like to know far more about emotions. How can
feelings affect thought? Psychodynamics remain all important. This book
has been lived’. Although he never met Ian McEwan, who referenced the
text in *Enduring Love*, Dr Enoch ‘approved’ of the novel, unlike the
film *Fatal Attraction* (1987, director A. Lyne), which did not depict
true De Clérambault’s syndrome, because ‘the protagonists had an initial
affair: usually there is no contact’.

After the success of *Uncommon Psychiatric Syndromes*, Dr Enoch wrote
other well-received books, including *Healing the Hurt Mind: Christian
Faith and Psychiatry*. :sup:`9` Now in its 11th edition, its title was
inspired by a patient’s letter, kept to this day, stating that ‘Dr Enoch
was the first person who listened to me and asked me how I am. Healing
began for me today’. In the most recent, *I Want a Christian
Psychiatrist*, :sup:`4` he returns to his theological roots. ‘You don’t
necessarily need a Christian psychiatrist: you need a competent
psychiatrist who must respect your faith’.

.. _S4:

Clinical career
===============

Dr Enoch recalls obtaining his first consultant post at Shelton
Hospital, Shrewsbury, after debating Ganser syndrome with Professor Sir
William Trethowan, foundation chair of psychiatry at the University of
Birmingham, at interview. He would later invite Trethowan to contribute
to the chapter on Ganser syndrome and Dr John C. Barker that on
Munchausen syndrome, in the first edition of *Uncommon Psychiatric
Syndromes*.

It was at Shelton Hospital that Dr Enoch introduced regular teaching,
therapeutic communities and care in the community. He recalls meeting
Enoch Powell, then expounding de-institutionalisation as minister of
health. He worked with Barbara Robb on a national campaign for elderly
care in hospitals, contributing a chapter to her book, *Sans Everything:
A Case to Answer*. :sup:`10` He remembers ‘feeling encouraged’ at the
time by the *Sunday Times*\ ’ article series on care in the community by
Marjorie Wallace, who later founded the mental health charity SANE, with
telling photographs by Lord Snowden.

Dr Enoch was later head-hunted to take on the new post of consultant
psychiatrist and senior clinical lecturer at the new Royal Liverpool
University Hospital’s ‘superb’ department of psychiatry, later including
beds at Rainhill Mental Hospital. He is still remembered as a dynamic
and enthusiastic teacher, as evidenced by Dr Gamal Hammad’s description
of him as ‘a charismatic guru, a wonderful mentor and a visionary’.
:sup:`11`

.. figure:: 146f1
   :alt: Dr Enoch at his home in Cardiff, March 2014.
   :name: F1

   Dr Enoch at his home in Cardiff, March 2014.

He always enjoyed encouraging the next generation of psychiatrists and
made a point of involving students and nurses in ward rounds: ‘I wanted
the doctors and students to see the full range of psychiatric disorders.
I used to remind them, ”Rare things rarely occur”.’ At the opening of
Shelton Hospital’s replacement, the Redwoods Centre, in 2011, his second
wife, Anne, a retired headmistress, recalls him being treated ‘like a
celebrity... they’d all read his book’.

Above all, Dr Enoch strove to teach and practise psychiatry as a
holistic discipline, examining each and every patient: ‘I liked
psychiatry because it deals with the whole person: their body, mind and
spirit. I wanted to do something exciting while staying true to my
faith. A good psychiatrist is prepared to listen, know their stuff and
gather it all together into a diagnostic formulation. It doesn’t mean
you have all the answers, but the diagnosis is the first step to
management and treatment.’

.. _S5:

On psychiatry
=============

Dr Enoch is a staunch supporter and advocate of psychiatry as a
compelling specialty with much still to be discovered: ‘It’s a new
frontier of medicine... We know so little about the human brain: the
heart is a pump, but you love with the hypothalamus. We thought that
scans would give us clear-cut answers but they have not. What is
consciousness? I have thirty books on it but no one can say where, how,
what. It is remarkable what can arise from the unconscious. I thought
that fMRI would locate jealousy, De Clérembault, because those syndromes
are so specific: monomanias with one delusion. The fact that we cannot
locate them suggests that the brain’s connections hold the answers. But
can this brain really have the capacity to understand itself?’

The specialty remains compelling for Dr Enoch, even after more than 50
years; he continues to advocate keeping psychiatric wards within medical
hospitals: ‘Psychiatry is the most intriguing of all specialties: you
deal with the whole Meeting the Royal College of Psychiatrists’
Pathfinder Fellows, January 2014. person. You must be a first-class
physician: I have picked up lung cancer, brain tumours, pernicious
anaemia, cardiac lesions, thyrotoxicosis. We are physicians of
psychological medicine. Recalcitrant cases not medically understood are
referred to us. You listen and discover things other doctors miss.

Patients come to you broken psychologically and emotionally, intent on
suicide, and get better. Is there anything more helpful in society than
to heal pain: physical and psychological? Psychiatric illness is an
illness like any other: treatable and curable despite what even doctors
may think. You need maturity to choose something so difficult, though.
You will need hope, positivity and graciousness.’

.. _S6:

On reflection
=============

Having seen his last patient on 31 December 2012 and survived a coronary
artery occlusion of ‘99%’, Dr Enoch remains active, lecturing at Cardiff
University Medical School until recently. In addition to his forthcoming
autobiography, a book of Welsh essays is due for publication in 2014,
with several exploring the relevance of the Ten Commandments today.
Although he never did complete that theology degree, he has continued to
preach from age 16 until today, in between spending time with his wife,
son and four grandchildren. Considering his rather uncommon life, he
reflects that: ‘I have been greatly blessed. I am very grateful for a
very exciting life; it’s still exciting. I have enjoyed psychiatry’s
riches in helping people in great depth.’

When we last met, Dr Enoch was looking forward to meeting recipients of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Pathfinder Fellowships, considering
the next generation with excitement – and a little envy: ‘this is going
to be the century of the brain’. Above all, it is the pursuit of
learning which he most fervently advocates for us all: ‘I spent 65 years
in the game, to realise how little I know. I would love to be starting
again, with the knowledge I have now’. His wife adds, ‘He is as
enthusiastic today as when he was twenty’. All taught by Dr Enoch,
exposed to this enthusiasm, may count themselves truly fortunate. His
last piece of advice? ‘Gather your materials from everywhere, but be
your own architect.’

.. [1]
   Dr Morgan David Enoch discusses his uncommon life in an interview
   with **Roxanne Keynejad**.

.. [2]
   **Roxanne Keynejad** MA (Oxon) MBBS AKC is a CTI Academic Clinical
   Fellow in General Adult Psychiatry at South London and Maudsley NHS
   Foundation Trust, London, UK, email: roxanne.keynejad@slam.nhs.uk
