============================
Nick Kitson MB, BS, FRCPsych
============================
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: Formerly consultant psychiatrist, Cornwall Partnership NHS Foundation Trust and Springfield University Hospital, honorary senior lecturer, St George's Hospital Medical School
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Richard Laugharne
:Date: 2015-8


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 208f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

Nick Kitson, who died suddenly at the age of 64 while on holiday on 24
February 2014, was a pioneer and national expert in the psychiatric
disorders of deaf people. He was the Founding Chair of the British
Society for Mental Health and Deafness and the longest serving president
of the European Society for Mental Health and Deafness (1990-1997),
remaining honorary member and honorary vice president of each,
respectively. He was clinical advisor to the Towards Equity and Access
Implementation Panel (the Department of Health and National Institute
for Mental Health England commissioning panel) in 2006/2007 and
‘responsible owner’ of a National Deaf Mental Health Commissioning
Project. He remained a trustee of and medical advisor to the Sign health
charity and awarded the title of Pioneer. He was joint editor of the
standard introductory textbook *Mental Health and Deafness*. At the
World Congress of Mental Health and Deafness held in 2014, a prize for
the best poster was established in his name.

Nick completed his medical training at St Bartholomew's Hospital in
1975. He was appointed consultant psychiatrist at Springfield University
Hospital and honorary senior lecturer at St George's Medical School in
1984. He was clinical director for the Specialist Mental Health Services
for the Deaf Community at Springfield and medical director of Pathfinder
NHS Trust from 1994 to 1998. When he became responsible for the
psychiatric care of people with deafness, his health authority gave him
9 months to learn sign language. He visited psychiatric units for deaf
people in America and realised the importance of employing deaf people
fluent in sign language. At the time he wrote about sign language: ‘It
is a very sophisticated language capable of expressing everything you
can say in English.’ The service for deaf people that he led and
developed for 18 years, with his wife Karen, covered the southern half
and then a third of England. He became a Member of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists in 1980 and was elected a Fellow in 1996.

While working as a consultant, he trained in short-term dynamic therapy
in 1984 and group analytic psychotherapy in 1989. He became an associate
member of the London Centre for Psychotherapy (British Psychotherapy
Foundation) in 1989 and a Full Member in 1996, supervising short-term
dynamic psychotherapy at the Tavistock and latterly at the London Centre
for Psychotherapy. Psychotherapy was always an integral part of his
clinical practice. He provided strong support for Jane Douglas, the
first profoundly deaf person to train as a psychoanalytic
psychotherapist.

Knowing the West Country well, Nick left London and moved to Cornwall in
2002. He initially worked as a community and in-patient psychiatrist
covering the St Austell area but, wishing to reduce his workload owing
to ill health, he became part-time consultant to the psychiatric
intensive care unit (PICU). The service was awarded the National PICU of
the Year in 2005. Formally retiring in 2009, he continued as his own
locum for the PICU, regularly sailing and taking trips abroad with Karen
and his family.

Nick was a hugely respected consultant psychiatrist. His colleagues
frequently sought his advice in difficult circumstances, and the advice
he gave was wise and supportive. He was down-to-earth and sensible; he
never pretended he knew the answer when he did not, but his advice was
even sounder in these circumstances. He continued to use his therapeutic
skills after retirement and remained enthusiastic and determined to help
the most challenging and difficult patients.

He will be sorely missed by his colleagues but his wise leadership will
continue to be influential. He is survived by Karen, his two daughters
and his grandchildren.
