============================================================================================
Update on the Improving Access to Psychological Therapies programme in England\ `† <#fn1>`__
============================================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: Commentary on … Children and Young People's Improving Access to Psychological Therapies
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Peter Fonagy
David M. Clark
:Correspondence: Peter Fonagy (p.fonagy@ucl.ac.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   Professor Sami Timimi recently expressed concerns about the Improving
   Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) programme. We argue that the
   concerns are largely unfounded and provide readers with an update on
   the programme.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We are pleased to have the opportunity to respond to Professor Timimi's
editorial in the April 2015 issue of *BJPsych Bulletin* and his comments
on the Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) programme in
general and the Children and Young People's Improving Access to
Psychological Therapies (CYP-IAPT) programme in particular. We hope to
point out that many of his concerns about both programmes are unfounded,
either because evidence we have collected should allay his concerns or
because the issues he identifies represent misunderstandings of the
literature and the initiatives.

.. _S1:

Adult IAPT
==========

The IAPT programme for adults aims to make National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence (NICE)-recommended psychological treatments for
depression and anxiety disorders more widely available by training 6000
new psychological therapists and deploying them in specialised
stepped-care services, along with experienced staff. The initiative has
several distinctive features, which an editorial in the journal *Nature*
described as ‘world-beating’.\ :sup:`1` For the first time, therapist
training follows nationally agreed curricula that focus on the
competencies required to deliver those treatments that have been shown
by randomised controlled trials (RCTs) to be effective for particular
conditions. An innovative session-by-session outcome monitoring system
captures clinical outcomes on almost everyone (97%) who has finished a
course of treatment (liberally defined as at least two sessions,
although many people have more),\ :sup:`2` and clinical commissioning
group (CCG)-level outcome data are published on a public
website.\ :sup:`3` This contrasts sharply with the picture before IAPT,
when psychological therapy services obtained outcome data on less than
40% of patients and are likely to have overestimated their value, as
people whose data are missing tend to have done less well.\ :sup:`4`

What does the more complete IAPT data tell us? Nationally, of patients
who have finished a course of treatment in IAPT, 45% recover (based on a
strict double criterion – dropping below the clinical threshold for both
anxiety and depression) and a further 16% show reliable improvement that
falls short of full recovery.\ :sup:`2,5` However, there is considerable
regional variability. About a third (70 of 211) of CCGs now report
recovery over 50% and some are consistently over 60%
(`www.hscic.gov.uk <www.hscic.gov.uk>`__). This shows what the IAPT
model can achieve in services with a sufficiently large and
appropriately trained workforce that benefits from excellent clinical
leadership. The challenge for the next phase is to raise other CCGs to
the same level.

Professor Timimi's editorial\ :sup:`6` asserts that there is little
evidence for the premises on which adult IAPT is based, and that IAPT
services are less effective and more expensive than pre-existing
counselling services. Both assertions can be refuted.

.. _S2:

IAPT outcomes
-------------

IAPT delivers therapies that have been shown to be effective for
particular conditions in RCTs, on the assumption that this is the best
way of ensuring good clinical outcomes. Timimi argues this is mistaken
because ‘within treatment, the factor that has the biggest impact on
outcomes is the therapeutic alliance (as rated by the patient) with
matching treatment model to diagnosis having a small to insignificant
impact’.\ :sup:`6` Contrary to this statement, there is evidence in all
anxiety disorders that some psychological treatments are more effective
than others.\ :sup:`5` In depression, the picture is less clear. Several
psychological therapies have been shown to be better than placebo or no
treatment, but there is little evidence of differential effectiveness
between these therapies.\ :sup:`5` However, there is no such thing as a
therapeutic alliance therapy. Even if therapeutic alliance were the most
important factor, one would still need to train therapists in procedures
that allow the therapeutic alliance to emerge. Clearly, it makes sense
to choose procedures from treatments that are known to work. It is also
important to note that the use of weak research designs means that many
studies of therapeutic alliance are likely to overestimate the
importance of this factor. Alliance is often measured late in therapy
when some patients have already improved. The correlation between
alliance and outcome may therefore be a consequence, rather than a
cause, of clinical improvement. Feeley's studies\ :sup:`7` showing that
late alliance is related to outcome but early alliance is not are
consistent with this point of view. Alliance studies rarely measure the
competence with which a treatment is delivered, so we cannot rule out
the possibility that positive alliance ratings reflect competent and
sensitive delivery of a treatment, not just the establishment of a good
therapist–patient relationship. The remarkable success of
internet-delivered therapies strongly challenges the claim that a strong
therapeutic alliance is essential.

The report\ :sup:`8` that Professor Timimi cites as evidence that IAPT
services are less effective and more costly than pre-IAPT counselling
services is flawed. It was produced by a charity that funded some
pre-IAPT counselling services and does not appear to have gone through a
normal peer-review process. It fails to describe its methods and
measures in the level of detail required for a journal article. However,
from the details that are available, it is clear that the report is
comparing chalk with cheese. IAPT recovery rates were based on all
patients who had at least two sessions. Pre-IAPT services had high
post-treatment missing data rates\ :sup:`4` and recovery rates were
based on those who contributed post-treatment data, which will
inevitably inflate estimates.\ :sup:`9` The IAPT recovery criterion was
a strict double-measure criterion, whereas pre-IAPT recovery was based
on a more lenient, single-measure criterion. Costs for IAPT and non-IAPT
services were also estimated differently, with the former including
set-up, staff training and premises costs, while it seems unlikely these
figured in the comparator costs.\ :sup:`8`

The characterisation of IAPT as a ‘fetishisation’ of
cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) is also misplaced. As NICE only
recommends CBT for anxiety disorders and depression, the initial focus
of IAPT was on this modality. However, the programme now supports the
training and employment of therapists who can deliver the four other
therapies that NICE recommends for depression (counselling, couples
therapy, interpersonal psychotherapy and brief psychodynamic therapy).
Counselling is already strongly represented, by over a quarter of all
IAPT high-intensity therapists. There is a need to build further
capacity in the other three therapies and this is already underway. In
the past 2 years IAPT has trained more therapists in non-CBT modalities
than in CBT.

.. _S3:

Children and Young People's IAPT
================================

Children and Young People's IAPT (CYP-IAPT) is training many more
systemic family practitioners, interpersonal psychotherapists and
parenting therapists than CBT therapists, and our core curriculum has
made use of client feedback to inform practice across modalities.
Professor Timimi's emphasis on therapeutic alliance is consistent with
CYP-IAPT's fundamental concern with collaborative practice and shared
decision-making.

Professor Timimi's first concern about CYP-IAPT is the risk of a
top-down *v*. bottom-up approach to service transformation. He suggests
that rather than using research evidence to guide selection and
implementation of interventions, it would be cheaper and better for
child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) simply to roll out
usual care based on his own Partners for Change Outcome Management
Systems (PCOMS) model for service transformation. He cites a selection
of meta-analyses to suggest that interventions targeted at specific
disorders have no effect, even when we know RCTs indicate large effect
sizes. Comparisons of psychological therapies with usual care indeed
tend to have small effects but this depends entirely on the services
offered in usual care. For example, multisystemic therapy has very large
effects because the usual care comparator is often part of youth justice
provision.\ :sup:`10` Comparisons with community-based active treatments
yield far smaller effects. Many advocates of evidence-based therapies
(EBTs) have pointed this out,\ :sup:`11` and there are indications that
modular-based approaches integrating a range of EBT elements may well be
the way forward.\ :sup:`12` On the whole, comparisons with usual care
show the difficulty of designing new interventions that systematically
outperform the old.\ :sup:`13` But does this warrant complacency about
usual care in CAMHS? Existing evidence for the effectiveness of ordinary
CAMHS in the UK and elsewhere should worry both clinicians and policy
makers. The observed effect sizes are small and sometimes even
statistically insignificant. The majority of children receiving
community-based usual care do not show clinical
improvement.\ :sup:`14,15`

Unfortunately, bringing about improvements appears quite challenging. In
his editorial Professor Timimi cites the historical Stark County and
Fort Bragg studies, which are relevant to this debate for two reasons.
First, they highlighted the importance of the method of implementation
in service improvements. When major service improvement initiatives are
launched, evidence now has to be presented that implementation science
principles are followed. For example, organising observation of clinical
work as part of supervision is essential for rigorous training of
therapists,\ :sup:`16` as is the structuring of services to accommodate
EBTs.\ :sup:`12` Second, the two studies led implementers and others to
stress the likely importance of continuous, clinically meaningful
feedback and progress monitoring. Implementation science considerations
and meaningful use of session-by-session outcome measurement have
informed CYP-IAPT's work from the beginning.\ :sup:`17` Rather than
seeking to impose a single solution on all services, we have tried to
disseminate a set of clinical principles (outcome focus, increased
patient and parent participation, use of EBTs) and to implement these
through local collaborations engaging a range of services, which jointly
tried to find the best way forward.

.. _S4:

CYP-IAPT: a model for child mental health services
==================================================

There is no template for a CYP-IAPT service; there are services that use
CYP-IAPT principles. PCOMS, or any other service model, could only be
universally implemented as part of a top-down initiative. As Professor
Timimi highlights, this was precisely what went wrong at Fort Bragg and
Stark County, and we did not wish to repeat the error. As a national
programme, CYP-IAPT required a modest governance structure, including
focused work streams to develop curricula, outcomes measurement and
service organisation, but it was delivered within CAMHS partnerships
made up of commissioners and both statutory and non-statutory providers
who wanted to deliver local change. Through a well-recognised
(evidence-based) phasing of the change process (exploration,
installation, initial implementation, innovation and sustainability), we
engaged services covering 68% of the population in the 1–19 years age
bracket within 4 years. Although we may not have succeeded everywhere,
our explicit strategy was to mobilise the local leadership and workforce
to engage children/young people and their parents in the process of
service transformation, including – but reaching out beyond – the
National Health Service (NHS), to achieve sustainable results.

A recent benchmarking survey found that 70% of CAMHS questioned said
they were working to CYP-IAPT principles.\ :sup:`18` According to the
annual update of data submitted for CYP-IAPT, data completeness of
matched cases at time 1 and time 2 cases was 63.2%.\ :sup:`19` The Rapid
Internal Audit\ :sup:`20` of 12 representative partnerships, over 350
clinicians and several focus groups of children and parents/carers found
that: The percentage of cases closed by mutual agreement out of all
closed cases has increased by 75% since the initiation of CYP-IAPT.The
number of weeks between referral and first appointment has decreased
from 16.6 in year 1 of CYP-IAPT to 6.6 in year 5.The proportion of
self-referrals, although still relatively small, increased by 51%.54% of
clinicians agreed that the service was working towards the principle of
increased self-referral; 61% agreed that access had improved for their
local population over the past year.Well over half of clinicians
questioned reported often or always using outcome data to review
treatment progress or to inform therapy; a similar percentage reported
often or always discussing outcomes data with children/young people and
families.More than three-quarters of clinicians reported usually or
always engaging in shared decision-making activities with parents/carers
and children.Children in focus groups spoke spontaneously about how
their involvement in service delivery gave them a personal sense of
worth and empowerment. Children and young people also agreed that
monitoring outcomes helped to keep things focused. Professor Timimi
identified delivering EBTs as the sole objective of CYP-IAPT. In fact,
we set ourselves six evidence-based objectives to improve services for
children and young people
(`www.cypiapt.org/children-and-young-peoples-project.php <www.cypiapt.org/children-and-young-peoples-project.php>`__).
In addition to (1) delivering EBTs, we aimed to (2) improve access
through self-referral, (3) work in partnership with the young person and
their parent or carer throughout treatment, (4) deliver outcomes-focused
treatments, (5) provide supervision to support delivery of
evidence-based, user- and outcomes-informed practice, and (6) support
whole-service transformation through leadership training. As we
understand PCOMS' priorities, these have much in common with the
CYP-IAPT curricula: the emphasis on consultation, involving optimal
collaboration with other agencies; outcomes focus, using
session-by-session patient-rated outcome data and changing treatment if
outcomes are not improving; developing effective treatment alliances
aided by the outcomes focus; developing team cultures that are recovery
focused; and understanding how to use outcome data for clinical
reflection, supervision and whole-team development.

CYP-IAPT insists on the use of treatment protocols based on manuals
validated by one or more RCTs. Delivery of these protocols requires a
clear set of competencies, which therapists must show they possess.
Professor Timimi is committed to the common factors model of therapeutic
change, and believes that generic therapeutic competencies are
sufficient to deliver effective help regardless of the nature of the
child's disorder. Although many therapies share important elements, such
as a strong therapeutic relationship, researchers have found that not
all therapies work equally well for all childhood disorders.\ :sup:`21`
Some therapies have actually been shown to be harmful.\ :sup:`22` In the
case of conduct problems, anxiety-related diagnoses (e.g. generalised
anxiety disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder), attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder and a number of other disorders, there is clear
evidence supporting skilled manualised interventions, which could not be
accounted for by common factors such as the therapeutic
alliance.\ :sup:`21` We also know from implementation science that
attending training workshops is not sufficient to acquire competence in
an intervention.\ :sup:`16` The CYP-IAPT training includes intensive
workshops and ongoing supervision/consultation, including practice
sample review (e.g. audiotape review).

During the earliest exploration phase of the implementation process, the
Department of Health and then NHS England sought to learn from local
providers to build on existing best practice rather than implementing
from above. We established collaboratives based around higher education
institutions to lead the implementation locally, as individuals,
organisations and system units gained competence and confidence in the
new ways of delivering therapy. In the current ‘innovation’ phase of
CYP-IAPT, a national group, the Collaborative of Collaboratives, is
presenting opportunities for CAMHS partnerships to refine and expand
both the treatments and the implementation of the programme, and the
group tasked with service transformation has drawn up a template for
improved services (*Delivering With and Delivering Well*),\ :sup:`23`
co-authored by the Child Outcomes Research Consortium (CORC), the
Quality Network for Community CAMHS (QNCC), the Choice and Partnership
Approach (CAPA) and Youth Access, young people and other voluntary
organisations, against which the quality of services can be judged.

Our current focus is the sustainability phase, which requires a national
system of quality assurance of training, performance and service
characteristics so that CAMHS partnerships can be held to account for
maintaining the system they have established. An Accreditation Council –
working in partnership with the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the
British Psychological Society, NHS England, Health Education England,
the QNCC, and the professional groups representing family therapists,
interpersonal psychotherapists and CBT therapists – has developed an
individual accreditation system for CYP-IAPT. These measures help
commissioners and providers ensure that children, young people and
parents receive the appropriate, evidence-based, outcomes-focused care
they deserve.

That these improvements have been possible against the background of the
most significant challenges across child mental health since the
establishment of child guidance clinics 60 years ago is a testament to
the incredible commitment to innovation of the CAMHS partnerships, their
clinicians, leaders, the children, young people and parents, as well as
the higher education institutions supporting their development. The high
profile of children and young people's mental health has been boosted by
the demonstration of effectiveness. We look forward to a brighter future
for CAMHS, characterised by improved accessibility, more participation,
an increased outcomes focus, greater transparency, and continued respect
of NICE guidance and evidence-based practice.

.. [1]
   **Peter Fonagy** OBE FMedSci FBA, National Clinical Advisor, CYP
   IAPT. **David M. Clark** CBE FBPs FMedSci, FBA, National Clinical and
   Informatics Advisor, Adult IAPT.
