====================================================================================================================
Experiences of ward rounds among in-patients on an acute mental health ward: a qualitative exploration\ `† <#fn1>`__
====================================================================================================================



Reed Cappleman
Zandra Bamford
Clare Dixon
Hayley Thomas
:Correspondence: Reed Cappleman
(reed.cappleman@swyt.nhs.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To address the gap in qualitative research
   examining patients' experiences of ward rounds. In-depth interviews
   were conducted with five in-patients on an acute mental health ward.
   Data were analysed using thematic analysis.

   **Results** Data were organised into three first-order themes,
   positioned within an overarching theme relating to patients'
   perceptions of the use of power and control within ward rounds.

   **Clinical implications** Systemic factors may make it difficult to
   facilitate ward rounds in a manner which leaves patients feeling
   fully empowered or in control, but there are practical measures to
   address these issues, drawn from participants' accounts.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Ward rounds are seen as a key component of care provision in in-patient
psychiatric settings.\ :sup:`1` However, literature in this area has
found that they evoke anxiety in a large proportion of
patients,\ :sup:`2,3` particularly when more people are
present.\ :sup:`4` Patients report not feeling listened to and feeling
that information is withheld from them.\ :sup:`3` Many patients also
feel inadequately prepared for ward rounds by staff.\ :sup:`5` Labib &
Brownell\ :sup:`3` highlight the scarcity of qualitative investigations
in this area and suggest that addressing this may highlight additional
unexplored factors affecting patient satisfaction with ward rounds. This
study aims to address this need. It was carried out in an acute
in-patient unit located in a district general hospital in the north west
of England. The need for this project to take place was identified by
the unit's psychiatry team, who wished to investigate how ward rounds
could be adapted to facilitate patient satisfaction. It was also hoped
the project might identify avenues of investigation for future
researchers, as per Labib & Brownell's suggestions.\ :sup:`3`

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Participants
------------

Participants were recruited from across three mixed-gender adult acute
mental health in-patient wards attached to a general hospital. Each ward
has a different consultant attached. Ward rounds within this unit are
chaired by psychiatrists and bring together information from members of
the multidisciplinary team (nursing, psychology, occupational therapy
and psychiatry), followed by a direct review of the patient's progress
and mental state, formulating risk and developing treatment plan changes
accordingly.

Patients from the wards were eligible to participate if they had
experienced two or more ward rounds. Although nine responded favourably
and completed informed consent forms, four did not participate: two were
unavailable on the days they were due to be interviewed, one declined to
take part when approached by the interviewer, and one chose to terminate
her interview citing her mental state as non-conducive to participation.
Detailed characteristics of the five participants are presented in
`Table 1 <#T1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Participant characteristics

   +----------+--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Patient  | Gender | Age,     | Length   | Ward     | Patient  |
   |          |        | years    | of stay  | rounds   | status   |
   |          |        |          | on       | a        |          |
   |          |        |          | ward,    | ttended, |          |
   |          |        |          | weeks    | *n*      |          |
   +==========+========+==========+==========+==========+==========+
   | Patient  | Female | 20       | 11       | Too many | Detained |
   | A        |        |          |          | to       |          |
   |          |        |          |          | recall   |          |
   +----------+--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |        |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Patient  | Male   | 41       | 4        | 4        | Detained |
   | B        |        |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |        |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Patient  | Male   | 36       | 5        | 4        | Detained |
   | C        |        |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |        |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Patient  | Male   | 49       | 2        | 2        | Informal |
   | D        |        |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   |          |        |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | Patient  | Male   | 27       | 1.5      | Too many | Detained |
   | E        |        |          |          | to       |          |
   |          |        |          |          | recall   |          |
   +----------+--------+----------+----------+----------+----------+

.. _S3:

Data collection
---------------

Ethical approval was granted from a local research ethics committee and
research and development department. Participants were recruited
following an initial approach being made by an assistant psychologist.
All participants were interviewed in the ward's ‘quiet room’ by R.C.,
using an interview topic guide (questions included ‘Tell me how you've
found the ward rounds here so far’ and ‘How do you feel when you're in
the ward round?’). Interviews lasted between 30 and 45 min, were
audio-recorded and were transcribed verbatim.

.. _S4:

Data analysis
-------------

Data were analysed using thematic analysis, a flexible approach for
organising large amounts of qualitative data.\ :sup:`6` Data analysis
followed the four conventions for thematic analysis suggested by Braun &
Clarke.\ :sup:`6`

#. Familiarisation with the data, re-reading transcripts looking for
   patterns and meanings.

#. Generating initial codes: organising the data into groups according
   to content and meaning. Transcripts were then re-coded and initial
   codes were grouped into ‘second-cycle’ codes.\ :sup:`7` For example,
   initial codes from patient C's transcript, such as ‘feeling
   intimidated’ and ‘not being co-operative backfires’ were subsumed
   under the second-cycle code ‘serious consequences to not behaving in
   the right way’.

#. Searching for themes: second-cycle codes were grouped together into
   broader themes and subthemes. For example, codes such as ‘staff as a
   supportive network’ and ‘approval means more within a good
   relationship’ were grouped together in the development of a theme
   about the importance of relationships.

#. Reviewing themes: ensuring each theme was coherent and that themes
   capture the essence of the data. At this point the theme ‘power and
   control’ was identified as an overarching theme and remaining themes
   designated as first-order themes.

Coded transcripts and themes were reviewed by the research team to
ensure analysis possessed sufficient quality and rigour.

.. _S5:

Results
=======

As the analysis of participants' accounts progressed, data were
organised into an overarching theme running throughout the data,
representing the data at the highest level of abstraction, and
first-level themes representing participants' accounts in less abstract,
more concrete ways. The terminology of ‘overarching themes’ and ‘levels
of themes’ is derived from Braun & Clarke.\ :sup:`6`

.. _S6:

First-level theme: not considering the patient's emotional state (‘They could possibly take into account a little bit more how you are at that moment in time’)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This theme concerns how the majority of participants felt that the ward
round process does not take the patient's emotional state into account
and actually increased their anxiety at times when it was already high.
The theme's title is a quote from patient C, who reported unease at
‘probing’ questions in the ward round when he was also experiencing
feelings of paranoia. Participants frequently admitted to anxiety about
discussing personal issues with a group of people, some of whom were
unknown to the participant: “‘Well … they can be scary at first … 'cos
there's all different people there, you've got support workers, staff
nurse there, there's your consultant, there's a SHO [senior house
officer,] there, you can have students there, I could be there, my
parents could be there. So it's like a lot of people in the ward review
and, er, it's like they're all talking about you’ (patient E).”

Another point raised in relation to this theme was the timing of
information-giving about the ward round. For example, patient B stated
that when the ward round process was initially described to him: “‘ …
they use all this, all this jargon, and you know, when your head's up
your arse so to speak, you don't take much of it in, you're just looking
at a load of professionals and you don't know what they do.’”

For patient B, information about the ward round which would have helped
ameliorate anxiety was given at a time (and by a means) that did not
take account of his mental state at that point.

.. _S7:

First-level theme: ‘behind closed doors’ (wanting more involvement in the process)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Participants felt that staff held control over ward round processes and
wished for more involvement. Participants described a lack of
collaboration in the area of decision-making, where they felt their
views were often not taken into account and that decisions were made
away from them, without their involvement.

   ‘ … it's like most of the things they're behind closed doors, and,
   and then they let you know, in your review they let you know “right
   we're going to follow this, we're gonna review this”.’ (patient E)

For patient A, the way in which events during ward rounds are documented
was an area where control lay with staff and where she wished for more
input and collaboration: “‘I think as well you should get like a copy of
what they've wrote [sic] (…) 'Cos you don't know what they write down
and stuff, I reckon they should tell you what they've wrote down so you
could like read it for a bit and then next week feed back on what
they've said and maybe like, like add things to it or develop what
they've wrote.’” However, some participants devised ways of being able
to have more input into the process, within the parameters they were
confronted with. Patient C articulated this using a ‘game playing’
metaphor: ‘it's gotten better now because I've just got some leave you
see but I wasn't entirely aware of how to play the game’. This was
linked to the idea of having to adhere to unwritten rules of behaviour
in the ward round: ‘there was a charge nurse in the last ward who was
getting very frustrated with me because she was trying very clearly to
show me the right way to behave and I was digging my heels in’. This
resulted in what patient C described as a ‘meet you halfway situation,
where if I cooperate with their goals they'll offer me incentives’.

.. _S8:

First-level theme: the importance of relationships (‘He's the only one who has listened’)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Participants stressed the importance of good relationships with staff
and that such relationships had a positive impact on their ward round
experiences. The theme is named after a quote from patient D, who said:
“‘Like I say, he listened. That's the main thing. And when you're in. .
when you're in the kind of situation I'm in at the moment, if people
listen to you it's half the battle, when you've got someone you can talk
to, and I felt I could talk to that doctor and he listened.’”

Patient A described finding the ward rounds themselves daunting, but
expressed a wish to use positive relationships she'd formed with staff
to help her cope with them: “‘If you're close to that member of staff
and they're sat at the side of you and if you were both speaking
together … Like that would be good. 'Cos you'd feel like somebody's
there for you, like, rather than being on your own.’” However, patient A
also added that the parameters of these helpful relationships were
controlled by staff, who may not always recognise the positive effects
of staff relationships on ward round experiences. This could result in
the ward round being set up in a way which does not take account of the
importance of relationships for patients, for example when there are
short-notice changes to which staff attend: ‘it's nerve-wracking enough
going into your ward review and then at last minute, “oh yeah by the
way, such and such a person isn't coming, this person's coming in”.’

.. _S9:

Overarching theme: power and control (‘they can keep renewing my section’)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The themes so far can be understood as part of an overarching theme
relating to power and control. Issues of power and control were implicit
within many issues that participants raised. The quote in this theme's
name originates from patient E's interview, and relates to how some
participants described their awareness during ward rounds that staff
have the power to decide if they stay in hospital or leave.

Participants often talked about issues of power and control by
describing staff in terms of police or other agents of the law. For
example, while describing being assessed in ward rounds, patient C
stated: ‘yeah, it's kind of the feeling where, I don't know if you've
ever been stopped by the police but they do that kind of thing, you can
feel them looking up and down at you … ’. Such comparisons seemed to
arise from participants' awareness of the assessment function of ward
rounds and professionals' power to determine the outcomes of these
assessments. Patient B described how this awareness led to anxiety about
the outcome of ward rounds: ‘ … at first, it's like having to tell these
people here, if I tell them I'm having these mad thoughts, they're gonna
lock me up forever’. As described in the first-level themes,
participants felt that professionals hold power and control over how the
ward round, and therefore the assessment process within it, is
conducted. However, as indicated by the first-level theme ‘the power of
relationships’, participants suggested these issues could be ameliorated
by positive, collaborative relationships with staff.

Patient B also described how interpretations of the actions and
intentions of those in the ward round may be influenced by previous
encounters with those in authority: “‘ 'Cos my personal experience of
walking into a room with loads of people is walking into a courtroom …
'Cos they sent me to jail. So, I didn't have a very good experience of
loads of people if you like.’” This account suggests that some ward
round procedures may evoke patients' negative memories of encounters
with powerful figures.

.. _S10:

Suggestions for improvements
----------------------------

Participants seemed eager to share their ideas about practical
improvements that could be made to ward rounds (`Box 1 <#box1>`__).
Indeed, in discussion with R.C. during recruitment, participants often
cited the desire to share such ideas as their primary motivation for
taking part.

**Box 1** Participants' suggestions for improvements to ward rounds

-  Allow patients access to ward round records and the power to
   negotiate additions to them

-  Invite a smaller number of staff into patients' initial ward rounds
   and increase the number gradually

-  Be open about when patients are being assessed on particular areas of
   their mental state and why

-  Utilise patients' one-to-one time with named nurses so ward rounds
   can be prepared for

-  Issue patients with a booklet about hospital procedures on admission,
   including information about ward rounds. This would serve as an aide
   memoire for patients to return to so they can remind themselves of
   ward round procedures

.. _S11:

Discussion
==========

Our participants' accounts lend support to past research indicating that
patients may find ward rounds anxiety provoking.\ :sup:`3,5` In support
of previous findings linking ward round size to patient
anxiety,\ :sup:`4,8` participants in this study also spoke of the
difficulties in talking to a room containing a large number of people
unknown to them. Participants also reported that ward rounds are more
distressing if they are already in an anxious or distressed state, an
association which has not yet been studied in the quantitative
literature. Findings from this study suggest that a lack of well-timed
information about ward rounds could also contribute to anxiety.

As hoped, using qualitative methods led to a deeper understanding of
participants' ward round experiences than has previously been possible
using quantitative methods. It was hoped that more participants would be
recruited but this proved difficult within the time available, owing to
potential participants' apparent fluctuating mental state and their
availability and motivation to take part. Although this is an
exploratory study with a small sample, the findings highlight previously
unexplored issues that may deserve further investigation. One such area
is that of the potential importance to patients of their relationships
with professionals and how sensitive use of positive relationships may
positively affect the ward round experience. For example, future
research might investigate whether anxiety in ward rounds is mitigated
by the presence of patients' favoured members of staff, such as named
nurses or key-workers.

.. _S12:

Improving the patient experience
--------------------------------

Study results and participants' suggestions for improvements to ward
rounds were fed back to the research site's consultant psychiatrists.
This generated discussion around how the practical measures suggested by
participants (`Box 1 <#box1>`__) may provide safeguards to minimise the
issues of power and control that inevitably influence in-patient
settings, and how members of other disciplines (e.g. nursing) can play a
key role in ensuring that patients feel prepared for ward rounds,
supporting them to manage their anxiety in the process. The study's
findings contributed to a subsequent reorganisation of ward round
procedures at the research site. During the feedback process, the
psychiatry team emphasised that continuing cuts to National Health
Service in-patient care may lead clinicians to change how they
facilitate ward rounds and that keeping the patient experience in mind
will be a challenging but essential task.

Using qualitative methods to investigate acute mental health
in-patients' experiences of ward rounds led to a richer understanding
than has previously been possible using quantitative methods. The
findings suggest possible directions for future research into ward
rounds and prompted clinical discussions that have informed changes to
ward round practice at the research site.

We thank participants who gave their time; Charlene Rouski, James
Dudley, Katie Usher and Dr Sarah Jones for their help with recruitment;
and the psychiatry team on units K1, K2 and K3 at Royal Bolton Hospital
for their support.

.. [1]
   **Dr Reed Cappleman** is a clinical psychologist at South West
   Yorkshire Partnership NHS Foundation Trust; **Dr Zandra Bamford** is
   clinical lead for Royal Bolton Hospital's acute care psychology
   services; **Dr Clare Dixon** is a clinical tutor on Lancaster
   University's Doctorate in Clinical Psychology, and a clinical
   psychologist at Alder Hey Children's Hospital; **Dr Hayley Thomas**
   is a consultant psychiatrist in Bolton's early intervention team.
