===============================================================================================================================================
Chemotherapy for Hodgkin's lymphoma in a patient receiving clozapine for treatment-resistant schizophrenia: use of the Mental Capacity Act 2005
===============================================================================================================================================



Florence Elizabeth Chamberlain
Nicholas Walsh
Jan FalkowskiCorrespondence to Florence Elizabeth Chamberlain
(florencechamberlain@doctors.org.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   Treatment resistance occurs in approximately 30% of individuals with
   schizophrenia and is commonly treated with clozapine. Nodular
   sclerosing Hodgkin's lymphoma is a subtype of Hodgkin's lymphoma
   predominantly affecting those under 50 years of age. In this case
   report, an individual with treatment-resistant schizophrenia
   developed nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's lymphoma and is treated with
   concurrent clozapine and systemic chemotherapy. The aim of this case
   report is to act as guidance for clinicians and to outline the
   difficulties of treating individuals with psychiatric illness under
   the Mental Capacity Act 2005 when the proposed treatment could lead
   to high levels of morbidity and mortality.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's lymphoma is the commonest subtype of
Hodgkin's lymphoma.\ :sup:`1` It is characterised by proliferation of
malignant lymphocytes in the reticuloendothelial system and presenting
with lymphadenopathy or systemic ‘B’ symptoms.\ :sup:`2` It affects men
and women equally and predominantly those under 50 years.\ :sup:`1`
There are 3 cases of Hodgkin's lymphoma per 100 000 people in
England,\ :sup:`3` and without treatment 5-year survival ranges from 40
to 95%.\ :sup:`2,4` Treatment includes radiotherapy, systemic
chemotherapy or both\ :sup:`2` and is curative in 90% of
cases.\ :sup:`1` Risks from systemic chemotherapy treatment include
myelosuppression, febrile neutropaenia and thrombocytopaenia.\ :sup:`2`
The mortality rate from febrile neutropaenia is 9.5%.\ :sup:`5`

The Mental Capacity Act 2005 is a legal framework in England and Wales
for making decisions on behalf of adults who lack capacity to make
particular decisions for themselves. All adults are presumed to have
capacity for a particular decision unless it can be proven otherwise.
Patients who lack capacity require their nearest relative or an
independent mental capacity advocate (IMCA) to make a decision on their
behalf. Under certain circumstances, decisions are made by the Court of
Protection. Treatment under the Mental Health Act 1983 does not include
the treatment of physical illness except in cases where the mental
illness is a consequence of a physical illness.

Treatment resistance is found in approximately 30% of patients with
schizophrenia.\ :sup:`6` Clozapine is currently the most effective
management option in schizophrenia, but because of its side-effect
profile it is reserved for use only as a third-line agent.\ :sup:`6-9`
This includes a 0.3-2% risk of potentially fatal
agranulocytosis,\ :sup:`8-10` which is higher among the Asian
population\ :sup:`8,11` and carries a mortality rate of
5-10%.\ :sup:`12` Despite this, a delay in starting clozapine in those
with treatment-resistant schizophrenia has been shown to lead to poor
outcomes.\ :sup:`9,13`

To reduce the risks associated with the development of agranulocytosis,
blood parameters should be monitored closely\ :sup:`14` and clozapine
should be discontinued permanently if leukocyte counts drop
significantly.\ :sup:`10` During clozapine treatment clinicians should
avoid prescribing drugs that depress leucopoiesis.\ :sup:`10` Here we
describe an unusual case where a patient was successfully treated for
nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's lymphoma using the Mental Capacity Act 2005
while concurrently treated with clozapine under Section 3 of the Mental
Health Act.

.. _S1:

Case presentation
=================

A Bangladeshi patient with a 20-year history of treatment-resistant
schizophrenia was treated with clozapine. Since diagnosis, the patient
has had frequent admissions to acute psychiatric hospitals due to
non-adherence, leading to rapid relapse of psychotic symptoms within
days of cessation. However, when adherent to clozapine, the patient
remains relatively independent with only mild residual delusional ideas
persisting in the background.

An abnormal swelling developed in the patient's neck, but believing this
to be a side-effect of clozapine, the patient refused to comply with
further treatment. While admitted as an in-patient under Section 3 of
the Mental Health Act 1983, the patient was diagnosed with stage IIA
nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's lymphoma and managed expectantly. However,
the patient developed severe leg oedema secondary to inferior vena cava
syndrome. Meanwhile, the lymphoma progressed to stage IIIB, with a very
poor prognosis if untreated.

The patient refuted the diagnosis of Hodgkin's lymphoma and accounted
for symptoms using a multitude of delusional ideas. These included being
‘incriminated by someone – who tried to get into my blood and body’ and
saying that their neck was ‘just bloated’. It was deemed that the
patient did not have the capacity to consent to or refuse treatment for
Hodgkin's lymphoma at that time. The patient was unable to make use of
the information that without treatment, a likely outcome would be death,
but with treatment the prognosis was excellent. They were not able to
understand the gravity of their illness, or why treatment was being
offered, as well as continuing to deny the diagnosis. The patient could
not weigh up the information provided but was, however, adamant that
they did not want their life to end.

The risk to the patient and to others from a prolonged schizophrenia
relapse if clozapine was withheld during chemotherapy treatment was
weighed against risk of death from myelodepletion. Switching to an
alternative antipsychotic agent was considered but not possible due to
failure of multiple first- and second-line agents in the past. A
literature search failed to provide any evidence of agranulocytosis from
treating patients with clozapine and systemic chemotherapy
previously.\ :sup:`15` It was therefore deemed in the patient's best
interests to give systemic chemotherapy and clozapine concurrently.

The urgency of treating the Hodgkin's lymphoma took precedence over
waiting to see whether capacity could be regained with sustained
clozapine adherence. In the absence of a nearest relative to consult, an
IMCA was appointed, who agreed that systemic chemotherapy treatment
should progress immediately against the patient's wishes in their best
interests. Application was successfully made to treat the patient with
clozapine off-licence.

Before commencing systemic chemotherapy, haematological parameters and
clozapine level were within normal range. The patient was treated with
six cycles of systemic chemotherapy. Each cycle consisted of doxorubicin
25 mg/m\ :sup:`2`, bleomycin 10 000 iu/m\ :sup:`2`, vinblastine 6
mg/m\ :sup:`2` and dacarbazine 375 mg/m\ :sup:`2` on day 1 and day 15
with a 28-day break between cycles. During the first cycle of systemic
chemotherapy the patient became agitated and required sedation. It was
decided that continuing with further treatment should be decided by the
Court of Protection, which granted permission.

The patient completed treatment successfully and obtained complete
remission from Hodgkin's lymphoma 6 months after treatment completion.

.. _S2:

Discussion
==========

This case illustrates some of the practical difficulties in treating
patients under the Mental Capacity Act 2005. Although the probable
outcome of not treating this patient's lymphoma was death, the proposed
treatment also carried a high risk of morbidity and mortality and the
administration of cytotoxic agents requires total compliance on behalf
of the patient to avoid causing unnecessary harm to the patient and
staff administering the treatment.

Any proposed intervention should be the least restrictive of the
patient's basic rights and freedoms and the patient must be given all
appropriate help to restore capacity to make such a decision. In this
case, there was no time to spare to see whether reinitiating clozapine
would restore the patient's capacity to consent to treatment and avoid
application to the Court of Protection to treat without the patient's
consent.

Since a third of the general population will be diagnosed with cancer in
their lifetime\ :sup:`16` and the population prevalence of schizophrenia
is 0.30-0.66%,\ :sup:`17` the concurrent use of clozapine and systemic
chemotherapy in Hodgkin's lymphoma and other malignancies needs formal
investigation. Our current knowledge base is from a handful of case
reports which are not necessarily relevant to the malignancy in
question.\ :sup:`15,18` There is, however, a growing body of evidence
from case reports that it may be safe to reintroduce clozapine treatment
to control psychotic symptoms once the patient is established on
systemic chemotherapy treatment.\ :sup:`19-21` One case report exists
where clozapine was reinstated in a case of Hodgkin's lymphoma when
other antipsychotic agents failed to maintain psychotic symptom
remission.\ :sup:`22` But there is a lack of clear national and local
guidelines as to the safe monitoring of these two potentially lethal
treatments when prescribed concurrently. In the case of the patient we
have described, blood parameters and clozapine levels were measured
twice weekly and physical observations conducted 4-hourly throughout
treatment.

It is widely established that patients are at greatest risk of
agranulocytosis in the first 6 months of treatment with clozapine. A few
cases of delayed-onset agranulocytosis have been
described.\ :sup:`23,24` The mechanism remains unknown, and thus
physicians and psychiatrists are reluctant to prescribe concurrent
myelosuppressing medication.\ :sup:`21` Whether those well established
on clozapine therapy are less likely to develop agranulocytosis while
receiving systemic chemotherapy than those within 6 months of treatment
needs also to be investigated.

Lithium has been used to increase neutrophil counts in those with
neutropaenia during systemic chemotherapy and also in those with
neutropaenia from clozapine therapy.\ :sup:`8,9,25` The mechanism is
poorly understood and may lead to an increased risk of lithium toxicity
despite levels being within the therapeutic range.\ :sup:`8` There is
also some evidence that granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF)
can be used to treat agranulocytosis associated with chemotherapy and
clozapine.\ :sup:`8` However, whether lithium and G-CSF can be used
prophylactically in cases where systemic chemotherapy and clozapine are
concurrently prescribed has not been examined.

.. _S3:

Conclusion
==========

Despite the fact that none of the haematological parameters fell below
critical levels in our patient, further research is needed before full
conclusions with regard to safety during concurrent clozapine and
systemic chemotherapy treatment. This case demonstrates the importance
of regular immune and haematological parameters monitoring when such
treatments are proposed.

.. [1]
   **Florence Elizabeth Chamberlain** is a Foundation Year 2 Trainee at
   North East Thames Foundation School, **Nicholas Walsh** is a
   Consultant Psychiatrist at Newham General Hospital, London, and **Jan
   Falkowski** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at Tower Hamlets Centre for
   Mental Health, Mile End Hospital, London, UK.
