================================================================================
Lessons from export to New Zealand of the second opinion appointed doctor scheme
================================================================================



John Dawson
Paul Glue
Pete M. Ellis
Jessie Lenagh-Glue
David Goldsmith
Don A. R. SmithCorrespondence to John Dawson (john.dawson@otago.ac.nz)
 [1]_
:Date: 2015-4

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** We compared findings of an audit of New Zealand’s
   version of the second opinion appointed doctor (SOAD) scheme with
   published information on the equivalent scheme for England and Wales,
   to consider what might be learnt from the different jurisdictions’
   experience.

   **Results** Strong similarities exist between the two schemes in the
   demographic profile of individuals subject to the SOAD process and
   rates of approval of compulsory treatment. The clearer legal
   framework for the English scheme and its supervision by an
   independent national agency may offer significant advantages in terms
   of consistency and transparency, compared with the informal,
   decentralised structure of New Zealand’s scheme.

   **Clinical implications** Clinicians may not always favour greater
   formality or elaborate national structures for administering the
   Mental Health Act, but there are advantages in promoting clarity and
   consistency in a mandatory statutory process designed to protect
   compulsory patients’ rights.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In 1992, New Zealand adopted a modified version of the second opinion
appointed doctor (SOAD) scheme into its mental health law. That scheme
was first enacted for England (and Wales) by the Mental Health Act 1983
(UK). As in England, New Zealand law requires the proposals of the
treating clinician to be approved by a second psychiatrist in two main
situations – for longer-term use of medication, and for
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) – where a compulsory patient does not
consent.\ :sup:`1` In England, this mandatory second opinion scheme has
been managed, funded and periodically reviewed by a national agency,
firstly by the Mental Health Act Commission (MHAC), then by the Care
Quality Commission (CQC). In New Zealand, no equivalent national agency
has existed to manage the scheme. Its administration has fallen on
regional officials (usually senior psychiatrists) who manage the
statutory process in the nation’s 20 district health boards. Moreover,
New Zealand’s national guidelines on the Mental Health Act\ :sup:`2,3`
contain nothing like the detail of the English Code of
Practice\ :sup:`4` regarding conduct of the scheme. Instead, each local
district health board uses its own systems and forms.

The English rules require SOADs to check the patient’s legal status,
speak to the patient in private, consult the treating clinician, consult
two other professionals involved in the patient’s care and provide
written reasons for the decision. A national system of online forms is
also used for SOADs to document these steps, state whether they approve
the treatment in changed or unchanged form and specify the agreed
treatment regime.\ :sup:`5` No such prescriptive rules govern the New
Zealand process. This paper compares the role performed by second
opinion psychiatrists in New Zealand with that of SOADs in England and
Wales. The term SOADs will be used to refer to the second opinion
psychiatrists, of both jurisdictions.

.. _S1:

Method
======

We audited the New Zealand scheme, for the first time, at three
different centres. We reviewed documentation concerning SOADs’ conduct
of the treatment approval process, for both medication and
ECT.\ :sup:`6` We matched SOAD reviews of ECT with the two medication
reviews nearest in time (ECT, *n* = 146; medication, *n* = 292; total,
*n* = 438). Then we studied the progress in the following year of 11
patients at one centre whose treatment had not been fully approved by
the SOAD.\ :sup:`7` Finally, we compared our findings with published
information and guidelines concerning the equivalent English scheme. The
study was approved by New Zealand’s Multi-Region Ethics Committee.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

.. _S3:

Comparisons between the New Zealand and English SOAD schemes
------------------------------------------------------------

We found intriguing similarities and important differences between the
operation of the New Zealand and English schemes. There were strong
similarities in the demographic profile of patients for whom treatment
approval was sought for medication and ECT respectively. In both
jurisdictions, in medication reviews, males outnumbered females by
approximately 2:1, whereas that gender ratio was reversed for ECT; the
mean age of patients undergoing medication review was significantly
younger than for ECT; and the mean age of female patients under review
was significantly older than males, for both medication and ECT.

These features seem to be associated with the different diagnostic
profile of patients undergoing the different forms of treatment. In New
Zealand, we found patients undergoing medication review tended to be
male (62%), younger (mean age 44.8 years) and had a diagnosis of
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder (64%), whereas patients being
considered for ECT tended to be female (70%), older (mean age 56.9
years) and had a diagnosis of affective disorder (68%).\ :sup:`6`
Interestingly, Māori patients tended to be underrepresented in figures
for ECT (6%) compared with their proportion in the general New Zealand
population (approximately 15%).

In both jurisdictions, ECT reviews generally occur at an early stage in
the Mental Health Act process. In England, Fennell, in a study conducted
some years ago, found 60% of ECT approvals occurred within 7 days of the
patient’s detention under the Act, 18% on the very first day.\ :sup:`8`
In New Zealand, we found 60% occurred during the initial month’s
compulsory assessment under the Act.\ :sup:`6` Medication reviews are
only required by the legislation, of both jurisdictions, after the
patient has been detained for a longer period of time.

In both jurisdictions, SOADs overwhelmingly approved the treatment
sought, especially ECT. Non-approval, or significant change in the
proposed treatment, was rare (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__).\ :sup:`6,9–11` In
England, there has been a recent trend towards less frequent full (or
‘unchanged’) approval of treatment plans for medication (81% in
2002–2007, falling to 68% in 2011–2012), though not for
ECT.\ :sup:`9,11`

.. _S4:

Lack of consistency between New Zealand centres
-----------------------------------------------

In our New Zealand audit, we found little consistency in the conduct of
the SOAD process at the different centres.\ :sup:`6` There were marked
differences in how SOADs were designated to review the treatment of
individual patients; the number of clinicians who performed the SOAD
role; their degree of independence from treating clinicians; the forms
they completed; and the steps they took during the approval process, as
documented in local forms or the patient’s clinical record in the week
before or after treatment was reviewed.

In New Zealand, the Mental Health Act authorises the Mental Health
Review Tribunal to appoint qualified psychiatrists as SOADs, but there
is no national agency managing the scheme.\ :sup:`1` Different methods
are then used in the various regional district health boards to
designate the particular SOAD who will review an individual patient’s
treatment. These methods include an administrator approaching SOADs on a
roster system; the treating clinician sending an email request to all
local SOADs, to see who responds; and the treating clinician directly
approaching a SOAD with specialised knowledge in treating the particular
patient’s condition. In some services, treating clinicians personally
decide which SOAD to approach.

At one centre, only a small number of appointed SOADs actually performed
the task. At another, the work was shared widely among consultant
psychiatrists. At a third, a single specialist considered almost all
proposals for approval of ECT, then administered the course of
treatment, if approved. The SOADs invariably worked in the same region
as the treating clinician. They were not paid more to perform the SOAD
role than their usual salary or given any particular relief from their
usual workload.

Each district health board used different forms and systems for
recording the SOADs’ written opinions on treatment. The text of these
opinions was remarkable in its diversity, ranging from a single word
(the name of an alternative medication) to a three-page formal report.
The depth of scrutiny given by SOADs to the treatment is indicated in
part by this written record. It revealed great variation between New
Zealand centres in the extent to which SOADs recorded having reviewed
the patient’s clinical notes, diagnosis or treatment plan, or recorded
the patient’s views on treatment. There was similar variation in the
extent to which there was any record that SOADs had spoken to the
treating clinician or provided a written Fig. 1Extent of approval of (a)
medication and (b) electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) by second opinion
appointed doctors (SOADs) in New Zealand (2003–2011) and England and
Wales (2002-2012).Data from Dawson *et al* (2013),\ :sup:`6` Mental
Health Act Commission (2008),\ :sup:`9` Care Quality Commission
(2013).\ :sup:`11` Terms used in New Zealand: ‘approved unchanged’,
‘partially approved’ and ‘not approved’. Terms used in England and Wales
for both periods of time: ‘approved unchanged’, ‘slight change’ and
‘significant change’. There were missing data for second opinions on
medication (New Zealand 2003–2011, 2.4%, England and Wales 2002–2007,
7.6% and 2011–2012, 3.5%) and ECT (New Zealand 2003–2011, 0%, England
and Wales 2002–2007, 8.2% and 2011–2012, 8.3%). justification for their
decision. This diversity is illustrated in `Fig. 2 <#F2>`__.

In short, there seems little consistency in SOADs’ conduct of the
process at different New Zealand centres. Moreover, different methods
were used to store information generated during the process, and
generally no adequate method was adopted for linking the information
SOADs provided on the forms with any comments they made in the patient’s
notes, so the two could be read together.

.. _S5:

No clear process where impasse
------------------------------

At one centre we evaluated the files of 11 patients whose treatment had
not been approved, or only partially approved, by the SOAD,\ :sup:`7`
trying to determine how the disagreement had been resolved. We found
that when the SOAD did not approve, or qualified, the treatment plan,
intensive consultation usually occurred between the treating clinician,
the SOAD and the regional administrator of the Act. Cases generating
most correspondence concerned non-approval of ECT. In some cases, these
written exchanges revealed significant dissatisfaction or disagreement
on the part of the clinicians.

In England, the Mental Health Act Code of Practice says (para 24.67)
there is ‘no appeal’ from the SOAD’s decision to approve treatment or
not.\ :sup:`4` In New Zealand, the Act simply says that, for the
proposed treatment to proceed, it must be approved by ‘a’ SOAD. This
rule does not say the SOAD can veto the treatment proposed. Instead, it
opens the possibility that another SOAD might approve the treatment, if
the first SOAD does not. So it might be said that there is an appeal.

In 2 (of 11) cases of non-approval we followed, further second opinions
were sought when the first SOAD declined. Nevertheless, some
disagreement arose in these cases between the clinicians as to whether
the initial SOAD’s refusal to approve treatment was final. No clearly
established process seemed to exist for resolving such disagreements,
and no clear ‘appeal’ process was specified by the Mental Health Act
guidelines\ :sup:`2` during the period studied.

.. _S6:

Discussion
==========

.. _S7:

Main findings
-------------

Our findings show some clear similarities in the conduct of the SOAD
schemes in England and New Zealand, although there is considerable
inconsistency in the process followed at different New Zealand centres,
along with uncertainties arising from the absence of a clear rule in New
Zealand regarding the finality of a SOAD’s decision not to approve
treatment.

There are similarities in the characteristics of patients subject to
medication and ECT reviews, in the stage patients have reached in the
civil commitment process when undergoing these reviews and in the high
rates at which SOADs approve the treating clinicians’ plans. In sum,
under the two schemes, SOADs seem to review similar patients, at similar
stages in the Mental Health Act process, with similar results.

One can debate whether high rates of approval of treatment by SOADs are
a good or a bad thing. Psychiatrists exercise considerable discretion in
selecting appropriate treatment and, in doing so, must take many factors
into Fig. 2Recorded elements at three New Zealand centres in second
opinion appointed doctor (SOAD) reviews of (a) medication and (b)
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). account. Complete agreement between
treating clinicians and SOADs on all occasions is therefore improbable.
If it occurred, it would suggest ‘rubber-stamping’ and no exercise of
independent judgement on the part of SOADs. That would seem to rob the
process of any value. Yet high levels of disagreement between the two
clinicians would also be a concern. It would seem to call into question
the competence of SOADs, or the competence of treating clinicians whose
plans would be regularly overruled. Alternatively, it would call into
question the reliability of treatment decisions in psychiatry, if the
two clinicians could rarely agree on a treatment plan.

A high but not complete level of agreement therefore seems satisfactory.
It suggests that independent judgement is exercised by SOADs, but the
two clinicians can usually agree on a treatment plan. The rates of
approval, in both New Zealand and England, fit that pattern, even though
the rates are not exactly the same.

.. _S8:

Lessons learnt
--------------

At the New Zealand centres studied, there were notable inconsistencies
in how SOADs were designated to review individual patients’ treatment
and in the degree of independence evident between SOADs and treating
clinicians. There also seemed to be little consistency in the range of
people SOADs consulted or in the information they considered (including
the frequency with which they consulted the treating clinician,
considered the patient’s views about treatment and provided a written
justification for their decision) – as judged from their written
comments on the forms or in patients’ notes. Likely explanations for
this diversity include the lack of detailed national guidelines
stipulating a process to follow, lack of specific training or funding
for SOADs who perform the role, and absence of decisions of New Zealand
courts reviewing the SOADs’ conduct against legal standards of
procedural fairness.

A notable feature of the New Zealand situation is the absence of a ‘no
appeal’ rule. In cases where SOADs declined to approve treatment,
intense consultation usually occurred, but this did not always produce
agreement between the SOAD and treating clinician on an amended
treatment plan. Approval from another SOAD might then be sought, on the
premise that treatment could proceed if ‘a’ positive opinion was
obtained.

The ‘no appeal’ rule in England is more final and certain. It may
encourage SOADs and treating clinicians to negotiate an amended
treatment plan to permit some form of agreed treatment to proceed, when
the patient is detained for treatment under the Act. It is interesting
that the MHAC and CQC publish no figures on cases in which SOAD approval
is declined. They report only cases in which the treating clinician’s
plan was approved ‘unchanged’, ‘slightly changed’, or ‘significantly
changed’. There is in fact no space on the current CQC form for English
SOADs to say they decline. Presumably they could simply decline to sign
the form and – if there was ‘no appeal’ – that would seem to mean the
treatment could not proceed.

This does not mean that all disagreements in England between treating
clinicians and SOADs are happily resolved. The ‘no appeal’ rule may
confer sufficient authority on SOADs to secure amendment of the
treatment plan, in most cases, and conferring such authority on SOADs
may be more readily justified where – as in England, but not New Zealand
– senior psychiatrists are selected, trained, funded and supervised by
an independent national agency to perform the task. But it is not wholly
obvious why one SOAD should have final authority to approve the
treatment or not, and some treating clinicians are no doubt left
aggrieved by the SOAD’s decision. The SOAD does not carry continuing
responsibility for the patient’s care, and the treating clinician may
have far more knowledge of the patient and be a specialist in treatment
of the patient’s particular condition. So why should the treating
clinician be overruled by another clinician, with no right of appeal?

Greater knowledge on the part of the treating clinician should, of
course, be taken into account by the SOAD when making their decision.
But a case can be made for the New Zealand position: that treatment
should be permitted provided ‘a’ SOAD approves. This produces something
like an appeal from the first SOAD’s decision. Any appeal process should
be clearly specified, however, and should not be capable of manipulation
by the treating clinician.

The new New Zealand guidelines regarding the Mental Health Act, issued
in 2012\ :sup:`3` after closure of the period we studied, address the
matter more fully. They suggest (at para 10.2.2) that, where the first
SOAD declines to approve, the regional administrator of the Mental
Health Act (although not the treating clinician) may ‘direct that
another approved psychiatrist provide a second opinion’. So the process
of obtaining another SOAD’s opinion is to be managed by a senior
psychiatric administrator, not by the treating clinician. One can
imagine such a process being managed in England by the CQC.

Nevertheless, through this ‘appeal’ process the first SOAD’s view can be
trumped. So then we may ask: why should the second SOAD’s view be
preferred to the first, and will ‘shopping around’ for opinions somehow
occur? In the end one might conclude that the practical advantages of
finality justify accepting the first SOAD’s view, and support the ‘no
appeal’ rule.

Other changes to the New Zealand scheme might be made to try to capture
some advantages of the English superstructure. The new guidelines in New
Zealand suggest SOADs should consider, before approving treatment: the
history of the patient’s illness and prior pharmaceutical regime; the
risks and benefits of potential treatment approaches; the patient’s
views, as far as they can be ascertained; and whether the treatment is
of maximal benefit to the patient and appropriate to their
condition.\ :sup:`3` This provides some guidance on the process to
follow. But the guidelines could go further, to specify clearly the
degree of independence required between SOADs and treating clinicians,
and the information SOADs should record. The Ministry could promulgate a
system of online forms to be used nationally. Completion of the forms
would confirm the necessary steps have been taken, and the forms could
be used to collate data, publish statistics and make the process more
transparent, as has occurred in England with reports from the MHAC and
CQC.\ :sup:`9–11`

.. _S9:

Limitations
-----------

The shortcomings of this study must be acknowledged. The retrospective
data collection for our audit was based on written forms and clinical
notes. It is a study of documented steps and is likely to underestimate
the intensity of treatment review SOADs conducted. Our general audit
only covered the process at 3 New Zealand district health boards (out of
20) and our substudy covered a small number of non-approved cases at a
single board. The audit discovered significant diversity in practice
between district health boards, so generalising to other boards may be
inappropriate.

.. _S10:

Implications
------------

In our audit, 438 examples of the SOAD process were studied at the three
sites. These related to both medication and ECT, and the results show
clear parallels between the operation of the New Zealand and English
schemes. Our substudy of non-approved cases is, we believe, the first of
its kind. In conclusion, the inconsistencies revealed in the conduct of
the process at different New Zealand centres should encourage clinicians
in England and Wales to value their clear national guidelines and forms.
It shows the benefits of the structure, training, funding and reporting
provided by the MHAC and CQC. Clinicians may not always value greater
formality or elaborate structures for administration of the Mental
Health Act. But, in light of New Zealand’s experience, we suggest that
central administration of a SOAD scheme can confer advantages in terms
of clarity and consistency that are particularly desirable in a
mandatory process designed to protect compulsory patients’ rights.

.. [1]
   **John Dawson** is a professor in the Faculty of Law at the
   University of Otago, Dunedin. **Paul Glue** is a professor in the
   Department of Psychological Medicine at the University of Otago,
   Dunedin. **Pete M. Ellis** is a professor in the Department of
   Psychological Medicine at the University of Otago, Wellington.
   **Jessie Lenagh-Glue** is a research assistant in the Faculty of Law
   at the University of Otago, Dunedin. **David Goldsmith** is a
   consultant psychiatrist at the Waitemata District Health Board,
   Auckland. **Don A. R. Smith** is a research fellow at the Department
   of Psychological Medicine at the University of Otago, Wellington, New
   Zealand.
