==================================================================
Early Psychosis Intervention: A Culturally Adaptive Clinical Guide
==================================================================



Roger Ho [1]_
:Date: 2015-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 55f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

This book is written by multidisciplinary pioneers in early psychosis
intervention in South-East Asia and is a product of two decades of
development in this rapidly growing region, a cultural mosaic. In the
foreword, Professor Patrick McGorry highlights that the essence of such
intervention is to bring maximum recovery for young people with
psychotic experiences.

The book is unique and attempts to connect early psychosis with
transcultural psychiatry. The first part describes service structures of
early psychosis programmes in Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan and Korea. The
authors define early psychosis afresh by introducing the culturally
adaptive translation in Chinese, *sijueshitiao*, meaning imbalance of
thinking and perception. The second part discusses the cultural issues
in management of early psychosis. The authors tactfully compare and
contrast different Asian beliefs of mental illness including Islam
(unbalanced lifestyle), Hindu (bad karma), Buddhism and Taoism (attacks
by ghosts) and Christianity (demonic possession). The local cultural
beliefs may increase duration of untreated illness because patients and
families often consult their traditional healers instead of medical
practitioners.

The authors present interesting data on public misconceptions about
psychosis. They highlight salient points in early psychosis treatment
such as recommended dose of each antipsychotic drug, topics to be
covered in peer support groups, strategies for family work and
medication adherence. I personally found the chapter illustrating the
state-of-art information technology and database design very
interesting.

I highly recommend this book to mental health professionals who are keen
to establish early psychosis intervention services in other parts of
Asia, Africa and South America. The authors carefully insert clinical
vignettes throughout the book and enrich its clinical relevance. Mental
health professionals working for well-established early psychosis
intervention programmes may find the culturally adaptive strategies
helpful in their clinical practice. In the near future, I hope Professor
Eric Chen and his colleagues may consider writing a book on the
neurobiology of early psychosis.

.. [1]
   **Roger Ho** is Assistant Professor and Consultant Psychiatrist,
   Department of Psychological Medicine, National University of
   Singapore, 1E Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore 119228, email:
   pcmrhcm@nus.edu.sg
