=================================================================
London’s liaison psychiatry services: survey of service provision
=================================================================



Smitha Naidu
Jim Bolton
Jared SmithCorrespondence to Jim Bolton (jim.bolton@swlstg-tr.nhs.uk)
 [1]_
:Date: 2015-4

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To describe the liaison psychiatry services of
   all 30 general hospitals in Greater London and to determine whether
   services met national recommendations. The results were compared with
   a similar survey conducted 8 years previously to determine whether
   there had been significant service development.

   **Results** We identified wide variations in service provision across
   London. Fifteen hospitals (50%) had 24-hour services and one had no
   service. There had been a significant increase in services that
   assessed older adults. Increases in the size of teams and consultant
   psychiatry staff were not significant.

   **Clinical implications** Despite an increasing emphasis on the
   effectiveness of liaison psychiatry services, no London hospital had
   staffing levels consistent with national recommendations. Recent
   evidence for the cost-effectiveness of liaison psychiatry and an
   emphasis on parity between physical and mental health in National
   Health Service policy may provide further impetus for growth.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Liaison psychiatry is concerned with the management of mental disorder
in general medical settings where there are high rates of mental health
problems. Mental disorder accounts for 5% of emergency department
attendances; 30% of hospital in-patients have comorbid mental
illness.\ :sup:`1`

A comprehensive liaison psychiatry service will address the following
clinical needs::sup:`1`

patients presenting at the emergency department with mental health
needs;comorbid mental and physical disorders;patients being treated for
the physical complications of alcohol and substance misuse;where
physical illness and its treatment is causing mental health
problems;medically unexplained physical symptoms.

In addition, liaison psychiatry services have a role in the training of
general medical staff in the recognition and basic management of common
mental health problems.\ :sup:`2`

The benefits of a comprehensive liaison psychiatry service for a general
hospital fall into four key domains::sup:`3`

improved psychiatric and medical outcomes of patientsenhanced patient
experience of medical careincreased patient safetygreater
cost-effectiveness of medical services.

The National Health Service (NHS) Confederation highlighted the economic
benefits of liaison psychiatry services, which are primarily achieved by
decreasing the length of hospital stays and reducing the frequencies of
reattendance and readmission.\ :sup:`4` A subsequent economic analysis
of a 24-hour liaison psychiatry service found that it generated
considerable cost savings for the health economy, with a cost–benefit
ratio of 4:1.\ :sup:`5` The greatest cost benefit was found in service
provision for older adults.

Following increased recognition of the clinical and economic benefits of
liaison psychiatry services, the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges
recommended the provision of 24-hour multidisciplinary liaison
psychiatry services for emergency departments and in-patient
wards.\ :sup:`6` In addition, the need for specific liaison psychiatry
service provision for older adults has been emphasised.\ :sup:`7,8`

To meet a need for more explicit guidance on the provision of services
for patients with mental health problems in general hospital settings,
the Royal College of Psychiatrists\ :sup:`9` updated its recommendations
for the staffing of liaison psychiatry services (`Table 1 <#T1>`__).
These were reiterated in national commissioning guidelines.\ :sup:`1`
The need for this guidance arose, in part, from the recognition of the
wide variability in service provision.

In 2004, a survey of liaison psychiatry services in 29 general hospitals
across Greater London identified wide variations in staffing, working
hours and patient groups seen.\ :sup:`10` Although half of services
worked over 24 hours, all except one service fell short of national
recommendations for service provision. Similar deficits have been
identified in other areas of the UK.\ :sup:`11–13`

Following a national focus on emergency care, there had been an
expansion in liaison psychiatry services serving emergency departments.
However, there was concern that Table 1Summary of liaison psychiatry
staffing recommendations\ :sup:`9,`\ `a <#TFN1>`__\ RoleWhole time
equivalentsConsultant psychiatrist1.0Trust grade
doctor1.0Nurses5.0Clinical health psychologist1.0Administrator1.5 [2]_
services for other general hospital patients might be neglected as a
result.

In light of recent recommendations for the establishment of robust
liaison psychiatry services, this survey aimed to identify changes in
service provision across London over the 8 years up to mid-2012, and to
audit the staffing of these services against national standards.

.. _S1:

Method
======

Greater London comprises 32 London boroughs and the City of London, and
has 30 general hospitals with emergency departments. Information on bed
numbers was obtained from hospital websites.

An email and telephone survey of liaison psychiatry services was carried
out over the first 6 months of 2012. A senior clinician from each of the
services was asked a list of predetermined questions. We enquired about
the number and professions of clinical team members. Higher specialist
trainees in psychiatry were not included in these figures as such posts
are often supernumerary and may not continue beyond the current
post-holder’s attachment.

We established details of service delivery. Hours of work were
categorised into services operating within core ‘working hours’ (09.00 h
to 17.00 h, Monday to Friday), those delivering an extended-hours
service and those operating 24 hours per day.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Comparison of the 2004 and 2012 profiles of the directly
      comparable liaison psychiatry services (*n* = 27)

   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   | Service variable    | 2004      | 2012      | 2004 *v.* 2012 |
   |                     |           |           | *P*            |
   +=====================+===========+===========+================+
   | Number of           | 638 (232) | 530 (242) | 0.001          |
   | in-patient beds,    |           |           |                |
   | mean (s.d.)         |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |                     |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   | Number of whole     | 8.4 (6.0) | 9.0 (5.7) | 0.63           |
   | time equivalent     |           |           |                |
   | staff, mean (s.d.)  |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |                     |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   | Hours of service,   |           |           |                |
   | *n* (%)             |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |     No service      | 0 (0.0)   | 1 (3.7)   |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |     Working hours   | 5 (18.5)  | 6 (22.2)  |                |
   | (09.00 h to 17.00   |           |           |                |
   | h)                  |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |     Extended hours  | 9 (33.3)  | 6 (22.2)  |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |     24 hours        | 13 (48.1) | 14 (51.9) | 0.80           |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |                     |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   | Staffing, *n* (%)   |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |     Dedicated       | 19 (70.4) | 23 (85.2) | 0.06           |
   | medical psychiatry  |           |           |                |
   | staff               |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |     Dedicated       | 19 (70.4) | 23 (85.2) | 0.06           |
   | consultant          |           |           |                |
   | psychiatry staff    |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |                     |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   | Patient groups      |           |           |                |
   | seen, *n* (%)       |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |     Older adults    | 17 (63.0) | 26 (96.3) | 0.01           |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+
   |     Alcohol and     | 21 (77.8) | 23 (85.2) | 0.55           |
   | substance misuse    |           |           |                |
   +---------------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+

The survey enquired about service provision for the following specific
patient groups:

those presenting to the emergency departmentin-patientsout-patientsolder
adultsthose with alcohol and/or substance misusethose with perinatal
mental health problems.

These groups were selected as being those most commonly served by a
comprehensive liaison psychiatry service. Where specialist liaison teams
existed to manage specific patient groups (e.g. older adults), these
were included within the data collected for the overall liaison
psychiatry service. Information was also collected on the organisations
responsible for the funding and management of services.

The results of the survey were analysed using the Statistical Package
for the Social Sciences, Release 19.0 (on IBM). Staffing levels were
compared with the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ recommendations
(`Table 1 <#T1>`__). Following reconfiguration of acute hospital
services between 2004 and 2012, we judged that differences between
liaison psychiatry staffing and service provision in these 2 years could
be compared at 27 sites.\ :sup:`10` Data from the two surveys were
compared using the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Tests for continuous variables
and the McNemar (mid-*p*) test for categorical variables, which is
appropriate for binary matched pairs data with small and moderate sample
sizes.\ :sup:`14` The criterion for statistical significance was set at
*P*\ <0.05.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

.. _S3:

Hospitals
---------

Information was collected from all 30 hospitals, of which 29 had a
liaison psychiatry service. Between 2004 and 2012, 2 hospitals had
closed and 3 new sites had opened; 27 hospitals were common to both
surveys.

A comparison of the profiles of the 27 directly comparable services is
given in `Table 2 <#T2>`__.

.. _S4:

Bed numbers
-----------

The mean number of in-patient beds for the 30 hospitals was 535 (range
200–1200, s.d. = 235). For the 27 comparable sites there was a
significant decrease in bed numbers of 17% over the previous 8 years
(*P* = 0.001).

.. _S5:

Working hours
-------------

Six (20%) hospitals had services operating in core working hours (09.00
h to 17.00 h, Monday to Friday). Eight (27%) hospitals had
extended-hours services and 15 (50%) had 24-hour services. At the 27
comparable sites, there was no significant change in the hours of work
between 2004 and 2012 (*P* = 0.80).

In the 15 hospitals with either no liaison psychiatry service or where
the service operated for less than 24 hours, out-of-hours cover by
community mental health services was available at 13 sites (87%).

.. _S6:

Patient groups
--------------

`Table 3 <#T3>`__ describes the patient groups assessed by services and
indicates where a particular group was managed by a specific specialist
team within the overall liaison psychiatry service.

All of the 29 services assessed patients in the hospital’s emergency
department. One service only assessed patients of 65 years of age or
over; younger adults were referred to community mental health services.

All of the liaison teams accepted referrals for older adults and 14
(48%) had a specific specialist older adults service. For the 27
comparable sites there was a significant increase in liaison psychiatry
service provision for older adults between 2004 and 2012 (*P* = 0.006),
but not for patients with alcohol and substance misuse (*P* = 0.55).

.. _S7:

Staffing
--------

The mean number of whole time equivalent clinical staff for all 29 teams
was 8.7 (range 1–22, s.d. = 5.5). The mean numbers of staff for the
various hours of service are given in `Table 4 <#T4>`__.

With respect to the 27 directly comparable sites, there had not been a
statistically significant increase in the mean size of teams (*P* =
0.63).

| Three teams (10%) consisted solely of nursing staff, but had access to
  senior medical staff if required. Fourteen teams (48%) had at least
  one whole time equivalent consultant psychiatrist. Two teams (7%) had
  a whole time Table 3Patient groups managed by liaison psychiatry
  services in London’s general hospitals (*n* = 30)Patient groupsLiaison
| psychiatry
| service
| *n* (%)Specialist service
| provision within
| the liaison service
| *n* (%)Emergency department29 (97)0 (0)In-patients28 (93)2
  (7)Out-patients16 (53)1 (3)Older adults29 (97)14 (48)Alcohol and
  substance
| misuse26 (87)10 (33)Perinatal26 (87)9 (30) Table 4Staffing of London’s
  liaison psychiatry services (*n* = 29)Whole time equivalent number of
  staff, mean (s.d.)Hours of serviceConsultant
| psychiatristOther
| medicalNursingPsychologyOtherWorking hours (*n* = 6)0.8 (0.5)0.8
  (0.7)1.8 (1.0)0.0 (0.0)0.0 (0.0)Extended hours (*n* = 8)0.5 (0.4)1.3
  (1.0)5.1 (4.7)0.3 (0.4)0.2 (0.5)24 hours (*n* = 15)0.9 (0.7)1.5
  (1.4)8.4 (2.4)0.1 (0.2)0.4 (1.1) equivalent psychologist and five more
  (17%) had regular psychology sessions.

At the directly comparable sites there had been an increase in the
number of teams with dedicated medical psychiatry staff and specifically
consultant psychiatry staff, but the differences were not statistically
significant (both *P* = 0.06).

National staffing recommendations for liaison psychiatry services
(`Table 1 <#T1>`__) are for a working-hours service, although it is
noted that an extended-hours service with additional staffing should be
provided where there is local need. It is difficult to compare the
services surveyed against these recommendations, because of the range of
different hours of work. However, none of the services employed all of
the recommended staff.

.. _S8:

Funding and management
----------------------

In total, 16 liaison psychiatry services (55%) were funded via a mental
health trust, 6 (21%) via an acute trust and 7 (24%) were jointly
funded. All services were managed by mental health trusts.

.. _S9:

Discussion
==========

This survey of London’s general hospitals describes the level of liaison
psychiatry service provision in 2012 and compares this with 8 years
previously. As in 2004, the survey found a wide variation in staffing
and hours of work. No hospitals had staffing levels consistent with
national recommendations. Between 2004 and 2012 there was a significant
increase in service provision for older adults. There was a
non-significant increase in the number of liaison psychiatry teams with
dedicated medical staff and consultant psychiatrists.

There continued to be considerable gaps in service provision, with one
hospital having no liaison psychiatry service. Although community mental
health services often provide psychiatric input where no liaison
psychiatry service exists, this is likely to be a less clinically and
cost-effective model of care.

The variation in service provision between hospitals has been found in
surveys of other areas of the UK.\ :sup:`11–13` As service provision in
London has previously been found to be more extensive than elsewhere,
this survey indicates that considerable development is required across
the UK to fulfil national recommendations and achieve potential cost
savings for the wider health economy.\ :sup:`5`

The increase in specific service provision for older adults might
reflect the emphasis on providing such services following the previous
survey.\ :sup:`7` Subsequent evidence of their cost-effectiveness may
provide further impetus for the growth of such services.\ :sup:`5`

There was an indication that psychiatric expertise within liaison
psychiatry services may be increasing, including a growth in consultant
numbers, although these findings did not reach statistical significance.
This potential increase may reflect recognition of the need for robust
clinical leadership and management, and of the specific expertise that
psychiatry can bring to the management of complex cases.\ :sup:`15`

The decrease in mean bed numbers for London’s hospitals may reflect the
emphasis in health service policy for England and Wales on providing
more services in the community. If this trend continues, it could have a
significant impact on how liaison psychiatry services are delivered. One
potential area of service development is the extension of liaison
psychiatry expertise into primary care to support the management of
patients with comorbid physical and mental illness and those with
medically unexplained symptoms.\ :sup:`15,16`

At the time of this survey, the principle of ‘parity of esteem’ between
mental and physical health services was stated in England’s NHS
Mandate.\ :sup:`17` NHS England’s objective is to close the health gap
between people with mental health problems and the population as a
whole. The potential impact of this on liaison psychiatry has been
articulated in a subsequent report, which recommends that commissioners
need to regard liaison services as a necessity rather than an optional
luxury, in order to provide an integrated approach to healthcare in
acute settings.\ :sup:`18`

Potential changes in the funding and commissioning of liaison psychiatry
services may also provide an impetus for service development. As
indicated by this survey, most services in England and Wales are
currently paid for from a mental health block contract.\ :sup:`19`
Separate funding of physical and mental health services is inappropriate
for liaison psychiatry, which bridges the two areas.\ :sup:`3` Work is
underway to devise a sustainable model of funding that will provide more
incentive for commissioners and providers of healthcare to establish
comprehensive liaison psychiatry services.

.. _S10:

Limitations
-----------

The survey was conducted in 2012, and several respondents indicated that
local commissioners were considering an increase in liaison psychiatry
service provision, often on a trial basis. Hence, although at the time
of publication there may have already been an increase service provision
in London, it will be several years before it can be determined whether
this has been sustained. We anticipate that this survey will provide a
baseline for a future survey to identify the effect of an increased
focus on liaison psychiatry service provision in commissioning guidance.

The survey is likely to underestimate overall mental health service
provision for adults in general hospitals. We did not include
stand-alone specialist services that operated separately from the main
liaison psychiatry service (e.g. neuropsychiatry, psycho-oncology,
clinical health psychology). Also, we did not enquire about child and
adolescent liaison psychiatry services, which usually operate separately
from adult services.

.. _S11:

Implications
------------

The survey describes the persistent variation in liaison psychiatry
service provision to London’s general hospitals, with services
universally falling below recommended standards. Since the survey was
undertaken, a number of national reports have highlighted the clinical
and economic benefits of liaison psychiatry and emphasised the
importance of parity between physical and mental health services. As
well as describing recent changes in services, the survey provides a
basis for future research to determine whether current recommendations
are translated into the commissioning of comprehensive liaison
psychiatry services for all of London’s general hospitals.

.. [1]
   **Smitha Naidu** MBBS MRCPsych was a higher specialist trainee in
   general adult psychiatry at South West London & St George’s Mental
   Health NHS Trust and is now a consultant psychiatrist at South London
   & Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust. **Jim Bolton** BSc(Hons) MBBS
   FRCPsych is a consultant liaison psychiatrist at St Helier Hospital
   in Surrey and Honorary Senior Lecturer at St George’s, University of
   London. **Jared Smith** BA(Hons) PhD is a research fellow in the
   Section of Mental Health, Division of Population Health Sciences &
   Education at St George’s, University of London.

.. [2]
   These recommendations are for a service operating from Monday to
   Friday, 09.00 h to 17.00 h, assessing and managing adults of all ages
   in a 650-bed general hospital. Psychiatric training posts are not
   included and are in addition to the staff above.
