================================================================
*Bulletin* comment: What is wrong with the likes of Rolf Harris?
================================================================

:Date: 2015-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The revelations about the perverse activities of high-profile
celebrities such as Rolf Harris, Jimmy Savile and Max Clifford continue
to cause shock, bewilderment and voyeuristic intrigue. It seems the
scourge of abuse is so prevalent that it extends into all institutions
previously held in high regard; from the county councils, to the
Catholic Church, and further to the Houses of Parliament.

For mental health professionals (as well as any other keen observer of
human behaviours), such disturbing disclosures often lead to discussions
about why any individual might act this way: considerations of
personality disorders may be had. The extreme arrogance, the lack of
regret and absence of profound feelings of guilt, in the context of
lifelong careers in the media or entertainment industries or positions
of importance in society, point towards cluster B difficulties, with
elements of both antisocial and histrionic disorders.

News reports inevitably pay most attention to the wrongdoer and the
calls for enquiries into the institutions, organisations or official
bodies that have essentially been supportive or at least responsible for
passively allowing the abuse to continue.

Ultimately, the revelations lead to thoughts about the trail of
destruction left in the wake of such behaviours. Extensive research has
repeatedly linked child sexual abuse with mental health difficulties of
later life. Severe depression, anxiety problems, post-traumatic stress
disorder and long-term inability to adjust to adult life: some studies
have found life prevalence rates of up to 80% in victims of sexual
abuse.

Although the media focus is on the activities of celebrities or society
leaders, they are clearly responsible for only a tiny fraction of all
childhood and adult sexual abuse cases. This high prevalence in the
community setting places the problem fairly and squarely in the realm of
public health. And as such, it should be the focus of effective
education programmes and community-based treatments for sex offenders.
The instruction of children and adolescents on human sexuality and the
importance of interpersonal skills needed to build satisfying and
healthy intimate relationships needs to be emphasised and funded.

Incarcerating the likes of Rolf Harris might satisfy the public’s desire
for justice or their need for prurient stimulation, but in reality it
does little for primary prevention of a continuing societal scourge.
