=====================================================================================================
The borderline of bipolar: opinions of patients and lessons for clinicians on the diagnostic conflict
=====================================================================================================

Emma Richardson
Derek K. TracyCorrespondence to Derek Tracy (derek.tracy@oxleas.nhs.uk)
 [1]_
:Date: 2015-6

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** It has been observed that some individuals
   self-diagnose with a bipolar affective disorder and many are later
   diagnosed with a borderline personality disorder. There is a
   background context of clinical and neurobiological overlap between
   these conditions, and fundamental debates on the validity of current
   diagnostic systems. This qualitative study is the first work to
   explore the views of patients caught at this diagnostic interface. We
   predicted that media exposure, stigma and attribution of
   responsibility would be key factors affecting patient understanding
   and opinion.

   **Results** Six core illness-differentiating themes emerged: public
   information, diagnosis delivery, illness causes, illness management,
   stigma, and relationship with others. Individuals did not ‘want’ to
   be diagnosed with a bipolar disorder, but wished for informed care.

   **Clinical implications** Understanding patient perspectives will
   allow clinical staff to better appreciate the difficulties faced by
   those we seek to help, identify gaps in care provision, and should
   stimulate thought on our attitudes to care and how we facilitate
   provision of information, including information about diagnosis.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

   ‘Someone call the doctor,

   Got a case of a love bipolar’

   – Katy Perry, ‘Hot N Cold’

Diagnosing mental illness can be clinically challenging. The publication
of DSM-5 :sup:`(n.d.a)` and the surrounding debates have raised
long-standing arguments about the fundamental validity of classification
systems and their potential to variously stigmatise and disempower, or
clarify and facilitate treatment and research. :sup:`(n.d.b)` In
parallel, neuroscientific research is increasingly moving towards the
concept of ‘pathway’ illnesses :sup:`(n.d.c)` with complex interactions
between many risk genes and the environment, and fuzzier boundaries
between conditions lying on a spectrum of phenotypes.
:sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.e)`

Given the difficulties that trained professionals can experience, it is
scarcely surprising that patients can have problems self-identifying
psychiatric phenomenology and diagnostic labels, and indeed seeking
expert help to establish a diagnosis has always been an important part
of all healthcare. It has been noted recently that a growing number of
individuals are presenting to mental health services having
self-diagnosed with bipolar affective disorder (BPAD). :sup:`(n.d.f)` In
our experience, many are ultimately diagnosed with a borderline
personality disorder (BPD).

Although there are obvious clinical similarities between the two
conditions, notably mood cycling between pathological extremes, and a
growing literature comparing them, to the best of our knowledge no one
has previously tried to explore the opinions of those caught in this
diagnostic dilemma. We hypothesised, fitting with the discussion piece
by Chan & Sireling, :sup:`(n.d.f)` that a complex combination of factors
including stigma, causality and blame, celebrity culture, treatment (and
treatability) and perception of staff attitudes would influence patient
thinking regarding diagnosis. Furthermore, we anticipated that a better
understanding of these issues would afford us greater insight into those
we treat, with reflection for how this might positively affect our
clinical practice in better communication, making and discussing
diagnoses, and developing rational care plans.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Participants
------------

The study recruited eight individuals over a 3-month period in the
London Borough of Bromley. All had self-diagnosed with BPAD, but were
subsequently diagnosed with BPD. Four had no previous contact with
mental health services and had been referred by their general
practitioner (GP) to secondary mental health services for assessment due
to their concerns that they had BPAD. Four had been within mental health
services for varying periods of time (3-32 years): differing diagnoses
had been suggested to them at different times, but a diagnosis of BPD
had only been made for the first time in the month prior to interview
and in the context of the patient having advocated for a diagnostic
review in the belief they had BPAD. All participants were White women (7
British, 1 American), although this was not intended through study
design, and were aged between 27 and 56 years old (median 35).

.. _S3:

Materials
---------

A semi-structured interview was designed following a narrative review of
the literature on the presentation and treatments of both BPAD and BPD.
This was used to explore participants’ opinions on the similarities and
differences between the two disorders in six areas: symptoms; the cause
of the difficulties; public understanding; availability of clinical
information; treatment; and stigma and attitudes. Participants were
encouraged to express their thoughts on any topic they felt was
important, including any not covered, or not fully covered, by the
semi-structured interview.

.. _S4:

Procedure
---------

| The study received ethical approval through Oxleas NHS Foundation
  Trust. The London Borough of Bromley’s primary care liaison ‘intake’
  team and the home and day treatment services were approached to
  identify eligible individuals. A letter of introduction outlining the
  study rationale was sent to 15 potential participants: 8 responded,
  were screened and deemed eligible, and provided informed consent to
  take part. All interviews were conducted jointly by both researchers
  and lasted between 36 and 75 minutes. They were transcribed verbatim
  (by E.R.) and processed Table 1 The major themes for both diagnoses
  identified by participants Theme Bipolar affective disorder (BPAD)
  Borderline personality disorder (BPD) Public information on the
  illnesses Highs and lows; euphoria; more predictable;
| public awareness; positive celebrity exposure;
| more internet resources and support groups Quicker mood changes, more
  exhausting; highs ‘not
| really enjoyable’; unknown to the public; harder to
| diagnose Delivery of the diagnosis Given more time by staff; taken
  seriously Mental health staff less knowledgeable; being kept
| in the dark; staff hesitancy; being dismissed; might
| present as clinically well; services geared towards
| the ‘most unwell’ rather than people with BPD Illness causes More
  genetic; brain ‘wiring’ or ‘chemical’
| problem More affected by the environment, especially early
| life traumas; inconsistent parenting Illness management Medications
  efficacious; psychology has less
| of a role; established protocols; a more
| passive process; staff better trained Primary psychological management
  but treatments
| have limited effectiveness; never recover; needed
| more self-awareness and self-management; become
| one’s own therapist; a difficult process to effect
| personality change; symptoms mitigate against
| recovery; staff ‘anti-medication’ even where it
| worked Stigma and blame De-stigmatised by public exposure; received
| sympathy; outside one’s control; people
| might fear you Reinforced by perceived staff attitudes and lack of
| information; staff hopelessness; personal fatalism;
| the name implies blame; responsible for being
| unwell; lack of sympathy; receiving a diagnosis
| could help remove some self-blame and provide
| better self-understanding Relationships with others Supported by
  friends, family and colleagues;
| can be concealed; infrequent nature would
| make it less troublesome Insidious destruction and sabotage of
  relationships;
| the need for a good therapeutic relationship;
| sabotage professional care offered; seek out
| conflict; ever-present and cannot be concealed
| from relationships through thematic analysis using the software
  package NVIVO v.10 for Windows.

.. _S5:

Results
=======

Six main themes emerged: public information on the illnesses; delivery
of the diagnosis; illness causes; illness management; stigma and blame;
and relationships with others. Participants’ comments are summarised in
`Table 1 <#T1>`__.

.. _S6:

Public information on the illness
---------------------------------

The largest theme to emerge was on ‘public information’: what these
disorders ‘looked like’ and how one could find reliable information
about them. All participants said they had more preceding knowledge of
BPAD, primarily from mainstream media sources; most said they had never
heard of BPD before being diagnosed and all thought the public at large
would be quite ignorant of this diagnosis. With the hindsight of having
been diagnosed with BPD, participants thought the two conditions were
quite similar, with prominent problematic mood swings occurring more
rapidly with a personality disorder. Several clinically delineating
factors were suggested, fitting with the literature on the topic:
:sup:`(n.d.g)–(n.d.h)` ‘self-loathing’ was noted to be a core feature of
BPD but not BPAD; a couple of participants opined that the rapidity of
mood swings made BPD a more ‘exhausting’ illness, whereas four
participants stated the ‘highs’ in BPD were not the pleasurable or
euphoric type they imagined one might experience with BPAD:

   ‘With borderline personality it all happens within sort of minutes,
   rather than a few months and elated mood for a period of time and
   then the depression, within the space of an hour you can be down
   again... which is pretty exhausting.’

Most participants had made attempts to find information prior to and
after accessing healthcare, most commonly though the internet. All had
found useful information on BPAD, though with the caveat that this is
what they initially supposed themselves to have, but only one
participant said she found a useful online resource on BPD after being
diagnosed. However, this finding, which was the subjective view of the
small number of participants interviewed, can be challenged and there
are certainly numerous professional and peer websites providing
information, support and advice. Putatively, the sense of there being
‘less information’ might be a better reflection of the celebrity culture
that was cited by seven participants as informing their views
specifically of BPAD, and no participants could think of parallel
examples of hearing about BPD:

   ‘[The public] haven’t a clue, never heard of [BPD]. If you went out
   now and took a questionnaire, a very simple yes/no questionnaire:
   ”Have you heard of?”, I bet you would get 90% ”no” as a response.’

.. _S7:

Delivery of the diagnosis
-------------------------

An interesting finding to emerge was that not one of our sample ‘wanted’
to ‘be bipolar’, with all regarding this as a serious illness with no
degree of ‘social desirability’. The label of bipolar disorder had been
self-affixed as a means of trying to understand the difficulties they
faced, with a sense that it seemed a ‘best fit’. Three of those already
in mental health services said they had an awareness that (at least
some) staff disagreed with their self-diagnosis, but that they were not
offered any alternative. Most said that when the BPD diagnosis was first
put to them they did not have enough time to ask questions about this or
talk through what it meant, and several used the word ‘abandoned’ in
this context. Several participants initially challenged the diagnosis of
BPD, but only in the context of feeling they were being dismissed or
pejoratively judged by staff. One recalled a staff member saying
‘there’s nothing we can do for you’, whereas another said she was told,
post-diagnosis ‘oh well, yeah, that’s a personality disorder, so we
can’t really help that’. Several thought this was because staff ‘don’t
know as much’ about BPD as they do about BPAD, and might ‘cover their
ignorance’ through dismissive attitudes. Six participants acknowledged
it might be more difficult for professionals to reach the diagnosis of
BPD; that BPAD might ‘look more obvious’; and that the labile nature of
BPD meant their presentations might be erratic – including individuals
presenting as clinically well – which might confuse staff. One
participant had been seen intermittently for varying durations by mental
health services over a period of 30 years before a diagnosis of BPD was
put to her. The discussion arose when she inadvertently saw the phrase
on her psychiatrist’s computer screen:

   ‘It also makes me angry, not because I have got [BPD], but angry
   because I have been seen by mental health professionals over the
   years and no bugger has mentioned anything about this.’

All eight participants stated that when time and care were taken to
explain what a personality disorder was, why it might occur, how it
might manifest for different people, and how one might try to manage
ensuing difficulties that the diagnosis of BPD ‘made sense’. In fact,
the majority of patients described a sense of relief at having had a
long-term difficulty named and contextualised, allowing them to think of
how they might prospectively deal with it. Two participants said that
they felt sufficiently strongly that the appropriate discussion of
diagnosis with patients was so critical a professional training need
that they were happy to volunteer time to speak to staff groups about
this:

   ‘I felt absolutely over the moon because I had a real thing with a
   real name and I wasn’t being told I was just hysterical and imagining
   it... so yes, to find out is a huge relief, and it is not that I am a
   complete bloody arsehole... it wasn’t me being obnoxious or out of
   control as a person.’

There was unanimity in feeling that anyone diagnosed with BPAD would be
given more time by staff to talk through the illness implications for
them and their family, and that in such discussions professionals would
be far less reticent and ‘take it seriously’. However, not all
help-seeking interactions with staff were reported in negative terms:
one participant recalled a very supportive one-to-one session with her
key worker, shortly after she had received her diagnosis:

   ‘[He said] ”it’s something like having blue eyes, it’s nothing you
   can help and it’s nothing to be ashamed of, it is just the way you
   are and it’s treatable”, and he was very nice about it you know... it
   made me feel better’.

.. _S8:

Illness causes
--------------

The literature supports an important role for environmental factors,
particularly early life trauma, in both BPD :sup:`(n.d.i)` and BPAD,
:sup:`(n.d.j)` although sexual abuse rates may be greater in those with
BPD. :sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.l)` Twin studies have shown a high degree of
heritability for BPD, :sup:`(n.d.m)` although this is still less than
that of BPAD. :sup:`(n.d.n)` Fitting with this there was reasonable
unanimity among participants that BPAD was ‘more nature’ and BPD ‘more
nurture’, with BPAD seen as variously a brain, neurological or chemical
disorder that one was more likely to inherit and BPD a condition that
developed in light of environmental stressors and traumas, with
particular emphasis given by most (5) participants to the notion of
inconsistent or unloving parenting:

   ‘I have always thought that bipolar [disorder] was mainly a chemical
   imbalance of the brain and that to me it didn’t seem that it was...
   environmentally affected. Borderline [personality disorder] seems to
   me as less of a chemical problem and more of a behaviour problem or
   reaction to environment and experiences.’

.. _S9:

Illness management
------------------

Participants’ comments on illness management were, in the main, in line
with the principles encapsulated in national guidelines.
:sup:`(n.d.o),(n.d.p)` Most considered that medication was the
cornerstone of treatment for bipolar affective disorders. In this way
treatment for those with a bipolar illness was seen as a more passive
process, wherein one could ‘just take the medication and get on with
it’:

   ‘The way I look at it is, if someone is diagnosed with bipolar
   [disorder] and... you get to a stage where you work out what
   medication suits them, I am therefore assuming they would operate as
   a normal functioning human being. Now there isn’t a pharmacological
   proposition for the likes of us, then we have to carry on in our own
   world and have to just get on with it, so we can’t reach that level
   of normality, can we?’

Six participants expressed frustration that although they did not think
medication was the primary treatment of BPD, staff had very negative
views of issuing them any medication, certainly when compared with
patients with BPAD:

   ‘I know you have this thing about why are people with [borderline
   personality disorder] given all this strong medication. From my
   experience I needed that to bring me down and keep my feet on the
   floor, because I was so impulsive and if I didn’t have that
   medication I probably wouldn’t be here as I would’ve jumped off a
   bridge or in front of a car.’

Participants thought that psychological engagement was more of a
critical factor for BPD than BPAD, although interestingly five believed
that the very nature of symptoms experienced in BPD mitigated against
good outcomes: a labile mood could make it hard to predictably and
consistently engage with therapy; and individuals might demonstrate
impulsive sabotaging acts against those trying to help them that would
‘prove’ their worthlessness. One participant thought people with
personality disorders could become ‘defensive and stubborn’ when offered
advice, whereas another thought them ‘very sensitive’ to perceived
criticisms compared with those with BPAD, and expressed her own general
sense when speaking to staff that ‘I’ve tried everything and none of it
works... it’s hard to imagine someone else can tell me how to deal with
this’. Participants thought that individuals with BPAD were ‘more
predictable’, whether having low or high mood, which would make it
easier for the patient and clinician to engage and treat them.

.. _S10:

Stigma and blame
----------------

All participants thought that significant stigma surrounded all mental
illnesses: individuals with both BPD and BPAD were seen as likely to
experience prejudice, with, in broad terms, neither disorder clearly
‘better’ or ‘worse’, although there is a body of literature to suggest
that BPD carries a particularly strong sense of stigma. :sup:`(n.d.q)`
The commentary by Chan & Sireling :sup:`(n.d.f)` noted the potential
role of public exposure, celebrity discussions and TV programmes in
portraying BPAD in a positive light and our work reflected this nuanced
aspect, with most participants saying such public discussions had helped
de-mystify BPAD:

   ‘It is quite uplifting, you look at someone like Stephen Fry, because
   if he has got it and he is still getting out and about and having a
   career, it’s not so bad for a person, I know... but borderline, I
   mean I don’t know.’

Although the point was not explicitly raised by any participant, and
indeed denied by several, it remains possible that this ‘celebrity
culture’ and media portrayal of BPAD might have imbued this condition
with an implicit degree of social desirability and association with
positive attributes such as artistic creativity, and therein account for
the fewer negative comments accrued when compared with BPD. Staff
attitudes were also seen to more negatively impinge on BPD, with the
lack of discussion leading to a sense that ‘there’s something wrong with
[borderline personality disorder]’. The very term borderline personality
disorder was described by four participants as being demeaning, with one
noting that it felt like a judgement on her life even though ‘there are
aspects of my personality which are lovely, you know, I can be quite
funny and humorous’. In 2003 the Treatment and Research Advancements
National Association for Personality Disorders (TARA-APD) campaigned to
change the name and designation of borderline personality disorder in
DSM-5; more recently an internet survey of 646 individuals diagnosed
with BPD noted that a considerable percentage thought this should be
renamed in DSM-5, potentially to include the terms ‘emotion(al)’ and
‘(dys)regulation’. :sup:`(n.d.r)`

A final delineating aspect with regard to stigma was a sense of
attribution of blame: seven participants felt that they, staff and the
public at large would regard someone with BPAD as a ‘victim’ of a
serious mental illness, whereas those with BPD were more likely to be
perceived as ‘perpetrators’ or creators of their problems, enhancing
feelings of guilt, shame and self-loathing. Nevertheless, several
participants noted that confirmation of the diagnosis of BPD had
alleviated some of this self-blame, with a sense that they had ‘a real
problem, like other people had’.

.. _S11:

Relationships with others
-------------------------

In discussion of the relationships with friends and family as well as
professional staff, all participants felt this was a more difficult
issue for those with BPD than for those with BPAD. Interestingly, in
both cases participants felt blame could at least in part be attributed
to those with a BPD, as well as to prejudicial attitudes:

   ‘they would be more understanding [of BPAD]... with borderline it is
   just these personality traits that are very difficult to live with...
   it is just a lot of work and you have to understand and I don’t think
   people can be bothered to try and understand other people.’

   ‘I seem to have this dependence on the therapist or psychiatrist...
   sometimes I would get really angry and lose my temper with people who
   are caring for me, I understand why professionals would dread
   [individuals with BPD] more than [those with] bipolar [disorder].’

In general, BPADs were seen as something that might be more easily
concealed from others, whereas a personality disorder was too pervasive
for this:

   ‘Nobody at her work knew [my friend] had bipolar. It has never been
   discussed, never been an issue, why? Because there has not been any
   abnormality of behaviour. But [people who have a borderline
   personality disorder] are doing it all the time.’

.. _S12:

Discussion
==========

Both BPD and BPAD are common mental health conditions, affecting 4–12%
(BPD) :sup:`(n.d.s)` and 1–4% (BPAD) :sup:`(n.d.t)` of the population,
and of course they can occur comorbidly. :sup:`(n.d.u)` For
professionals there are apparent similarities between them, and several
recent systematic reviews have explored this topic.
:sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.v),(n.d.w)` As well as an overlap in symptomatology
there are interesting data indicating that both conditions demonstrate
some similar neurobiological changes, especially to the limbic system
and in frontolimbic connectivity – although with differences in
amygdalar and hippocampal alteration – and to serotonergic and
dopaminergic neurotransmitter systems. Nevertheless, most work supports
the concept that these two disorders are fundamentally distinct
conditions. :sup:`(n.d.g),(n.d.k),(n.d.x)–(n.d.y)` Despite this broad
literature, to the best of our knowledge no previous work has explored
the opinions of those caught in the diagnostic dilemma on the
similarities and differences between the two disorders.

.. _S13:

Study limitations
-----------------

Our study included only eight participants, all women and from a single
London borough, and this may hinder the generalisability of our data.
Furthermore, there might be a responder bias, and the opinions of the
seven potentially eligible participants who declined to consider taking
part might have been quite different. No clear differences in response
were noted between those newly referred to mental health services and
those already receiving care for some time, and the latter did not ‘know
more’ about BPD. None of our participants were continuing to question
their diagnosis of BPD, and all had had some time to contemplate it
before the interview. There were more negative comments expressed about
BPD, even if participants said they did not think this was a ‘worse’
condition. We did not identify, and are not aware of, any patients
presenting with concerns that they have BPD only to be diagnosed with
BPAD: this may be less likely due to the identified issue of public
awareness. No viewpoints of those with BPAD on the difference between
the disorders were obtained.

.. _S14:

Implications
------------

Our study suggests that people do not ‘want’ to be diagnosed with
bipolar affective disorders; they are looking for information and clear
communication with professionals. Whereas previous work has
qualitatively explored the thoughts and feelings of those diagnosed with
BPD (and BPAD), none has evaluated a diagnostic interface and prior
knowledge of the disorder. One cannot receive appropriate treatment for
something one is unaware of, and there must be many individuals
suffering psychological distress and the symptoms of BPD without being
aware of the nature of their illness and struggling to define their
difficulties.

At the broadest level, there are interesting questions about the role of
the mental health professions and professional bodies such as the Royal
Colleges of Psychiatry and Nursing and the British Psychological Society
in the UK, third-sector organisations and the media in the discussion of
mental health disorders. Such organisations, and many others, continue
to roll out worthy campaigns to target stigma and discrimination in
mental health. Information on specific mental health difficulties,
including BPD, is available, including a leaflet produced by the Royal
College of Psychiatrists and designed to be read by non-professionals
(http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/healthadvice/problemsdisorders/personalitydisorder.aspx).
However, a critical question is how could one look for what one does not
know exists? Most participants noted that their information about mental
ill health came, at least initially, from general media and in
particular from awareness of celebrities whose mental health
difficulties had been well documented. Stephen Fry was held out as a
particularly positive role model by most of our participants: his
willingness to talk publicly and openly was cited as being both
inspiring and informative, and had a marked impact on participants’
conceptualisations about their own problems, including influencing their
thoughts on their diagnoses. A perhaps unanswerable question is how to
achieve a similarly positive and educational context for BPD. Whether
campaigns such as that by TARA-APD have significantly raised the profile
of BPD remains uncertain.

Nevertheless, the challenge to mental health staff faced with patients
in this diagnostic dilemma is clear. Our patients are asking us for
information, for time to think about and question what we say, and for
the respect of being treated honestly in such discussions. A recent
review by Gask *et al* :sup:`(n.d.z)` noted the critical importance of
hope, optimism and an accessible ‘trusting relationship with an open,
non-judgemental manner’ when managing personality disorders.

Diagnosis is part of healthcare, and while important debates about the
validity of our existing models continue – and the British Psychological
Society expressed concern in 2011 about the potential medicalisation of
what might be considered normal variation in behaviour :sup:`(n.d.aa)` –
a diagnosis can help conceptualise difficulties and instigate
appropriate and evidence-based care. Although professionals can be
circumspect about making a diagnosis too rapidly (and many psychiatrists
have been traditionally taught not to diagnose a personality disorder on
first assessment), there is a very real danger that failure to do so can
hinder care and mean that individuals receive no, or inappropriate,
treatments that might not help, and indeed that might cause harm. If we
are withholding or being unduly circumspect and hesitant about
diagnosis, then we must ask ourselves why, and consider how our
(in)actions might make a patient feel. Failure to openly discuss
diagnostic thoughts risks perpetuating stigma and self-blame that can
already be a common part of BPD. All our participants stated that having
an accurate diagnosis was a hugely important step in self-reflection and
understanding, and in considering their future, even if it came with
other negative aspects.

In our sample several participants acknowledged that the diagnosis of a
BPD might be hard to make; that the inherent lability could make it
difficult to accurately assess the mental state and risk; and that the
very nature of the symptoms suffered could make it challenging to
consistently engage with a therapeutic programme and the staff providing
care. There are real professional dangers of negative
counter-transference in such situations and of projecting our
frustrations or disappointments – current or historically accumulated –
on those we treat, potentially furthering a sense of abandonment and
rejection. Trust and the therapeutic alliance is a critical component of
the relationship and process of our engagement with all patients, even
if not addressed explicitly, and seldom more so that those with BPD,
:sup:`(n.d.ab)` many of whom have had a significant history of past
abandonments. We must be careful in suppositions that people are
‘choosing’ or ‘want’ diagnoses to ‘escape’ or deny a personality
disorder: our data would not support such a hypothesis.

We believe there are many positives for patients and staff to take from
this work. The debates on diagnostic systems and the neuroscientific
research will continue, but what is being asked for is freely available:
open and honest discussion, respect and information. Disagreements are
part of clinical life and outcomes are not always as optimal as one
would like: however, these factors can only be worsened by not
listening. Our attitudes and self-reflection are vital: it is an
interesting fact that BPAD is often conceptualised as a ‘serious mental
illness’, but BPD is not, when the evidence suggests functioning and
prognosis can be as bad in the latter. :sup:`(n.d.v)` Few staff working
in mental health can be unaware of the frequency and often profound
severity of BPD, but there is a critical issue of perception: of
allowing those we try to help to see our concerns, and making them feel
listened to in clear dialogue. Borderline personality disorder was
initially named as it was felt to ‘border’ on a psychotic state, but
perhaps bordering on a bipolar one would be more apposite.

We are grateful to those who gave their time to talk openly and
thoughtfully about the difficulties they have faced. We hope they will
derive some satisfaction from the fact that this may help the care of
others.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R29

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.ab.

.. [1]
   **Emma Richardson** is an honorary research worker at Oxleas NHS
   Foundation Trust and an MSc graduate of the Institute of Psychiatry,
   King’s College London and **Derek K. Tracy** is a consultant
   psychiatrist and Associate Clinical Director of Crisis and Inpatient
   Services at Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust and a researcher at the
   Cognition, Schizophrenia and Imaging Laboratory at the Institute of
   Psychiatry, King’s College London.
