=====================================================================================================================
Specialist adult ADHD clinics in East Anglia: service evaluation and audit of NICE guideline compliance\ `† <#fn1>`__
=====================================================================================================================



Rakesh Kumar Magon
Beena Latheesh
Ulrich MüllerCorrespondence to Rakesh Kumar Magon
(rakesh.magon@hpft.nhs.uk)  [1]_  [2]_
:Date: 2015-6

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To measure compliance with National Institute for
   Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommendations in two adult
   attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) clinics and to guide
   further service development. We audited the case notes of 150
   patients referred to adult ADHD clinics in East Anglia in 2010-2011
   against NICE standards using an adapted version of the ADHD audit
   support tool.

   **Results** We found good compliance with NICE standards for
   diagnosis, assessment and pharmacological treatment of adult ADHD.
   There was a failure in smooth transitional arrangements from child
   and adolescent mental health to adult ADHD services. Comprehensive
   treatment programmes addressing psychological, behavioural,
   educational and occupational needs were not well developed.
   Deficiencies were observed in conducting recommended physical
   examinations. Substance use was prevalent in almost half of ADHD
   patients.

   **Clinical implications** Greater attention is needed in delivering
   better transitional arrangements and comprehensive treatment
   programmes for adult ADHD. More structured training with emphasis on
   ADHD-specific psychological interventions, physical examination and
   treatment of complex cases, especially with comorbid substance
   misuse, should be offered to clinicians.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common
neurodevelopmental disorder. Symptoms of ADHD persist into adulthood and
10-20% of children with a diagnosis of ADHD still meet diagnostic
criteria in adulthood. :sup:`1` The National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE) guideline makes clear recommendations for
assessment and management of ADHD in adulthood. :sup:`2` An increasing
number of mental health trusts in the UK are implementing this guideline
and offer services for adults with ADHD. :sup:`3`

The Adult ADHD Research Clinic in Cambridge (with a satellite clinic in
Peterborough) is a joint venture between the Department of Psychiatry at
the University of Cambridge and Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
Foundation Trust (CPFT); this tertiary referral centre provided a
diagnostic and treatment advice service for East Anglia until it was
temporarily suspended in August 2011. In January 2013, a new National
Health Service (NHS)-funded adult ADHD service was started by CPFT.
Adult ADHD clinics of the Hertfordshire Partnership NHS Foundation Trust
(HPFT) are part of secondary mental health services for adults in
Hertfordshire providing comprehensive assessment, diagnosis and
treatment. Patients stabilised with drug therapy are referred back to
their respective general practitioner (GP) through a shared care
agreement.

.. _S1:

Method
======

The study was conducted to measure compliance of current practice in two
adult ADHD centres with recommendations in the NICE guideline and to
further inform service development.

We audited the case notes of 150 patients who were referred to our adult
ADHD clinics in Cambridgeshire and Hertfordshire in 2010–2011 against
NICE standards using an adapted version of the ADHD (adult) audit
support tool. :sup:`4` The percentage of patients was calculated for
whom selected relevant NICE standards were met. As a part of the audit,
data on patterns of substance use in the ADHD population were also
collected. The project had formal approval from both participating
trusts.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

There were a total of 150 ADHD adult patients selected consecutively for
this audit from the two trusts (CPFT *n* = 100, HPFT *n* = 50).

.. _S3:

Demographics
------------

The study sample (`Table 1 <#T1>`__) was predominantly male (77%), young
(66% were 18–30 years old) and White (84%). Ethnicity was not recorded
in the case notes of 64 adult ADHD patients. Less than a third of the
sample (*n* = 46) was in regular employment, with 51 patients in the
unemployed category; the rest were in education (*n* = 41). Employment
status was unknown for 12 patients. Fifty-seven ADHD patients had a
forensic history.

.. _S4:

Transitional arrangements
-------------------------

There was failure in transition to adult ADHD services in 34 out of 53
(64%) cases known to child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS)
with an established ADHD diagnosis (`Table 2 <#T2>`__). The reason
quoted for non-transition in some cases was receiving treatment from
abroad (6 cases); one patient did not want to continue the drug
treatment and one patient was having difficulty with the drug treatment.
The reason for non-transition in the remaining 26 patients was not
known.

.. _S5:

Diagnosis and treatment
-----------------------

Good compliance was observed in using (and documenting) diagnostic
criteria (DSM-IV and/or ICD-10) :sup:`5,6` across both trusts (89% at
CPFT and 100% at HPFT) and assessing psychosocial impairment along with
patients’ needs, physical health history and coexisting conditions.

Drug treatment was the first line of treatment recommended for 80%
(80/100) of the patients at CPFT and 94% (47/50) at HPFT. In HPFT,
methylphenidate was the first drug tried in 79% (37/47) of cases and
there was 100% compliance in initiation and titration of the
methylphenidate and monitoring of side-effects. Before starting the drug
treatment, a full mental health and social assessment was carried out
for all patients. However, a full physical assessment prior to drug
treatment was performed only in 11% of cases (5/47); some physical
examination was carried out in 72% (34/47). Risk assessment for
substance misuse and drug diversion was performed in the majority of
cases (HPFT 94%; CPFT 100%). Of the patients taking methylphenidate, 10%
(4/47) received routine blood tests. Antipsychotic use was observed in
3% of patients (5/150); none of these patients carried a diagnosis of
psychotic disorder; one patient suffered with a comorbid tic disorder
and indication of antipsychotic use in four other patients was not
documented in case notes.

A medical or family history of serious cardiac disease, a history of
sudden death in young family members or abnormal findings on cardiac
examination was reported in only 7 patients, but an electrocardiogram
(ECG) recording was performed for 14 patients.

A comprehensive treatment programme including drug treatment and
addressing patients’ psychological, behavioural, educational or
occupational needs was recommended by CPFT for 95% of adults with ADHD.
However, drug treatment formed a part of comprehensive treatment
programme in only 25% (12/47) of adults receiving treatment in HPFT,
where a diagnostic and treatment service is established.

.. _S6:

Psychological intervention
--------------------------

Group or individual cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) to address the
person’s functional impairment was considered Table 1 Study sample
demographics Age group, years 18–30 31–65 Female 21 13 Male 78 38
Ethnicity     White British 72     Other White and Black background 9
    Other mixed background 1     Asian 2     Other ethnic background 2
    Unknown 64 Employment status     Regular employment 46
    Unemployed 51     Student 41     Unknown category and other 12 for
15% (15/100) of the service users attending CPFT and 10% (5/50) of
service users in HPFT. Psychological treatment was considered in the
context of persisting functional impairment or patients’ choice as an
alternative to drug treatment.

.. _S7:

Alcohol and substance misuse
----------------------------

Almost half of the sample diagnosed with ADHD used illicit or licit
substances (45%; 67/150). Alcohol (19%; 28/150) and nicotine (17%;
26/150) were the most commonly used drugs. Patients also used caffeine
(13%; 19/150); cocaine (10%; 15/150); cannabis (7%; 11/150); amphetamine
(4%; 6/150); ecstasy (3%; 5/150); hallucinogens (0.6%; 1/150) and heroin
(0.6%; 1/150). All adults with ADHD and comorbid substance use received
treatment by clinicians with expertise in both ADHD and substance misuse
management (HPFT) or were referred to the drug and alcohol team with a
recommendation for starting ADHD drug treatment after the substance
misuse management (CPFT). Overall, 85% (57/67) of patients using
substances were offered drug treatment for ADHD and 15% (10/67) were
referred or signposted to the drugs and alcohol team for treatment of
alcohol dependence (*n* = 9) and opiate dependence (*n* = 1).

.. _S8:

Person-centred care
-------------------

Written information about the illness and on the treatment and care was
given, along with information on the availability of NICE guidance to
the majority of patients (148/150).

.. _S9:

Organisational service
----------------------

| Organisational support in terms of training programmes covering
  diagnosis and management was present at both trusts. Local shared care
  arrangement between primary and secondary care was present at HPFT
  only. Under the shared care arrangement, a range of responsibilities
  from drug prescription to physical health monitoring and annual
  reviews is transferred when the specialist and the GP agree that the
  patient’s condition is reasonably predictable and the treatment regime
  has been specified. If the GP is not confident about undertaking this
  role, then they are under no obligation to do so. In such an event,
  the total Table 2 Audit standards based on the NICE guideline and
  trust compliance Compliance with standards % Standards HPFT CPFT
  Smooth transition for young people with ADHD receiving treatment and
  care from CAMHS **67** **24\ **\ `\* <#TFN2>`__ Diagnosis should meet
  the diagnostic criteria in DSM-IV or ICD-10 100 89 Diagnosis process
  should include an assessment of the person’s needs, coexisting
  conditions,
| social, family and educational or occupational circumstances and
  physical health 100 100 Drug treatment should be the first-line
  treatment 94 80 Drug treatment should be started only under the
  guidance of a psychiatrist, nurse prescriber
| specialising in ADHD, or other clinical prescriber with training in
  the diagnosis and
| management of ADHD 100 `\* <#TFN2>`__ Before starting drug treatment
  for adults with ADHD: 100 100 • A full mental health and social
  assessment should be performed • ECG if there is medical or family
  history of serious cardiac disease, a history of sudden
| death in young family members or abnormal findings on cardiac
  examination 100
| (overusedin7cases) `\* <#TFN2>`__ • Risk assessment for substance
  misuse and drug diversion should be performed 94 100 • All recommended
  physical examination **11**
| (34 received some
| physical examination) `\* <#TFN2>`__ Drug treatment for adults with
  ADHD should always form part of a comprehensive
| treatment programme that includes psychological, behavioural and
  occupational needs **25** 95 (standard
| recommended on
| assessment\ `\* <#TFN2>`__) Antipsychotics should not be used for the
  treatment of ADHD in adults 90 100 Methylphenidate should be the first
  drug tried in adults with ADHD 78 `\* <#TFN2>`__ People taking
  methylphenidate should not have: `\* <#TFN2>`__ • Routine blood tests
  90 • ECG 100 During the titration phase, symptoms and side-effects
  should be recorded at each dose
| change by the prescriber 100 `\* <#TFN2>`__ Adherence to NICE
  guidelines on methylphenidate use 100 `\* <#TFN2>`__ Group or
  individual CBT to address the person’s functional impairment should be
  considered **10** **15** Drug treatment for adults with ADHD who also
  misuse substances should only be
| prescribed by an appropriately qualified healthcare professional with
  expertise in managing
| both ADHD and substance misuse 100 `\* <#TFN2>`__ Specialist ADHD
  teams should jointly develop training programmes for the diagnosis and
| management of ADHD for mental health, social care, forensic and
  primary care providers
| and other professionals who have contact with people with ADHD 100 100
  Are there local shared care arrangements in place between primary and
  secondary care? 100 `\* <#TFN2>`__  [3]_  [4]_  [5]_ clinical
  responsibility for the patient remains with the specialist in
  secondary care.

.. _S10:

Discussion
==========

Overall, this first audit of adult ADHD services in East Anglia
established good compliance with NICE guidance for assessment and
treatment. This confirms that the implementation of NICE guideline
recommendations for adults with ADHD is feasible and should therefore be
rolled out and evaluated on a broader scale.

There was a failure in smooth transitional arrangements from CAMHS to
adult ADHD services. Different reasons were quoted for non-transition in
some cases, but for most patients the reasons were not known. The 2010
TRACK study, which looked into the transition policies, procedures and
outcomes in Greater London, :sup:`7` found that neurodevelopmental
disorders such as ADHD did not come under the eligibility criteria for
transfer from CAMHS to adult mental health services. These young people
are either retained at CAHMS or referred to GPs or voluntary
organisations. For patients with a childhood diagnosis of ADHD there
should be a clear transitional arrangement that takes into account the
fact that adolescents are the most critical group of patients and that
lack of treatment during the transitional period typically results in
increased morbidity in adulthood. :sup:`8` Clear communication and
transitional pathways between specialist adult ADHD services, CAMHS,
community paediatricians and GPs are essential to ensure continuity of
care for individuals with ADHD from adolescence to adulthood. Currently,
HPFT has a policy and CPFT is developing a transitional pathway, with
the aim of improving transitional arrangements.

NICE has explicitly expressed the need for full mental health and social
assessment and full history and physical examination prior to the drug
treatment. :sup:`2` In our study good compliance was observed in using
(and documenting) diagnostic criteria (DSM-IV and/or ICD-10) and
assessing psychosocial impairment. A full mental and social assessment
prior to starting the ADHD drug was carried out, but deficiencies were
observed in conducting (or delegating) recommended physical examination.
Interestingly, there was an overuse of ECG investigations. Such
discrepancy in practice can be overcome by structured training on adult
ADHD with emphasis on physical examination and the use of ECG. This can
be complimented by filing a physical examination checklist in the
patient file and developing a local protocol for the indication of ECG
use in adult ADHD patients with a history (or family history) of
cardiovascular problems.

Drug treatment was the first line of treatment in the majority of cases.
However, attention is needed in delivering more comprehensive treatment
programmes addressing psychological, behavioural, educational and
occupational needs. Adult ADHD patients are commonly referred to
existing psychological services embedded in local community mental
health teams or Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT)
services, which have limited expertise in managing ADHD symptoms and
associated impairments. The main issues that affect adults with ADHD
include poor skills in prioritising and organising workloads in the
workplace and home environment, occupational and educational
underachievement, poor interpersonal and social skills and low
self-esteem. :sup:`9` Although good evidence of the effects of
psychotherapy in adulthood is sparse, :sup:`10` new research supports
the use of CBT programmes in adults with ADHD. :sup:`11–13` In the UK,
the Young–Bramham Programme :sup:`11` provides an integrated approach
for understanding ADHD, adjusting modules to the diagnosis and
developing skills to cope with symptoms and associated impairments. The
programme offers techniques based on psychoeducation, motivational
interviewing, cognitive remediation and CBT. :sup:`11`

Use of antipsychotics was seen in 3% (5/150) of patients referred for
ADHD assessment, despite the fact that NICE has ruled out the use of
antipsychotic drugs in treatment of core symptoms of ADHD. :sup:`2` The
finding highlights the need for more effort in educating clinicians
about safety and effectiveness of antipsychotics in ADHD. More
comprehensive treatment programmes that address psychological,
behavioural, educational and occupational needs should be established
and encouraged through the development of local ADHD support groups and
in partnership with the voluntary sector. These include anger
management, occupational therapy, ADHD life coaching, inter-agency
liaison and working with voluntary sector providing employment support
and counselling services.

Several longitudinal studies of children and adolescents with ADHD have
demonstrated an increased risk of developing substance use disorder
compared with matched controls. :sup:`14,15` Factors such as
novelty-seeking personality traits, increased impulsivity,
self-medication for ADHD symptoms :sup:`16` and comorbid disorders such
as conduct disorder :sup:`14,17` and bipolar disorder :sup:`18` increase
the risk of developing substance use disorder in this population. Adults
with ADHD are more likely to be past or current users of substances and
use these substances in greater amounts. They are also more likely to
receive treatment for previous alcohol and drug use disorders. :sup:`19`

In our sample, substance use was prevalent in almost half (45%) of the
ADHD patients. Patients with substance use disorder were appropriately
referred to the addiction team and/or managed by clinicians with
expertise in treating both ADHD and substance misuse as per the NICE
guideline. It is important that mental health professionals receive
appropriate training in assessment and management of ADHD with comorbid
substance use disorder. Magon & Müller :sup:`20` discuss treatment
studies in this area and provide a treatment algorithm to guide
clinicians in the management of adult ADHD comorbid with different forms
and severities of substance use disorders.

The national Prescribing Observatory for Mental Health (POMH-UK)
launched a new Quality Improvement Programme (QIP) in 2013 focusing on
prescribing for ADHD in children, adolescents and adults
(`www.rcpsych.ac.uk/pomh <www.rcpsych.ac.uk/pomh>`__). The baseline
audit on prescribing for ADHD was concluded and results published in a
report in September 2013; the report is not available externally, but
more information can be obtained by contacting POMH at
pomh-uk@rcpsych.ac.uk. The QIP project will generate UK-wide data on
prescribing for adults with ADHD and help to identify gaps in service
provision.

.. [1]
   **Rakesh Magon** is Consultant Psychiatrist, Hertfordshire
   Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust; **Beena Latheesh** is
   Honorary Research Assistant, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
   Foundation Trust; **Ulrich Müller** is Consultant Psychiatrist,
   Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, and Honorary
   Visiting Fellow, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge.

.. [2]
   See invited commentary, pp. 140–3, this issue.

.. [3]
   ADHD, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder; CAMHS, child and
   adolescent mental health services; CBT, cognitive–behavioural
   therapy; CPFT, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust;
   ECG, electrocardiogram; HPFT, Hertfordshire Partnership University
   NHS Foundation Trust; NICE, National Institute for Health and Care
   Excellence.

.. [4]
   Standards for recommended therapeutic interventions were not
   applicable due to the limited service model (assessment and treatment
   advice only) at the time of the audit.

.. [5]
   Highlighted low compliances (in bold) are discussed in the paper in
   detail.
