============================================================================================================
The cardiovascular safety of the empirical measurement of the seizure threshold in electroconvulsive therapy
============================================================================================================

Lindsay Mizen
Charles Morton
Allan ScottCorrespondence to Lindsay Mizen (lmizen@nhs.net)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-2

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Committee on
   Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) and Related Treatments advises the
   measurement of initial seizure threshold in all patients undergoing
   ECT if possible. The subconvulsive electrical stimulation inherent in
   this process is thought to increase the risk of bradycardia and
   therefore asystole. Our aim was to establish the prevalence of
   asystole (no heart beat for 5 or more seconds) during empirical
   measurement of seizure threshold in patients who had not received
   anticholinergic drugs, as we were unable to find any published
   reports of bradycardia or asystole prevalence under these conditions.
   The electrocardiogram traces of 50 such consecutive patients were
   analysed later.

   **Results** Asystole occurred in 5% of stimulations. Each episode of
   asystole resolved spontaneously with no adverse outcomes. Contrary to
   expectations, asystole was no more prevalent in subconvulsive
   stimulations than in convulsive stimulations.

   **Clinical implications** There was no evidence that the empirical
   measurement of the seizure threshold added to the cardiovascular risk
   of ECT.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The electrical stimulus of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may have
effects other than the induction of cerebral seizure activity. It was
recognised soon after the introduction of ECT that the stimulus could
affect the heart, usually causing a bradycardia resulting from the
electrical stimulation of the motor nucleus of the vagus nerve and
nucleus ambiguus, within the medulla oblongata.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` This
bradycardia can be severe and as long ago as 1978 the American
Psychiatric Association (APA) stated that the bradycardia might even be
prolonged enough to cause cardiac arrest.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Although no
references were given to support this concern, asystole and cardiac
arrest have been reported since.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` The APA recommended the
routine intravenous administration of an anticholinergic drug to reduce
the risk of severe bradycardia, but this never became routine
anaesthetic practice in the UK. The Royal College of Psychiatrists
recognises that ‘severe bradycardia can usually but not invariably be
prevented by pre-treatment with anticholinergic agents’ and that such
vagolytic drugs are sometimes used to attenuate bradycardia, but it does
not specifically recommend the routine administration of an
anticholinergic drug.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`

Evidence from case reports has been taken to mean that severe
bradycardia is more likely after subconvulsive electrical stimulation;
that is, stimulation that does not lead to generalised cerebral seizure
activity.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b),(n.d.d)` This is because seizure
activity has an opposite effect on the heart, leading to tachycardia,
whereas in subconvulsive stimulation the vagal effect is
unopposed.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Subconvulsive stimulation was uncommon in
traditional ECT practice because fixed, high doses of electrical charge
were delivered. Contemporary ECT machines can deliver adjustable doses
and it is now recommended that the dose is titrated for the individual
patient, particularly for bilateral ECT.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` The convulsive
dose depends on the seizure threshold for the individual patient. This
is measured empirically by stimulation with repeated, increasing doses
of electrical charge at the start of the course of ECT. In contemporary
practice, the vast majority of patients receive at least one
subconvulsive stimulation at their first treatment in a course of ECT.
The APA now notes that not all anaesthetists routinely use
anticholinergic drugs, but also states that the bradycardia after
subconvulsive stimulation is of ‘graver’ concern, and that many
anaesthetists routinely administer such agents at treatments in which
the measurement of seizure threshold is planned.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` Some
ECT practitioners simply do not undertake empirical measurement of the
seizure threshold in patients with a known history of cardiac
disease.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

We aimed to investigate the prevalence of asystole during empirical
measurement of seizure threshold in the absence of anticholinergic
drugs.

.. _S1:

Method
======

We analysed the printed paper record of the electrocardiogram (ECG)
taken during the first treatment of 53 consecutive patients referred for
a new course of ECT at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital between 12 February
2008 and 5 March 2010. An individual patient was included only once.
Three of these patients are not included in the present report because
the anaesthetist administered an intravenous anticholinergic drug before
ECT; in all cases this was because of previous excessive salivation
during ECT. The present sample therefore consists of 50 from 53
consecutive referrals for ECT. The intravenous induction agent was
etomidate in 38 patients and propofol in 12 patients. Muscle relaxation
was always achieved by intravenous suxamethonium, after precurarisation
with 5 mg atracurium. The vast majority of patients (*n* = 47) were
treated with bilateral ECT; the remaining 3 received right unilateral
ECT.

All treatments were administered using a Spectrum 5000M ECT machine,
which has an inbuilt two-channel electroencephalogram (EEG) facility to
measure cerebral seizure activity. The protocol for the empirical
measurement of the seizure threshold at the first treatment was as
follows: the first stimulation was with 4% (46 mC), and if cerebral
seizure activity did not ensue, then a second stimulation was given with
7% (81 mC). In patients prescribed an anti-epileptic drug, the first
stimulation was with 9% (104 mC) and if no cerebral seizure activity
ensued, then a second stimulation was given with 18% (207 mC). For both
groups of patients the protocol included doses for third and subsequent
stimulations, when necessary. The flow chart presented in `Fig.
1 <#F1>`__ shows the number of patients receiving one or more
stimulations.

Our clinic participates in the Scottish national audit of ECT practice,
coordinated and reported by NHS National Services Scotland. This paper
includes demographic, episodic and treatment data routinely recorded and
reported. The only change made to our routine data collection was to
print a paper record of the ECG. These paper records were given a coded
number by the ECT consultant (A.S.) and then stored outside the ECT
clinic until they were read by an independent rater (L.M.); clinical and
treatment information was masked to the rater. We used ECG lead II and
the paper record ran at 25 mm/s.

The point when bradycardia becomes asystole is arbitrary. The criterion
that 5 s (125 mm on the paper record) without a QRS complex constitutes
asystole is taken from a previous report.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Its authors
also conducted a secondary analysis of patients in whom the asystole
lasted as long as 7 s and so we also considered a secondary analysis
with this definition of asystole. The analysis of the paper records was
standardised by discussion among the present authors before analysis.
The electrical stimulation led to a characteristic type of artefact on
the paper record (`Fig. 2 <#F2>`__) and the time from the end of this
artefact (that is, the end of electrical stimulation) to the time of the
first QRS complex was measured. The morphology of this complex had to be
the same morphology as complexes before electrical stimulation, which
meant ectopic beats were disregarded. If the independent rater was
uncertain about the measurement of this time, she consulted C.M. and the
time was agreed between these raters; patient details remained masked to
L.M., and C.M. was shown only the paper record and any other clinical or
treatment information was masked. The results were analysed using
Microsoft Office Excel 2007 and StatsDirect Version 2.7.9 for Windows.
As the inter-subject variance (between different patients) was Fig.
1Numbers of patients in the sample receiving one or more ECT
stimulations. Fig. 2ECG with electrical stimulus artefact followed by a
period of asystole. likely to be higher than the intra-subject variance
(multiple stimulations in one patient), each electrical stimulation was
considered as an independent measure. Convulsive and subconvulsive
stimulations were compared using Fisher’s exact test and the ‘exact’ or
‘Clobber-Pearson’ method was used to calculate 95% confidence intervals
of proportions.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` The episodes of asystole in different
stimulations were compared using paired *t*-tests.

It is the policy of NHS Scotland to withhold from publication data that
may identify individual patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` This report respects
this principle.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

As shown in `Table 1 <#T1>`__, the sample consisted of 37 women and 13
men (mean age 57.4, range 22–87 years). The most prevalent primary
psychiatric diagnosis was severe depression with (*n* = 18), or without
(*n* = 16), psychosis; 6 patients had moderate depression and 7 were
diagnosed with other types of depressive disorder. Six of the total
group of patients with depression had bipolar affective disorder.
Schizophrenia was the primary diagnosis in 2 patients.

The majority of patients (*n* = 38) were prescribed a combination of
psychotropic drugs, including tricyclic antidepressants (*n* = 6) and
lithium carbonate (*n* = 7); 8 patients were prescribed monotherapy, 6
with an antidepressant drug, 1 with lithium carbonate and 1 with
diazepam; 4 patients were not prescribed any psychotropic drug
treatment. Five patients were prescribed a beta-blocking drug for
hypertension. Of the 8 patients who experienced asystole, 3 were
anaesthetised with propofol and 5 with etomidate. None of these 8
patients were on anti-epileptic medication and so they received the
standard electrical stimulation protocol (rather than the higher doses
administered to patients on anti-epileptics).

`Table 2 <#T2>`__ shows that the time to first R-wave ranged from 0.04
to 9.12 seconds. Because of the nature of the titration procedure, most
patients (*n* = 47) did not have a convulsion after the first
stimulation and so experienced more than one electrical stimulation.

The data were analysed with each stimulus measured as an independent
variable and the total number of stimulations given in the study was
172. Most patients (*n* = 49, 98%) experienced cerebral seizure activity
(CSA) in this study and the one patient who did not underwent 5
electrical stimulations with no seizure. This patient did not experience
asystole. The mean number of stimulations before experiencing CSA was
2.5. Our primary analysis was with asystole defined as 5 s without a QRS
complex. With this definition, asystole occurred in 4/124 (3%)
subconvulsive stimulations (95% CI 0.89 to 8.05%) and 5/48 (10%)
convulsive stimulations (95% CI 3.47 to 22.66%). The number of
subconvulsive stimulations is considerably higher than that of
convulsive stimulations because, from the second stimulation onwards,
the patient has experienced previous subconvulsive stimulations, but for
convulsive stimulations the patient has not experienced any previous
convulsive stimulations. Of the asystolic events, 6 occurred after a
second electrical stimulation and the other 3 occurred after a third
stimulation. Only one patient, a 70-year-old female with severe
depression, experienced multiple episodes (2) of asystole, which were
after her second (non-convulsive) and third (convulsive) electrical
stimulation. The average age of the 8 patients who experienced asystole
was 69.9 years and only 1 of them was male. Six of these patients were
prescribed a combination of psychotropic medications and one was not
prescribed any psychotropic drugs. Six of these patients had no
documented history of cardiovascular disease.

Secondary analysis carried out using a definition of asystole of 7 s
without a QRS complex reduced the number of episodes of asystole to 2.
One of these followed a convulsive stimulation in a 72-year-old female
with severe depression and a history of hypertension and ischaemic heart
disease with previous stent insertion. She was the only patient (of
three) taking a beta-blocker (atenolol) to exhibit asystole. The other
episode of asystole lasting longer than 7 s was in a 70-year-old female
with severe depression without a history of cardiovascular disease. It
followed a second non-convulsive stimulation, lasted 9.12 s and was
therefore the longest period of asystole noted.

| A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test, comparing convulsive and
  subconvulsive stimulations, did not reach statistical significance
  (*P* = 0.12), but the odds ratio was 3.46 (95% CI 0.71 to 18.27)
  suggesting that a patient was more likely to have an episode of
  asystole after convulsive rather than subconvulsive stimulation. We
  compared the first and second stimulations in patients who had two or
  more subconvulsive stimulations, using a paired *t*-test, and found
  that the mean time to the first QRS complex was statistically longer
  after a second subconvulsive stimulus (*P* = 0.04, 95% CI –1.72 to
  –0.04). We then compared the first and second stimulations in all
  patients who had two or more stimulations, regardless of whether they
  experienced Table 1Demographic of the study sampleAsystoleNo
  asystoleWhole sampleTotal *n*\ 84250Demographics , , , Male, *n* (%)1
  (12.5)12 (28.6)13 (26.0) , , , Female, *n* (%)7 (87.5)30 (71.4)37
  (74.0) , , , Age, mean (s.d. range): years69.9 (54.0–85.7)55.1
  (38.8–71.3)57.4 (40.5–74.3)\ *Diagnosis*\ Depression, *n*
  (%) , , , Unspecified2 (25.0)4 (9.5)6 (12.0) , , , Mild1 (12.5)01
  (2.0) , , , Moderate06 (14.3)6 (12.0) , , , Severe without psychosis1
  (12.5)11 (26.2)12 (24.0) , , , Severe with psychosis4 (50.0)10
  (23.8)14 (28.0)Bipolar affective disorder, *n* (%) , , , Moderate01
  (2.4)1 (2.0) , , , Severe without psychosis04 (9.5)4
  (8.0) , , , Severe with psychosis02 (4.8)2 (4.0)Schizophrenia02 (4.8)2
  (4.0)Schizophrenia02 (4.8)2 (4.0)Schizophrenia + severe depression01
  (2.4)1 (2.0)Severe depression with psychosis + Alzheimer’s disease01
  (2.4)1 (2.0)Psychotropic drugs, *n* (%) , , , No1 (12.5)3 (7.1)4
  (8.0) , , , Single1 (12.5)7 (16.7)8 (16.0) , , , Multiple6 (75.0)32
  (76.2)38 (76.0)History of cardiovascular diseaes, *n* (%)2 (25.0)10
  (23.8)\ `a <#TFN2>`__\ 12 (24.0)Beta-blocker prescribed, *n* (%)1
  (12.5)4 (9.5)5 (10.0)Anaesthetic agent, *n* (%) , , , Propofol3
  (37.5)9 (21.4)12 (24.0) , , , Etomidate5 (62.5)33 (78.6)38 (76.0)Type
  of ECT, *n* (%) , , , Bilateral8 (100.0)39 (92.9)47 (94.0) , , , Right
  unilateral03 (7.1)3 (6.0) [2]_ [3]_ Table 2Asystole in convulsive and
  subconvulsive stimuliCerebral seizure activity inducedNo cerebral
  seizure activity inducedStimulationConvulsive
| stimulations
| *n*\ Time to first
| QRS, median
| (range)\ `a <#TFN3>`__\ Asystole
| *n*\ Proportion
| (95% CI)Subconvulsive
| stimulations
| *n*\ Time to first
| QRS, median
| (range)\ `a <#TFN3>`__\ Asystole
| *n*\ Proportion
| (95% CI)1st32.36
| (0.88–3.00)00.00
| (0–0.71)46
| (+1 off-page)\ `b <#TFN4>`__\ 1.32
| (0.04–4.84)00.00
| (0–0.08)2nd201.18
| (0.04–7.08)20.10
| (0.01–0.32)271.48
| (0.04–9.12)40.15
| (0.04–0.34)3rd21
| (+1 unreadable)\ `c <#TFN5>`__\ 1.88
| (0.04–6.96)30.14
| (0.03–0.36)51.36
| (0.56–3.84)00.00
| (0–0.52)4th41.52
| (0.04–4.44)00.00
| (0–0.6)10.5600.01
| (0–0.98)5th0000.0010.9600.01
| (0–0.98)\ **Total480.10**
| **(0.03-0.23)1240.03**
| **(0.01-0.08)**\  [4]_ [5]_ [6]_ seizure activity (again using a
  paired *t*-test), and again found that the mean time to first QRS
  post-stimulation was significantly longer after a second stimulation
  (*P* = 0.03, 95% CI –1.09 to –0.05). We also compared the time to the
  first QRS complex after second and third stimulations in all patients
  who underwent three or more stimulations, using a paired *t*-test, but
  did not find a statistically significant difference (*P* = 0.36, 95%
  CI –0.66 to 0.96).

All episodes of asystole in this study resolved spontaneously without
medical intervention.

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

Asystole (5 s without a QRS complex) occurred in 9 of 172 stimulations
in this study (5%; 95% CI 0.02 to 0.10). As each episode of asystole
resolved without medical intervention, our findings suggest that the
empirical measurement of seizure threshold does not add to the
cardiovascular risk of ECT, nor is there a need to routinely administer
an anticholinergic drug. Contrary to expectation, asystole was more
prevalent after convulsive than non-convulsive stimulation. We have also
shown that time to the first QRS complex post-stimulation was longer in
patients who received two subconvulsive stimulations rather than one. As
increasing doses of electricity are given on subsequent stimulations
when titrating up to seizure threshold, this could suggest that time to
the first QRS complex simply increases together with the dose of
electricity. This is supported by the fact that none of the episodes of
asystole occurred after a patient’s first electrical stimulation and
that the comparison of first and second stimulations, regardless of
whether or not seizure activity ensued, showed a statistically
significant difference between the times to first QRS complex (*P* =
0.03, 95% CI –1.09 to –0.05). On the other hand, there was no
statistically significant difference between second and third
stimulations (*P* = 0.36, 95% CI –0.66 to 0.96). This may be because the
effect of increasing doses of electricity and/or absence of seizure
activity is lost after a certain threshold, or because neither the
electrical dose nor presence or absence of seizure activity are factors
influencing the risk of asystole and the effect seen at previous
stimulations may be due to small sample size. Further studies with a
larger sample size would help to delineate this.

Our results support those of Burd & Kettl,\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` who found
that although asystole was common in elderly patients undergoing ECT
(364/1146, 40.1%), routine use of atropine was unnecessary because brief
asystole was not associated with adverse outcome. Burd & Kettl studied
patients throughout ECT treatment courses, not just during stimulus
titration, which may explain the difference in incidence of asystole
observed in our study. They also refer to reports of asystole lasting up
to 7 s and so we attempted to conduct a secondary analysis using a
definition of 7 s without a QRS complex. However, in our sample there
were only 2 episodes of asystole which exceeded 7 s (1 in a convulsive
stimulation and 1 in which no convulsion was stimulated) and so no
statistical analysis of these episodes could be performed. In 1996,
McCall *et al*\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` used an even more conservative definition
of asystole (10 s of ECG electrical silence) in an attempt to capture
only pathological asystolic events. Using this cut-off there were no
patients in our study who experienced asystole, again supporting the
idea that the periods of electrical silence in our study were not
pathological. Furthermore, only one of the patients in our study
suffered more than one episode of asystole, which suggests that, for a
given individual, one episode of asystole does not generally predict
further similar events. A limitation of our study was that it was not
possible to statistically analyse the other factors that could prolong
the time to the first QRS complex, because of the small number of
patients. Larger prevalence studies will be needed to further
investigate these factors.

We thank Fiona Morrison, medical secretary supervisor, for her help with
the production of the manuscript.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

.. [1]
   **Dr Lindsay Mizen** is a Clinical Research Fellow at the University
   of Edinburgh and an honorary ST5 trainee in the psychiatry of
   intellectual disability in the South East Scotland Deanery who was
   based at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital while conducting this study.
   **Dr Charles Morton** is a consultant anaesthetist, Royal Infirmary
   of Edinburgh. **Dr Allan Scott** is now retired, but was a consultant
   general adult psychiatrist at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital while
   conducting the study.

.. [2]
   ECT, electroconvulsive therapy.

.. [3]
   Including pulmonary embolism + one decision based on medications
   suggestive of cardiovascular disease.

.. [4]
   Time given in seconds.

.. [5]
   Off-page: an ECG trace that went off the side of the page and could
   not be analysed.

.. [6]
   Unreadable: an ECG trace so distorted it could not be analysed.
