====================================================================================================================
Stigma and self-esteem across societies: avoiding blanket psychological responses to gay men experiencing homophobia
====================================================================================================================



Karyofyllis Zervoulis
Evanthia Lyons
Sokratis Dinos

:Correspondence: Karyofyllis Zervoulis
(KaryofyllisZervoulis@bpp.com)  [1]_

:date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** The relationship between homophobia (varying from
   actual and perceived to internalised) and measures of well-being is
   well documented. A study in Athens, Greece and London, UK attempted
   to examine this relationship in two cities with potentially different
   levels of homophobia. One-hundred and eighty-eight men who have sex
   with men (MSM) living in London and 173 MSM living in Athens
   completed a survey investigating their views on their sexuality,
   perceptions of local homophobia and their identity evaluation in
   terms of global self-esteem.

   **Results** The results confirmed a negative association between
   homophobia and self-esteem within each city sample. However, Athens
   MSM, despite perceiving significantly higher levels of local
   homophobia than London MSM, did not differ on most indicators of
   internalised homophobia and scored higher on global self-esteem than
   London MSM. The city context had a significant impact on the
   relationship.

   **Clinical implications** The findings are discussed in relation to
   the implications they pose for mental health professionals dealing
   with MSM from communities experiencing variable societal
   stigmatisation and its effect on a positive sense of self.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Goffman\ :sup:`1` identified homosexuality as falling into a stigmatised
category based on moral failing (i.e. being responsible and therefore
being blamed for the condition) and rooted in patriarchal and
heteronormative positions as well as the main, mostly monotheistic,
religions. The most commonly used term to describe the stigmatisation of
lesbian, gay and bisexual (LGB) people is ‘homophobia’ as the dislike or
hatred towards homosexuals.\ :sup:`2` Homophobia is often experienced by
gay people from their early years at school, within their families,
within their immediate daily environment and in broader society
including its institutions, such as the media, workplaces or legislative
bodies. Homophobia takes many forms that have been described extensively
in the literature in terms of discrimination, violence, prejudice and
stereotypes and harassment.\ :sup:`3-6` Importantly, homophobia appears
to affect gay people's own beliefs and attitudes towards themselves.
This is known as ‘internalised homophobia’, the phenomenon where gay
people are to a variable extent unhappy about their sexual orientation
because of societal homophobia.\ :sup:`7`

In general, stigmatisation of an attribute may have a negative effect on
a person's positive sense of self. In the case of LGB people, there is
evidence that homophobia, both perceived and internalised, affects them
in terms of their overall well-being and often in terms of their
self-esteem.\ :sup:`8-11` Self-esteem is an individual's own evaluation
of their personal worth and, according to Rosenberg,\ :sup:`12` it
refers to the notion of a relatively stable sense of an overall or
global, as it is often described, personal worth. There is a voluminous
amount of work which has found a relationship between self-esteem and
depression,\ :sup:`13` anxiety,\ :sup:`14` anger, hostility and
aggressiveness\ :sup:`15` and life satisfaction.\ :sup:`16` Therefore,
self-esteem is an important construct that mental health professionals
need to take into account when dealing with mental health problems.

There are many recent surveys in the UK suggesting that homophobia is
still widespread and experienced by gay men in their daily lives,
affecting their psychological well-being. A number of studies have also
shown the direct relationship between homophobia (or fear of being
discriminated against) and mental health problems.\ :sup:`4,6`
Furthermore, recent epidemiological studies found that LGB groups have a
significantly higher prevalence of mental health problems than the
general population; in particular, conditions including common mental
disorders and alcohol and substance misuse, and attempted
suicide.\ :sup:`17,18` In addition to a higher prevalence of mental
health problems in gay men and LGB groups in general, further evidence
suggests that there are disparities in access to mental healthcare. For
example, LGB people report a mixed reception from mental health
services.\ :sup:`17` In particular, mental healthcare for LGB groups is
very often associated with depreciation of their domestic circumstances,
refusal to accept partners as next of kin, professionals' excessive
curiosity about LGB lives, concern about confidentiality, and fear that
their sexuality will be regarded as the ‘pathology’ requiring
attention.\ :sup:`19,20` Along these lines, Kitzinger & Coyle\ :sup:`21`
argue that psychological research has always presented homosexuality as
a form of pathology and, when dealing with gay or lesbian issues, it is
concentrated in clinical and psychotherapeutic psychology.

Societal homophobia is not evident or perceived to be at the same level
across all countries or societies. There are historical, cultural and
institutional factors that affect its factual or perceived
prevalence.\ :sup:`8,21,22` For example, in institutional terms, there
is a broad spectrum that includes countries where homosexual activity is
punished to countries where same-sex marriage is recognised. Between
these two ends, there are countries where homosexuality is neither
illegal nor there are provisions for equal treatment of people
irrespective of their sexuality. In relation to the context of this
study, there is evidence that Greek society is more homophobic than the
UK society\ :sup:`23,24` and that Greek LGB people tend to face greater
difficulties in disclosing their sexuality than
Anglo-Americans.\ :sup:`25-27` In Greece, sex between men was
decriminalised in 1951 while there was never any mention of lesbians in
Greek law. Today, the age of consent for gay men is set at 17, higher by
2 years than for heterosexuals. There is no official recognition of
same-sex couples in any terms. In the UK, although ‘homosexuality’ was
decriminalised later, in 1967, legislation today does not discriminate
on the basis of sexuality. Currently, same-sex couples can marry and
adopt children.

It needs to be noted that metropolitan and cosmopolitan cities such as
London consist of people from a variety of countries and cultures.
People who live in London or Athens are not exclusively of White English
or Greek ethnic background, nor have they been born and lived in either
city all their life. So, the term cross-cultural should be avoided in
studies such as this one; instead, cross-city comparisons resemble more
and should be referred to as cross-national comparisons. The term
‘national’ entails the space and the local rules of law, it does not
necessarily refer to participants' nationalities in legal terms and in
this case, it can include MSM from potentially any cultural communities
that live within the national space, although the existence of a
predominant cultural and ethnic majority should be acknowledged.

.. _S1:

Aims
====

This study aimed to investigate the link between homophobia and
self-esteem in Athens and London, two cities with potentially different
levels of perceived homophobia. It investigated the following research
questions: Is there a difference in perceived and internalised
homophobia between MSM living in London and Athens?Does perceived
homophobia relate positively to internalised homophobia and do they both
relate negatively to self-esteem of London and Athens MSM?Is there a
difference in self-esteem between London and Athens MSM? The study also
attempted to investigate whether societal context is important in
explaining the relationship between perceived and internalised
homophobia and self-esteem.

.. _S2:

Method
======

.. _S3:

Participants
------------

The sample included 188 MSM living in London and 173 MSM living in
Athens, their mean age being 32 (range 16-64) and 27 (range 16-50) years
respectively. The mean time of living in the city was longer for Athens
than for London MSM. There was ethnic variation within both samples, but
to a lesser degree in Athens than in London; the majority of both
samples were White. In terms of sexuality, 89% of London MSM reported
that they were sexually attracted to men only, with the remaining 11%
being attracted to both men and women. The corresponding figures for
Athens MSM were 71% and 29% respectively. In relation to educational
level, about 7 in 10 London MSM and 8 in 10 Athens MSM reported to have
at least a university degree. Finally, nearly half of the Athenians were
recruited and completed the questionnaire online and the rest used a
hard copy whereas a small majority of Londoners (56%) filled out the
survey online. `Table 1 <#T1>`__ provides a summary of this demographic
information.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Sample characteristics by city

   =========================== ================== ==================
   \                           London (*n* = 188) Athens (*n* = 173)
   =========================== ================== ==================
   Age, years (mean)           32                 27
   \                                              
   Living in the city, mean    12 years 4 months  20 years 3 months
   \                                              
   Ethnic group, %                                
   White                       56.3               86.1
   Other                       43.7               13.9
   \                                              
   Sexuality,\ `a <#TFN1>`__ %                    
   Gay                         89.1               71.4
   Bisexual                    10.9               28.6
   \                                              
   Participation method, %                        
   Offline                     44.1               52
   Online                      55.9               48
   =========================== ================== ==================

   London *n* = 183, Athens *n* = 168

As there was some scepticism as to whether living in a city for only a
few years would be considered sufficient for the participants to be
‘typical’ Londoners or Athenians and because such participants may not
have had informed views about how their fellow citizens view gay men in
their city, differences in the responses given on all variables of the
questionnaire between participants living in London for less than 5
years or more than 5 years were investigated. No statistically
significant differences were found. A similar analysis could not be
conducted for the Athenian sample because only a handful of participants
lived in the city for less than 5 years.

.. _S4:

Procedure
---------

A survey took place in the capital cities of Greece and the UK in Greek
and English respectively. Participants were recruited using two methods:
the distribution of questionnaires at gay venues (the questionnaires
were then self-completed) and through an online questionnaire advertised
in several popular gay-themed websites. The study was presented as one
examining gay men's views about their social environment, being part of
a broader research programme into how gay men see themselves and deal
with everyday issues. Potential participants had to be residents of
London or Athens for at least the past 12 months. They were assured that
their responses and their participation in this research project would
remain entirely anonymous and they were informed of their right of
withdrawal. Data collection took place over a period of the same 3
months for both cities, although the majority of offline survey data
were collected over 2-week periods in each city within those 3 months
when the online survey link was live.

.. _S5:

Materials
---------

The study was conducted through a survey that, apart from questions on
demographics, included four scales: ‘disclosure of one's sexuality’,
‘perceived homophobia of the general public and of people close to the
participants’, MSM's ‘internalised homophobia’, and ‘global
self-esteem’. The scales, based on existing English-language scales or
developed first in English, were translated to Greek and back-translated
until they matched each other so that similar items were asked to both
English-speaking participants in London and Greek-speaking participants
in Athens. Because of the cross-national element of the study, original
scales were subjected to psychometric testing to standardise the scales
between the two samples. In particular, all Likert-type scales were
subjected to factor analyses for the English and Greek versions
separately. Cross-language structurally identical scales were formed
following the factor analyses solutions as well as conceptual
interpretations, and the reliability of each emerging scale was measured
in terms of Cronbach's α in English and Greek separately. Details of the
measurements used are given below.

.. _S6:

Disclosure of one's sexuality
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Participants were asked to report the extent to which they were ‘out’ at
work, to friends and family. For example, participants had to state
whether they had discussed their sexuality with all, some or none of
their friends.

.. _S7:

Perceived homophobia of the general public and of people close to the participants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Participants' perceptions of other people's homophobic feelings and
attitudes were assessed using 36 items based on the Modern Homophobia
Scale developed by Raja & Stokes.\ :sup:`28` Eight items were
preselected according to their original loadings in the factor analysis
that Raja & Stokes ran. Preference was shown to items with higher
loadings under each of the three factors of the authors' factor analysis
solution as well as items with relevance to this study and its
cross-national context. For example, an item referring to gay men being
allowed to join the military rather than the item that referred to
openly gay celebrities advertising products was chosen despite the lower
loading of the former; the reason was that both countries have armies
but there are no openly gay celebrities in Greece. Furthermore, the
selected items were modified to reflect representations of homophobia;
instead of using the original statements written in the first person
such as ‘I wouldn't mind going to a party that included gay men’, the
statements were modified to read ‘I think that most Londoners/Athenians
wouldn't mind going to a party that included gay men’. The same
preselected eight items were repeated four times each to capture the
perceptions of our participants on how homophobic they think that (a)
the general public, (b) their family members, (c) their friends, and (d)
their colleagues are. So, the expression ‘most Londoners’ or ‘most
Athenians’ was replaced by ‘most members of my family’, ‘most of my
friends’, and ‘most of my colleagues’ accordingly. Note that the wording
of these representations assessed homophobia in terms of attitudes and
behaviour towards gay men only rather than sexual minorities in general.
All statements were scored on a 1 to 5 Likert-type scale with 1 meaning
‘strongly disagree’ and 5 meaning ‘strongly agree’. Reliability alphas
for the scales made up of 8 items each and assessing perceived
homophobia of the 4 different groups of people in both London and Athens
were good and varied from 0.76 to 0.93.

.. _S8:

Internalised homophobia
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mayfield's\ :sup:`29` Internalized Homonegativity Inventory was used,
including its three factors referring to ‘personal homonegativity’ (e.g.
‘I feel ashamed of my homosexuality’), ‘gay affirmation’ (e.g. ‘I
believe being gay is an important part of me’) and ‘morality of
homosexuality’ (e.g. ‘I believe it is morally wrong for men to be
attracted to each other’). Factor analyses run for each sample confirmed
the existence of these factors. One item was excluded from the ‘morality
of homosexuality’ factor as it was reducing the α of the Greek scale
below the 0.60 level; the same item had to be removed from the English
version for equivalence. The alphas of the three factors were 0.69,
0.77, 0.90 and 0.63, 0.76, 0.88 for the English and Greek versions
respectively.

.. _S9:

Self-esteem scale
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Finally, Rosenberg's\ :sup:`12` Global Self-Esteem Scale consisting of
ten items was used in full to provide a measure of the participants'
perception of self-worth. The items of the original scale were rated on
a 4-point ‘strongly disagree’ to ‘strongly agree’ scale but we added a
middle fifth option of ‘neither disagree nor agree’ to increase variance
in the data. A single-factor solution was produced for both city samples
with reliability α 0.88 for London and α 0.87 for Athens.

.. _S10:

Results
=======

In analysing the data, missing values met within any section of this
survey were not treated in any way, and cases with missing values were
excluded analysis by analysis. Because numbers of valid cases for each
analysis conducted were adequate, treating of missing values with the
potential to affect results was seen as erroneous.

Initially, in establishing potential differences in the views and
attitudes of Athens and London participants themselves, an important
observation was that there were statistically significant differences
between the two city groups in relation to the disclosure of their
sexuality to other people (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). The scores obtained on
this measure were subjected to a 3×2 chi-squared analysis. Differences
between the samples were found to be highly significant when discussion
with family members (χ\ :sup:`2` = 45.25, d.f. = 2, *P*\ <0.001) and
friends (χ\ :sup:`2` = 39.15, d.f. = 2, *P*\ <0.001) was concerned and
as far as hiding (χ\ :sup:`2` = 65.96, d.f. = 2, *P*\ <0.001) or
revealing (χ\ :sup:`2` = 72.46, d.f. = 2, *P*\ <0.001) sexuality from
colleagues at work or university was concerned.

.. figure:: 170f1
   :alt: Sexuality disclosure in the study sample.
   (a) Discussed sexuality with family members; (b) Discussed sexuality
   with friends; (c) Hiding sexuality from colleagues; (d) Colleagues
   know about one's sexuality.
   :name: F1

   Sexuality disclosure in the study sample.
   (a) Discussed sexuality with family members; (b) Discussed sexuality
   with friends; (c) Hiding sexuality from colleagues; (d) Colleagues
   know about one's sexuality.

A multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was then conducted to
investigate the differences seen in `Table 1 <#T1>`__ between London and
Athens MSM in their views on how they think the general local public and
people close to them see gay men (`Table 2 <#T2>`__). Overall, Athens
MSM perceived other people's homophobia, whether general public,
friends, family members or colleagues, to be higher compared with London
MSM perceptions. There was a significant overall difference between the
two populations on the combined four dependent variables (*F*\ :sub:`(4,
298)` = 36.63, *P*\ <0.001; Wilks's λ = 0.67, partial η\ :sup:`2` =
0.33). In the separate analyses for each dependent variable, all
differences between Londoners and Athenians were also found to be highly
statistically significant (`Table 3 <#T3>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Descriptive statistics of the Likert-type variables of the study

   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | 5-point Likert-type variables  | London          | Athens          |
   | (*n* items)                    | *n* (mean) s.d. | *n* (mean) s.d. |
   +================================+=================+=================+
   | Perceived homophobia           |                 |                 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   |     General public (8)         | 176 (2.38) 0.59 | 166 (3.14) 0.63 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   |     Friends (8)                | 176 (1.75) 0.63 | 156 (2.40) 0.68 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   |     Family (8)                 | 175 (2.37) 0.96 | 156 (3.23) 0.83 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   |     Colleagues (8)             | 173 (1.98) 0.73 | 155 (2.67) 0.73 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   |                                |                 |                 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | Gay men's personal             | 184 (1.87) 0.72 | 167 (1.95) 0.70 |
   | homonegativity (11)            |                 |                 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   |                                |                 |                 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | Gay men's negative views on    | 185 (1.25) 0.46 | 167 (1.37) 0.51 |
   | morality of homosexuality (4)  |                 |                 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   |                                |                 |                 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | Gay affirmation (7)            | 186 (3.72) 0.66 | 166 (3.60) 0.67 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   |                                |                 |                 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | Self-esteem (10)               | 172 (3.92) 0.68 | 155 (4.10) 0.65 |
   +--------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Between-subjects effects on the variables referring to perceived
      homophobia of others

   +-----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------+
   | Variables             | *F*\ `a <#TFN2>`__ | η\ :sub:`p`\ :sup:`2` |
   +=======================+====================+=======================+
   | Perceived homophobia  | 111.889            | 0.271                 |
   | of general public (8) |                    |                       |
   +-----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------+
   |                       |                    |                       |
   +-----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------+
   | Perceived homophobia  | 85.349             | 0.221                 |
   | of friends (8)        |                    |                       |
   +-----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------+
   |                       |                    |                       |
   +-----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------+
   | Perceived homophobia  | 75.872             | 0.201                 |
   | of family (8)         |                    |                       |
   +-----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------+
   |                       |                    |                       |
   +-----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------+
   | Perceived homophobia  | 72.925             | 0.195                 |
   | of colleagues (8)     |                    |                       |
   +-----------------------+--------------------+-----------------------+

   d.f. = 1, d.f. for error = 301, *P* = 0.000 for all variables.

In investigating the differences between the two samples in relation to
‘internalised homophobia’ as again seen in `Table 1 <#T1>`__, a one-way
between-groups MANOVA showed that there was a narrowly statistically
significant difference between Londoners and Athenians on the combined
dependent variables (*F*\ :sub:`(3, 340)` = 2.65, *P*\ <0.05; Wilks's λ
= 0.98, partial η\ :sup:`2` = 0.02). When the results for the three
dependent variables were considered separately, Athens MSM scored
significantly higher only on the ‘morality of homosexuality’ variable
(*F*\ :sub:`(1, 342)` = 6.545, *P*\ <0.05, partial η\ :sup:`2` = 0.02).

Third, an independent-samples *t*-test was conducted to compare the
self-esteem scores (`Table 2 <#T2>`__) for the London and Athens
samples. There was a significant difference in scores between the two
groups with Athenians reporting a higher self-esteem than Londoners (*t*
= −2.421, d.f. = 325, *P*\ <0.05, r γ λ = 0.13).

Correlational analysis showed, as expected, positive relationships
between most perceived and internalised homophobia scales and negative
relationships between homophobia and self-esteem scales. Online tables
DS1 and DS2 show that these findings are relatively consistent across
the two city samples. Further regression analyses were carried out to
test the relationship of both internalised and perceived homophobia of
others controlling for city. Correlations showed that factors for each
scale were significantly associated with each other; this was expected
given that they are subscales of the same construct. Therefore, and to
avoid multi-collinearity, the composite scores of the scales were used.
To test whether city explained the relationship between homophobia
(internalised and perceived) and self-esteem, a stepwise hierarchical
regression was conducted. The first step tested the relationship between
homophobia and self-esteem and the second step tested whether the
addition of city had a significant impact on the model. The
inter-correlations between ‘self-esteem’ and ‘perceived homophobia of
others’ as well as ‘internalised homophobia’ were significant (*r* =
−0.15, *P*\ <0.05 and *r* = −0.27, *P*\ <0.001 respectively). The
correlation between perceived and internalised homophobia was also
significant (*r* = 0.29, *P*\ <0.001). Model 1 is statistically
significant (adjusted *R*\ :sup:`2` = 0.070, *P*\ <0.001) but
self-esteem is explained significantly only by internalised homophobia
(`Table 4 <#T4>`__). City, in model 2 has a significant impact on the
relationship between internalised and perceived homophobia of others and
self-esteem (adjusted *R*\ :sup:`2` = 0.12, *P*\ <0.001). In particular,
city explains an additional 5% of the model. Moreover, both homophobia
scales in the model independently explain self-esteem significantly.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T4

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Explanation of self-esteem by homophobia scales (composite scores)
      and the role of city context

   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+
   | Independent variables  | Standardised β | *T*    | *P*\ ⩽ |
   +========================+================+========+========+
   | *Step 1*               |                |        |        |
   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+
   | Perception of          | −0.079         | −1.403 | n.s.   |
   | homophobia in others   |                |        |        |
   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+
   |     Internalised       | −0.242         | −4.313 | ~0     |
   | homophobia             |                |        |        |
   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+
   | F\ :sub:`(2, 321)` =   |                |        |        |
   | 13.1, *R* = 0.275,     |                |        |        |
   | *R*\ :sup:`2` = 0.076, |                |        |        |
   | adjusted *R*\ :sup:`2` |                |        |        |
   | = 0.070, *P*\ <0.001   |                |        |        |
   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+
   |                        |                |        |        |
   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+
   | *Step 2*               |                |        |        |
   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+
   |     Perception of      | −0.228         | −3.479 | 0.001  |
   | homophobia in others   |                |        |        |
   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+
   |     Internalised       | −0.210         | −3.805 | ~0     |
   | homophobia             |                |        |        |
   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+
   |     City context       | 0.260          | 4.147  | ~0     |
   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+
   | F\ :sub:`(3, 320)` =   |                |        |        |
   | 14.9, *R* = 0.351,     |                |        |        |
   | *R*\ :sup:`2` = 0.123, |                |        |        |
   | adjusted *R*\ :sup:`2` |                |        |        |
   | = 0.12, *P*\ <0.001.   |                |        |        |
   +------------------------+----------------+--------+--------+

.. _S11:

Discussion
==========

The first aim of this study was to explore potential differences between
MSM living in Athens and London in relation to how they view their
sexuality and on the ways in which others in their broader environment
or those close to them see gay men. The findings suggested that there
are indeed some significant differences between the samples of the two
cities. Athens men were more ‘closeted’ than London men and reported
higher levels of homophobia in terms of how the general public and
people in their close environment see gay men. However, although
Athenians again scored higher in the internalised homophobia scales,
such a difference was found to be narrowly significant only when all
factors measuring internalised homophobia were combined for the
analysis. Finally, there was a difference between scores on the
self-esteem scale with Londoners this time reporting lower levels of
self-esteem than Athenians. Along these lines, society played a
significant role in the relationship between homophobia and self-esteem;
the relationship became stronger as a result of city of residence.

In general, Athenians appeared to perceive that they lived in a more
homophobic city than Londoners and this could relate to the observation
that they felt less comfortable to disclose their sexuality publicly.
This finding comes into agreement with the difficulties reported by
ethnically Greek gay people in Phellas's\ :sup:`26` and
Fygetakis's\ :sup:`25` studies. One would expect, however, that
Athenians' self-esteem might have been lower than Londoners'
self-esteem, which in this study was not the case. This could be due to
the likely possibility that sexuality was not considered to be the sole
or even the most important and salient element of one's life. Our
findings support Abrams & Hogg's\ :sup:`30` claim that global
self-esteem evaluation may not reflect the particular group membership
under investigation and also support other findings on the relationship
between stigma and self-esteem not being inevitable.\ :sup:`31`
Similarly, Brady & Busse\ :sup:`32` found no significant difference in
terms of psychological well-being and adjustment among open or closeted
respondents in the last three stages of Cass's coming out model. Such
findings may relate to Alquijay's\ :sup:`33` argument that, in cultures
where interdependence is valued, the meanings of self and self-esteem
may be different; this point could be very relevant for our Athens
participants. In general, progression through the stages proposed by
Cass's model on ‘sexual identity formation’\ :sup:`34-36` may be
influenced by expectations of the Greek society. Global self-esteem and
its relationship to stigmatised identity may be negotiated in different
ways by Greek sexually stigmatised groups compared with other
nationalities or to other type of stigmatised groups, again because of
specific societal norms that relate to sexuality.

It needs to be underlined that there was a clear negative correlation
between self-esteem and personal homophobia in both samples; this
supports findings such as Szymanski *et al*'s,\ :sup:`11` among others,
who linked internalised homophobia to the well-being of lesbians and gay
men. There were also significant positive correlations between all
measurements of perceived homophobia of family members and colleagues
with internalised homophobia variables (the direction was negative for
‘gay affirmation’) and friends' homophobia was found to have the
strongest relationship. Such findings demonstrate the potential
consequences of societal homophobia on gay men and women. Therefore, it
is society that needs to change; this can happen via the promotion of
institutional social equity for gay people's self-acceptance and the
building of a positive identity as Berg *et al*\ :sup:`8` argue.

.. _S12:

Limitations
-----------

Although our results suggest some interesting relationships, there are
limitations regarding the interpretation of findings. One of the main
limitations is the correlational nature of the study that does not allow
the data to show causal relationships regarding the extent of the
contextual impact of homophobia on self-esteem. Additionally, the
concepts' measures are related highly to each other and this may have an
impact on the results and subsequent conclusions regarding the strength
of associations. It would have been beneficial to have used additional
outcomes variables that measure mental health and broader well-being.
Although self-esteem is a good indicator of well-being, it does not
capture its complexity. Therefore, the issue of homophobia and its
relationship to well-being in conjunction with societal or cultural
differences needs to be unpacked further.

It should also be acknowledged that one of the main limitations of this
study is the inability to account for non-response due to the use of
online data collection. This is a weakness of internet-based surveys
because non-response can threaten the validity of data; participants may
differ from non-participants on a number of characteristics. Still, as
internet use and internet-based research are gradually becoming more and
more common, at least within European contexts such as those in this
study, issues of generalisability and validity are dealt with. As Hewson
stated,\ :sup:`37` there is gradually less sample bias as potential
internet-based research participants are less and less the White,
middle-class, technologically proficient people. Mathy *et
al*,\ :sup:`38` for example, compared the demographics of a small sample
of lesbian and bisexual women with a larger sample collected by a large
polling organisation and they found that their rigorous internet
sampling designs were found to be more robust and equally representative
of the US general population. The internet sample was more
representative in terms of education and income and broader ethnic
diversity and it was equally effective in representing the distribution
of population in rural and urban areas. In addition, there is a point to
be made on the online facilitation of self-disclosure and this is very
relevant for this study as we recruited people who belong to a
stigmatised group. The effectiveness of online or computer-based surveys
or interviews for researching sensitive issues such as sexual behaviour
is well established. There is ample evidence that computerised internet
interface tends to facilitate self-disclosure and honesty among research
participants and that participants report lower social anxiety and
social desirability when they are using the internet than when they are
using paper-based methods.\ :sup:`39-45`

In investigating cross-city differences, this study and the way it
recruited participants could not have and does not claim to have done
such investigations by employing homogeneous cultural groups within each
city. Both cities, and especially London, include microcultures within
any culture due to the diversity of their populations. This makes it
impossible for this study to claim consistency of experiences among
participants of each city. However, owing to the way data were
collected, the study captures a relatively diverse sample of
microcultures that constitute the populations of MSM within each city.

.. _S13:

Relevance to mental health services
-----------------------------------

In conclusion, until societal changes in terms of homophobia happen,
mental health professionals need to be aware of contextual differences
in dealing with gay men and women who seek help. Although literature
suggests that evidence-based interventions for the general population
can also be beneficial for gay men,\ :sup:`46` studies (mainly
qualitative in nature) have shown that LGB services are preferred over
mainstream ones.\ :sup:`20` For example, research has shown that ‘gay
affirmative therapy’ is preferred by LGB people as it views LGB
lifestyles and sexual identities positively without pathologising
them.\ :sup:`47` However, these findings come from qualitative studies
with purposive samples. There needs to be a strong understanding of
indigenous psychologies and the relationship between culture and
psychology. Providing blanket responses to feelings of rejection, for
example, which may encourage clients to disclose their sexuality as part
of the process of self-acceptance and building a positive sense of self
is not always the optimal strategy. Complete ‘coming out’ should not
always be seen as the end goal because it may be that it has much graver
consequences than incomplete ‘coming out’ within some societies. The
existence of close societal ties between people may be more important
for one's well-being. Jeopardising such ties as part of the ‘coming out’
process may be counterproductive for the gay individual. This may be
particularly important in societies that do not have a developed gay
community and gay movement that could provide alternative adequate
support mechanisms.

.. [1]
   **Karyofyllis Zervoulis** is Lecturer in Social Psychology, BPP
   University, London, **Evanthia Lyons** is Head of School of
   Psychology, Criminology and Sociology, Kingston University, London
   and **Sokratis Dinos** is Senior Lecturer in Psychology, BPP
   University.
