==================================================================
Black Rainbow: How Words Healed Me – My Journey Through Depression
==================================================================



Rebecca J. Lawrence [1]_
:Date: 2015-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 150f2
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

*Black Rainbow* is Rachel Kelly’s story of depression and recovery. It
is an eloquent description of her experience of two severe depressive
episodes, both with marked anxiety symptoms, and with a strong emphasis
on the ‘striking physicality of the illness’.

During her first episode, she focuses on the biological nature of her
illness, becoming frighteningly dependent on her husband and mother and
an attentive psychiatrist, and obsessively preoccupied with her
medication. Although this persists in the second episode, she develops a
wider interest in factors that may have contributed to her illness, and
seeks lifestyle changes and therapy to reduce her vulnerability. She
recognises in particular her traits of sensitivity and perfectionism,
and the difficulties inherent in combining motherhood with a
high-achieving career.

Kelly gains much solace from words, including poetry and prayer, during
her prolonged recoveries. Her familiarity with poetry from childhood may
underlie this and her accounts of her life when depressed describe a
return to a childlike state, where she is cared for by her devoted
husband and mother. Her own role as a mother is temporarily lost,
something she reflects on later with a sense of shame and failure.

Although she does not spare herself, it must be acknowledged that her
experiences are different from most, given her level of privilege. A
full-time nanny cares for her children, her psychiatrist visits her at
home every couple of days, and she gives up work without obvious
financial pressure, assuming a prolonged sick role. Interestingly, she
herself questions the value of this and explores the difficulty of
needing to be seen as either fully ill or well, and the possibility,
often denied, of secondary gain. But her recovery is allowed to be
unusually gentle, with a gradual and vividly recounted reawakening of
senses dulled by depression, something not always possible for those
less fortunate.

More personally, having also experienced depression, I found this a
beautiful book. I remain unconvinced that poetry can cure depression
(Kelly does not claim this), but it can provide much needed comfort and
sets it within the human experience. In W.H. Auden’s words from *Musée
des Beaux Arts*, ‘About suffering they were never wrong, The Old
Masters’.

.. [1]
   **Rebecca J. Lawrence** is consultant psychiatrist in addictions,
   Royal Edinburgh Hospital, Edinburgh, UK, email:
   rebecca.lawrence@nhslothian.scot.nhs.uk
