=======================================
ECT practices in Iraq: a national audit
=======================================

Nesif Alhemiary
Zainab Ali
Mohammed J. AbbasCorrespondence to Dr Mohammed J. Abbas
(mohammed.abbas@leicspart.nhs.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method**

   This national audit examined practice of electroconvulsive therapy
   (ECT) in Iraq against local standards. Data were collected by a
   questionnaire sent to heads of departments or medical directors in
   the 10 Iraqi hospitals which provide ECT and by examining case notes
   of all patients who had ECT in the first 6 months of 2013.

   **Results**

   Of the 26 psychiatric hospitals in Iraq, 10 provide ECT. There were
   some resource shortcomings in the ECT clinics (e.g. only 2 had a
   minimum of 2 rooms and all had no EEG monitoring). During the audit
   period, 251 patients had ECT. The mean age was 36.2 years and 51.8%
   were males. Bilateral ECT was used in all cases, general anaesthesia
   in 77.15%. The main indication for ECT was schizophrenia, followed by
   severe depression, resistant mania, catatonia and others.

   **Clinical implications**

   More work is needed to ensure all patients receive modified ECT. ECT
   is still used widely for schizophrenia. This needs further
   exploration and training.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is an effective treatment for a small
number of patients who have severe mental
disorders.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` Its use has declined in Western
countries over the years\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` and it has been associated with
stigma.\ :sup:`(n.d.d),(n.d.e)` Unmodified ECT and its portrayal in the
media might have contributed to that stigma.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

ECT practice varies across countries.\ :sup:`(n.d.c),(n.d.g)` In Asia, a
survey of 257 institutions in 23 countries suggested that the practice
may be seen as suboptimal, schizophrenia was the main indication,
unmodified ECT is commonly used, electroencephalography (EEG) is not
common and no formal training was given.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`

International guidelines have been developed to ensure good practice in
delivering ECT.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` In Iraq, the ECT Policy 2009 was
produced by the Ministry of Health as part of a quality and standards
project aimed at developing standards for care in psychiatric services.
The project was carried out as a collaboration between the Royal College
of Psychiatrists' Iraq Sub Committee and the Ministry of Health in Iraq
using consensus conferences methodology.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` The aim of this
audit was to assess the practice of ECT in psychiatric hospitals in Iraq
by measuring the degree of compliance with the standards of the Iraqi
ECT Policy 2009.

.. _S1:

Method
======

Psychiatric services in Iraq are provided in 26 hospitals. Three of
these are psychiatric hospitals and the rest are psychiatry wards or
units within general hospitals.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` We contacted medical
directors or heads of psychiatry departments by email or telephone to
find out how many hospitals have ECT facilities: it transpired that only
10 provide ECT treatment.

The audit was designed to investigate compliance with the Iraqi ECT
Policy 2009. The policy is written in Arabic and English. We divided the
standards of this policy into two groups: the first group included
standards related to the requirements of ECT clinics in terms of number
of rooms, equipment, medicines, processes and staff. The second group
covered the standards related to individual ECT treatments. The full
policy is available from authors on request.

A self-completed questionnaire covering the first group of standards and
a data collection form covering the second group were developed by the
authors. The questionnaire was sent by email to medical directors or
heads of departments in the 10 hospitals. The data collection form was
completed by psychiatry trainees (students of the Iraqi Board of
Psychiatry) in these hospitals providing data from case notes of all
patients who had ECT in the first 6 months of 2013. The patients were
identified from the ECT clinics' records. This audit was approved by the
Iraqi Board of Psychiatry.

Data were analysed with SPSS version 19.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

All 10 hospitals returned the questionnaire regarding the first group of
standards. For individual ECT treatments, data were available from 8
hospitals only. One hospital did not provide data and in the other no
ECT treatment was given during the audit period.

Results showed that only 2 hospitals (20%) have a minimum of 2 rooms in
their ECT clinics. Only 3 hospitals (30%) have an ECT machine which is
less than 5 years old. No hospital has a machine which has EEG
monitoring. Apart from one hospital, all machines used brief-pulse wave
electrical current. Only in 4 hospitals (40%) was there an anaesthesia
specialist attached to the department. There was a nurse responsible for
the department in 7 out of the 10 clinics (70%). A nominated
psychiatrist responsible for the department was available in 6 clinics
(60%); all clinics (100%) train their ECT team and 4 (40%) conduct an
annual audit of the work of the department (`Table 1 <#T1>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Responses to the questionnaire in relation to 10 ECT clinics
      requirements

   ============================================================== === == =
   \                                                              *n*    
   ============================================================== === == =
   Anaesthesia drugs are used according to Iraqi standards        5   0  5
   \                                                                     
   Is there anaesthesia specialist in the ECT department?         4   1  5
   \                                                                     
   Is there is a nurse responsible for the ECT department?        7   3  0
   \                                                                     
   Has a minimum of two rooms                                     2   8  0
   \                                                                     
   ECT device has EEG                                             0   10 0
   \                                                                     
   ECT device has different doses                                 8   2  0
   \                                                                     
   ECT device is less than 5 years old                            3   7  0
   \                                                                     
   A nominated psychiatrist is responsible for the ECT department 6   4  0
       If yes, was the ECT team trained by the psychiatrist?      6   0  0
       If yes, did the psychiatrist conduct annual audit?         4   2  0
   ============================================================== === == =

   ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; EEG, electroencephalography.

During the audit period, 251 patients had ECT: 130 male and 121 female.
The average number of patients per hospital was 26.1 (range 0-47). The
mean age was 36.2 years (range 17-67 years). The majority of patients (n
= 181, 72.1%) were 18 to 44 years old, followed by the age group 45 to
64 years (n = 67, 26.7%). There was only 1 adolescent patient (<18 years
old) and only 2 elderly patients (>65 years old).

The gender distribution was roughly equal with 51.8% of the patients
male and 48.2% female. Only about a third (28.3%) were in-patients.
Written consent by the patients or their relatives was obtained in all
cases. ECT was given through bilateral electrodes placement in all
patients. General anaesthesia was used in 77.15% of the cases.
Unmodified ECT was given in three hospitals. Further correspondence with
these hospitals revealed that the reason for using unmodified ECT was
the unavailability of anaesthetists.

The main indication for ECT was schizophrenia (51%), followed by severe
depression (31.5%), resistant mania (10.4%) catatonia (2.4%) and others
(4.4%). In those diagnosed as having schizophrenia, only 5.5% had a
second opinion before ECT was prescribed and in 40% the reason was poor
response to other treatments (`Table 2 <#T2>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Demographic and clinical characteristics of the sample (*n* = 251)

   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        | *n* (%)    |
   +========================================================+============+
   | Gender                                                 |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Male                                               | 130 (51.8) |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Female                                             | 121 (48.2) |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | Service setting                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     In-patient                                         | 180 (71.7) |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Out-patient                                        | 71 (28.3)  |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | ECT prescriber: psychiatric specialist                 | 251 (100)  |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | Diagnosis                                              |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Severe depression                                  | 79 (31.5)  |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Resistant mania                                    | 26 (10.4)  |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Catatonia                                          | 6 (2.4)    |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Puerperal psychosis                                | 1 (0.4)    |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Schizophrenia                                      | 128 (51)   |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Other                                              | 11 (4.4)   |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | In schizophrenia, reason for ECT                       |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Previous good response to ECT                      | 3 (1.2)    |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Poor response to other treatments                  | 102 (40.6) |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Risk to self or others                             | 20 (8.0)   |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |     Other                                              | 3 (1.2)    |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | In schizophrenia, second opinion was obtained: Yes     | 7 (5.5)    |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | Written consent by patient or relatives: Yes           | 251 (100)  |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | ECT was done under general anaesthesia: Yes            | 176 (70.1) |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | Patient was informed to fast 10 h before treatment:    | 251 (100)  |
   | Yes                                                    |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | ECT dose given according to Iraqi standards: Yes       | 251 (100)  |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | There was a prolonged seizure: Yes                     | 0 (0)      |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | Bilateral ECT: Yes                                     | 251 (100)  |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | Patient had ECT previously: Yes                        | 102 (40.6) |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   |                                                        |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
   | Patient notes had documentation about response to      | 62 (24.7)  |
   | previous ECT: Yes                                      |            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------+

   ECT, electroconvulsive therapy.

All of the 251 patients (100%) received a physical health examination.
However, investigations were done more often in the patients who had
modified ECT than those who had unmodified ECT (`Table 3 <#T3>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Investigations

   ==================== ============== ============ =================
   \                    Unmodified     Modified ECT *P*
                        ECT (*n* = 75) (*n* = 176)  
                        *n* (%)        *n* (%)      
   ==================== ============== ============ =================
   Complete blood count 21 (28.0)      171 (97.2)   `\**\* <#TFN3>`__
   \                                                
   Fasting blood sugar  17 (22.7)      168 (95.5)   `\**\* <#TFN3>`__
   \                                                
   Urea and creatinine  8 (10.7)       170 (97.1)   `\**\* <#TFN3>`__
   \                                                
   Liver function test  8 (10.7)       171 (97.2)   `\**\* <#TFN3>`__
   \                                                
   Chest X-ray          11 (14.7)      176 (100)    `\**\* <#TFN3>`__
   \                                                
   Electrocardiogram    12 (16.0)      176 (100)    `\**\* <#TFN3>`__
   ==================== ============== ============ =================

   *P*\ <0.001, chi-squared test.

There were no statistically significant differences between males and
females across clinical and demographic variables.

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

As far as we know, this is the first national audit of ECT practice in
Iraq against clear and explicit standards. We collected data through two
routes, a health professional questionnaire and a review of patient case
notes. The audit highlighted areas of good practice and areas which need
further improvement.

The majority of our patients were young (72.1% were 18 to 44 years old),
which is very similar to Asian patients having ECT\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` but
different from trends in Western countries, where patients are usually
elderly.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` Chanpattana et al\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` suggested
that this difference in age group trends could be caused by Asian
population demographics and the fact that schizophrenia (with higher
prevalence in younger patients) is the main indication for ECT in Asian
patients. These explanations could also be valid for our Iraqi sample.

The gender distribution of our sample was roughly equal. This is
slightly different from what is known in Asian countries, where more
males receive ECT,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` and from Western countries, where
more females do.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)-(n.d.l)` A possible reason for this
near-equal gender distribution is that, in Iraq, there was found to be
no gender difference in depression;\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` however, it is also
possible that our finding was accidental.

Another finding which was very similar to Chanpattana et
al's\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` was that schizophrenia was the major indication for
ECT (51% v. 41.8% in their sample). This finding is slightly different
from what Iraqi psychiatrists report about the indications for ECT. In a
recent survey which included 73 Iraqi psychiatrists, the first
indication mentioned was depression, followed by
schizophrenia.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` The use of ECT in schizophrenia could
raise a number of questions about the appropriateness and reasons for
its use. International guidelines do not recommend ECT in general cases
of schizophrenia, but as an option where clozapine has already proved
ineffective or intolerable.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` A review concluded that ETC
might be an option in patients who show poor response to
medication\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` and this was also cited as the main reason
for ECT in our sample. The lack or unavailability of clozapine and the
difficulties associated with blood monitoring in Iraq might be one
reason for poor treatment response. The practice of having a second
opinion for the use of ECT in schizophrenia is still very rare in Iraq
(5.5%) and needs to be encouraged.

It is encouraging that the majority (70.1%) of ECT in our study was
modified ECT. This figure indicates a significant improvement in this
area: although we do not have exact figures, we are aware that prior to
2003 ECT was mostly given in an unmodified way. This also seems better
than the practice of ECT in Asian countries in general, where 55.7% of
patients still receive unmodified ECT,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` but is below the
100% standard stipulated by the Iraqi ECT Policy and the practice in
high-income countries.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` Unmodified ECT was
applied only in three hospitals and the unavailability of anaesthetists
was the only reason. Measures to address this resource issue need to be
taken by the Ministry of Health. Closure of ECT clinics where general
anaesthesia is not available might be one, albeit the last resort,
option. In this context, we are aware that the biggest psychiatry
hospital in Iraq (which has 1200 beds) has stopped ECT treatment because
of the unavailability of anaesthetists and patients who need ECT are
transferred to an acute hospital where a modified ECT is given. This has
led to a significant reduction in the number of ECTs (Tamimy J, 2011,
personal communication).

In addition to human resources, this audit identified other shortcomings
such as the number of rooms, the age of the ECT machine and the lack of
EEG monitoring facilities. Improving these areas could lead to an
improvement in the quality of care patients receive. For example, EEG
monitoring, which was absent in all clinics, could mean lower doses
being given and subsequently, fewer cognitive
side-effects.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` One way of improving these areas could be
by nominating a consultant psychiatrist (in our sample, this happened in
only 60% of the ECT clinics) and a nurse who are responsible for ECT
delivery, oversee its practice and audit it.

Bilateral ECT was performed on all patients in compliance with the Iraqi
ECT Policy, which stipulates that bilateral ECT should be used except in
patients under the age of 18 (only one patient in our sample) or in
elderly patients with cognitive impairment. Bilateral use of ECT seems
to be the norm in many
countries.\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.j),(n.d.p),(n.d.q)`

.. _S4:

Limitations
-----------

One limitation of our study is that we did not collect data about the
number of ECT sessions given to each patient. This information could
inform us about Iraqi practice in that area, but not necessarily in
measuring compliance with the policy, which does not include a standard
about the number of ECT sessions. Another limitation is that we did not
record how many of the consent forms were signed by patients as opposed
to relatives. This could have shed light on transcultural differences in
that area. In Iraq, giving consent by the family on behalf of the
patient is seen as acceptable. This is something which needs to be
explored further in the absence of an active mental health act. This
audit has not covered ECT practice in private clinics. We know from
personal contact that this is not uncommon but it is not governed by any
policy. Regulations might need to be enforced to ensure good practice.
We did not collect data about who administered the ECT treatments;
however, we know that in Iraq ECT is administered by a psychiatry
specialist or a trainee.

The recent history of Iraq has been very traumatic, with three wars,
years of economic sanctions and more than 11 years of civil unrest.
These major events have affected the health services', including mental
health services', infrastructure. Since 2003, there have been attempts
to improve and modernise mental health services in collaboration with
international bodies such as the Royal College of Psychiatrists through
its Iraq Sub Committee. This subcommittee has contributed to many
projects,\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` for example drafting the ECT standards. This
audit has examined the practice of ECT in Iraq against these standards
and identified areas for further improvement. There are resource issues
that need to be addressed by the Ministry of Health and areas which
could be improved by training or research. In particular, the use of ECT
in schizophrenia needs further exploration.

We thank the medical directors and heads of departments who answered the
questionnaire. We also thank the trainee psychiatrists in the Iraqi
Board of Psychiatry who helped in the data collection: Dr Ghada Adeeb,
Dr Tharaa Wadaah, Dr Lava Dara, Dr Haeffa Ahmed, Dr Akeel Ibraheem, Dr
Sadoon Abid, Dr Yassir Saad, Dr Ashwan A. Shwan, Dr Arafat Aldujaili.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.q.

.. [1]
   **Dr Nesif Alhemiary** MBChB, FIBMS (Psych) assistant professor and
   consultant psychiatrist, Faculty of Medicine, Baghdad University;
   **Dr Zainab Ali** MBChB, psychiatric trainee, Iraqi Board of
   Psychiatry, Baghdad Teaching Hospital, Iraq; **Dr Mohammed J. Abbas**
   MRCPsych, consultant psychiatrist, Leicestershire Partnership NHS
   Trust, and past chair of the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Iraq Sub
   Committee, Leicester, UK.
