========================================================================================================
Difficult to treat? A comparison of the effectiveness of treatment as usual in refugees and non-refugees
========================================================================================================



F. Jackie June ter Heide
Geert E. Smid

:Correspondence: Jackie June ter Heide
(j.ter.heide@centrum45.nl)  [1]_

:date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To examine treatment response in traumatised
   refugees, we compared routine outcome monitoring data (Harvard Trauma
   Questionnaire) of two refugee populations with those of individuals
   experiencing profession-related trauma who were treated at a
   specialised psychotrauma institute.

   **Results** Asylum seekers/temporary refugees (*n* = 21) and
   resettled refugees (*n* = 169) showed significantly lower
   post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptom reduction between
   intake and 1 year after intake than did a comparison group of
   non-refugees (*n* = 37), but the interaction effect was clinically
   small (partial η\ :sup:`2` = 0.03). Refugees who had more severe
   symptoms at intake showed significantly greater symptom reduction
   after 1 year.

   **Clinical implications** Therapists and refugee patients should have
   realistic expectations about response to treatment as usual.
   Additional treatment focusing on improving quality of life may be
   needed for refugees whose PTSD symptom severity remains high. At the
   same time, novel approaches may be developed to boost treatment
   response in refugee patients with low responsiveness.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Among many clinicians, traumatised asylum seekers and refugees have a
reputation of being difficult to treat. Low treatment response in
refugees is often attributed to patient-related factors,\ :sup:`1` such
as trauma history, current stressors and complex psychopathology. Many
asylum seekers and refugees have been exposed to multiple, prolonged,
interpersonal traumatic events such as war and human
trafficking.\ :sup:`2` In addition, they have to handle the stress of
forced migration, including involvement in legal procedures\ :sup:`3`
and loss of their home country, cultural resources, family and social
status.\ :sup:`4` Apart from post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD),\ :sup:`5` they may experience comorbid symptoms including
depression, anxiety and psychosis,\ :sup:`6` as well as symptoms
sometimes referred to as complex PTSD.\ :sup:`7` By contrast, some
clinicians argue that it is the treatment offered to refugees, rather
than their potential to benefit from treatment, that leads to low
treatment response,\ :sup:`8` and that refugees, like other adults with
chronic PTSD,\ :sup:`9` should be treated with trauma-focused
interventions. One way to examine treatment response in refugees is by
comparing the effectiveness of different kinds of treatment in refugee
samples. In recent years, randomised trials have shown promising effects
for trauma-focused treatment in refugees.\ :sup:`10` Another way to
examine treatment response is to compare the effectiveness of treatment
in refugee samples and non-refugee samples. This has been done little,
if at all. This study's aim is to compare traumatised asylum seekers'
and refugees' response to treatment as usual with that of another
multiply traumatised population: indivduals affected by
profession-related trauma (i.e. military veterans and police officers).

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Setting
-------

Data were collected in Foundation Centrum '45, a Dutch mental health
institute specialising in treatment of complex psychotrauma. Specific
populations include asylum seekers and refugees, veterans of various
peace missions, World War II resistance fighters as well as
concentration camp survivors and their offspring, and police officers.
Centrum '45 receives national referrals of patients who, owing to their
psychosocial complexity, cannot be treated in general mental healthcare
or who have shown insufficient response to treatment in general mental
healthcare. Treatment for PTSD (individually or in groups) generally
consists of a combination of supportive therapy, pharmacotherapy and
trauma-focused therapy, particularly eye movement desensitisation and
reprocessing (EMDR),\ :sup:`11` narrative exposure therapy
(NET)\ :sup:`12` and brief eclectic psychotherapy for PTSD
(BEPP).\ :sup:`13` As these three trauma-focused treatments are evidence
based, choice of treatment mainly depends on the therapist's training.
Art therapy, psychomotor therapy and music therapy are also offered,
especially to patients who follow a clinical or day-clinical programme.

.. _S3:

Assessments
-----------

To evaluate the effectiveness of treatment as usual, Centrum '45 has
routinely administered assessments at intake and at the end of
treatment. Since 2007, a routine outcome monitoring (ROM) assessment 1
year after intake has been added for all patient populations. Since its
introduction, ROM response has increased from around 40 to 55% in 2012.
For several years, the Harvard Trauma Questionnaire (HTQ)\ :sup:`14` was
used as a ROM instrument with refugees and for a shorter period also
with non-refugee populations. The HTQ has been specifically designed for
use with refugee populations. It is a self-report instrument that
consists of two parts: one focusing on traumatic events and one on
symptoms of post-traumatic stress (specific to DSM-IV\ :sup:`15` and
additional symptoms reported by traumatised refugees). Symptoms are
rated on a four-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 4
(extremely). A mean score of 2.5 has been recommended as cut-off score
for PTSD,\ :sup:`16` although this recommendation has not been validated
in a wide range of patient populations.

.. _S4:

Sample
------

To answer our research question, we had at our disposal a ROM data-set
that consisted of 577 patients who had completed assessments both at
intake and 1 year after intake (with a range of 8 to 16 months). From
this data-set, we excluded all partners and children of war-affected
persons (*n* = 218; primarily children of parents traumatised in World
War II) because their reasons for seeking help, generally speaking, do
not include PTSD. We then excluded all patients who at intake had not
been administered the HTQ (*n* = 125) but another instrument to assess
PTSD (a Dutch self-rating inventory for PTSD).\ :sup:`16` As the final
dataset contained only a small number of patients traumatised during
World War II (*n* = 7), we also excluded those patients. The final
data-set consisted of 227 patients who had had their second assessment
between March 2007 and April 2013. We divided the sample into three
groups: asylum seekers/temporary refugees (i.e. those who are still
awaiting the decision on their asylum application and those who have
obtained temporary refugee status, which may not be extended after 5
years), resettled refugees (i.e. those who have obtained permanent
refugee status or subsequent Dutch nationality), and patients with
profession-related trauma (i.e. military veterans and police officers).

.. _S5:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

All analyses were performed using SPSS version 20.0 for Windows.
Demographical and clinical characteristics were calculated, and
chi-squared and *t*-tests were conducted to check for demographical and
clinical differences between the groups. For the HTQ, mean PTSD severity
at intake (T1) and one year after intake (T2) was computed as well as
the difference between the two (PTSD symptom reduction). We checked HTQ
variables for extreme outliers, but we found none. Missing data for the
HTQ consisted of missing mean scores at T2 for 7 patients (2 asylum
seekers/temporary refugees and 5 resettled refugees) and missing events
scores at T1 for 42 patients (4 asylum seekers/temporary refugees, 34
resettled refugees and 4 professionals). We handled missing data by
using pair-wise deletion.

We conducted pair-wise *t*-tests to determine treatment response within
each group, and calculated by hand the effect sizes (η\ :sup:`2`).
Following Cohen, we interpreted η\ :sup:`2` = 0.01 to be a small effect,
η\ :sup:`2` = 0.06 as moderate and η\ :sup:`2` = 0.14 as
large.\ :sup:`17` We set confidence intervals at 95%. To examine
potential differences in treatment response between the three groups, we
conducted repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), using time as
within-subjects factor and group as between-subjects factor. For the
interaction effect, an effect-size (partial η\ :sup:`2`) of 0.01 was
interpreted to be small, 0.09 as medium and 0.25 as large.\ :sup:`17` To
examine variables associated with treatment response in asylum seekers
and refugees, we performed a multiple regression analysis with PTSD
symptom reduction (HTQ score at T1 minus HTQ score at T2) as the
dependent variable and demographic variables (gender, age and refugee
status (no/temporary/permanent)) and clinical variables (PTSD severity
at T1, number of traumatic event types and time between assessments) as
independent variables.

.. _S6:

Results
=======

.. _S7:

Demographic characteristics
---------------------------

For demographic and clinical characteristics of the final sample, see
`Table 1 <#T1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Demographic and clinical characteristics of the groups

   +----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+------+----------+
   |          | Asylum   | R        | Pro      | *F*   | d.f. | *P*      |
   |          | seekers/ | esettled | fession- |       |      |          |
   |          | t        | refugees | related  |       |      |          |
   |          | emporary | (*n* =   | trauma   |       |      |          |
   |          | refugees | 169)     | (*n* =   |       |      |          |
   |          | (*n* =   |          | 37)      |       |      |          |
   |          | 21)      |          |          |       |      |          |
   +==========+==========+==========+==========+=======+======+==========+
   | Dem      |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | ographic |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | charact  |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | eristics |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+------+----------+
   |     Age, | 36.1     | 43.8     | 44.5     | 7.32  | 2    | 0.001    |
   | years:   | (10.4)   | (8.9)    | (8.6)    |       |      |          |
   | mean     |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | (s.d.)   |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+------+----------+
   |          | 12       | 123      | 34       |       | 2    | 0.00     |
   |    Male, | (57.1)   | (72.8)   | (91.9)   |       |      | 9\ `a <# |
   | *n* (%)  |          |          |          |       |      | TFN3>`__ |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+------+----------+
   |          |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+------+----------+
   | Clinical |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | charact  |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | eristics |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+------+----------+
   |     HTQ  | 3.14     | 3.08     | 2.80     | 6.72  | 2    | 0.002    |
   | score at | (0.35)   | (0.52)   | (0.53)   |       |      |          |
   | intake,  |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | mean     |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | (s.d.)   |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+------+----------+
   |     T    | 13.9     | 12.3     | 9.3      | 8.12  | 2    | 0.001    |
   | raumatic | (4.0)    | (5.4)    | (4.6)    |       |      |          |
   | event    |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | types    |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | (HTQ)    |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | ,\ `b <# |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | TFN4>`__ |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | *n*:     |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | mean     |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | (s.d.)   |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+------+----------+
   |     Time | 12.1     | 12.1     | 10.6     | 16.09 | 2    | <0.001   |
   | between  | (1.7)    | (1.4)    | (1.5)    |       |      |          |
   | asse     |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | ssments, |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | months:  |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | mean     |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   | (s.d.)   |          |          |          |       |      |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+-------+------+----------+

   HTQ, Harvard Trauma Questionnaire.

   χ\ :sup:`2` = 9.47.

   Experienced or witnessed.

Because this study was observational, we found significant differences
in demographic and clinical characteristics between the three groups for
all variables. Asylum seekers/temporary refugees came predominantly from
Afghanistan, Armenia, Iraq and Sierra Leone (*n* = 3, 14.3% for each
country); resettled refugees came predominantly from the former
Yugoslavia (*n* = 59, 34.9%), Iraq (*n* = 28, 16.6%) and Afghanistan
(*n* = 22, 13.0%); and patients who had profession-related trauma came
predominantly from The Netherlands (*n* = 33, 89.2%). The traumatic
events that the asylum seekers/temporary refugees most frequently
reported were physical torture (*n* = 17, 81.0%), threat of physical
torture (*n* = 17, 81.0%) and other life-threatening situation (*n* =
17, 81.0%). Resettled refugees most frequently reported being close to
death (*n* = 135, 79.9%), other life-threatening situation (*n* = 125,
74.0%) and forced isolation from family (*n* = 123, 72.8%).
Professionals most frequently reported other life-threatening situation
(*n* = 34, 91.9%), combat situation (*n* = 34, 91.9%), serious injury
(*n* = 31, 83.8%) and being close to death (*n* = 31, 83.8%).

.. _S8:

Treatment outcome
-----------------

`Figure 1 <#F1>`__ shows the results of the repeated measures ANOVA for
the three groups.

.. figure:: 184f1
   :alt: PTSD symptom severity at intake and after 1 year.
   :name: F1

   PTSD symptom severity at intake and after 1 year.

Mean PTSD symptom severity decreased from 3.13 (95% CI 2.91 to 3.35) to
2.92 (95% CI 2.65 to 3.20) for asylum seekers/temporary refugees; from
3.10 (95% CI 3.03 to 3.18) to 2.88 (95% CI 2.79 to 2.98) for resettled
refugees; and from 2.80 (95% CI 2.64 to 2.96) to 2.31 (95% CI 2.11 to
2.51) for patients suffering from profession-related trauma.
Paired-samples *t*-tests revealed a significant decrease in PTSD
severity for resettled refugees (0.22, s.d. = 0.52, *t*\ :sub:`(163)` =
5.39, *P*\ <0.001) and for professionals (0.49, s.d. = 0.64,
*t*\ :sub:`(36)` = 4.65, *P*\ <0.001), but not for the smallest group,
asylum seekers/temporary refugees (0.21, s.d. = 0.59, *t*\ :sub:`(18)` =
1.53, *P* = 0.143). Effect sizes for treatment response in asylum
seekers/temporary refugees and resettled refugees were moderate
(η\ :sup:`2` = 0.12 and η\ :sup:`2` = 0.15, respectively); effect size
for patients with profession-related trauma was large (η\ :sup:`2` =
0.38).\ :sup:`16` Repeated measures ANOVA showed a significant effect
for time (*F* = 32.27, *P*\ <0.001) with a medium effect size (partial
η\ :sup:`2` = 0.13), and a significant group×time interaction effect
(*F* = 3.65, *P* = 0.028) with a small effect size (partial η\ :sup:`2`
= 0.03).\ :sup:`16`

We then combined the two refugee groups and, using multiple regression
analysis, we examined whether seven demographic and clinical variables
were associated with PTSD symptom reduction (`Table 2 <#T2>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Factors associated with reduction in PTSD symptom severity in
      refugees after 1 year

   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   |                                           | B     | 95% CI        | β     | *P*    |
   +===========================================+=======+===============+=======+========+
   | Demographic variables                     |       |               |       |        |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   |     Gender                                | 0.11  | −0.07 to 0.29 | 0.09  | 0.238  |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   |     Age                                   | 0.00  | −0.01 to 0.00 | −0.09 | 0.277  |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   |                                           |       |               |       |        |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   | Refugee status                            |       |               |       |        |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   |     None *v.* permanent                   | −0.03 | −0.37 to 0.31 | −0.01 | 0.872  |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   |     Temporary *v.* permanent              | −0.14 | −0.52 to 0.24 | −0.06 | 0.464  |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   |                                           |       |               |       |        |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   | Clinical variables                        |       |               |       |        |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   |     PTSD symptom severity at intake (HTQ) | 0.48  | 0.32 to 0.64  | 0.45  | <0.001 |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   |     Traumatic event types (HTQ), *n*      | −0.01 | −0.03 to 0.00 | −0.11 | 0.157  |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+
   |     Time between assessments, months      | −0.01 | −0.06 to 0.05 | −0.01 | 0.851  |
   +-------------------------------------------+-------+---------------+-------+--------+

   B, regression coefficient; β, standardised regression coefficient;
   HTQ, Harvard Trauma Questionnaire; PTSD, post-traumatic stress
   disorder

As shown in `Table 2 <#T2>`__, refugee patients with more severe PTSD
symptoms at intake had significantly stronger reductions in PTSD symptom
severity after 1 year. The other variables were not significantly
associated with PTSD symptom reduction. The percentage of variance
explained by the model (R\ :sup:`2`) was 21.5%.

.. _S9:

Discussion
==========

This study shows that asylum seekers/temporary refugees and resettled
refugees experienced significantly lower PTSD symptom reduction between
intake and 1 year after intake than did a comparison group of multiply
traumatised military veterans and police officers. However, greatest
differences between groups were found in PTSD symptom severity at intake
and 1 year after intake rather than in PTSD symptom reduction.
Explorations of PTSD symptom reduction in refugees showed that those who
had more severe symptoms at intake experienced significantly greater
symptom reduction after 1 year; other variables (including variables
related to refugee status and number of traumatic events) were not
related to symptom reduction.

The results show that despite specialised treatment being offered to
refugees, treatment response can be limited and PTSD severity frequently
remains high. Possible explanations, and consequently clinical
implications, might be threefold: patient-related, therapist-related and
treatment-related. As for patient-related factors, the multiple
determinants of PTSD might influence refugees' ability to benefit from
treatment. It is generally acknowledged that PTSD in refugees is
influenced by both traumatic and current stressors, some (or many) of
which may be beyond the patients' and therapists' control.\ :sup:`18`
Following this explanation, clinicians and patients should have
realistic expectations about what treatment may achieve in such a
heavily traumatised and burdened population. Interventions that focus on
improving quality of life rather than on further symptom reduction, such
as acceptance and commitment therapy,\ :sup:`19` might be useful for
those patients who despite prolonged treatment continue to suffer from
clinically significant PTSD. Clinicians sometimes suspect asylum seekers
to exaggerate symptoms to remain in medical care and thereby increase
the chance of obtaining a refugee status. We found no substantiation for
this hypothesis of ‘secondary gain’ - in our study, not having a
permanent refugee status was not associated with a decreased treatment
response.

As for therapist-related factors, therapeutic skills that might suffice
in trauma-focused treatment of other multiply traumatised groups might
fall short in the treatment of refugees. Therapists might need more
extensive training and supervision regarding choosing and staying with a
treatment focus, categorising and selecting of target memories, and
understanding and restructuring of trauma-related cognitions in order
not to lose their way in the multitude of symptoms, memories and
transcultural challenges. At the same time, therapists need to maintain
a sense of being ‘good enough’ to provide treatment to refugees with
limited responsiveness.\ :sup:`20`

Finally, regarding treatment-related factors, not all evidence-based
treatments will work with all refugees. Therapists will need to explore
non-response, and they may need to consult refugee patient populations
themselves\ :sup:`21` to examine which treatment aims and techniques
speak to refugees who insufficiently benefit from treatment as usual. In
addition, novel approaches may be developed to enhance treatment
response. Centrum '45 is currently exploring the feasibility of refugee
treatment that focuses primarily on prolonged grief rather than on PTSD,
and of intranasal oxytocin as a novel strategy to boost treatment
response in refugees.\ :sup:`22`

.. _S10:

Limitations
-----------

Although this study is valuable for comparing the effects of treatment
as usual in refugee populations with those in a non-refugee population
(which, to our knowledge, has not been done before), it also has several
limitations. First, a division of the asylum seeker group into asylum
seekers and temporary refugees, and of the profession-related trauma
group into military veterans and police officers, would have been
clinically meaningful but was not possible due to limited sample sizes
for these groups. Second, some variables that might have shed light on
differences in treatment response between the three groups (including
comorbid disorders, the amount and content of treatment, change in
refugee status and chronicity of PTSD) were not included in the
data-set. Future studies should use a broader range of variables to more
comprehensively assess predictors of refugees' treatment responses.
Third, ROM assessments at our institute are completed by about 55% of
patients, and findings might not generalise to our complete patient
population, nor to traumatised refugees in general.

Nevertheless, our study contributes to the debate on refugees' treatment
response by showing that it is indeed relatively lower than that of
multiply traumatised non-refugees.

We thank Niels van der Aa for providing us with the data-set and
methodological information.

.. [1]
   **F. Jackie June ter Heide** MA, MPhil (Cantab) is a clinical
   psychologist/psychotherapist and researcher, Foundation Centrum
   '45/partner in Arq, Oegstgeest and Diemen, The Netherlands, and
   **Geert E. Smid** MD, PhD is a psychiatrist and senior researcher,
   Foundation Centrum '45/partner in Arq.
