==============================================================================================
Cognitive–behavioural therapy by psychiatric trainees: can a little knowledge be a good thing?
==============================================================================================

Eric Kelleher
Melissa Hayde
Yvonne Tone
Iulia Dud
Colette Kearns
Mary McGoldrick
Michael McDonoughCorrespondence to Eric Kelleher (eric.kelleher@tcd.ie)
 [1]_
:Date: 2015-2

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To establish the competency of psychiatric
   trainees in delivering cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) to
   selected cases, following introductory lectures and supervision.
   Supervisor reports of trainees rotating through a national
   psychiatric hospital over 8.5 years were reviewed along with revised
   Cognitive Therapy Scale (CTS-R) ratings where available. Independent
   *t*-test was used to compare variables.

   **Results** Structured supervision reports were available for 52 of
   55 (95%) trainees. The mean result (4.6, s.d. = 0.9) was at or above
   the accepted level for competency (≥3) for participating trainees.
   Available CTS-R ratings (*n* = 22) supported the supervisor report
   findings for those particular trainees.

   **Clinical implications** This study indicates that trainees under
   supervision can provide meaningful clinical interventions when
   delivering CBT to selected cases. The costs of supervision need to be
   judged against these clinical gains.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Developing competencies in psychotherapy is a requirement of basic
psychiatry specialist training in both the UK and
Ireland.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` Of the psychotherapies,
cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) has gained increasing prominence
both as a treatment alternative and adjunct to medication due to its
proven efficacy in the treatment of mood,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`
anxiety,\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` psychotic\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` and eating
disorders.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` In England, the Improving Access to
Psychological Therapies (IAPT; `www.iapt.nhs.uk <www.iapt.nhs.uk>`__)
outlines the government’s commitment to use CBT in the
future.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` This highlights a clear practical need for all
psychiatric trainees to develop competencies in CBT.

In clinical practice, psychotherapy is often delivered by psychotherapy
trainees under supervision, such as post-doctoral fellows or
pre-doctoral interns in psychology or social work.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`
Previous work by Brittlebank & Owens suggests that psychiatric trainees
can deliver CBT effectively to patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` To date, much
of the literature on psychiatric trainees delivering CBT has focused on
comparing the recommendations of the Royal College of Psychiatrists with
clinical practice\ :sup:`(n.d.i)\ ,\ (n.d.j)` and looking at strategies
to improve its organisation.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` Recommendations such as
improving the availability of supervision,\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` protected
time\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` and suitable cases have been
made.\ :sup:`(n.d.n),(n.d.o)` Although there has been literature
published on the assessment of psychotherapy competencies for
psychiatric trainees,\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.q)` to the best of our
knowledge, there is little published on the competency of psychiatric
trainees to actually deliver CBT based on structured feedback from
supervisors and the use of structured tools such as those found on
postgraduate psychotherapy courses.

Cognitive–behavioural therapy supervision sessions are based on an
established format.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` This incorporates agenda-setting,
case discussion/review of session, didactic discussion of the CBT model
for the presenting problem, questions for supervision, plan for next
session with patient, homework task (e.g. recommended reading) and
audio/videotape review if available. Trainees are expected to work with
their patients for up to 12 sessions and are encouraged to record their
sessions (audio or video) with the patient’s consent. Trainees should
attend regular supervision sessions with their allocated supervisor.
Excerpts from the therapy session recordings are listened to and used as
a tool to guide the trainee’s supervision.

In addition to structured supervision reports, a further method of
establishing trainee competence is the revised Cognitive Therapy Scale
(CTS-R).\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.s)` The CTS-R is widely used in
postgraduate CBT training courses as a way of grading course work and,
although not without controversy, is considered the gold-standard
measure of clinical competence.

We hypothesised that psychiatric trainees would perform effectively and
competently as CBT therapists (based on structured supervision reports)
if well supervised and if allocated suitable, uncomplicated cases.

Our aims were as follows:

to retrospectively review all available supervision reports for
psychiatric trainees rotating through a national psychiatric hospital to
investigate their competency at delivering CBT;to investigate whether
CTS-R reports, where available, supported the findings of the
supervisor’s report;to investigate trainee satisfaction with receiving
CBT supervision.

.. _S1:

Method
======

The study was undertaken in St Patrick’s University Hospital, a 300-bed
facility in Dublin affiliated with the University of Dublin, Trinity
College. It has a well-developed psychotherapy service. The hospital
receives trainees from the Dublin University Psychiatric Regional
Training Programme (DUPRTP) on 6-month rotations.

Since 2009, there has been a single, time-protected psychotherapy post
on the DUPRTP located in this hospital, with supervision provided by a
consultant psychiatrist with psychotherapy training. The time for this
CBT delivery is protected by another trainee covering their work.
Obtaining this post is a competitive process and trainees are expected
to complete at least one case using CBT during their rotation.

All therapists working in the hospital have been accredited by the
British Association of Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapies (BABCP)
and are involved in training and examining on the cognitive
psychotherapy course, University of Dublin, Trinity College, which uses
the CTS-R extensively.

All trainees at the outset of their 6-month rotation in St Patrick’s
University Hospital were invited to provide psychotherapy with CBT under
supervision. Initial consultant-led teaching is provided on basic
psychotherapy and CBT skills. This comprises of three introductory
2-hour seminars for each 6-month intake of trainees at the hospital. The
teaching sessions comprised: introduction to the CBT model; cognitive
distortions; structuring a session; use of behavioural techniques;
guided discovery and Socratic questioning; planning a course of therapy;
and use of supervision.

The cases undertaken by the trainees were recruited from both
out-patient and in-patient CBT waiting lists and assessed for
suitability prior to allocation. Suitable training cases were
individuals deemed to have a typical Axis 1 disorder\ :sup:`(n.d.t)`
without active complications or comorbidities, who were easy to engage
interpersonally. Trainees were encouraged to record their sessions using
audiotape or videotape – with patient consent – for discussion at
supervision. Supervision sessions occurred fortnightly.

Following the end of therapy, supervisors completed a structured report
used by the hospital’s psychotherapy service for rating trainees, using
the common headings: Establishing a therapeutic relationship; Ability to
apply CBT model; Understanding of model preparation; Use of supervision
time; and Overall. They rated trainees using a simple Likert scale (0–6)
that was incorporated from the CTS-R\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` and work by
Dreyfus.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` Ratings are: 0, negative impact; 1, no impact
(neutral); 2, minimal impact; 3, some positive impact; 4, moderately
successful impact; 5, successful impact; and 6, highly successful
impact. A result of 3 or over for each item indicates competence.

All trainees under supervision were invited to submit an audio/videotape
recording to be assessed using the CTS-R. The CTS-R\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` is a
revised version of the existing Cognitive Therapy Scale.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)`
The rater assesses trainee competence in 12 areas:

agenda setting and adherencefeedbackcollaborationpacing efficient use of
timeinterpersonal effectivenesseliciting appropriate emotional
expressioneliciting key cognitionseliciting behavioursguided
discoveryconceptual integrationapplication of cognitive changehomework
setting.

Ratings are given using the same 7-point Likert scale as described above
to establish the trainee’s competency in each area. A result between 36
and 48 from a total of 72 establishes competency in that
assessment.\ :sup:`(n.d.r),(n.d.u)` The CTS-R has demonstrated high
internal consistency and interrater reliabilty.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)`

Trainee satisfaction with the quality of supervision and free-text
comments were also recorded using a specifically designed questionnaire
(details available from the authors on request). Trainees were asked
about: availability of supervision; atmosphere conducive to feedback;
availability of suitable cases; supervisor’s ability to communicate
theory; and an overall rating.

Following approval by the hospital’s ethics committee, we reviewed all
available supervisor reports and CTS-R ratings made between July 2004
and December 2012.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

Over an 8.5-year period, 95 trainees expressed interest in participating
in training to treat a patient using CBT (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). Twenty-one
trainees subsequently dropped out, citing lack of free time for
psychotherapy and work pressures.

Seventy-four trainees attended introductory lectures and were allocated
to a CBT supervisor. Of these, 37 attended supervision with nurse
therapists and 37 attended supervision with the consultant. Nineteen
trainees attended an initial supervision session but could not recruit a
training case or a suitable training case was not available. Of the 95
trainees, 55 (58%) treated at least one patient using a CBT model.

Complete data were available for 52 of the 55 participants (95%). The
remaining three supervisor reports were not completed or could not be
located. Of the 55 participating trainees, 7 rotated through protected
psychotherapy.

.. figure:: 41f1
   :alt: Flow chart showing the number of trainees in the study. CBT,
   cognitive-behavioural therapy;
   CTS-R, revised Cognitive Therapy Scale.
   :name: F1

   Flow chart showing the number of trainees in the study. CBT,
   cognitive-behavioural therapy;
   CTS-R, revised Cognitive Therapy Scale.

.. _S3:

Characteristics of trainees
---------------------------

In total, 55 trainees treated a patient using CBT (55% male, mean age 31
years (range 25.1–42.8)). All were psychiatric trainees pre-membership
(MRCPsych) with no previous experience of delivering CBT. Trainees had
spent a mean of 15 months (s.d. = 8.2) in psychiatric training.

Of the 55 trainees, 7 completed a protected training post.
Characteristics of this subgroup were well matched to other trainees
(43% male, mean age 31 (range 26.5–32.8)).

In total, 38 trainees took on 1 case, 14 trainees took on 2 cases, and 3
trainees took on 3 cases (total = 76 patients). Twenty-two trainees
(40%) availed of the opportunity to have an assessment rated using the
CTS-R. For those trainees who saw more than one case, we reviewed their
CTS-R from their first case only.

.. _S4:

Patient characteristics
-----------------------

Of the 76 patients seen, the initial working diagnoses included
depression (*n* = 21), obsessive-compulsive disorder (*n* = 12), social
anxiety (*n* = 10), panic disorder (*n* = 7), generalised anxiety (*n* =
7), health anxiety (*n* = 3), low self-esteem (*n* = 2) specific phobia
(*n* = 2), eating disorder (*n* = 2), non-epileptic seizures (*n* = 1),
behavioural activation (*n* = 3), anger management (*n* = 3), psychosis
(*n* = 2) and borderline personality (*n* = 1).

.. _S5:

Supervisors’ structured ratings of all trainees delivering CBT
--------------------------------------------------------------

The average result for the complete data available for the 52 trainees
was found to be at or above the accepted level for competency (≥3)
across a range of areas. Results for each item were: Establishing a
therapeutic relationship, mean = 4.6, s.d. = 0.7; Ability to apply
model, mean = 4.4, s.d. = 0.9; Understanding of the model/reading
preparation, mean = 4.5, s.d. = 0.9; Use of supervision time, mean =
4.7, s.d. = 0.9; and Overall, mean = 4.6, s.d. = 0.9. Trainees in the
protected post (*n* = 7) scored higher in all areas of the supervisor’s
report compared with non-protected posts (*n* = 45). The greatest
difference was seen in trainees’ ability to apply the CBT model and the
use of supervision time (`Table 1 <#T1>`__ and `Fig. 2 <#F2>`__).

There was a significant difference (*P*\ <0.001) in the supervisor
scores obtained by those trainees (*n* = 22) who submitted an
audio/videotape to be reviewed using the CTS-R (mean = 4.9, s.d. =
0.158) compared with the remaining (*n* = 30) trainees (mean = 4.28,
s.d. = 0.13): *t*\ (50) = 15 (`Table 2 <#T2>`__). Of the 22 trainees who
submitted a tape, 7 were in the protected psychotherapy post. The
remaining trainees (*n* = 15) were in a range of general adult
psychiatry posts.

The average rating for all 22 trainees was 41.74 (s.d. = 5.16). Trainees
were rated highest in interpersonal effectiveness (4.14) and eliciting
key behaviours (3.89) and cognitions (3.63), and lowest at eliciting
appropriate emotional expression (2.98). The results of the CTS-R
findings are displayed in `Table 3 <#T3>`__.

.. _S6:

Trainees’ ratings of supervisors
--------------------------------

Of the 55 trainees, 49 (89%) rated their satisfaction with supervision
over the training period. Six trainees did not return forms. The
majority reported the supervision they received as either excellent,
very good or good in separate areas: availability of supervision (48/49,
97%); atmosphere conducive to feedback (49/49, 100%); availability of
cases (41/49, 84%); supervisor’s ability to communicate theory (49/49,
100%); and overall satisfaction (49/49, 100%). Remaining trainees rated
the availability of cases as adequate or unsatisfactory and 1 trainee
rated the availability of supervision as unsatisfactory.

Free-text section feedback suggested that trainees wished for more
opportunities to continue with psychotherapy training, more suitable
training cases to apply the CBT model and more protected time. Those who
agreed to have an audio/videotape reviewed using the CTS-R found it
helpful for guidance as to what areas to focus on for future therapy
sessions. Anecdotal feedback from supervisors suggested that the
training experience was positive; however uncontracted ‘goodwill’
supervision of psychiatric trainees was felt to place an unsustainable
extra demand on busy CBT practitioners. Arranging CBT supervision within
the same multidisciplinary team was deemed ideal as the psychiatric
trainee can take on cases that would have been allocated to the team’s
CBT practitioner.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Comparison of mean structured ratings for trainees in protected
      and non-protected and non-protected posts

   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Supervisor     | Protected      | Non-protected  | Overall (*n* = |
   | rating         | posts (*n* =   | posts          | 52)            |
   |                | 7)             | (*n* = 45),    | mean score     |
   |                | mean score     | mean score     |                |
   +================+================+================+================+
   | Establish      | 5.1            | 4.5            | 4.6            |
   | therapeutic    |                |                |                |
   | relationship   |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Ability to     | 5.4            | 4.2            | 4.4            |
   | apply model    |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Understanding  | 5.4            | 4.3            | 4.5            |
   | of             |                |                |                |
   | model/reading  |                |                |                |
   | preparation    |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Use of         | 5.7            | 4.5            | 4.7            |
   | supervision    |                |                |                |
   | time           |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   |                |                |                |                |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
   | Overall        | 5.5            | 4.4            | 4.6            |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

.. figure:: 42f2
   :alt: Comparison of structured ratings for trainees in protected and
   unprotected posts.
   Likert scale values are itemised as: 0, negative impact; 1, no impact
   (neutral); 2, minimal impact; 3, some positive impact; 4, moderately
   successful impact; 5, successful impact; 6, highly successful impact.
   :name: F2

   Comparison of structured ratings for trainees in protected and
   unprotected posts.
   Likert scale values are itemised as: 0, negative impact; 1, no impact
   (neutral); 2, minimal impact; 3, some positive impact; 4, moderately
   successful impact; 5, successful impact; 6, highly successful impact.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Comparison of mean structured supervisor ratings for trainees who
      did (+) and did not (–) submit a recording to be rated using the
      revised Cognitive Therapy Scale (CTS-R)

   +----------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
   | Supervisor     | Mean           | Mean           | Overall mean |
   | rating item    | supervisor     | supervisor     | (*n* = 52)   |
   |                | rating         | rating         |              |
   |                | CTS-R (+) (*n* | CTS-R (–) (*n* |              |
   |                | = 22)          | = 30)          |              |
   +================+================+================+==============+
   | Establish      | 4.8            | 4.5            | 4.6          |
   | therapeutic    |                |                |              |
   | relationship   |                |                |              |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
   |                |                |                |              |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
   | Ability to     | 4.7            | 4.1            | 4.4          |
   | apply model    |                |                |              |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
   |                |                |                |              |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
   | Understanding  | 4.8            | 4.2            | 4.5          |
   | of             |                |                |              |
   | model/reading  |                |                |              |
   | preparation    |                |                |              |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
   |                |                |                |              |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
   | Use of         | 5.1            | 4.3            | 4.7          |
   | supervision    |                |                |              |
   | time           |                |                |              |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
   |                |                |                |              |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
   | Overall        | 5              | 4.3            | 4.6          |
   +----------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+

.. _S7:

Discussion
==========

We conducted a retrospective review of supervisor assessments for
psychiatric trainees who, under supervision, engaged in a programme of
delivering CBT to patients. The completion rate in our study (58%) was
broadly similar to that reported in other similar
studies\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` evaluating a CBT training programme for
psychiatric trainees. Our findings suggest that trainees can provide
meaningful clinical interventions when delivering CBT under close
supervision and with carefully selected cases. The mean rating for all
trainees (i.e. 4.6, s.d. = 0.9) means that their CBT therapy had at
least a moderately successful impact, which supports our primary
hypothesis. Obstacles to participation cited by trainees included
well-documented reasons of work pressures\ :sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.o)` and
lack of protected time.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` As the structured feedback
shows, trainees who did participate found it a positive experience.

| Trainees bring many strengths to the delivery of therapy as a result
  of their medical training, including knowledge of psychopathology and
  diagnostic systems and being used to working independently. Medicine
  as a profession has a strong academic base and doctors as
  professionals value characteristics such as
  ‘competence’.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` A particular strength for the trainees
  in this study was their ability to establish a therapeutic
  relationship with clients. Indeed, this ability forms the foundation
  for delivering Table 3Revised Cognitive Therapy Scale (CTS-R) ratings
  from 22 trainees who submitted a tape to be reviewedCTS-R itemMean
  rating
| (*n* = 22)1. Agenda setting and adherence3.142. Feedback3.203.
  Collaboration3.324. Pacing efficient use of time3.935. Interpersonal
  effectiveness4.146. Eliciting appropriate emotional expression2.987.
  Eliciting key cognitions3.638. Eliciting behaviours3.899. Guided
  discovery3.3310. Conceptual integration3.4011. Application of
  cognitive change3.5812. Homework setting3.20Total (out of 72)41.74
| (s.d. = 5.16) therapy itself.\ :sup:`(n.d.x),(n.d.y)` It is likely to
  have contributed to trainee success.

Trainees who were in a dedicated psychotherapy post (*n* = 7) obtained
higher supervision scores than those who were not (*n* = 45). They were
time-protected during their delivery of therapy and were immersed in a
team environment dedicated to delivering CBT. Furthermore, in obtaining
their psychotherapy post, they were self-selected as having already an
established interest in delivering psychotherapy. These factors are
likely to have contributed to them obtaining higher scores than those
who did not have protected time.

The competency ratings using the CTS-R are in line with the structured
supervisor reports. For those who were assessed using the CTS-R,
trainees were rated highest in interpersonal effectiveness and eliciting
key behaviours and cognitions. They rated lowest at eliciting
appropriate emotional expression. This is in keeping with our experience
of supervising psychiatric trainees. Eliciting emotional expression is
challenging because it requires the trainee to leave their established
role as a doctor and enter the more experiential role of a therapist.

There was a significant difference in supervisor ratings in favour of
those trainees who submitted an audio/videotape to be reviewed using the
CTS-R (*n* = 22) compared with those who did not. We propose that these
self-selected trainees were inherently more confident at delivering CBT
to patients, as they agreed to an additional rating scale using the
CTS-R. Trainees who did not submit a tape for CTS-R review were not
surveyed as to reasons why, which retrospectively would have been
helpful. Encouraging and engaging more apprehensive trainees in
psychotherapy training and specifically video feedback may be a
challenge. In many ways it is these trainees who might benefit most from
structured/objective feedback. Meeting this challenge requires a
judicious blend of mandatory training requirements and a supportive,
non-judgemental training environment.

This study has several limitations. To reliably assess competencies on
the higher diploma in cognitive psychotherapy offered by Trinity
College, for example, one would need to examine one case report, one
essay, three tapes and a class presentation. This study employed
structured supervisor reports completed at the end of therapy and CTS-R
assessments in some cases. The CTS-R was assessed at one time point
during the course of therapy and ideally two time points should have
been used.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` Furthermore, although all supervisors had
been accredited by the BABCP, ideally an external supervisor should have
also assessed the CBT delivered by trainees to remove any
bias.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` We do not have completed outcome measures from
participating patients, which would have been useful.

With adequate planning, as in this study, trainees after a mean of 15
months’ training could treat selected cases with CBT, thus helping to
address the demand for increased provision of ‘talking therapies’.
Supervisors highlighted that some supervision was delivered on a
‘goodwill’ basis and suggested that the cases chosen should come from
the list of that particular team’s allotted therapist, thus helping to
reduce their workload and enable them to provide supervision and protect
their time. Trainees themselves can support their competencies by using
structured outcome measures and session recordings when providing CBT.
This can further help to demonstrate the therapeutic value of trainees’
CBT casework in resource-pressured clinical services.

Training in psychotherapy such as CBT affords the trainee the
opportunity to enrich their role as a psychiatrist and gain valuable
skills that can help them and the patients they treat throughout their
career. In addition, it provides trainees with a valuable insight into a
therapeutic intervention that they will be either delivering themselves
or referring to another provider. As indicated in this study, trainees
can provide meaningful clinical interventions when delivering CBT under
close supervision and with carefully selected cases. The costs of
training and supervision need to be judged against these clinical gains.

The authors would like to thank all the patients, trainees and
supervisors who took part in this study.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.y.

.. [1]
   **Eric Kelleher** is a Clinical Research Fellow at St James’
   University Hospital and a PhD student at the Department of
   Psychiatry, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. **Melissa Hayde** is a
   psychology graduate and an administrator at St Patrick’s University
   Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. **Yvonne Tone** is a Senior Cognitive
   Behavioural Therapist in the Student Counselling Service, Trinity
   College Dublin, Ireland. **Iulia Dud** is a psychiatry registrar at
   St Patrick’s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. **Colette Kearns**
   is a Senior Cognitive Behavioural Therapist at St Patrick’s
   University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. **Mary McGoldrick** is a
   Cognitive Behavioural Therapist at St Patrick’s University Hospital,
   Dublin, Ireland. **Michael McDonough** is a Consultant Psychiatrist,
   CBT Therapist and Anxiety Programme Director at St Patrick’s
   University Hospital and Honorary Clinical Lecturer at Trinity College
   Dublin, Ireland.
