=======================================================================================================
What is culturally informed psychiatry? Cultural understanding and withdrawal in the clinical encounter
=======================================================================================================

Anne Birgitte LesethCorrespondence to Anne Leseth (Anne.Leseth@hioa.no)
 [1]_
:Date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   What is culturally informed psychiatry? What does it mean, and why is
   it important? These questions are discussed with a focus on the
   cultural aspects of the clinical encounter. The DSM-5 *Outline for
   Cultural Formulation* was developed as a method of assessing the
   cultural factors affecting the clinical encounter. It calls for the
   assessment of the cultural features of the relationship between the
   patient and the clinician; however, there is a lack of debate about
   what this means in practice. Clinicians run the risk of withdrawal
   rather than cultural understanding when facing patients with
   different cultural backgrounds. Using ethnographic material from
   anthropological fieldwork, I suggest that the encounter with cultural
   differences could be a useful point of departure for the clinician to
   develop cultural understanding. It is argued that recognising the
   experiences of differences is crucial in strengthening transcultural
   communication and preventing misdiagnosis in the clinician–patient
   encounter.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

“‘Pathology’ is always a measure of difference.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`”
Increased evidence points towards culture as one aspect influencing the
prognosis, cause, manifestation and course of mental health problems.
Mental health problems are more frequently misdiagnosed among patients
from ethnic minority, immigrant and refugee groups than among
native-born patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Misdiagnoses may involve failing
to recognise the mental health condition or mistaking culturally
normative behaviour for psychopathology.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` The cultural
formulation in DSM-5 was developed as a standard method of applying
cultural perspectives to the clinical evaluation.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` The
*Outline for Cultural Formation* (OCF) has been field-tested for
diagnostic usefulness among clinicians.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` The cultural
formulation has been praised as the most outstanding anthropological
contribution to psychiatry, yet it has also been met by critiques by
some medical anthropologists and psychiatrists. With the cultural
formulation in the DSM-5 and its critique as the point of departure,
this article questions what culturally informed psychiatry means. The
argument is that the encounter between the patient and the clinician is
a crucial, yet underappreciated, position from where the clinician might
develop a cultural understanding.

.. _S1:

DSM and the problem with culture
================================

The contemporary model of the cultural formulation in the DSM-5 and
DSM-IV dates from the criticism of the insensitivity to cultural issues
in the DSM-III.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` The institutional culture of medicine
was characterised as a ‘culture of no culture’, with limited interest in
cultural issues.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` The OCF was first published in the
DSM-IV in 1984, with a glossary of culture-bound syndromes, culturally
relevant diagnostic categories and cultural considerations in the
narratives introducing each chapter.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` The National
Institute of Mental Health in the USA supported the creation of a
culture and diagnosis group in 1991, whose main goal was to advise the
DSM-IV task force on how to make culture more central to the
manual.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` However, although the culture and diagnosis
group succeeded in emphasising the relevance of cultural issues in
psychiatry, there has been criticism of the cultural formulation from
leading medical anthropologists over the years. This criticism can be
summed up in the following four points. There is a lack of evidence that
culturally informed therapeutic practices work.\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.k)`
Kleinman & Benson suggest that the major claims about the value of
cultural competence for professional caregiving are not supported by
evaluation research showing that systematic attention to culture really
improves clinical services.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` This lack of evidence is a
failure of outcome research to take culture seriously enough to asses
the cost-effectiveness of culturally informed therapeutic
practices.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` Moreover, evidence-based practice should
include a broader view of evidence that takes into account how different
cultures recognise different ways of knowing.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)`\ In
striking contrast to its current use in anthropology, the concept of
culture tends to be defined in medicine as something possessed by the
patient and not the doctor.Culture is conceived as a confounding
variable that White practitioners must deal with when they interact with
people from ethnic minority groups.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` The locus of
normality is white. Taking whiteness for granted represents a specific
view of culture that is shared by many White
practitioners.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` The Black and minority ethnic patient is
construed as the object of specialised knowledge, while the professional
and their cultural context are left unquestioned.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`
Historically, this view is reflected in the ways of linking psychiatric
knowledge production and implementation to a strictly Western agency,
while non-Westerners are often posited as passive receivers of this
knowledge.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`\ Clinicians are criticised for lacking a
cultural self-reflexive attitude towards their own professional
practice.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` The cultural formulation of the DSM-5 aims to
address these criticisms. The OCF is converted into the Cultural
Formulation Interview (CFI), including 16 questions focusing on the
patient's presenting concerns and definition of their problem and idiom
of distress.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)(p.749–760)` Culture is defined as the
systems of knowledge, concepts, rules and practices that are learned and
transmitted across generations, yet are open, dynamic and undergo
continuous changes over time.

The formulation emphasises that cultural information must not be
overgeneralised or stereotype groups of fixed cultural
traits.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)(p.749)` The OCF calls for a systematic assessment
of the following four categories when conducting the CFI: cultural
identity of the individualcultural conceptualisation of
distresspsychosocial stressors and cultural features of vulnerability
and resiliencecultural features of the relationship between the
individual and the clinician.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)(p.750)`

A persistent challenge faced by clinicians in implementing the cultural
formulation in the DSM-5 is how to translate insights from the social
sciences in intelligible, practical and sustainable
ways.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)`

I aim to delve deeper into the fourth category: the clinical
relationship. I aim to translate insights from anthropological fieldwork
into practical methods for clinicians. Cultural difference can affect
the clinical encounter, and part of the role of culturally informed
psychiatry is to address this difference. Using ethnographic material
from my anthropological fieldwork in Tanzania, I explore the cultural
experience evoked in the encounter. This knowledge is transferred into
the context of medical practice.

.. _S2:

White person, where are you going?
==================================

Dressed in training tights, a t-shirt and running shoes, I stood in an
outside gathering hall in a squatter area of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, in
January 1989. I was preparing to exercise young Tanzanian women in
aerobic. As a new teacher in physical education from Norway, I was
engaged for 1 month in the Norwegian sports development project, Sports
for All, with the aim of giving working class women the opportunity to
exercise. Twenty women arrived; none of them was wearing training gear
or running shoes, but they had colourful dresses or blouses and skirts
and were barefoot. I started to count one, two, three, and then pressed
the play button on the music player. The Tanzanian women questioned
every move I made. They wondered if they would get paid for exercising.
They wanted to touch my white, pale skin and glanced at my freckles.
They laughed in a friendly way at jumping up and down, commenting that
the moves were a bit childish. Every day, when I left the daily
training, people glanced at me and called out: ‘White person, where are
you going?’ This question persecuted me in the years to come during
several field visits to Tanzania and filled me with uneasiness,
curiosity and amazement.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)`

The amazement was first and foremost a ‘culture shock’ that caused me to
question my whiteness, my way of practice and instruction. The Danish
anthropologist Kirsten Hastrup used the term ‘amazement’ as a cultural
pivotal point and a way of understanding that brings a person through
emotional and embodied states.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` When our habitual
practices are questioned we become amazed. When the Tanzanian women
questioned the way I moved my arms up and down, they questioned body
practices that were part of my professional education and that I had
taken for granted. When they commented on my moves or skin colour, I was
amazed, as I never thought about these in terms other than ‘normal
ways’. The amazement is embodied and cultured.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)`

It was in the encounter with the Tanzanian women that I became aware of
my habitual practices and cultural ways. It was by being amazed that I
became conscious that, like the Tanzanians, I too possessed systems of
knowledge, concepts, rules and practices that are learned and
transmitted across generations, yet are open, dynamic and undergo
continuous changes over time.

Next, I will discuss how this experience can be relevant to a Western
clinician by elaborating on some characteristics of the encounter
between the doctor and patient, as discussed by Roland Littlewood, among
others.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)`

.. _S3:

The clinical encounter
======================

The encounter between the psychiatrist and the patient involves two
people who have their own expectations. If the doctor–patient situation
is familiar to both, they will each probably make an effort to live up
to the other's expectations. For example, the expectation that the
patient is seeking advice to solve a specific problem and that the
doctor is an expert who will provide this advice. However, the
psychiatrist and the patient face challenges if their cultural
backgrounds differ considerably. The psychiatrist might have a less
clear expectation of how the patient is likely to behave and what the
limits of normality and abnormality are. In this sense, the encounter
between the psychiatrist and the patient shares several similarities
with the encounter between the researcher and informants from different
cultural contexts. The psychiatrist's attitude towards a patient from a
minority ethnic background will be informed by the clinician's own
experiences, stereotypes and conscious and unconscious racial
assumptions. For example, the clinician might have certain race-related
assumptions and the patient might be assumed to have a core set of
beliefs.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` Stereotypes of how other groups of people (such
as Danish-Somalis, Native Americans and British Pakistanis) tend to
behave influence the treatment options. Patients have their own
expectations and the extent to which they see themselves as mentally ill
varies with cultural background. What might be tolerated in Tanzania,
such as spirit possession, witchcraft and healing ritual, are regarded
as forms of abnormality (if not mental illness), in
Britain.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` Patients with a migrant background seeking help
in psychiatric out-patient clinics in European counties might have
experiences of mental illness that differ from the doctor's experiences.
For example, they might experience their illness as a physical
disability or have felt lost in a fragmented health
system.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` How the psychiatrist copes with their own
amazement is therefore of importance.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` I present two
cases based on my own experience to demonstrate two ways clinicians
might respond to amazement.

.. _S4:

Amazement: cultural understanding or withdrawal?
================================================

Culturally informed psychiatry is required in domestic contexts familiar
to the clinician. Clinicians' experiences of differences, such as
language barriers, patients' expressions of distress and orientations of
belief can trigger fear, anxiety and amazement. To be aware of one's own
amazement might uncover issues taken for granted that the clinician
assumes to be inevitable and universal. These often unnoticed
assumptions may refer to all sorts of beliefs, habits, practices and
values, from body comportment to being accustomed to urban
infrastructure. I suggest two responses to this amazement: cultural
understanding and withdrawal.

.. _S5:

Example 1
---------

At a Swedish conference on psychiatry and the cultural formulation in
the DSM-5, the participants discussed diagnostic practices for asylum
seekers. A psychiatrist said: ‘It is very hard when you receive a
refugee. The first thing you are supposed to do is to consider the
person's mental health. I was really amazed when I discovered that my
patient's strong sense of confusion was not necessarily due to his
mental condition. Rather, it could be ascribed to his overwhelmed
experience of seeing a Swedish city … We should not be too quick to
diagnose refugees with post-traumatic stress disorder [PTSD], before
they have time to get used to the new cultural context.’ The discussion
that followed concerned various clinical experiences with ‘cultural
differences’, such as the difficulty in understanding patients'
expressions of distress and in making meaningful diagnostic
evaluations.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` The psychiatrist was amazed at his own
cultural attention to the patient. He took for granted, as a
prerequisite for professional practice, that the patient was familiar
with the material surroundings of the therapy practice: the buildings,
roads, transport and so on. In the encounter with the patient, he had
quickly diagnosed the patient's confusedness as PTSD. Although the
refugee suffered in some ways because of his experience in a war-ridden
country, the psychiatrist's amazement and reflection on it gave him
alternative ways of interpreting the patient's suffering.

The psychiatrist was able to reflect critically upon his own cultural
background and his taken-for-granted perspectives, which places him in a
better position to understand and reconsider the mental state of the
asylum seeker.

.. _S6:

Example 2
---------

A Norwegian family therapist was observing an 8-year-old Afghan boy to
assess his mental health. The boy was not very talkative and was by
himself. He had arrived in Norway with his family some years ago. His
parents were reluctant towards family therapy as it appeared quite
unfamiliar to them. The therapist, on the other hand, aimed at making a
decision on the diagnosis of the boy. The parents came with the boy the
day that the therapist informed them about the boy's problems. She
explained to them that their son was diagnosed with autism spectrum
disorder.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)(p.50–55)` The therapist informed the parents
about their welfare rights that followed their son's acknowledged
diagnosis, information that was quite new to them. The therapist made a
new appointment with the parents and their son. However, only the father
attended the next appointment. He informed the therapist that they had
received a letter from the director of the hospital claiming the
director regretted that their son received the diagnosis and confirmed
its withdrawal. Their son did not have autism. The father said there was
no more to do, and politely left. Leaving behind the astonished
therapist, the director of the hospital confirmed that the letter was
never written. When the therapist called the father of the boy to tell
him that there was never such a letter, the father replied that it must
have been lost. The therapist was never in contact with the family
again.

When giving this account, the therapist expressed great frustration that
the family did not see the value of this diagnosis. She saw it as her
duty to assess and diagnose the patient. She was amazed that the family
did not accept the diagnosis and she thought of this as a cultural
problem. Therefore, she did not try to explore how her own amazement
could be interpreted as a cultural response to an unfamiliar situation
(that the parents did not accept the diagnosis). In the encounter, the
family therapist took it for granted that the patient and their
relatives would accept the diagnosis given to them.

The amazed clinicians might not be able to develop an understanding in
the encounter with the patient, but might withdraw instead. Clinicians
may respond to their own experience of difference by using cultural
categories on the patients, setting themselves as the normative
standard. Imposing identities on patients, such as ‘boy with autism’,
‘woman with bipolar disorder’, ‘man with suicidal tendencies’, helps
clinicians feel more secure with their own identity and withdraw from an
alternative identity experienced by the patient.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)`

To be able to learn from one's own amazement to develop understanding as
a researcher requires a culturally reflexive research position. In
anthropological fieldwork the researcher must take into account that
they are always part of the situation being studied. Part of the
criticism of the cultural formulation, as discussed earlier, is a lack
of self-reflexivity among clinicians when it comes to their professional
background. A clinician who understands something of their own cultural
background and how it contributes to their values, perceptions and
personal style is in a better position to learn from the clinical
encounter with others.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` Amazement that stems from the
encounter with difference is, in this regard, a trigger point.

The two examples above demonstrate that it is not a straightforward
matter for the clinician to use amazement as a tool to gain cultural
understanding of the clinical situation.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` Emotions can be
as deceptive as statistics. That the clinician registers their own
amazement does not mean the interpretation is accurate.

.. _S7:

Conclusions
===========

Multicultural societies with increasingly complex health problems make
the practice of culturally informed psychiatry urgent. This article has
demonstrated that the encounter between the patient and the clinician is
a crucial, yet underappreciated, position from which the clinician might
develop a cultural understanding. The cultural dimension of the
clinician–patient relationship must be explored in actual situations
through the clinician's self-reflexive focus on amazement and questions
such as, ‘How do I respond to situations where I become amazed?’, ‘Is it
possible for me to develop understanding rather than withdrawal?’

The clinician is always formed by social and cultural contexts and is
never culturally neutral. Moreover, the clinician has a clinical
responsibility to make explicit his or her own assumptions, premises and
categories in relation to patients to prevent misunderstandings and
misdiagnoses. Culturally informed psychiatry cannot be defined once and
for all; it is not a quick-fix technique or manual. It is rather the
continuous development of a professional attitude, perceiving all human
beings, including the clinician, as cultural bearers and cultural
learners.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` The clinician should take seriously their own
amazement as a point of entry to this attitude. However, to develop
amazement as a clinician to strengthen culturally informed psychiatry
does not lead to an easy resolution of a client's problem. A whole new
series of questions arises, and we need culturally reflexive
psychiatrists to deal with these questions.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.aa.

.. [1]
   Anne Birgitte Leseth is a social anthropologist, a sports scientist
   and an associate professor at the Centre for the Study of
   Professions, Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied
   Sciences, Oslo, Norway.
