===========================================================================================================================================
Recognition of the neurobiological insults imposed by complex trauma and the implications for psychotherapeutic interventions\ `† <#fn1>`__
===========================================================================================================================================



Frank M. Corrigan
Alastair M. Hull
:Correspondence: Frank M. Corrigan
(frank.corrigan@nhs.net)  [1]_ [2]_

:date: 2015-4

:Abstract:
   Considerable research has been conducted on particular approaches to
   the psychotherapy of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). However,
   the evidence indicates that modalities tested in randomised
   controlled trials (RCTs) are far from 100% applicable and effective
   and the RCT model itself is inadequate for evaluating treatments of
   conditions with complex presentations and frequently multiple
   comorbidities. Evidence at levels 2 and 3 cannot be ignored.
   Expert-led interventions consistent with the emerging understanding
   of affective neuroscience are needed and not the unthinking
   application of a dominant therapeutic paradigm with evidence for PTSD
   but not complex PTSD. The over-optimistic claims for the
   effectiveness of cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) and
   misrepresentation of other approaches do not best serve a group of
   patients greatly in need of help; excluding individuals with such
   disorders as untreatable or treatment-resistant when viable
   alternatives exist is not acceptable.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The healing of emotional wounds is an endogenous, dynamic process which,
fortunately, occurs spontaneously in most people whose traumatic
experiences resolve over time. Just as the pain of grief diminishes as
the body feelings become less insistent and perspectives change, so
other adverse events can be processed naturally and emotional healing
can occur. When a bereavement is traumatic, for whatever reason, the
natural healing process may be blocked and the pain fails to resolve.
This is echoed after other adversity: the distress and its associated
body feeling, however subtle, continue to intrude on awareness and
impair the capacity for positive affects. A failure to recognise the
intrinsic homeostatic, emotional healing potential of the brain/mind
leads to an overemphasis on techniques for regulation of distress and a
denial of opportunity for resolution.

.. _S1:

Simple protocols for PTSD, complex post-traumatic presentations and help-seeking
================================================================================

There are interventions available to treat established post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) that have been shown to be effective. Reviews of
the literature and expert consensus have supported the use of
trauma-focused cognitive–behavioural therapy (TF-CBT; especially
treatment programmes involving imaginal and *in vivo* exposure), and eye
movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR).\ :sup:`1,2` Moreover,
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines
on PTSD recommend that all individuals with PTSD should be offered
TF-CBT or EMDR.\ :sup:`3` However, psychotherapy studies for PTSD
typically exclude for comorbidity and complexity and do not report
adverse effects: it should not be assumed that therapy is either
positive or, at worst, neutral. The wrong therapy, by the wrong
therapist or with the wrong timing (or a combination thereof) may be
psychonoxious. Reviews and guidelines present the evidence base for
PTSD, but rarely overtly identify the dichotomy between the patients
seen in research studies and those with the range of clinical
presentations encountered after traumatic experiences, even though the
evidence indicates that modalities tested in randomised controlled
trials (RCTs) are far from 100% applicable and effective.\ :sup:`4` The
guidelines also do not readily apply to the nature and challenges of
treating someone with complex PTSD, as opposed to single-event-related
PTSD. The oversimplified misrepresentation of the evidence base leads to
a constricted provision of services.

In most areas of medicine it is seen that the most severe damage can
present the greatest challenges to the intrinsic healing potential of
the body. The complexity of the wounding requires an integration of
approaches from different specialties and disciplines. This applies not
only to the acute interventions but to the painstaking rehabilitation
work that may be required over many years to achieve optimal, if still
less than full, functioning.

A pain clinic which ignored a history of severe body injuries with
functional consequences – and the associated emotional factors – and
offered only paracetamol on the grounds that there was good-quality
evidence for its analgesic efficacy in many conditions, would fail to
treat much intense and prolonged suffering. The psychotherapy often
provided for complex PTSD includes no multi-modal approach and those who
fail to benefit may then be considered to be treatment-resistant. For
patients with complex PTSD the ineffectiveness of psychiatric treatment
and subsequent labelling as treatment resistance can then be attributed
to an underlying personality disorder, often without adequate assessment
or corroboration. Patients who are told that their lack of response to
treatment is due to long-standing differences in one or more of the
following: their thinking, their emotional regulation, their behaviour,
and/or their interpersonal relationships, will feel further invalidation
that confirms their inseparable differences from the rest of humanity.
If everyone else can learn top-down regulation of distress in response
to triggers, the failure to acquire these skills is held to imply
deep-seated personality pathology.

.. _S2:

Help-seeking: incentives and disincentives in asking for treatment
==================================================================

There is evidence that even those with non-complex post-traumatic
disorders may be reluctant to seek treatment for their
condition.\ :sup:`5` Rates of help-seeking for PTSD are lower than for
similar mental disorders such as depression\ :sup:`5` and studies both
internationally and in Northern Ireland have shown extended time to
seeking treatment (12–22 years).\ :sup:`6,7` Reasons given in the USA by
those not in treatment who nevertheless recognised that they needed help
included a perceived lack of effectiveness (it would not help or did not
help in the past), dissatisfaction with services, stigma or fear of
forced hospitalisation.\ :sup:`5` If the wrong treatment paradigm has
been offered or the individuals have felt labelled as
treatment-resistant or as having a personality disorder, they will be
less likely to present again for help and will either not seek any
treatment or seek it elsewhere. A narrow approach focused on effortful
regulation of distress will deter from contacting services those who
believe they have been doing their best to manage their condition
themselves.

.. _S3:

Brain stem responses to traumatic experience may be stored and lead to dysfunction
==================================================================================

.. _S4:

The body awareness of defence responses
---------------------------------------

Trauma involving threat, whether physical or social, instigates impulses
to defend oneself arising in the midbrain.\ :sup:`8–10` These impulses
may be aborted at an early stage or become active only to be
ineffective. They may also be subject to top-down control through the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex,\ :sup:`11` at which level the regulation
may also be involuntary. The sequences of movement impulses associated
with these responses can be stored ‘in the body’ to the extent that they
are outside the ready awareness of working memory and unavailable to
access through word-based interventions. Fight, flight, freeze, hide,
avoid, attach, submit, despair and uncontrolled activation states have
autonomic and motor accompaniments which can be triggered many years
after the traumatic episode.\ :sup:`12` Striatal memory activated
preferentially under stress is one mechanism implicating the basal
ganglia\ :sup:`13` in procedural (motor) rather than hippocampal
(episodic) memory. Animal studies stress the role of the midbrain
periaqueductal gray (PAG) and its connections with the hypothalamus for
the full motor and autonomic components of the basic defence
responses.\ :sup:`14,15` It is often through specific motor tension
patterns that trauma memories are accessed in body-based psychotherapy:
these are the route to healing in somatic experiencing and sensorimotor
psychotherapy. This suggests that the midbrain and the basal ganglia
loops engaged by defensive movements, actual or thwarted, are
instrumental in what is stored in the body following unresolved trauma.
The profound impact of sensorimotor psychotherapy and somatic
experiencing in survivors of trauma is a source of empirical data which
demand thorough evaluation. Rigorous level 2 (case controlled trials,
non-randomised) or level 3 (observational studies including surveys)
evidence is frequently accepted in medicine when it would be difficult
to apply RCT methods, either because of unrealistic statistical power
demands or because of a likelihood of harm to patients assigned to a
cohort which did not receive the active treatment; for example, the
acceptance of psychological first aid after disasters where denying core
elements of the approach would be unethical.

.. _S5:

The body awareness of emotions
------------------------------

The animal work of Jaak Panksepp (e.g. Panskeep & Biven\ :sup:`16`) has
accumulated over decades into a fundamental realisation that there are
basic emotional systems in the mammalian brain. The seven basic
emotional systems are: SEEKING/desire; RAGE/anger; FEAR/anxiety;
LUST/sexual urges; CARE/maternal nurturance; PANIC/GRIEF/separation
distress; and PLAY/physical social-engagement. The midbrain areas
involved are the ventral tegmental area for SEEKING and PLAY; the dorsal
PAG for RAGE and GRIEF/PANIC; the ventral and dorsal PAG for FEAR and
LUST; and the ventral PAG for CARE. All of these basic affective systems
are active in humans and are a fundamental part of being human. Many
clinical researchers would add shame as a basic affect but the
possibility of this being generated in the midbrain is difficult to
study in laboratory animals (as discussed in Corrigan\ :sup:`17`). The
emotional systems experienced as negative are all activated in various
ways by traumatic experience. The aloneness, abandonment and shame of
GRIEF/PANIC/separation distress; the terror and dread of FEAR; the
explosive energy of anger and RAGE: all of these are commonly
encountered in treating PTSD. To treat them as only subcortical
disturbances which must be properly managed by the re-trained cortex –
or as manifestations of amygdala activation which can be re-learnt
through prolonged exposure – is to ignore the fundamental role of
emotional response in a person’s interaction with the environment. When
the environment is hostile these responses facilitate survival: they are
adaptive and based in trends that go far back in brain evolution. In
therapy it can be through emotions that healing and lasting
transformation are achieved.\ :sup:`18`

.. _S6:

The understanding of the ‘reptilian’ brain as essential for human emotional life
================================================================================

The MacLean description of the triune brain\ :sup:`19` provides a neat
guide to the different levels of the central nervous system in relation
to their evolution from organisms more primitive than humans. It is
important, however, to appreciate that the ‘reptilian’ brain has evolved
in humans to participate in complex functions that would not be
available to reptiles. A human may not have as fast a tongue-flick as a
lizard, but the human brainstem is supporting behavioural programmes
with much greater autonomic and motor variability. A review of
neuroimaging studies of the human PAG confirms the involvement of the
PAG in many pain syndromes, including fibromyalgia and migraine, and
during electroacupuncture.\ :sup:`20` There are demonstrable PAG
responses during emotional experiences such as fear and dread,
disappointment, social rejection, hearing aversive sounds, and stressful
cognitive tasks. The imaging studies of the human PAG confirm much of
what has been found in animal studies.

.. _S7:

What is missing from evidence-based treatments that are not effective?
======================================================================

Patients with complex PTSD who cannot be held in a compassionate and
non-judgemental therapeutic relationship will quickly revert to the
survival behaviours which have kept them alive. They will default from a
therapeutic interaction which carries some of the more threatening
features of the ambivalent or disorganised attachment styles to which
they may have been exposed from birth. These non-secure relationship
templates amplify the impact of later traumatic experiences. Such
patients are often exquisitely sensitive at an unconscious level to
attachment conflicts. While craving normal attachments, like most
humans, any ambivalence or disorganisation in the interactions can lead
to an activation of defence response sequences established in early
life. The associated survival behaviours will then interfere with the
capacity to engage wholeheartedly with the treatments offered. Patients
who understand and know the rules to abusive or traumatising
interpersonal interaction need to be presented with contingencies to
allow them to experience and learn how to have normal, non-traumatising
interactions. The attunement with a therapist aware of the importance of
attachment in early life experience is essential for the processing of
early attachment disruption. The first opportunity some complex trauma
patients will have for a stable and non-abusive relationship will be
with the therapist. A non-challenging, validating and boundaried
therapeutic relationship may be able, eventually, to facilitate the
feeling of safety and trust which has been lacking through most, if not
all, of the patient’s life.

.. _S8:

The awareness of the body
-------------------------

Those who have disturbing body reactions to triggers reminiscent in some
way of the original adverse/traumatic experience will have tried to
think their way out of the problem themselves. They may also have been
the recipients of common-sense solutions from friends and family. They
will have almost certainly discovered the inability to influence through
thinking the body sensations of traumatic experience: working memory and
cognitive solution areas of the neocortex fail to influence the
sensorimotor sequences programmed by the trauma. *Body-Centered
Psychotherapy: The Hakomi Method*,\ :sup:`21` first published in 1990,
described mindful body awareness for the elicitation of core material,
not necessarily of traumatic origin. This influenced the development of
sensorimotor psychotherapy in which the mindful attention to somatic
residues of traumatic experience promotes the resolution of these for
clinical recovery.\ :sup:`22` Somatic experiencing was developed by
Peter Levine,\ :sup:`23` whose recent book carries the subtitle ‘How the
body releases trauma and restores goodness’.\ :sup:`24`

The extant neurobiology also focuses on the body. For example, van der
Kolk,\ :sup:`25` writing on approaches to the psychobiology of PTSD,
included in the title of his chapter the evocative words: ‘the body
keeps the score’. Scaer, with a perspective derived from an extensive
experience in neurology, concluded that trauma, including preverbal
trauma, could leave residues in the body to manifest in later years as
clinical syndromes.\ :sup:`26` Patients with dissociative disorders have
difficulty in being in the body experience and becoming safely embodied
is a challenge for many.\ :sup:`27`

The gulf between the body-based psychobiology and the talking
treatments, evidence-based for PTSD but not for complex PTSD, has been
bridged by sensorimotor psychotherapy, somatic experiencing, the
Comprehensive Resource Model (CRM),\ :sup:`28` and other formalised
approaches which provide extensive modality-specific training for trauma
psychotherapists. Although these are widely used, the lack of RCT data
means that they can be readily dismissed if authorities wish to do so:
collation of level 2/level 3 evidence would cost much less and set
standards for trainers and therapists in the promotion of safe practice.
Anecdotally, dropout rate might be the first outcome criterion to employ
when empirical studies do evaluate these psychotherapies. Patients who
continue to attend because they find sessions helpful and relevant,
especially when they have dropped out of other approaches, can provide
naturalistic data of empirical value to a caring service.

.. _S9:

The body awareness of safety
----------------------------

The ‘safe place’ is used in the preparation for EMDR to provide an
imaginal resource for stabilisation if processing becomes too
distressing.\ :sup:`29` It is also used as a screening tool for EMDR – a
patient who cannot access an imaginal place of safety will not readily
be offered active reprocessing. This is regarded as an important
safeguard as those who have never felt safe have almost certainly
suffered from attachment and other trauma from birth, and are likely to
be highly dissociative. Calm or peaceful imagery may be used for those
who cannot tolerate even the word ‘safe’, but this is fraught with
difficulty as the lowering of vigilance may trigger switching to
protective ego states or activate trauma-burdened memories. When
hypervigilance has long been a default setting, the potential pursuit or
creation of a ‘safe place’ or ‘calm place’ may be rejected as too
triggering or activating, and alternative creative language will be
required. In sensorimotor psychotherapy the attainment of a sense of
safety in the body is considered of great importance for stabilisation.
This leads to the proposition that it is only when the safe place is
sufficiently strong to be experienced at a somatic level that it can be
considered to be fully present. Safety resources that do not extend
below the cortex are unlikely to have the required depth when processing
becomes difficult. Conversely, being able to find the feeling of safety
in the body\ :sup:`27` provides an anchor for processing material which
would otherwise be overwhelming. Innovative approaches such as the CRM
provide therapists with strategies to build internal resources; thus
patients who would otherwise be rejected due to an inability to imagine
a safe place can be resourced in alternative ways.\ :sup:`28`

.. _S10:

The understanding of dissociation as essentially neurobiological
----------------------------------------------------------------

Dissociation helps the individual experiencing trauma to survive by
compartmentalising the responses to the event. It is then not
overwhelming, either neurochemically or physiologically. Peritraumatic
dissociation is probably best understood through animal models of
stress-induced analgesia to which many neurochemicals contribute (e.g.
Ford & Finn\ :sup:`30`). However, it is clear from animal models that,
when the trauma involves intense fear, endocannabinoids are released to
prevent the overwhelming terror associated with unopposed glutamate,
dopamine or acetylcholine transmission in the fear circuits. Riebe *et
al*\ :sup:`31` describe a spill-over effect which triggers the synthesis
and release of endogenous cannabinoids. These then bind to presynaptic
cannabinoid receptors to down-regulate the release of the fear-promoting
neurotransmitters. The endocannabinoid system is active in the fear
circuitry of the amygdala, hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, but also
in the midbrain PAG where it mediates non-opioid analgesia.\ :sup:`8`
There is evidence that the learning of emotional responses is not
confined to the corticolimbic system but occurs also in the midbrain –
as would be expected from clinical observations in the treatment of
PTSD, such as the resistance of the exaggerated startle response to
extinction.

Endogenous opioids promote the analgesia accompanying the passive
defence responses mediated by the ventral PAG;\ :sup:`8` and modulation
of these opioids can be used to study behaviour suggestive of terror in
laboratory rats.\ :sup:`32` Lanius\ :sup:`33` considers endogenous
opioids to have a foundational role in dissociative responses to trauma.
Whichever chemicals are primarily involved, peritraumatic neurochemical
change may contribute longer-term to structural dissociation of the
personality.

.. _S11:

The awareness in the body of the level of activation related to trauma
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Orientation to the occurrence of a traumatic event precipitates an
immediate shift in the body’s level of arousal. For example, being
exposed to a direct gaze activates the midbrain in those who are
suffering from the after-effects of complex trauma but induces a
response at a primarily cortical level in a non-traumatised control
group.\ :sup:`34` This activation readily precipitates a generalised
arousal through brainstem nuclei for the release of monoamines and other
neurochemicals. From brainstem structures such as the locus coeruleus
there are ascending noradrenergic projections to the thalamus and cortex
for general arousal as well as downward projections to the spinal cord.
Ascending dopaminergic projections from the ventral tegmental area
activate the ventral striatum and the substantia nigra. There are major
ascending cholinergic and serotoninergic projections from the brainstem.
So alerting, arousing, activating stimuli – often involving different
appreciation of pain levels – are exerting their influence through
deeply subcortical structures.

.. _S12:

The awareness in the body of the residues of attachment response patterns established in infancy
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is particularly easy for those working in the ‘here and now’ to scoff
at the idea of working with body feelings left over from experiences of
attachment disruption in early life. This is despite there being much
description of the relevance of attachment in the development of affect
regulation capacities (e.g. Schore\ :sup:`35`) and evidence of the
relevance of disorganised caregiving in the development of clinical
syndromes (e.g. Lyons-Ruth *et al*,\ :sup:`36` Hesse *et
al*\ :sup:`37`). Attachment disorders can be dismissed as an easy
default explanation when there is little evidence of other trauma to
explain difficult-to-treat syndromes. However, if the conflicts are
approached through body activations brought into awareness while
grounded in the experience of specific situations, the patient, rather
than the therapist’s model, is leading the enquiry; the body’s response
will ground the experience in the ‘here and now’ (Schwenkler, May 2014,
personal communication). If there are clear patterns of body response to
the present-day relationship conflicts, these are the foundation for
identification of cycles of obstruction of the attachment urge, followed
by protest, despair, detachment, dissociation and sequences of defence
responses. A simple here-and-now trigger, such as disproportionate rage
to a partner’s temporary absence, can reveal patterns established in
early life. Scaer\ :sup:`26` sets out the arguments for procedural
memory based in brainstem centres being established in infants with
preverbal capacities for emotion and sensation. These action tendencies
based in procedural memory manifest later as proximity-seeking, social
engagement and defensive behaviours,\ :sup:`37` which may appear at odds
with the here-and-now context.

.. _S13:

Healing has no territory
========================

We have argued that the evidence for particular approaches to the
psychotherapy of complex PTSD indicates that so-called ‘evidence-based’
modalities – defined as much by those clinical cases excluded as those
included – are far from 100% applicable and effective.\ :sup:`4`
Instead, we consider that psychotherapies which acknowledge the role of
the somatic residues of traumatic experiences – provide techniques for
their resolution – are necessary for the healing of the range of
clinical disorders arising from severe and complex traumatic experiences
during the brain’s early development. Safety, compassion and patience
are needed to counteract the long-term hypervigilance and other
threat-based responses, so that the patient is internally resourced and
treatment is not quickly rejected. Recognition, and evaluation, of
non-RCT but still empirical data from widely used psychotherapies such
as sensorimotor psychotherapy and somatic experiencing could widen the
evidence base, guiding service development for those suffering in a way
which cannot be treated by standard talking therapy.

.. _S14:

A willingness to explore other/additional pathways to healing
=============================================================

Given the limitations of RCT-evidence-based CBT for complex
post-traumatic conditions,\ :sup:`4` it is essential to investigate
other approaches consistent with the evolving understanding of the
neurobiological underpinnings of traumatic experiences and reactions. In
its standard format, EMDR cannot be readily applied in complex
post-traumatic disorders but it can have adaptations for use in
structural dissociative conditions (e.g. Paulsen\ :sup:`38`). These
modifications are often influenced by the many publications (over
decades) of hypnotherapy experience of treating complex trauma disorders
(e.g. Frederick & McNeal\ :sup:`39`). Moreover, advances in
psychotherapy such as Brainspotting\ :sup:`40` and the CRM\ :sup:`28`
may be effective at a deep level of the psyche because they necessarily
involve the midbrain.\ :sup:`41` Psychotherapies such as sensorimotor
psychotherapy and somatic experiencing, which work with emotions and
defence responses and access these through awareness of the body and the
sensations, movement tendencies and motor impulses ‘remembered’ from the
time of the trauma, also work at multiple brain levels. Trauma release
exercises\ :sup:`42` for the discharge of muscular energy residual from
adverse events will certainly recruit subcortical areas, as the
intrinsic generators of tremor – central oscillators – are not in the
neocortex.\ :sup:`43` Body-oriented breathing exercises stemming from
the CRM\ :sup:`28` and yoga breathing cycles (e.g. Brown &
Gebarg\ :sup:`44`), based in the respiratory central pattern generators
of the brainstem,\ :sup:`45` can be used clinically to augment affect
regulation.

Russell,\ :sup:`46` asking why EMDR was not more available to US service
personnel, explored the reasons for the dominant treatment paradigms
being exclusive. Some of these were financial; some were theoretical or
belief-based. Grand\ :sup:`40` advocates the view that ‘healing has no
territory’: developments in therapy should always be encouraged and
embraced, although it will inevitably mean that the techniques pioneered
will be replaced. For example, the CRM has evolved from resource
brainspotting to meet the needs of those individuals with complex trauma
and dissociative disorders who require more resourcing than is provided
by the safe, attentive and attuned presence of the brainspotting
therapist working in a dual attunement frame.\ :sup:`40` Any important
advance will change the field so much that other breakthroughs will
follow; each is a temporary way station. No therapeutic paradigm should
be allowed to become so dominant that it stifles clinical innovation,
especially in the absence of compelling evidence of efficacy for complex
disorders.

.. _S15:

Implications for mental health services of fully engaging with the treatment of complex trauma, and research challenges
=======================================================================================================================

The high prevalence of trauma exposure and trauma-based disorders with
severe consequences for physical and mental health raises the
possibility of significant unmet need. Adults who have been exposed to
four or more defined categories of adverse childhood experiences have
higher risks for alcohol and substance misuse, depression, suicidality
and poor physical health.\ :sup:`47` Childhood sexual abuse increases
the risks in adulthood of depression, anxiety, suicidality, alcohol and
illicit drug dependence, PTSD symptoms and poor physical
health.\ :sup:`48` The lifetime prevalence of traumatic events and PTSD
is high in those with severe mental illness\ :sup:`49` and there is
evidence that trauma therapy can be effective even in this
group.\ :sup:`50` The service implications of the epidemiological
findings are that the provision of long-term trauma psychotherapy may be
required, and this is expensive. It is considerably cheaper to downplay
or ignore the role of trauma and constantly question any psychotherapy
methods which have not yet acquired a gold standard RCT evidence base,
even if they are expert led or neurobiologically informed. Indeed,
services driven by waiting list targets have a disincentive to explore
training in, and use of, psychotherapy interventions which require
longer therapeutic contact. For dissociative disorders the treatment may
require years, even with the best psychotherapy available,\ :sup:`51`
rather than the maximum of 20 sessions currently offered by many
services.

If there is no cultural dissociation from the reality of the need for
treatment of complex post-traumatic conditions, the consequence would be
a caring health service providing treatment for a large number of
patients who are only in ill health because they suffered trauma, loss
or abuse at an early and critical age. If health service providers
recognised the limitations of the RCT evidence base, they could promote
training in internationally recognised models and conduct clinical
research on those particular psychotherapeutic approaches. Moreover,
psychotherapists who are better acquainted with the neurobiological
under-pinnings of psychological conditions and their implications for
treatment and outcomes, may be less affected themselves by feelings of
hopelessness in their long-term clinical endeavours.

NICE\ :sup:`3` recommended chronic disease management strategies if
trials of evidence-based therapies (TF-CBT or EMDR) were ineffective for
PTSD; the guidelines did not differentiate the evidence base for PTSD
from that for complex PTSD. As we have suggested, these treatments are
likely to have been found ineffective for complex PTSD. A focus on sleep
hygiene, structured and supported activities as well as coping
strategies for chronic problems will neither greatly assist the patient
nor allow their therapist the satisfaction of seeing benefits from their
skilled and compassionate intervention. Nothing else will be offered if
services or systems continue to affectively dissociate from the clinical
reality through the blinkered insistence that it is not really happening
and that ‘apparently normal’ and ‘getting on with life’ perspectives are
the only possible vision.

.. _S16:

Research challenges
-------------------

For clinical trial research to demonstrate real-world effectiveness of
treatments for the range of post-traumatic conditions, the exclusion
criteria need to be reduced. Comorbidity with PTSD is the norm, not the
exception, yet trials do not reflect this. The measurement of treatment
outcomes also needs to reflect more than just any change in PTSD
symptoms and to include general functioning, intra- and inter-personal
issues, and quality of life. Funding for complex interventions is
expensive and a research programme is needed which does not rely on the
single intervention for single outcome measure model: this would pose
immediate difficulties within a phase-oriented structure for treatment.
One intriguing question within the treatment of complex trauma is
whether the resourcing required to allow re-processing of trauma
experience and memory needs to be provided as a specific phase of
treatment prior to any re-processing or whether it can be integral to
each therapy session and therefore specific to the issue being
reprocessed (as is suggested in the CRM\ :sup:`28`). While discussions
about the provision of expensive, innovative medical treatments have
occurred, often in public, we are unaware of discussions justifying and
limiting the access to long-term psychotherapy for complex disorders.

.. _S17:

Education challenges
--------------------

The need for outreach and education of referrers should not be
underestimated. Evidence from a novel ‘screen and treat’ model after a
high-profile terrorist incident showed that despite widespread
advertising of the services, general practitioners (GPs) were found to
refer few patients to trauma services specifically tasked with assessing
and treating individuals in the aftermath of the incident.\ :sup:`52`
There is perhaps even less reason to expect referrals from GPs of
individuals with complex post-trauma reactions originating in early
development. Within general adult psychiatry the role of trauma may or
may not be recognised, largely dependent on the clinician’s interest,
knowledge or conceptualisation of cases; it may also perhaps reflect
their pessimism about the availability of effective treatment.
Potentially significant post-traumatic psychopathology in psychiatric
patients\ :sup:`49` can go unrecognised when there is a failure to
include trauma experience in treatment formulations. When this applies
to the so-called ‘large T’ trauma causes, there is even less likelihood
of the significant attachment disruptions inherent in developmental
trauma being identified.

.. _S18:

Conclusions
===========

Within psychological services, the general public have been greatly
served by improving access to psychological therapies (IAPT) in England
and Wales and similar initiatives elsewhere. However, limited session
provision and a dominant therapeutic paradigm that does not approach the
needs of patients with chronic, comorbid and complex post-traumatic
reactions, leaves those with the most severe symptoms without effective
treatment. Patients unable to make use of time-limited
cognitive–behavioural strategies may face rejection and labelling,
feeling blamed for their non-improvement. In fact, they are victims
again, this time of therapists trying to deliver a therapy for a quite
different disorder, with managers who expect them to demonstrate
consistently improving rating scale scores.

The strategy for the provision of psychological therapies needs to
ensure that the most ill are not sidelined and blamed. Current drivers
such as waiting list targets are vital to drive access to therapy.
However, quality must also be brought to the fore: clinical governance
demands the establishment of an environment that allows clinical
excellence to thrive; excellence demands that the therapy provided is
evidenced for the disorder being treated. In Scotland, there is a
strategy for trauma-sensitive services including certain ‘at risk’
groups such as veterans of the armed forces. This is to be applauded.
However, clinicians and managers should be educated to clinical need at
all points on the trauma spectrum, not just those potentially responsive
to CBT or those with combat-related disorders.

Systems that allow long-term trauma psychotherapy rather than
time-limited, defined sessional input are needed. Treatment should be
influenced by the major developments in affective neuroscience to
proceed in a direction that is not affect-phobic. Individuals with
highly polysymptomatic post-traumatic conditions, often with more
Schneiderian first-rank symptoms than individuals with
schizophrenia,\ :sup:`53` pose major difficulties when monitoring
clinical trials. However, the inherent difficulties do not then demand
an acceptance – as clinically sufficient – of those techniques validated
for the reduction of particular symptoms or symptom clusters within
non-complex PTSD. The search for the best treatments for the most
traumatised individuals is being hampered by the exclusive acceptance of
conditioning, cognitive or emotional learning models which dismiss the
fundamental role of affective experience in response to the environment
and are, therefore, dehumanising.

We are grateful to Janina Fisher, Ron Schwenkler and Catherine Shea for
comments on earlier drafts of this paper and to the anonymous reviewer
who made very helpful criticisms and comments.

.. [1]
   **Frank M. Corrigan** is a consultant psychiatrist at Argyll & Bute
   Hospital, Lochgilphead, Argyll, UK, and **Alastair M. Hull** is a
   consultant psychiatrist in psychotherapy at Perth Royal Infirmary,
   Perth, UK.

.. [2]
   See *Bulletin* comment, p. 100, this issue.
