======================================================================================
Testimony of Experience: Docta Ignorantia and the Philadelphia Association Communities
======================================================================================



Duncan Double [1]_

:date: 2015-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

R. D. Laing and others founded the Philadelphia Association (PA) in
1965. The PA provides community households where people with emotional
difficulties can live with others. The first ‘official’ community was
the infamous Kingsley Hall, a ‘counterculture’ centre in the East End of
London, which after 5 years was largely trashed and uninhabitable. In
retrospect, Laing admitted that it was not a ‘roaring success’
(*Conversations with R. D. Laing*, B. Mullan). Nonetheless, despite the
commonly perceived demise of ‘anti-psychiatry’, with which Laing was
associated, the PA has survived nearly 50 years and still runs two
community houses. In this book, Bruce Scott, a member of the PA, where
he did his psychoanalytic psychotherapy training, offers the testimonies
of 14 people who have lived in a PA household. These were obtained
mostly by face-to-face interviews or by questionnaire.

Scott sees the PA communities as providing true asylum, in the sense of
an ‘inviolable place’. There is no discussion, however, about whether
such asylum is possible if the person is detained under the Mental
Health Act 1983. My guess is Scott would say not. He makes a case for
*docta ignorantia* or the doctrine of learned ignorance, a concept used
by Nicolas Cusanus in the 15th century to recognise the limits of
knowledge. For Scott, this is a path to health practised by the PA
communities. However, there is little discussion about whether such
neutrality is attainable. I am uncertain whether Scott’s search for an
‘anti-method’ is anything more than being pragmatic. The testimonies
commonly mention the lack of structure in the households. I have no
problem with mystery and perplexity and I totally agree with an
anti-materialistic stance for dealing with mental distress. The PA
rightly wants to avoid the objectification of people with mental health
problems. Helping them find their own way is not easy.

This book describes the tension between ‘going to pieces’ and being
helped to ‘come back together again’. Regression and psychosis can be
mechanisms of healing and re-adaptation, as noted by Donald Winnicott
among others. The PA continues to explore these areas, as does this
book, but it may be increasingly difficult to find space for them in a
bureaucratic society.

.. [1]
   **Duncan Double** is consultant psychiatrist, Norfolk and Waveney
   Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust, Lowestoft, UK, email:
   dbdouble@dbdouble.co.uk
