============================================================
Clinical Guide to Obsessive Compulsive and Related Disorders
============================================================

Ijeoma E. Onuba [1]_
:Date: 2015-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

This book gives an overview of obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD),
hoarding disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, excoriation (skin picking)
and trichotillomania, all listed in DSM-5 under ‘obsessive–compulsive
and related disorders’. The authors have also included hypochondriasis
and tic disorder as some of the related disorders.

The book is divided into three parts. The first part gives a general
overview and evaluation of the disorders. The second part discusses each
disorder in detail, focusing on the clinical description, diagnosis,
comorbidity, course and prognosis, differential diagnosis and treatment.
Scales that can be used in monitoring treatment are included in the
appendix at the end of the book. The final part is titled ‘special
clinical considerations’ and addresses areas such as treatment
resistance, treatment of children and people with intellectual
disability, and alternative treatments. This part also mentions
neurosurgery for OCD and the ethical dilemmas associated with this
approach. The appendices have a list of suggested further reading and
contact details of organisations and treatment centres.

A useful resource for trainees and students is a table in the first
chapter, which shows types of obsessions and compulsions with good
examples. I also like the way the authors describe how to differentiate
the symptoms associated with each disorder and normal behaviour. The
book also gives practical advice on how to screen for these disorders.
The response rates to treatments are discussed and some chapters also
mention research work.

There is a table summarising pharmacological treatment for each disorder
when managing children and I wished a similar table was done at the end
of part two, which could be used as a quick reference guide. The book’s
title may mislead readers who are looking for information on
hypochondriasis and tic disorder.

I would recommend this book for health professionals, students and even
patients and their carers. It is well written, concise and easy to
follow.

.. [1]
   **Ijeoma E. Onuba** is ST6 general adult psychiatry at The Barberry
   Centre, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health Foundation Trust,
   Birmingham, UK, email: ijeoma.onuba@bsmhft.nhs.uk
