=========================================================================
*Bulletin* comment: In praise of the psychiatric ward round\ `† <#fn1>`__
=========================================================================

:Date: 2015-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Facing a room full of strangers when hallucinating, delusional or
suicidal could clearly be seen as an ordeal. However, such a situation
continues regularly during ward rounds in psychiatric hospitals the
world over. Campaigners advocating for the rights of patients or service
users have repeatedly called for the trial of the weekly review to be
abolished. It causes anxiety and stress, with most attendees complaining
of feeling as though they had not been listened to and that vital
information had been withheld from them.

Considerations of the power and more subtle dynamics between patients
and staff – specifically the more senior clinicians – during the ward
round provide helpful insights as to how damaging such regular
interactions might be. The only conclusion surely must be the immediate
cessation of such an anachronistic institutionalised process. However,
the psychiatric ward must have some positive or beneficial aspects not
only for a multitude of multidisciplinary members who attend it but also
for the distressed, sick patient who has to endure it. Ward rounds have
been taking place for decades; had they been purely detrimental they
surely would have been junked years ago.

The chance for medical students and trainees doctors to see a senior
clinician interview a patient in a difficult and challenging environment
is invaluable. Observing such an interaction may offer junior staff
insights into both beneficial methods that work and harmful approaches
that should never be repeated. The opportunity to see signs and symptoms
of psychiatric disease is educational for all.

Eliciting such phenomena may be harmful to the patient and the degree to
which the assessment results in a negative experience is as much to do
with the skill of the interviewer as it is with the patient's pathology.

Seeing how an individual deals with and reacts to a challenging
situation often provides valuable insights as to any underlying
psychopathology. The ward round might lead the patient with more
personality-based difficulties to exhibit a pathognomonic response that
might not have been otherwise observed. The previously elated patient
with bipolar disorder who is able to sit in the ward round without
breaking into song or rhyme is obviously improving.

And finally, following in the footsteps of Foulkes it might be argued
that the social interactions of the patient in the group setting are
providing some therapeutic benefit, however small.
