======================================================================================================================
Neglect of the complex: why psychotherapy for post-traumatic clinical presentations is often ineffective\ `† <#fn1>`__
======================================================================================================================

Frank M. Corrigan
Alastair M. HullCorrespondence to Frank M. Corrigan
(frank.corigan@nhs.net)  [1]_  [2]_
:Date: 2015-4

:Abstract:
   Evidence of efficacy in studies of post-traumatic conditions is
   largely derived from studies in which variables are kept to a
   minimum. Extrapolation of treatments from uncomplicated disorders to
   complex conditions may therefore be called evidence-based without
   being evidenced. Complex conditions with polysymptomatic
   presentations and extensive comorbidity are being denied proper
   evaluation, and patients most severely traumatised from the early
   stages of their development are not provided with rigorously
   evaluated psychotherapies because they are more difficult to study in
   the manner approved by research protocols. Such evidence as there is
   suggests that the simple extension of treatments for uncomplicated
   disorders is seriously inadequate. This has significant implications
   for health services responsible for the provision of the most
   efficacious treatments to those whose disorders arise from severe
   trauma, often very early in their life.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _S1:

Evidence-based and evidenced are not necessarily the same
=========================================================

Psychotherapy for post-traumatic clinical presentations is often
restricted by the lack of evidence in support of approaches other than
those validated for non-complex post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
such as cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) :sup:`(n.d.a)` and eye
movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR). :sup:`(n.d.b),
(n.d.c)` Complex PTSD has different definitions but is essentially a
multifaceted presentation arising from extreme stress, usually at an
early developmental level. This leads to difficulty in regulating
affective arousal; alterations in attention and consciousness such as
amnesia and dissociation; somatisation; chronic characterological
changes; and alterations in systems of meaning. :sup:`(n.d.d)` The
variability in the syndromes that result means that inexact use of
terminology bedevils this clinical and research area. While PTSD is a
theoretical umbrella term, :sup:`(n.d.e)` we use ‘complex PTSD’ in this
paper to refer to complex reactions to multiple traumatic stressor
exposures and experiences, usually against a background of severe
disturbances in primary caregiving relationships.

Complex presentations are often excluded from studies because they do
not fit neatly into the simple nosological categorisations required for
research power. This means that the most severe disorders are not
studied adequately and patients most affected by early trauma are often
not recognised by services. Both historically and currently, at the
individual as well as the societal level, dissociation from the
acknowledgement of the severe impact of childhood abuse on the
developing brain leads to inadequate provision of services. Assimilation
into treatment models of the emerging affective neuroscience of adverse
experience could help to redress the balance by shifting the focus from
top-down regulation to bottom-up, body-based processing.

At present there is little regard for the subcortical generators of
distress and an overemphasis on the cognitive strategies needed to
manage the resulting emotions. At the institutional level this
translates to a preoccupation with therapist supervision; attainment of
symptom-reduction goals; invalidation of the importance of affective
experience; and intolerance of clinical complexity. There are then
imposed limitations on psychotherapy sessions and inadequate time and
emphasis on therapeutic engagement. The concept of evidence needs to be
expanded to include neuroscientific plausibility. The collection of
outcome data needs to include biological data such as changes in
functional imaging responses to trauma-related and apparently innocuous
interpersonal stimuli. Neuroscientific plausibility can be a source of
indirect evidence and affective neuroscience can be included in the
rationale for novel treatments in complex PTSD. We explore this
elsewhere (details available from the authors on request). However,
acknowledgement of the magnitude of the problem would have severe
financial implications for mental health services.

.. _S2:

Limitations of the evidence base for the treatment of complex PTSD
==================================================================

Evidence-based therapy for mental disorders is often considered to be
CBT as it has been shown to be of value in reducing symptoms in many
disorders. CBT has been able to accumulate evidence in part through the
readiness of funding bodies to provide for research when there is likely
to be some observable and measurable benefit, however clinically
relevant – in terms of symptoms or functioning. If research funding is
not readily accessible for complex and prolonged interventions that are
clinically applied in the phase-based treatment of complex PTSD, it is
easy to arrive at the false conclusion that a lack of evidence for a
particular therapy indicates that it is not effective. There is not, to
our knowledge, any register of projects which have been refused
financial support or discouraged from making a full application on the
basis of cost. One example is sensorimotor psychotherapy, :sup:`(n.d.f)`
which has as yet little supporting evidence but is endorsed by leading
international experts and is neuroscientifically credible. The costs of
carrying out an outcome study of sensorimotor psychotherapy with current
methodological constraints would be prohibitive. Somatic experiencing
:sup:`(n.d.g)` preceded sensorimotor psychotherapy as a body-based
therapy for the resolution of traumatic experience and is widely used
throughout the world. It also lacks the evidence base deemed necessary
in those services for which rapid symptom reduction is the economically
derived priority.

Both the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
guidelines :sup:`(n.d.h)` and a Cochrane review of psychological
therapies for chronic PTSD in adults :sup:`(n.d.i)` concluded that EMDR
and trauma-focused CBT are effective in clinician-rated symptom
reduction, although there was evidence of greater dropout in active
treatment groups. The authors of both also considered the evidence
available to them to be of low quality. A Cochrane review of
psychological therapies for people with borderline personality disorder
:sup:`(n.d.j)` concluded that dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT) was
effective in reducing anger and parasuicidality and in improving general
mental health, but it did not appear to be more likely than treatment as
usual to keep people in therapy. The authors considered that none of the
treatments they studied for borderline personality disorder had ‘a very
robust evidence base’.

.. _S3:

Consequences of accepting ‘evidence-based’ as ‘evidenced’
=========================================================

If CBT and/or DBT were effective for 100% of patients with complex
trauma sequelae there would be no need for additional therapeutic
approaches. To illustrate our contention that this may not be the case,
a relevant paper :sup:`(n.d.k)` recommended to us as methodologically
sound has been selected. This helps to clarify the answer to the 100%
resolution question in regard to CBT. In this paper by McDonagh and
colleagues, :sup:`(n.d.k)` exclusion criteria were: use of medication
with significant autonomic nervous system effects; dissociative identity
disorder; current alcohol or drug misuse; presence of active suicidality
or a history of two or more suicide gestures or attempts in the
preceding year. Women were also excluded from the study if they were in
a relationship with an abusive partner, a situation unfortunately all
too common in this clinical population. Although the eventual study
group had experienced multiple traumas, those who completed treatment
were middle-aged, well educated and in employment. Many of the patients
encountered in general psychiatric practice do not fit this profile.
Many of those who present clinically with a history of complex PTSD have
been attempting to manage their distress through one – or more likely a
combination – coping strategies, for instance self-harm, alcohol/drug
misuse, eating disorders, or other behaviours designed to limit their
sudden shifts out of the ‘window of tolerance’. :sup:`(n.d.l)` The
efforts to achieve physiological regulation themselves then lead to
further difficulties. Because treatment studies in general dislike
comorbidity, the evidence on treatment approaches to multiple,
coexisting and complex problems is limited.

As well as the exclusion of people who need therapy – such as those who
are chronically suicidal as a result of early trauma – there was
evidence of a problem with dropouts from the study. This was most
evident with CBT (41%) and required the discharge of the random
assignment process to get sufficient numbers into the CBT group. The
post-treatment analysis applying intention-to-treat showed no
significant difference in the numbers no longer meeting PTSD criteria:
28% for CBT (*n* = 8); 32% for present-centred therapy (*n* = 7); 17%
for the waiting list (*n* = 4). So of the 200+ patients who met the
criteria for complex PTSD following childhood sexual abuse, 74 were
included in the study and 8 got better with CBT compared with 4 on the
waiting list. This falls well short of a 100% recovery criterion which
would support the restriction of training to CBT, and raises serious
questions about CBT being the core treatment modality provided for
complex post-traumatic presentations.

For the completers only (i.e. ignoring those who dropped out) both
treatment groups improved significantly compared with the waiting list
and both showed sustained improvements at 6 months. CBT therefore had
clear and demonstrable benefits for some female childhood sexual abuse
survivors. However, patients were more likely to stay in present-centred
therapy, in which the therapists were required to be genuine, empathic
and non-judgemental.

This is only one methodologically sound study of a selected population
but it is of interest that the problem with the dropout rate has been
previously observed for clinical practice in the ‘real world’,
:sup:`(n.d.m)` in which many psychologists trained in CBT were found to
be reluctant to use imaginal exposure. :sup:`(n.d.n)` There is a
striking discrepancy between recommended best evidence-based practice
for PTSD and actual clinical practice. :sup:`(n.d.o)` The underlying
reasons for this discrepancy are likely to be complex but may reflect
the clinician’s view of the tolerability of the therapy for both patient
and practitioner. Prolonged exposure may be necessary for some who
prefer to spend the hours on slow adaptation rather than to go with the
rapid information processing available in non-exposure treatment
protocols such as EMDR. :sup:`(n.d.b)` However, EMDR cannot be applied
in complex PTSD with strict adherence to the standard protocol used in
non-complex PTSD without a high risk of increasing dysregulation. For
the multiple traumatic events and experiences of the kind commonly
encountered by victims of child sexual abuse, prolonged exposure is
unlikely to work in the lifetime of the patient.

The context-dependent unhitching of stimulus and response can occur
without any impact on the stored representation of the unconditioned
stimulus. :sup:`(n.d.p)` If the unconditioned stimulus involves a body
memory from being raped at 3 years old, it may be possible to reduce the
distress related to adult sexual activity without having any impact on
the stored and readily triggered pain, rage, terror, shame, abandonment,
isolation, worthlessness, hopelessness, helplessness or survival terror.
Also unaffected will be the dissociative defences which helped the child
to survive and continue with life, apparently unscathed. The therapeutic
gains are therefore helpful, but limited.

Therapists engaged in the provision of prolonged exposure may be
troubled by ‘feelings of helplessness’. :sup:`(n.d.q)` So if the
therapists feel helpless, they then need to spend more time in
supervision, being exposed to their helplessness with a supervisor who
presumably feels less helpless because he or she is supervising rather
than treating. Subsequently, within systems there is then less time
available to treat those patients who are willing and able to
participate in the exposure therapy that even those supplying it dislike
and prefer to avoid. It may also be the personal preference of clinical
researchers to focus on the cognitive, as in restructuring, rather than
be exposed to the realms of horror and terror, intense isolation and
abandonment, excruciating pain and despair of the complex trauma
survivor. If the therapist has unresolved residues of traumatic
experience himself, the ability to convey the psychotherapy may be even
more challenging; it is then much easier to focus on reappraisal and the
reassurance that all present have survived and prospered.

.. _S4:

Dropouts from DBT
=================

Dialectical behaviour therapy provides techniques for safety and
stabilisation of borderline personality disorders :sup:`(n.d.r)` and
some of its elements have been adapted for dissociative disorders.
:sup:`(n.d.s)` In DBT emotions are recognised as an important part of
human experience and there is considerable emphasis on their regulation
to reduce distress. So it is interesting to see that dropout rates from
DBT in the UK can increase, from an already high 52% to 88% in those
with more complex presentations. :sup:`(n.d.t)` Of course, not all
patients with borderline personality disorder have a history of trauma
or unresolved attachment and genetic and other factors may be present in
some. :sup:`(n.d.u)` However, between 40 and 70% of those with
borderline personality disorder would also meet criteria for one of the
major dissociative disorders in which trauma histories and disorganised
attachment are major aetiological factors. :sup:`(n.d.u)` It is
surprising, but perhaps a reflection of what is considered treatable,
that attachment trauma is often ignored, despite research specifying
feelings of emptiness and problems in coping with abandonment as key
features of borderline personality disorder. :sup:`(n.d.j)` Treatment
continuity may be interfered with by the behaviourist management of
dissociation as a problem behaviour, which can be approached through
desensitisation of present cues to past traumatic experiences.
:sup:`(n.d.u)` The structural dissociation model of van der Hart *et al*
:sup:`(n.d.v)` sees self-states that interfere with therapy as
nevertheless based in the defence from the overwhelming effects of
trauma. Therapists working with an ego state model in which the
cooperation of aggressive protector parts is a prerequisite for
continuing treatment (e.g. Paulsen :sup:`(n.d.w)` ) have identified and
delineated strategies for achieving this. It would be interesting to
know whether the disregard for the original survival functions of
peritraumatic and structural dissociation contributes to the high
dropout from DBT. A very testable hypothesis is that people who drop out
from DBT are primarily those with significant but unrecognised
dissociative disorders.

.. _S5:

Prevalence of dissociative disorders
====================================

There is evidence that some of the complex post-traumatic disorders –
including dissociative disorders – can have an impact on functioning
equivalent at least to major psychotic disorders, and should be
considered to be ‘serious mental illness’. :sup:`(n.d.x)` Studies of the
general population find a prevalence rate for dissociative identity
disorder at 1–3%, whereas in psychiatric patient populations the figure
is 1–5%. :sup:`(n.d.y)` Those individuals are often not diagnosed as
having dissociative identity disorder but receive treatment according to
the most prominent signs and symptoms, and their response to treatment
for depression, anxiety, panic disorder, eating disorder, substance
misuse or somatoform disorders will inevitably be incomplete. Moreover,
unreported or unrecognised trauma is common in psychiatric patients
(details available from the authors on request). Unfortunately, in
controlled trials in groups of patients presenting with these symptoms
and syndromes the diagnosis of those who drop out is not reassessed.
Ethical constraints would prevent attempts to acquire this information
after a patient has dropped out, so there is a need to assess for the
sequelae of complex trauma at recruitment. It could be predicted that
some will have unrecognised major dissociative disorders, or significant
secondary or tertiary dissociative symptoms. Treatment of comorbid
conditions – or concomitant symptoms – is an inadequate response to a
range of complex presentations aetiologically related to early trauma.

.. _S6:

Therapy for severe complex PTSD and dissociative disorders
==========================================================

It could be argued that psychotherapy for the residual effects of trauma
should start with the aim of helping those most severely affected. Chu
*et al* :sup:`(n.d.y)` reviewed the treatment of the major dissociative
disorders which are recognised to result from early attachment trauma
often compounded by later sexual and/or physical abuse. The review
argued that the economic cost of dissociative disorders was considerable
and highlighted the priority needed for the development of effective
treatments. However, dissociative disorders were frequently unrecognised
as such, perhaps because of their polysymptomatic presentations, and
therefore appropriate services were not provided. When treatment was
adapted to address the consequences of dissociative defences to complex
trauma, even those with severe disorders could improve. The lack of
controlled or randomised outcomes studies for the psychotherapy of
dissociative disorders is an effect of the complexity of the
presentations and of the level of funding that would be required to
properly evaluate treatment. The lack of evidence is not an indicator
that particular approaches do not work – only that they have not been
rigorously tested. Testing procedures understandably but unhelpfully
prefer simple, measurable attributes for economy of scale.

.. _S7:

Conclusions
===========

Patients with many trauma-based disorders are not well served by
existing therapies: they will often drop out of treatment at an early
stage. PTSD is an inclusive term :sup:`(n.d.e)` which has precipitated
much research and clinical interest. However, this categorisation has
dominated research and clinical services to the detriment of the range
of disorders occurring after traumatic experience. :sup:`(n.d.z)`
Disorders arising from extreme stress during the brain’s development and
maturation need a prolonged period for recovery. The first requirement
is therefore to adopt an approach which will retain patients in therapy
long enough for the therapist and patient to form a shared understanding
of what is happening and to find a way of working together. This way
must be found to be beneficial for the patient and sufficiently
tolerable for the therapist so that the therapist does not avoid it.

We are grateful to Janina Fisher and Ron Schwenkler for comments on
early drafts.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.z.

.. [1]
   **Frank M. Corrigan** is a consultant psychiatrist at Argyll & Bute
   Hospital, Lochgilphead, Argyll, NHS Highland, and **Alastair M.
   Hull** is a consultant psychiatrist in psychotherapy at Perth Royal
   Infirmary, Perth, NHS Tayside.

.. [2]
   See *Bulletin* comment, p. 100, this issue.
