===================================================================
The neurology–psychiatry divide: a thought experiment\ `† <#fn1>`__
===================================================================

Thomas J. ReillyCorrespondence to Thomas J. Reilly (t.reilly@nhs.net)
 [1]_  [2]_
:Date: 2015-6

:Abstract:
   Diseases of the brain are generally classified as either neurological
   or psychiatric. However, these two groups of illnesses cannot be
   readily separated on the basis of pathophysiology or symptomatology.
   It is difficult to rationally explain to someone with no prior frame
   of reference why we have the split between neurological and
   psychiatric illness. This demonstrates that the division is
   untenable, which has implications for training in both psychiatry and
   neurology.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Can the distinction between psychiatric and neurological illness be
explained to a Martian? This hypothetical Martian has come down to Earth
and wants to know about our classification of diseases pertaining to the
brain. Let us suppose our Martian has similar anatomy and biology to
humans, except he has no concept of illnesses relating to the central
nervous system; he does not experience psychiatric or neurological
disease. The Martian is curious as to why most organs (such as lungs,
kidneys, hearts and eyes) are treated by a single medical specialty,
whereas the brain is divided between neurologists and psychiatrists.

.. _S1:

Convention
==========

Perhaps a reasonable place to start would be to define neurological
illnesses as those treated by neurologists and psychiatric illnesses as
those treated by psychiatrists. You might take the Martian to a
neurology ward and declare that all patients here have neurological
illnesses. Or explain that the people seen by community psychiatric
nurses are those with psychiatric illness. Of course, this is circular
reasoning and does not stand up to much scrutiny. The Martian would
surely not be satisfied by this explanation; he has no prior knowledge
of the history, development or social implications of psychiatry *v*.
neurological disease. Therefore, to him, the division is not
self-evident.

.. _S2:

Neuropathology
==============

You might, therefore, go a little deeper and start to think about what
characterises each type of illness. The Martian recognises the notion of
pathology and can relate this to other aspects of disease – for example,
pulmonary fibrosis causing restrictive lung disease, which we categorise
as a respiratory disease. By comparison, you might argue that
neuropathological lesions cause neurological disease, whereas
psychiatric illness is more to do with abnormal function of the brain.
This seems sensible and certainly holds for well-characterised
neurological disease such as multiple sclerosis. Demyelination of
neuronal axons is the neuropathology, which results in a patient’s
symptoms. However, it becomes less tenable as the underlying disease
processes are less well characterised. Epilepsy was once regarded as a
psychiatric disease. As its neuropathology was better understood, we now
regard it as a neurological illness. :sup:`(n.d.a)` Similarly, we now
know of pathological processes in diseases such as schizophrenia. These
processes, while not localised lesions, are evident when comparing brain
imaging of people with schizophrenia to healthy controls and are present
before the illness manifests clinically. :sup:`(n.d.b)`

The final nail in the coffin of classifying brain diseases by their
pathology is the case of conversion disorder, or neurologically
unexplained symptoms. By definition, this disorder cannot be explained
by underlying neuropathology. :sup:`(n.d.c)` It is, presumably, a result
of psychological and social factors and is more a ‘functional’ disorder
of the central nervous system. And yet it is not treated by
psychiatrists but by neurologists. Attempting to categorise brain
disease by pathology is clearly troublesome so perhaps we should focus
on dividing illnesses based on their symptoms.

.. _S3:

Symptomatology
==============

You could try explaining to the Martian that there are ‘neurological
symptoms’, weakness, tingling and seizures, for example. By contrast,
‘psychiatric symptoms’ would generally be regarded as dysfunction of
higher functions of the nervous system, disturbance in mood, delusions,
hallucinations and so forth. Of course, there is some overlap but
neurological symptoms would generally signify neurological disease which
would interest a neurologist more than a psychiatrist. This holds true
for conversion disorder which, although not involving lesions of the
nervous system, certainly presents with symptoms more familiar to
neurologists.

Unfortunately, it would take little time for our Martian friend to pick
holes in this argument. He could point to anti-*N*-methyl-d-aspartate
receptor encephalitis, which can be clinically indistinguishable from
the first episode of schizophrenia, though it has a well-defined
‘neurological’ pathophysiology. :sup:`(n.d.d)` This disease was only
recently discovered, making it difficult to estimate how many patients
presenting with psychiatric symptoms actually have neurological
diseases. Similarly, psychiatric symptoms are common in traditionally
neurological disorders: hallucinations in Parkinson’s disease
:sup:`(n.d.e)` and depression in multiple sclerosis :sup:`(n.d.f)` are
just two examples.

.. _S4:

The biopsychosocial approach
----------------------------

It could be argued that psychiatrists are specifically trained to have a
biopsychosocial approach to disease, paying more attention to
psychological and social aspects. :sup:`(n.d.g)` This is important, as
these factors influence the presentation and course of psychiatric
illness. However, as previously stated, psychological and social factors
also underpin traditionally neurological conditions such as unexplained
neurological symptoms and non-epileptic attacks. Indeed, there is a
spectrum of psychosocial components to all diseases. Having a
biopsychosocial approach to illness is required not just for
psychiatrists and neurologists but for all doctors. In an ideal world,
our approach to all illness would include consideration of psychological
and social factors, and would be indistinguishable between neurologists
and psychiatrists.

.. _S5:

Conclusion
==========

There is no defining line between neurology and psychiatry. Furthermore,
I contest that it is impossible to justify the separation of
neurological and psychiatric illness on a rational basis. To a Martian,
or anyone looking at the situation with a fresh pair of eyes, it is
impossible to explain how we put brain disorders into either
neurological or psychiatric boxes. This is because current
classification is based on convention, tradition and quirks of history.

To our Martian, it would probably seem rational to have a degree of
overlap in training between neurologists and psychiatrists. It would
seem desirable that neurologists be competent in the management of
psychiatric disorders, and *vice versa*. Unfortunately, this is not the
case. In the UK, it is perfectly normal to train in one of these
specialties with no exposure to the other, unlike in other European
countries. :sup:`(n.d.h)` Nature does not respect our arbitrary
categorisations and neither do our patients. It would surely benefit
both specialties to integrate training pathways, as has been suggested
by others. :sup:`(n.d.i)`

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

.. [1]
   **Thomas J Reilly** BSc MBChB is an academic foundation doctor at the
   University of Glasgow and NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, UK.

.. [2]
   See pp. 105–7, this issue.
