==================================================================================================
A guide to a new short course to promote interest and engagement in psychiatry in medical students
==================================================================================================



Matthew Langley
Benjamin Lomas
Zena Schofield
Gillian DoodyCorrespondence to Gillian Doody
(gillian.doody@nottingham.ac.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   This article describes a new course for preclinical medical
   undergraduates designed to promote interest and engagement in
   psychiatry. The course employed a range of innovative teaching
   techniques alongside ward visits to provide students with early
   clinical experience. Unusually, assessment for the course involved
   the production of creative works as well as reflective writing about
   students' experiences. We collected a variety of feedback from
   participants showing that they found the course enjoyable and
   educational. We conclude that, overall, the course had a positive
   effect on student perceptions of psychiatry.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Psychiatry is one of several medical specialties undergoing a crisis in
recruitment, with a 15% shortfall in core trainee (CT1) allocations year
by year.\ :sup:`1` The Royal College of Psychiatrists is seeking to
address this deficit by engaging with students before, during and after
medical school,\ :sup:`2` with recommendations for interventions at each
level. One such intervention is the provision of student selected
components (SSCs) in psychiatry. In this paper, we discuss our
experience of developing and delivering an innovative optional module
for second-year medical students studying for the Bachelor of Medical
Sciences (BMedSci) degree at the University of Nottingham and the impact
this had on their attitudes towards psychiatry.

.. _S1:

Aims and objectives
===================

The aims of the module were: to stimulate students to learn more about
psychiatry before entering traditional 6-week clinical placements in
year 4to demystify and destigmatise the specialty and consider how
psychiatric practice differs relative to the traditional medical models
of medicine and surgeryto improve students' critical reflection skills
and to allow them to improve their medical practice by reflecting on
personal experience.

When designing this course, we were guided by our aims and objectives
and by literature available about other psychiatry SSCs (see below). We
were, however, constrained by some practical considerations. The module
had to fit into an existing undergraduate timetable that was already
very busy. This meant that the SSC had to be completed in one semester
and we managed to negotiate eight sessions of varying length for our
teaching. The total duration of the course, including time for
submitting the assessments, was approximately 3 months. We were also
keen to avoid duplicating the teaching and experiences that students
would receive during their clinical attachments to psychiatry in their
fourth year.

A literature search was conducted to see whether other medical schools
had undertaken similar SSCs and, if so, what their experiences were. A
range of databases (AMED, Embase, HMIC, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, BNI, CINAHL,
Health Business Elite) were searched using all combinations of the terms
‘psychiatry’, ‘student selected component’, ‘special study module’,
‘SSC’ and ‘SSM’. This search yielded 21 results and, after removal of
duplicates, review of the abstracts identified 4 articles of particular
interest. Brown *et al*'s\ :sup:`3` survey of Scottish psychiatrists
supported our view that engaging medical students early in their
training was important for promoting positive attitudes towards
psychiatry. We also found three published examples of SSCs/SSMs in
psychiatry. One of these was a 3-week SSC at Hull York Medical School on
mental health and the arts.\ :sup:`4` The other two were both SSMs
looking at the representation of mental illness in films.\ :sup:`5,6`

Some parts of our design were influenced by these reports. For example,
we included short examples from films and other popular media in our
seminars (e.g. *Winnie the Pooh* cartoons). We also acknowledged the
natural link between mental health and the arts in our innovative
assessment scheme where students were asked to prepare and present
creative pieces influenced by their experiences during the module.
However, we felt that a design using only one approach (e.g. film or
arts in general) would not allow us to meet all of our objectives.
Hence, our course included a variety of teaching modalities and, very
importantly, used early clinical experience in the form of structured
ward visits.

The module structure comprises lectures, small-group teaching,
student-led presentations, group work, self-directed learning and two
field trips to psychiatric hospitals. The intention was not necessarily
to recruit every member of this group to the specialty, but to sow the
seeds of positive regard for psychiatry and its patients and to
destigmatise mental illness.

The course consists of five 2-h seminars on the following topics: the
history of psychiatry, psychosis, neurosis, the subspecialties and
ethical dilemmas in psychiatry. Interspersed with these seminars are two
clinical visits supervised by senior clinicians, each 3 h long. Twelve
students are accommodated on the course. This early exposure to mental
health in-patient care is to our knowledge rare in the UK. In the final
3-h seminar students present part of the course assessment in the form
of a creative piece about psychiatry to an audience of their peers,
consultants and an assessment panel.

Interesting and interactive sessions were devised which minimised
didactic teaching, as far as possible, while still introducing the
serious and sensitive nature of mental illness. It was also important
not to duplicate any of the curriculum material the students would
receive in their later fourth-year clinical psychiatry placements.

.. _S2:

Course structure and materials
==============================

.. _S3:

Seminar 1: History of psychiatry
--------------------------------

An assumption was made that students' prior knowledge was comparable to
a member of the public's and therefore likely to be influenced by
popular media portrayals of mental illness\ :sup:`7` or personal
experience involving themselves, friends or relatives.

The session begins with students having to define the job descriptions
of psychologists and psychiatrists in an interactive session with the
facilitators for 20 min.

‘Getting away with murder’ is then played. This is an exercise designed
to draw out student preconceptions and prejudices, which could then be
challenged and revisited throughout the course. Students are divided
into two groups and asked about the role mental illness plays in
violence. A scenario is presented whereby students are asked to imagine
they have committed a murder and have decided to feign symptoms of a
mental illness to be found not culpable. Working in their groups
facilitated by course tutors, the students then brief a patient
simulator (who is experienced in portraying the symptoms of mental
illness in medical assessment and training) on how to behave and what to
say. Next, a specialist forensic psychiatry trainee interviews the
simulators in front of both groups. Students are positively rewarded
with chocolate for the simulator portrayal of a convincing symptom or
syndrome of mental disorder.

This exercise successfully sparks the students' interest and leads to an
open discussion, guided by feedback from the interviewing psychiatrist,
about the symptoms the students describe and why they believe them to
represent mental illness. The symptoms generated by the students were
contrasted with symptoms that are typically seen in forensic psychiatry
settings. The remainder of the session is spent presenting students with
a broad history of psychiatry through the ages with a focus on attitudes
towards mental illness in different societies and contrasting these with
the students' own attitudes.

.. _S4:

Seminar 2: Psychoses
--------------------

The second seminar focuses on the nature of psychosis and the challenges
it poses to patients, mental health services and society. The students
are shown a video interview with a patient who experiences features of
psychosis. To facilitate empathy, the patient selected for interview was
also a student of a similar age. He talks through his experiences – the
first time the students hear a description of a psychotic episode – and
the impact the illness has had on his life. This challenges the
students' previously expressed views as to the experience of mental
illness and the information generated by students during the ‘getting
away with murder’ game is revisited. A discussion is facilitated to
establish the nature of the symptoms of psychosis.

To enable students to develop an experiential insight into
schizophrenia, we attempted to simulate a psychotic symptom. There is an
existing body of literature to support this approach.\ :sup:`8` The
experience of an auditory hallucination is simulated for the students by
listening to an audio file played on their own mobile phones or other
devices via headphones. The scripts were based on patients' descriptions
of their auditory hallucinations and then anonymised. The hallucinations
were voiced by members of the teaching team, recorded and mixed
together. The audio file was distributed to students via the Moodle
virtual learning environment (https://moodle.org) with instructions to
bring it to the relevant session on a device with headphones attached,
having not yet listened to it.

The pressure to perform well academically in medical students is well
known, as is their competitive nature. A quick-to-administer
intelligence test was identified and students take the test under normal
conditions. Next, they complete a comparable test while listening to the
simulated auditory hallucinations on their headphones. The tests are
scored and students compare their two sets of individual results; group
means are calculated and a paired *t*-test performed to demonstrate the
effects of hallucinations on intelligence testing.

.. _S5:

Seminar 3: Neuroses
-------------------

This seminar aims to introduce depression and anxiety disorders by
highlighting issues related to defining the boundaries between normal
and pathological experiences. A small degree of anxiety is generated in
students at the beginning of the session. On arrival they are told they
are to sit an *ad hoc* examination under strict conditions. The teaching
team act in an anxious manner themselves, talking about the need to
standardise the course for external examiners, while students wait
silently for everyone to arrive. When instructed to turn the exam paper
over students discover a questionnaire asking about the acute symptoms
of anxiety derived from the ICD-10 criteria for generalised anxiety
disorder. Students then reflect on their feelings on being told they had
an examination and how these match to those probed in the questionnaire.
A number of anxiety symptoms are elicited. Having induced symptoms of
anxiety, prior learning is then activated by a group discussion
reminding the students of the biological basis of the physiological
changes that occur in anxiety.

To further illustrate the concepts included in the broad area of
neurosis, video clips of characters from *Winnie the Pooh*\ :sup:`9` are
then shown and discussed in the group. This illustrates how disorders
can be identified (e.g. depressive disorder in Eeyore, anxiety disorder
in Piglet) and the importance of having a structured means of drawing
the line between the normal and the pathological.

It was considered important that issues of suicide and risk assessment
are discussed. To facilitate this, examples of famous people who have
died by suicide are called upon, allowing this emotive topic to be
discussed in a sensitive way within the now-bonded group.

.. _S6:

Seminar 4: Subspecialties
-------------------------

As psychiatry is a medical specialty with many subspecialties that most
medical students do not get experience in, the students were introduced
to the main subspecialties with brief talks from consultant
psychiatrists in various fields (old age, child and adolescent,
intellectual disability, forensic and psychotherapy). Exposure to the
enthusiasm and expertise of specialist consultants is a valuable part of
the module and speakers are briefed to talk to the topic ‘I like my job,
because … ’ for 20 min and allow 5 min for questions. Following this
seminar, students are asked to express individual preferences for their
visit to a subspecialty unit.

.. _S7:

Seminar 5: Ethical dilemmas in psychiatry
-----------------------------------------

Psychiatrists face numerous clinical ethical dilemmas. It is important
to introduce the students to these issues; they are taught ethical
principles at an early stage in the medical curriculum and have a basic
understanding of the area. Consultants from subspecialist areas within
general adult psychiatry present to the students real clinical cases
featuring ethical considerations. The consultants specialise in liaison
psychiatry, perinatal psychiatry, eating disorders and gender identity
issues. Feedback from students indicated that, before the presentations,
they were unaware of some of these specialist areas of psychiatry.

.. _S8:

Clinical visits
---------------

Within the module are two visits to in-patient psychiatric units.
Students attend in pairs: visiting one of the six local acute general
adult wards on the first visit and one of the available subspecialty
in-patient units on the second visit (drug and alcohol, perinatal,
forensic, intellectual disability, child and adolescent, old age). To
prepare the students for the visit, information is given about ward
etiquette (dress, ID, behaviour, safety), suitable questions are
suggested for the meeting with a patient and opportunities are given to
ask questions about the visits. Senior doctors, either consultants or
higher specialist trainees, lead the visits. The visit format is
prescribed as follows. First, students observe the psychiatrist
interviewing a consenting patient (30 min) and then discuss the case.
After a coffee break, students are introduced to a consenting patient to
speak with them in a communal ward area for 30 min. Following this,
students have the chance to reflect verbally on their experiences with
the psychiatrist and ask questions about the patient they have seen. By
encouraging the students to focus on the impact of the mental illness
and the care received, rather than take a formal psychiatric history,
the importance of and need for high-quality psychiatric care is
reinforced.

.. _S9:

Assessment
----------

As an optional module contributing towards an intercalated BMedSci
degree, a summative assessment is mandated. As the aim of the module is
to demystify and destigmatise psychiatry as well as developing empathy
the assessment places emphasis on reflective processes. Students are
required to produce two reflective essays, one entitled ‘My impressions
of psychiatry’ (1500 words) and the other ‘Meeting a psychiatric
patient’ (1000 words). They are also required to produce a piece of
creative work that communicates their understanding of any aspect of
psychiatry with an accompanying written explanation of the work. This
was presented to the student group, the facilitators, consultants and
psychiatric staff who facilitate the ward visits. A psychiatric
occupational therapist helped to develop the marking criteria and was a
member of the assessment panel. The creative work presented was
emotionally poignant and exceeded expectations; students produced
paintings, photography, poetry, interpretative contemporary dance, short
films and sculptures. Their work has been exhibited at the medical
school and is available for future groups to see online.

.. _S10:

The student experience
======================

The Attitudes to Psychiatry (ATP) questionnaire\ :sup:`10` and a bespoke
questionnaire to obtain qualitative and quantitative feedback on the
creative assessment and the role of reflection in medical training were
completed by students both before and after the course. There were no
statistically significant differences in attitudes to psychiatry
question items before and after the course. There were 11 students who
completed the ATP before the module and 10 who completed it at the end
of the module. When individual statements were examined using
chi-squared results for the responses before and after the module
compared with the mean response before the module for each question on
the ATP, three questions initially seemed statistically significant
(Question 3: ‘Psychiatric hospitals are little more than prisons’,
Question 9: ‘Psychiatric teaching increases our understanding of medical
and surgical patients’, Question 29: ‘Psychiatric patients are often
more interesting to work with than other patients’). However, once
adjusted for multiple testing using a Bonferroni correction, the results
were no longer statistically significant. The lack of statistically
significant results in the ATP is probably due to the small sample size
and the fact that students self-selected the course, which might have
resulted in the group being biased positively towards those attracted to
psychiatry at the outset.

The most positive effect of the course was apparent in the essays the
students produced. Most chose to reflect on their personal journey
through the course, with a common theme being the realisation that
previously held stereotypic views of the psychiatrist and their patients
were inaccurate. Our aim to give students a positive experience of
psychiatry was achieved – one student wrote ‘Considering that I chose
this module having no intention of taking a career route in psychiatry,
I must say that the module has certainly left positive impressions upon
me, and right now, I definitely would not rule out such a possibility’.

An example of the impact of the module is voiced by a student who wrote:
‘My impression of psychiatry has been very positive. [Psychiatry] is an
exciting and ever-evolving profession’. Admittedly, students were aware
of the ‘hidden agenda’ created by the recruitment crisis in psychiatry
and perhaps they knew we would be delighted to read quotes such as, ‘I
have ended this course wanting to pursue a career in old age
psychiatry’.

Another common essay theme was the belief that medical students should
be taught about psychiatry earlier in their training. One student
stated: ‘My impressions of psychiatry have changed dramatically over the
[past] year and I am of the opinion that all medical students would
benefit from early exposure to this [specialty]’. Another student,
having highlighted the stigma among medical students towards people with
mental illness, said: ‘I believe there should be a lot more emphasis on
mental health in … the preclinical phase of medical training, perhaps
this can reduce the stigma associated with the subject’.

Clinical visits received excellent feedback from the students. One
wrote: ‘Probably the most important factor in sculpting my impressions,
were my own experiences on the wards … It felt like no other hospital
ward that I'd been on before’. Another student wrote: ‘Experiences such
as meeting this patient, and the ward round, changed my views and
attitudes towards psychiatry entirely’. The effect of the contact with
patients was clear, with one student writing: ‘Thinking about psychiatry
now, the patients are what I will take from this module’.

The aim to reduce stigma both towards psychiatric patients and their
psychiatrists appears to have been achieved. One student stated ‘I was
greeted, not with a room of [Freuds], but kind, friendly, relaxed
psychiatrists. People who seemed like the most passionate doctors of any
[specialty] I'd encountered’. Another said: ‘[The course] has stripped
away levels of stigma I barely knew I had, yet which society had
conditioned me into having’. Several of the students commented on their
desire to see stigma towards those experiencing mental illnesses to be
reduced, typified by one student who wrote ‘Mental illness is just as
real as physical illness and deserves the same amount of respect’.

.. _S11:

Discussion
==========

It should be noted that the sample size of the first cohort was small,
only 12, so it is difficult to draw anything more than impressions from
the data collected. The course has been repeated but again with only 12
participants. Because funding streams are different for preclinical and
clinical medical students at present there are practical limitations on
the number of students who can undertake the module. However, with minor
alterations, the module could be taught with larger numbers of students
and in medical schools throughout the UK. A useful follow-up would be to
conduct the ATP on second-year students who do not undertake this module
and compare the results. In addition, following up this group of
students to see whether the changes in attitude are sustained or
short-lived might be of value. Comments made by the students during the
module indicated that negative attitudes regarding mental health
services are being propagated even in preclinical teaching sessions. As
it has not been possible to do a long-term follow-up of these students
yet, the effect of studying other areas of clinical medicine on their
long-term career choice has not been established. This positive change
in attitudes to psychiatry may or may not be sustained in the long term,
but at least we have a tool that has demonstrated a positive impact on
medical students that could be repeated in larger numbers.

.. _S12:

Summary
=======

In conclusion, by using innovative, interactive teaching techniques
combined with early clinical visits to psychiatric units, the course
achieved its aims of demystifying and destigmatising psychiatry. At the
start of the course, none of the students had considered psychiatry as a
career; by the end 25% stated they intended to become psychiatrists and
a further 17% said they would consider a career in psychiatry. More than
half of the students requested to do their BMedSci projects in areas
related to psychiatry through the Institute of Mental Health,
Nottingham. The remainder acknowledged a positive change in their
attitudes towards psychiatry, viewing it as an interesting and important
medical specialty. We are currently exploring the possibility of
offering a similar bespoke course for local sixth-form pupils to
encourage those interested in psychiatry to apply to medical school.

The assessment work demonstrated that all the students had increased
their knowledge of psychiatry, with most having undertaken further
personal study that was referenced in their submissions. The assessment
process included a reflective piece enabling the students to develop
reflective skills, with some being more able to demonstrate this in
written form than others. As students are motivated by assessment, using
an assessed reflective piece encouraged their focus on this skill that
will benefit them in their future medical careers. Psychiatry in
particular is an area where reflective practice is vital, so this
assessment tool has face validity. We would encourage all psychiatrists
in medical education to reflect on how we can make changes to improve
recruitment of appropriately skilled doctors to psychiatry and present
this module as one suggestion.

.. [1]
   **Matthew Langley** is a specialist trainee in psychiatry
   (undertaking special interest sessions in medical education), East
   Midlands North School of Psychiatry; **Benjamin Lomas** is a lecturer
   in general adult psychiatry at the University of Nottingham; **Zena
   Schofield** is a specialist trainee in psychiatry, East Midlands
   North School of Psychiatry; and **Gillian Doody** is a professor of
   general adult psychiatry and medical education at the University of
   Nottingham.
