====================================================================================================
Mindfulness for Health: A Practical Guide to Relieving Pain, Reducing Stress and Restoring Wellbeing
====================================================================================================

Thomas A. Ernst [1]_
:Date: 2015-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

This book leads the reader through a journey of how to deal with
suffering from bodily symptoms-related illness and injury. It clearly
describes the differences between primary suffering due to injury and
secondary suffering largely created within the mind through learnt
views, behaviours and fears the person has experienced in their life or
through their illness. It then gently describes how, by engaging with
the secondary suffering, much of the suffering can be relieved or
brought down to the primary pain and suffering which is generally easier
to manage within traditional medicine. The book also points out that
traditional medical models of pain often miss secondary suffering,
whereas traditional therapies often fail to address secondary suffering
or can even make it worse. It is to the great credit of authors that
they deal with this sensitive issue with compassion and empathy.

The book then turns into a step-by-step practical guide on how to
approach secondary pain and suffering. The guide is complete with audio
recordings of practices that the reader can easily follow and this will
not require excessive time. Real-life experiences of people who were
helped by following this guide are included.

The problem of dealing with pain and suffering is as old as humanity and
the readers would have come across many hopes and promises made by
medicine, alternative medicine and the spiritual sector among others.
This book outlines not only anecdotal evidence in the form of
testimonies from people engaging in mindfulness but also benefits from a
wealth of research which it refers to.

As a doctor having used mindfulness successfully to manage my own pain
and suffering from illness, I found reading this book was somewhat
challenging, as it would be to many other readers. However, I have not
yet read a book on mindfulness so sensitive and gentle with the issue of
pain and suffering as this one.

.. [1]
   **Dr Thomas A. Ernst** FRCP, Department of Ageing and Health, Guy's
   and St Thomas' Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK, email:
   thomas.ernst@gstt.nhs.uk
