================================================================
Mental health problems associated with female genital mutilation
================================================================



Jeroen Knipscheer
Erick Vloeberghs
Anke van der Kwaak
Maria van den Muijsenbergh

:Correspondence: Jeroen W. Knipscheer
(j.w.knipscheer@uu.nl)  [1]_

:date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method**

   To study the mental health status of 66 genitally mutilated immigrant
   women originating from Africa (i.e. Somalia, Sudan, Eritrea and
   Sierra Leone). Scores on standardised questionnaires (Harvard Trauma
   Questionnaire-30, Hopkins Symptom Checklist-25, COPE-Easy, Lowlands
   Acculturation Scale) and demographic and psychosocial correlates were
   analysed.

   **Results**

   A third of the respondents reported scores above the cut-off for
   affective or anxiety disorders; scores indicative for post-traumatic
   stress disorder were presented by 17.5% of women. Type of
   circumcision (infibulation), recollection of the event (a vivid
   memory), coping style (avoidance, in particular substance misuse) and
   employment status (lack of income) were significantly associated with
   psychopathology.

   **Clinical implications**

   A considerable minority group, characterised by infibulated women who
   have a vivid memory of the circumcision and cope with their symptoms
   in an avoidant way, reports to experience severe consequences of
   genital circumcision. In terms of public healthcare, interventions
   should target these groups as a priority.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Female genital mutilation (FGM) ‘comprises all procedures involving the
partial or total removal of the external female genitalia or other
injury to the female genital organs whether for cultural, religious or
other non-therapeutic reasons’.\ :sup:`1` The procedure is performed
within a wide range of mainly African ethnic groups. Appropriate
estimations are that between 100 and 140 million women and girls have
undergone the practice.\ :sup:`2` FGM is defined as a violation of human
rights, and in many countries it has been outlawed. Nonetheless, FGM is
still performed in a large part of Africa, particularly in Eastern
regions. Currently, FGM is also performed in small migrant girls
resident in European countries.\ :sup:`3` The impact of FGM on social
and psychological health is underresearched\ :sup:`4-9` and knowledge of
the psychosocial consequences in a migration context is even
scarcer.\ :sup:`10-12` Moreover, reports vary from high prevalence of
trauma-related and other psychiatric symptoms such as anxiety and
depression,\ :sup:`4,13` to no mental health problems at all\ :sup:`14`
or even positive feelings.\ :sup:`15,16`

The aims of this study were to explore the relationship between FGM and
psychopathology in circumcised women originating from an African country
who have migrated to The Netherlands. Research questions were: What kind
of mental health problems are reported by circumcised immigrant
women?Which factors are associated with the presented psychopathology?
Based on the literature,\ :sup:`4-12` we hypothesised potential
predictors of psychopathology which could be distinguished between
demographic factors (e.g. country of birth, years of residence in The
Netherlands, educational level), circumcision-related factors (type of
circumcision, age at the time of circumcision, vividness of recollection
of the circumcision), coping mechanisms and acculturation demands.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Design
------

In a cross-sectional research design, a survey among a sample of
circumcised immigrant women in The Netherlands was conducted. Topics
were measured in a quantitative way by means of culturally sensitive
standardised questionnaires (the complete study design is described in
Vloeberghs *et al*\ :sup:`17`).

.. _S3:

Procedure
---------

The estimated size of the target population (women who have undergone
FGM living in The Netherlands) is about 26 000 women.\ :sup:`3` We
involved representatives of this population actively in the research
process, at the level of both data acquisition and data interpretation.
Participants were recruited by means of snowball sampling, a sampling
method that is being used to study hard-to-reach populations (see, for
example, de Jong & van Ommeren\ :sup:`18`).

The first stage of snowball sampling involves selecting individuals
using referrals by insiders within the target population. These
individuals were asked to list others with identical characteristics.
From this list at least one person was randomly selected and approached
for an interview. The interviewee was then asked to list others and the
same procedure was repeated several times. Attempts were made to
maximise sociodemographic diversity. Approximately half to a third of
the solicited women (depending on the interviewer and her network)
agreed to participate. It was not possible to compare those who chose to
participate in the interview with those who declined.

The interviews were conducted by seven interviewers (all females coming
from the participants' countries of origin). We consulted various key
persons in the different communities during the development of the
measures and the interpretation of the results (e.g. during ‘experts
meetings’). Interrater reliability across the interviews was enhanced by
means of a protocol that guided the interview process and a training
concerning the way in which the interviews should be conducted, how to
handle possible risks of (re-) traumatisation and ethical aspects
concerning the process of personal data collection.

The respondents were informed about the aim of the study by means of an
information sheet. The interviewers – who were awarded financial
compensation – were instructed to read the information sheet to
illiterate respondents. It was emphasised that they had to guarantee
anonymity and that participation of the respondents was voluntary.
Participants were reassured about confidentiality and told that they
were not obliged to answer questions that they did not wish to answer.
They were given the telephone number of a family doctor attached to the
project (M. van den M.) whom they could contact in case of problems or
questions concerning their well-being.

The interviews mainly took place at the respondents' homes. In some
cases they were conducted at community centres or in public places,
depending on the preference of the participant. The interviews were
completed within an 18-month period in 2008/2009. The duration of the
interviews varied from 40 to 180 min (mean duration about 90 min). The
answers were recorded verbatim and later transcribed by the researchers
(J.K. and E.V.).

.. _S4:

Sample characteristics
----------------------

A group of 66 women participated in the study (`Table 1 <#T1>`__). The
participants' ages ranged from 18 to 69 years, averaging 35.5 years
(s.d. = 10.5); 43% were married, 79% had children (mean 1.78, s.d. =
1.6). The group included 36 (54%) heavily circumcised (infibulated)
women, mainly from Sudan and Somalia. The other women had undergone less
invasive forms of circumcision: 9 women got an excision (type 2),
whereas 21 had undergone type 1 circumcision.\ :sup:`19` The age at
which the participants were circumcised ranged from 8 months to 16 years
(mean 6.4, s.d. = 4.1).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Descriptive statistics of demographic variables of the FGM sample
      (*n* = 66)

   ========================================== =================
   Variable                                   
   ========================================== =================
   Age, years: mean (s.d.) range              35.5 (10.5) 18–69
   \                                          
   Age at circumcision, years: mean (s.d.)    6.4 (4.1) 0.8–16
   range                                      
   \                                          
   Years in The Netherlands, mean (s.d.)      10.9 (6.3) 2–29
   range                                      
   \                                          
   Number of children, mean (s.d.) range      1.78 (1.6) 0–8
   \                                          
   Country of birth, *n* (%)                  
     Somalia                                  18 (27)
     Sierra Leone                             12 (18)
     Sudan                                    18 (27)
     Eritrea                                  12 (18)
     Ethiopia                                 6 (9)
   \                                          
   Type of mutilation,\ `a <#TFN2>`__ *n* (%) 
     Type I clitoridectomy                    21 (32)
     Type II excision                         9 (14)
     Type III infibulation                    35 (54)
   \                                          
   Marital status, *n* (%)                    
     Alone (single, widow, divorced)          33 (57)
     Married with family                      25 (43)
   \                                          
   Education, *n* (%)                         
     Low (⩽6 years)                           9 (16)
     Middle (6–12 years)                      24 (43)
     High (⩾12 years)                         23 (41)
   \                                          
   Source of income, *n* (%)                  
     Job, education fee or social benefit     37 (66)
     No income                                19 (34)
   ========================================== =================

   FGM, female genital mutilation.

   According to World Health Organization classification.\ :sup:`19`

.. _S5:

Instruments
-----------

The survey consisted of four questionnaires including the Harvard Trauma
Questionnaire (HTQ-30),\ :sup:`20` a 30-item transculturally validated
screening instrument for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
symptomatology (Cronbach's α = 0.96 in the current sample); the Hopkins
Symptom Checklist (HSCL-25),\ :sup:`21` which measures anxiety (10
items) and depression symptoms (15 items) and has proven to be useful as
a screening instrument in several cross-cultural studies and patient
studies\ :sup:`22-25` (Cronbach's α = 0.96); the COPE-Easy,\ :sup:`26`
which measures different coping styles by means of 32 items grouped
under three theoretical head dimensions: (a) actively problem-directed
coping, (b) support-seeking coping and (c) avoidance behaviour; the
internal consistency of the subscales of COPE-Easy in this sample was
satisfactory (Cronbach's α varying between 0.67 for avoidance behaviour
and 0.91 for active problem-directed coping); and the Lowlands
Acculturation Scale (LAS),\ :sup:`27` which assesses the level of
cultural adaptation with 20 items and distinguishes between a global
orientation towards the past (and land of origin) as opposed to the
orientation towards the future (and country of current residence) in
terms of integration skills and culture-bound traditions (Cronbach's α =
0.63). All instruments were translated into languages spoken by the
participants, applying a back-translation procedure. A preliminary
version of the questionnaires was pilot-tested with ten women and both
content and format were revised on the basis of results.

.. _S6:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

Hierarchical regression analyses were used to test whether demographic
factors (country of birth, age, years of residence in The Netherlands,
marital status, educational level, source of income and number of
children), circumcision-related factors (type of circumcision, age at
the time of circumcision, vividness of recollection of the
circumcision), coping strategies (COPE-Easy subscales) and acculturation
demands (LAS subscales) predicted symptom severity of PTSD (HTQ-30 total
score), anxiety and depression (HSCL-25 total score).

.. _S7:

Results
=======

More than a third of the participants (*n* = 24, 36%) scored above the
cut-off level for indicators of psychopathology: a fifth of the total
sample (*n* = 13, 20%) met the criteria for PTSD (mean HTQ-30 score
>2.5), a third met the criteria for depression (*n* = 22, 33%), nearly a
third met the criteria for an anxiety disorder (*n* = 20, 30%; mean
HSCL-25 score >1.75) and a sixth (*n* = 11, 18%) scored above the
cut-off level for all three psychopathology indicators. Almost
two-thirds of all participants (*n* = 42, 64%) did not report scores
above the cut-off on indicators for PTSD, anxiety or depression.

Type of circumcision, country of origin, source of income, vividness of
recollection and coping style were significant factors in a multivariate
context concerning mental health symptoms. Infibulation, a ‘vivid
recollection’ and a substance-misuse coping style were associated with
enhanced PTSD scores, whereas originating from Somalia was associated
with decreased post-traumatic symptoms (*R*\ :sup:`2` = 0.67,
*F*\ :sub:`(4.38)` = 22.04, *P*\ <0.0001; `Table 2 <#T2>`__). Associated
with higher anxiety and depression scores were infibulation, substance
misuse, avoidance coping and lack of income; however, women originating
from Somalia reported less anxiety and depression (*R*\ :sup:`2` = 0.59,
*F*\ :sub:`(5.39)` = 13.68, *P*\ <0.0001; `Table 3 <#T3>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Summary of hierarchical multiple regression analysis on HTQ-30
      total score (*n* = 66)

   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   | Variable          | Beta              | 95% CI low | 95% CI high |
   +===================+===================+============+=============+
   | 1 Memory          | −0.648\           | −0.644     | −0.296      |
   |                   | `\**\* <#TFN6>`__ |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   |                   |                   |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   | 2 Memory          | −0.522\           | −0.536     | −0.222      |
   |                   | `\**\* <#TFN6>`__ |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Coping        | 0.421\            | 0.062      | 0.194       |
   | substance misuse  | `\**\* <#TFN6>`__ |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   |                   |                   |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   | 3 Memory          | −0.545\           | −0.542     | −0.248      |
   |                   | `\**\* <#TFN6>`__ |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Coping        | 0.422\            | 0.067      | 0.190       |
   | substance misuse  | `\**\* <#TFN6>`__ |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Somalia       | −0.255\           | −0.739     | −0.101      |
   |                   |  `\*\* <#TFN5>`__ |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   |                   |                   |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   | 4 Memory          | −0.478\           | −0.489     | −0.204      |
   |                   | `\**\* <#TFN6>`__ |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Coping        | 0.335\            | 0.041      | 0.163       |
   | substance misuse  | `\**\* <#TFN6>`__ |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Somalia       | −0.358\           | −0.915     | −0.263      |
   |                   | `\**\* <#TFN6>`__ |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Infibulation  | 0.285\            | 0.076      | 0.625       |
   |                   |  `\*\* <#TFN5>`__ |            |             |
   +-------------------+-------------------+------------+-------------+

   HTQ, Harvard Trauma Questionnaire.

   *P*\ <0.05

   *P*\ <0.01

   *P*\ <0.001.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Summary of hierarchical multiple regression analysis on HSCL total
      score (*n* = 66)

   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   | Variable                  | Beta                      | 95% CI low | 95% CI high |
   +===========================+===========================+============+=============+
   | 1 Coping substance misuse | 0.656\ `\**\* <#TFN10>`__ | 0.140      | 0.293       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |                           |                           |            |             |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   | 2 Coping substance misuse | 0.551\ `\**\* <#TFN10>`__ | 0.101      | 0.263       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Coping avoidance      | 0.254\ `\* <#TFN8>`__     | 0.002      | 0.094       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   | 3 Coping substance misuse | 0.546\ `\**\* <#TFN10>`__ | 0.102      | 0.258       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Coping avoidance      | 0.289\ `\* <#TFN8>`__     | 0.009      | 0.099       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Somalia               | −0.219\ `\* <#TFN8>`__    | − 0.781    | 0.000       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |                           |                           |            |             |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   | 4 Coping substance misuse | 0.467\ `\**\* <#TFN10>`__ | 0.078      | 0.230       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Coping avoidance      | 0.207                     | −0.005     | 0.083       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Somalia               | −0.322\ `\*\* <#TFN9>`__  | −0.970     | −0.183      |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Infibulation          | 0.316\ `\* <#TFN8>`__     | 0.090      | 0.737       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |                           |                           |            |             |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   | 5 Coping substance misuse | 0.454\ `\**\* <#TFN10>`__ | 0.076      | 0.223       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Coping avoidance      | 0.224\ `\* <#TFN8>`__     | 0.000      | 0.084       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Somalia               | −0.330\ `\*\* <#TFN9>`__  | −0.969     | −0.210      |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     Infibulation          | 0.284\ `\* <#TFN8>`__     | 0.059      | 0.687       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+
   |     No income             | 0.199\ `\* <#TFN8>`__     | 0.001      | 0.547       |
   +---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+-------------+

   HSCL, Hopkins Symptom Checklist.

   *P*\ <0.05

   *P*\ <0.01

   *P*\ <0.001.

.. _S8:

Discussion
==========

FGM is associated with a wide range of long-term health and
psychological problems (e.g. Andro *et al*\ :sup:`28`). Circumcised
immigrant women in this study are likely to report emotional
disturbances that relate to FGM, with about a sixth reporting scores
above the threshold for PTSD and a third reporting severe levels of
depression or anxiety. Specific factors, associated partly with FGM and
partly with current life stressors, influence the severity of
psychopathology. In particular, infibulated immigrant women who have a
vivid recollection of the circumcision, who do not have a paid job, and
who cope with their problems mainly in an avoidant way (substance
misuse), may form a group at risk of severe psychological problems.

The majority of the sample reported mental health problems but did not
meet criteria indicative of psychopathology. These relatively low
percentages could be due to the common fact that the majority of the
survivors of traumatic events are able to recover without developing
mental health problems. The underreporting of symptoms could also be
owing to different perceptions (not the circumcision but other stressors
would be responsible for the current complaints/symptoms) or taboo
(being ashamed to talk about the problems, feeling a sense of stigma).
In addition, the reluctance to speak out can be related to the fact that
thinking or talking about the mutilation may cause the pain experienced
at the time of the ritual to reappear; chronic pain and traumatisation
can have a mutually reinforcing effect.\ :sup:`29` Nonetheless, it may
also be true that the majority of the women experience no substantial
traumatic symptoms as a consequence of FGM (see Lockhat,\ :sup:`12` who
showed that women who were circumcised according to the mild sunna
variant (type 4) did not report PTSD-related problems).

The finding that infibulation and a vivid recollection may enhance
symptomatology may not come as a surprise. Still, some findings do
puzzle us, such as the finding that Somali background appears to have a
protective effect.

Speaking openly about the trauma may only be beneficial when this is
appropriate within a culture of recognition of the trauma and its
psychological consequences. Somali respondents may have more problems
communicating about FGM in their culture. Another explanation may be
that Somali women assess the event less negatively than women from other
countries. According to the Lockhat model,\ :sup:`12` a negative
judgement is predictive of PTSD development. In fact, some Somali women
refer to the Islamic teachings saying that sunna is not prohibited. To
them sunna has a normative and positive connotation within Islam,
whereas, for instance, Sudanese respondents reject the Somali
reinterpretation (Idjtihad) of what is being said in the Holy
Writings.\ :sup:`11`

Another finding concerns the relationship between symptoms, avoidant
coping and substance misuse. Avoidance plays a pivotal role in PTSD
symptom maintenance.\ :sup:`30` Accordingly, it is not surprising that
avoidant coping is associated with PTSD symptom severity. Participants
may develop substance misuse problems in an attempt to manage distress
associated with the effects of FGM and related stress symptoms, or to
numb themselves from the remembrance or experience of intense emotions.
In our sample this coping style seems to exacerbate the problems in
those experiencing anxiety and depression.

Our study has a unique character. The active participation of the target
population and the way we obtained data provide sufficient ground for
answering the research questions validly. For HTQ and HSCL excellent
cross-cultural psychometric results have been reported. Some caution,
however, is warranted in interpreting the results. Using a
cross-sectional design, we can only employ a relatively passive approach
to making causal inferences based on the findings – we may only speak
about potential predictors. Moreover, the small group size, which is an
inherent consequence of studying such a precarious topic, presents an
important limitation as do the composition characteristics of the group
(i.e. the high level of education and low marital state).

Incorporated in the clinical treatment of circumcised immigrant women
should be providing them with coping mechanisms to help them come to
terms with their experiences. Using therapy to equip women with
instrumental skills to help them cope in day-to-day life and promote
social integration to avoid social isolation (e.g. by enrolling the
women in education/training) is also a good starting point for improving
mental health (see also Summerfield\ :sup:`31`). In addition, when
treating women who experienced FGM one must be able to discern the
various types of FGM, be knowledgeable about the related symptoms and
the effects these may have on the woman, and have awareness regarding
the taboo surrounding the practice. Finally, mental healthcare providers
should be attentive to the fact that FGM is but one of a range of
possible traumatising experiences the patient may have been subjected
to. They should not only focus on FGM but check whether there are other
factors, such as social or financial circumstances, that may be causing
the symptoms presented by the patient.

On the basis of the empirical findings presented, our study shows that
FGM is associated with psychological health problems for a substantial
group of immigrant women. However, a considerable number of women are
capable of coping with most impediments and may regard the ritual as
‘normal’ and therefore not sickening. Our data thus underline the
diversity in interpreting the events and the level of remembrance as
crucial for experiencing psychopathology. For future studies, it is
important to elucidate the contextual factors that influence decisions
about service utilisation. Prevention and clinical efforts should focus
on the individual within its context and should be aware of potential
hesitation among some women to seek psychological help. Clinicians are
encouraged not to pathologise the consequences of FGM but to focus on
the urgent psychological, social and psychosexual needs identified among
a significant number of circumcised women.

.. [1]
   **Jeroen Knipscheer** is a psychologist and senior researcher at Arq
   Psychotrauma Expert Group, Diemen/Oegstgeest, and Department of
   Clinical and Health Psychology, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
   **Erik Vloeberghs** is a senior officer of research and development
   at Pharos, Centre of Expertise on Health Disparities, Utrecht, The
   Netherlands. **Anke van der Kwaak** is a senior health advisor,
   trainer and project leader at the Royal Tropical Institute and
   University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. **Maria van den
   Muijsenbergh** is a general practitioner and senior researcher at
   Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, and Pharos, Centre of
   Expertise on Health Disparities, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
