========================================================================================================================================
Relationship between timeliness of contact and length of stay in older and younger patients of a consultation-liaison psychiatry service
========================================================================================================================================



Rebecca Wood
Anne P. F. Wand
Glenn E. HuntCorrespondence to Rebecca Wood (rebecca.wood@sydney.edu.au)
 [1]_
:Date: 2015-6

:Abstract:
   **Aim and methods** The aims were to determine whether the timeliness
   of contact with a consultation-liaison psychiatry (CLP) service is
   associated with shorter lengths of stay (LOS), whether this
   relationship persists for stays greater than 4 days and whether this
   association varies with age. The length of stay was correlated with
   the time from admission to contact with the service (the referral lag
   (REFLAG)), and the REFLAG’s proportion of length of stay (REFLAG/LOS)
   for all 140 in-patients, those with stays greater than 4 days, and
   for those under and over 65 years.

   **Results** The length of stay was significantly correlated with
   referral lag and logREFLAG/logLOS for all patients and for patients
   with stays greater than 4 days. The correlations remained significant
   for both age groups, but were stronger in the younger group.

   **Clinical implications** Timeliness of contact with CLP was
   associated with shorter length of stay, particularly in younger
   patients. Psychiatric factors influencing length of stay in older
   patients should be studied by CLP services.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Consultation-liaison psychiatry (CLP) has not consistently demonstrated
evidence of cost-effectiveness, which is partly related to the
difficulty of conducting studies with robust methodology that reflect
the real-life operation of CLP services.\ :sup:`1` Some recent studies
have demonstrated the effectiveness of intensive psychiatric
consultation services with the specific brief of reducing length of stay
(LOS).\ :sup:`2,3` In contrast, studies of services with a traditional
model of accepting referrals from a treating team, have found that
earlier contact with CLP is associated with reduced lengths of
stay.\ :sup:`4–11` Most of these studies have compared length of stay
with the proportion of the referral lag (i.e. REFLAG: the time from
admission to patient contact with the CLP service) of the length of stay
(i.e. REFLAG/LOS).\ :sup:`4–7,10` This avoids directly comparing lengths
of stay with the referral lag, as these are related variables. In
support of this, REFLAG/LOS has been found to be independent of length
of stay, if the stay is longer than 4 days.\ :sup:`10` The primary aim
of this study was to examine if the timing of contact is associated with
length of stay for all patients referred to a CLP service, particularly
when those with a stay less than 4 days were excluded. Furthermore, CLP
services see many frail and complex older patients who utilise
proportionally greater resources.\ :sup:`12` Older in-patients with, or
who develop, mental conditions while in hospital have been found to have
longer lengths of stay.\ :sup:`13` A secondary aim of this study was to
compare the relationship of timeliness of referral and length of stay
for patients under and over 65 years old.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Participants
------------

The study was conducted at a 215-bed acute metropolitan general hospital
in Sydney, Australia. The CLP service at this hospital consisted of a
part-time staff specialist psychiatrist (0.6 full-time equivalent) and a
full-time psychiatry trainee. The hospital also employs mental health
liaison nurses (0.9 full-time equivalent) who directly manage some ward
referrals instead of the CLP service. The CLP service was referred 1.03%
of all hospital in-patients during 2012, which is in keeping with
previous studies.\ :sup:`14` All consecutive in-patients referred to the
CLP service, excluding those referred from the obstetrics and
gynaecology department, from 1 January to 31 December, 2012, were
included in the study. This exclusion was made because of a difference
in referral pathway, as these patients had usually been seen on an
ongoing basis during their out-patient antenatal care.

.. _S3:

Data collection
---------------

Data were collected for patients referred to the CLP service from the
routinely used service referral forms and the medical record. Data
collected included demographic information, admission date, date of
first contact with CLP and number of contacts, length of stay, referring
team, referral reason, medical diagnosis, psychiatric diagnosis,
Karnofsky score on contact with the CLP service and at discharge. The
Karnofsky score was recorded by the CLP team at initial contact and on
discharge. This score was devised to quantify ability to carry out
normal activities and self-care, and is rated from 0 (dead) to 100
(normal, no complaints, no evidence of disease) and has been established
as a valid and reliable score of global functioning.\ :sup:`15`

Length of stay was calculated as the whole number of days from admission
to the day of discharge from the hospital and if these were the same day
this was counted as a length of stay of 1 day. The psychiatric diagnosis
was made using the DSM-IV-TR criteria,\ :sup:`16` and multiple
psychiatric diagnoses were recorded with identification of the primary
diagnosis relevant to the episode of care. This study was approved by
the Human Ethics Committee for Sydney Local Health District (RPAH zone).

.. _S4:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

Distributions were described as mean, standard deviation and range. The
referral lag was calculated as the whole number of days between
admission and first contact by the CLP service and this parameter was
used to calculate the proportion of referral lag over length of stay
(REFLAG/LOS). Thus, a REFLAG/LOS of 0.5 indicated that a patient was
referred halfway through their admission and a REFLAG/LOS of 0.25, at
the first quartile of the admission. Logarithmic transformations
(logREFLAG/logLOS) were required because the data were positively skewed
and logging the values made the data more normally distributed,
consistent with previous studies.\ :sup:`4–7` These variables were
compared with the lengths of stay for all in-patient referrals, and then
specifically in groups according to age (‘younger’ – defined as under 65
and ‘older’ – 65 years or more). Group differences were determined using
one-way ANOVAs and Spearman’s correlations were used to assess
associations between variables if any of the variables were not normally
distributed. All data analyses were performed using SPSS version 17 for
Windows. All *P*-values were two-tailed and significant differences
between groups were determined using *P*\ <0.05.

.. _S5:

Results
=======

There were 174 in-patient referrals to the CLP service in 2012. Of
these, 34 were in-patients of the obstetrics service who were excluded
from the analysis. The demographic profile, referring team, Karnofsky
score and number of contacts by the CLP service of the remaining 140
patients are presented in `Table 1 <#T1>`__. Patients 65 years and older
were more likely to be born overseas, require an interpreter and have
more contacts (reviews during admission) than younger patients. In
total, seven (5%) in-patients died; four of these were less than 65
years old.

The most common referral reasons for all referrals were depression (45,
32%) and self-poisoning (18, 13%), followed by confusion (16, 11%) and
medication review/past psychiatric history (14, 10%). For the two most
common referral reasons, there was the greatest discrepancy in the age
groups. There was a greater proportion of patients 65 years and older
referred for depression (37, 41%) compared with those under 65 years of
age (8, 16%); and a greater proportion of those with self-poisoning in
the younger group (13, 26%) than the older group (5, 6%).

The most common medical diagnostic categories for all referrals were
respiratory (21, 15%), oncological (18, 13%), related to self-poisoning
(16, 11%) and neurological (15, 11%) conditions. Between the age groups
the largest differences in percentage terms were for self-poisoning (12,
24% for the younger group and 4, 4% for the older group) and urosepsis
(0, 0% *v.* 13, 14%).

The psychiatric diagnoses for both age groups are also presented in
`Table 1 <#T1>`__. There was a significant association between
psychiatric diagnoses and age groups (χ\ :sup:`2` = 14.804 (d.f. = 4),
*P*\ <0.005). When the four diagnostic groups were assessed
individually, it was noted that patients 65 years and over were more
likely to have a diagnosis of a mood disorder than younger patients
(χ\ :sup:`2` = 5.20 (d.f. = 1), *P* = 0.23), whereas younger patients
were more likely to have other diagnoses (*n* = 14, 28%), such as
anxiety or adjustment disorders (χ\ :sup:`2` = 7.59 (d.f. = 1) *P* =
0.006) compared with older patients (*n* = 9, 10%).

The average length of stay for all patients was 19.6 days, whereas the
average hospital in-patient stay over the same time period was 3.5 days.
The length of stay, referral lag and related parameters are detailed in
`Table 2 <#T2>`__. The lengths of stay for older patients was
significantly longer than those patients who were under 65 years old
(*F*\ (1,138) = 6.17, *P* = 0.014). There was also a significant age
group difference for referral lag (*F*\ (1,138) = 4.80, *P* = 0.030) and
logREFLAG/logLOS (*F*\ (1,124) = 4.41, *P* = 0.038).

When contact with the CLP service occurred during a 1-day admission (LOS
= 1) or on day 1 of a longer admission (REFLAG = 0), this introduced a
mathematical error in calculating the REFLAG/LOS and the logarithmic
transformation of REFLAG/LOS. As the logarithm of zero is undefined and
the logarithm of one is zero, these cases resulted in an undefined value
for logREFLAG/logLOS. Therefore, these patients (*n* = 14) were not
included in some analyses. There were no significant differences between
the older and younger groups of patients in terms of the number of these
cases.

The correlations between length of stay and the parameters related to
referral lag are shown in `Table 3 <#T3>`__. There were significant
correlations between length of stay and all the referral lag parameters
for all patients, which included the correlation between length of stay
and referral lag when the values were logarithmically transformed
(logREFLAG/logLOS, *r* = 0.38, *P* = 0.001). These relationships were
more strongly correlated in patients under 65 years old. A total of 38
patients had a lengths of stay of 1-4 days. The positive correlation of
the timeliness of referral and length of stay was only maintained for
the REFLAG/LOS with logarithmic transformation (*r* = 0.242, *P* = 0.02)
and the referral lag itself (*r* = 0.547, *P* = 0.001) when the 38
patients with a shorter length of stay were removed (`Table 4 <#T4>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Demographic variables by age group

   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              | Age 64 or    | Age 65 or    | Total       | *P*   |
   |              | younger      | older        | (*n* = 140) |       |
   |              | (*n* = 50)   | (*n* = 90)   |             |       |
   +==============+==============+==============+=============+=======+
   | Age, mean    | 43.6 (15.8)  | 79.2 (7.8)   |             |       |
   | (s.d.)       |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   | Women, *n*   | 27 (54)      | 57 (63)      | 84 (60)     | NS    |
   | (%)          |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   | Born         | 21 (42)      | 62 (69)      | 83 (59)     | 0.002 |
   | overseas     |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   | Interpreter  | 4 (8)        | 37 (41)      | 41 (29)     | 0.001 |
   | used         |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   | Department   |              |              |             |       |
   | referred     |              |              |             |       |
   | from, *n*    |              |              |             |       |
   | (%)          |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |     General  | 23 (46)      | 36 (40)      | 59 (42)     |       |
   | medical      |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |     Aged     | 1            | 32 (36)      | 33 (24)     |       |
   | care and     |              |              |             |       |
   | re           |              |              |             |       |
   | habilitation |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              | 16 (32)      | 4 (4)        | 20 (14)     |       |
   |    Intensive |              |              |             |       |
   | care unit    |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              | 4 (8)        | 9 (10)       | 13 (9)      |       |
   |   Palliative |              |              |             |       |
   | care         |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              | 4 (8)        | 4 (4)        | 8 (6)       |       |
   |    Emergency |              |              |             |       |
   | department   |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |     Surgery  | 1 (2)        | 5 (6)        | 6 (4)       |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              | 1 (2)        | 0            | 1 (0.7)     |       |
   |  Paediatrics |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   | Karnofsky    | 24.8 (5.0)   | 25.1 (5.4)   | 25.0 (5.3)  | NS    |
   | score on     |              |              |             |       |
   | admission,   |              |              |             |       |
   | mean (s.d.)  |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   | Karnofsky    | 61.4 (28)    | 54.1 (23)    | 57 (25)     | NS    |
   | score on     |              |              |             |       |
   | discharge,   |              |              |             |       |
   | mean (s.d.)  |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   | Contacts,    | 4.4 (3.6)    | 7.6 (6.3)    | 6.4 (5.7)   | 0.002 |
   | mean (s.d.)  | 1–18         | 1–41         |             |       |
   | range        |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   | Contacts per | 1.24 (0.89)  | 0.95 (0.93)  | 1.05 (0.92) | NS    |
   | day after    |              |              |             |       |
   | first        |              |              |             |       |
   | contact,     |              |              |             |       |
   | mean (s.d.)  |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   | Psychiatric  |              |              |             |       |
   | d            |              |              |             |       |
   | iagnosis,\ ` |              |              |             |       |
   | a <#TFN2>`__ |              |              |             |       |
   | *n* (%)      |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |     Organic  | 12 (24)      | 35 (39)      | 47 (33.6)   | NS    |
   | brain        |              |              |             |       |
   | disorder     |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |     Mood     | 6 (12)       | 26 (29)      | 32 (22.9)   | 0.023 |
   | disorder     |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |     No       | 10 (20)      | 12 (13)      | 22 (16)     | NS    |
   | psychiatric  |              |              |             |       |
   | diagnosis    |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              | 8 (16)       | 8 (9)        | 16 (11)     | NS    |
   |    Psychotic |              |              |             |       |
   | disorder     |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |     Other    | 14 (28)      | 9 (10)       | 23 (16)     | 0.006 |
   | diagnoses\ ` |              |              |             |       |
   | b <#TFN3>`__ |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   |              |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+
   | Multiple     | 9 (18)       | 22 (24)      | 31 (22)     | NS    |
   | psychiatric  |              |              |             |       |
   | diagnoses,   |              |              |             |       |
   | *n* (%)      |              |              |             |       |
   +--------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+-------+

   NS, not significant.

   Chi-square, χ\ :sup:`2` = 14.804 (d.f. = 4), *P* < 0.005.

   Other diagnoses included: anxiety disorders, adjustment disorder,
   borderline personality disorder, somatoform disorders, substance
   misuse disorders, eating disorders and bereavement.

.. _S6:

Discussion
==========

It is acknowledged that the average length of stay of patients with
psychological comorbidity is much longer than the overall average length
of stay.\ :sup:`17` This is consistent with the results of this study
where CLP-referred patients had a greater mean length of stay compared
with the length for all patients at the studied hospital. It is
therefore important to investigate factors that may relate to this
disparity in stay length, which could then become targets of
interventions to reduce healthcare costs. In this study, there is a
significant association between early contact with CLP services and
shortened stays for all patients referred to the CLP service. The
association was strongest for patients under 65 years of age. The
relationship was maintained for those patients with stays greater than 4
days.

The results regarding timeliness of contact with CLP services are in
keeping with most previous studies.\ :sup:`4–11` Only one study, which
focused on patients with organic brain disorder referred to a CLP
service, did not find that earlier referral predicted a shorter length
of stay.\ :sup:`18` Only two previous studies have separated out those
patients with stays greater than 4 days.\ :sup:`3,10` It could be argued
that in a hospital stay less than 4 days, the impact of a CLP service is
likely to be minimal given the frequently delayed response to
psychiatric interventions, both pharmacological and psychological, and
the multiple other factors that are involved in a patient’s readiness
for discharge. Furthermore, it is particularly important for CLP
services to demonstrate reduction in lengths of admissions in more
complex long-term patients; where there is greater potential cost saving
through shorter hospital stays.

None of the studies that have previously examined the impact on the
length of stay of the proportion of the referral lag of the length of
stay have specified the number of cases that have not been calculated
because of the mathematical errors in those cases with a stay of 1 day,
or who are referred on the same day of admission.\ :sup:`4–7` This is
not as important for those cases with a 1-day stay as there is no
possibility that a CLP service could reduce this further. However, the
necessity to not include those cases that are referred as early as
possible does potentially reduce any positive effect demonstrated by CLP
services using this measure. Thus, the number of cases that result in
mathematical error should be reported in future studies.

.. _S7:

Differences between the two groups
----------------------------------

| There was a significant but comparatively weaker correlation between
  length of stay and timing of referral in older patients compared with
  the younger group, which was a disappointing finding as this is a
  large and important target group for CLP services. This result is in
  contrast to the study of the rapid assessment, interface and discharge
  integrated model (RAID), which found that most of the service’s cost
  savings were achieved through reduced lengths of stay and fewer
  readmissions in the geriatric wards.\ :sup:`2` The authors suggested
  these outcomes were related to educating general hospital staff about
  mental health problems and efforts to link patients to appropriate
  pathways for community care.\ :sup:`2` The difference in strength of
  correlation of the association found in the study presented here may
  be because of the inherent differences Table 2Comparison of length of
  stay (LOS) and referral lag (REFLAG) related parameters by age
  groupMean (s.d.) range\ *n*\ Age 64 or younger
| (*n* = 50)Age 65 or older
| (*n* = 90)Total
| (*n* = 140)\ *P*\ Length of stay, days10.4 (10.2) 1–4224.6 (39.5)
  1–33719.6 (32.9)0.014Referral lag1403.9 (5.0)8.5 (14.5)6.9
  (12.2)0.03REFLAG/LOS133\ `a <#TFN5>`__\ 0.498 (0.288)0.408
  (0.274)0.441 (0.281)NSlogREFLAG/log
  LOS126\ `b <#TFN6>`__\ 0.4050.5330.4900.038 [2]_ [3]_ [4]_ Table
  3Spearman’s correlations between referral lag related parameters and
  length of stay (LOS) by age groupLength of stay, Spearman’s
  rhoPatients, 64 years and underPatients 65, years and overAll
  patientsVariable\ *rPnrPnrPn*\ Referral lag
  (REFLAG)0.6940.001500.6440.001900.6970.001140REFLAG/LOS–0.5300.00148–0.2770.01085–0.3780.001133\ `a <#TFN7>`__\ Log(REFLAG)/log(LOS)0.5650.001420.2280.037840.3800.001126\ `b <#TFN8>`__\  [5]_ [6]_
  between the two age groups, including the need for an interpreter. The
  study hospital serves an ethnically diverse population with 48.1% of
  the hospital’s catchment population born overseas, which explains the
  high level of utilisation of interpreters by this CLP
  service.\ :sup:`19`

The higher number of contacts with the CLP service received by the older
group is likely reflective of the longer length of admission. This
correlation has been found previously.\ :sup:`10` It is unsurprising
that patients who are in hospital longer will see CLP services on a
greater number of occasions. In support of this, there was no
significant difference between the two age groups in the average number
of contacts/day after initial contact with CLP services, despite the
greater need for interpreters in the older age group.

Surprisingly, the Karnofsky scores were not significantly different
between the older and younger groups of patients, which would suggest
that disparity in functional status does not account for the difference
in the correlation results. This may reflect the limitations of this
scale as it is most applicable to non-hospital-based supportive care
settings, such as palliative care, rather than acute in-patient
treatment.\ :sup:`20`

| Previous studies have found factors that predict later referral to CLP
  services, such as higher social vulnerability,\ :sup:`12` referral for
  depression and psychiatric diagnoses of adjustment disorder and
  delirium and no psychiatric diagnosis.\ :sup:`5` Therefore, the
  profile of psychiatric diagnosis between the younger and older
  patients may also have contributed to the difference in impact of CLP
  on length of stay between the two groups. The older patients were more
  likely to be diagnosed with a mood disorder but, Table 4Spearman’s
  correlations between referral lag (REFLAG) related parameters and
  length of stay (LOS) when patients with a length of stay <4 days (*n*
  = 38) were excludedVariable\ *n*\ Length of
| stay, *rP*\ Age1020.090NSReferral lag
  (REFLAG)1020.5470.001REFLAG/LOS97\ `a <#TFN10>`__–0.087NSLog(REFLAG)/log(LOS)97\ `a <#TFN10>`__\ 0.2420.02 [7]_ [8]_
  unexpectedly, there was no difference for the diagnoses related to
  organic brain disorders between the two age groups. There are two
  possible explanations for the relatively low frequency of referred
  patients diagnosed with cognitive disorders. First, the study hospital
  has been found to have low rates of recognition of cognitive disorders
  by referring teams.\ :sup:`21` Second, a concurrent
  delirium-prevention study took place at this hospital that improved
  staff knowledge and confidence and reduced the occurrence of delirium,
  which may have reduced the overall number of individuals with
  cognitive disorders referred.\ :sup:`22`

There was a greater proportion of patients referred for, and diagnosed
with, self-poisoning in the younger group of patients compared with the
older group, which may have influenced the difference seen in the two
age groups. Psychiatric input is almost universal in patients who are
admitted with self-harm as the reason for the consultation is
immediately obvious and this may be reflected in earlier referral of
these patients by the treating team\ :sup:`5` and arguably therefore,
greater influence of the CLP team on management and discharge planning.

There were other significant differences in the older group of patients
in this sample in terms of length of stay and referral lag. The fact
that there was a longer length of stay in older patients referred to CLP
is not surprising and is in keeping with previous reports.\ :sup:`13`
Three in-patients, all older than 65 years of age, had stays greater
than 100 days. These outliers were included in the final statistical
analysis but did not significantly influence results when removed. The
longer admissions may have been because of factors such as waiting for
residential care placement or rehabilitation, and greater medical
comorbidity, which are less common in younger patients. Arguably, there
is limited scope for CLP to influence lengths of stay when these factors
are active.

The longer referral lag for the older patients is somewhat surprising
for this service, which has a liaison attachment with the aged care and
rehabilitation department. This department referred only 24% of all
older (≥65) CLP patients; a greater proportion of older patients were
referred instead by general medical teams (40%), which carry a larger
total patient load. However, the longer referral lag in the older
patients may also reflect other differences between the younger and
older patient groups that influence timing of the referral from the
teams. For example, proportionally more older patients were born
overseas and required an interpreter. It is possible that delays in
accessing interpreters precluded early referral to CLP.

.. _S8:

Limitations
-----------

This study was conducted in a district hospital with a representative
sample of CLP patients. It did not involve alterations to the
established CLP service or its referral patterns and was conducted
retrospectively, which eliminated the possibility of the Hawthorne
effect. Therefore, although based on small numbers, the results are
generalisable to most CLP services, which are not designed as
specialised acute intervention teams focused upon reducing lengths of
stay.

The data collected included many of the parameters that may have
contributed to the differences in effect of CLP contact on length of
stay of the two groups. However, the re-admission rates of the two
groups were not known and this has been suggested as an important
potential consequence of reducing length of stay, although this is
contested by some studies.\ :sup:`23` No other study that has examined
the timeliness of CLP contact has included this
parameter,\ :sup:`4–7,10` but it has been included in other
cost-effectiveness studies with different methodology.\ :sup:`2` This
would be an important point for inclusion in future studies of
timeliness of CLP contact and lengths of stay.

The limits of interpretation previously discussed regarding the
association of timeliness of referral with lengths of stay also apply to
this study. The demonstrated relationship between the time to referral
and stay length cannot be assumed to be causal and it remains possible
that the association is a result of unmeasured factors. These factors
may include those associated with the request for consultation or also
that the direction of the inference may be reversed.\ :sup:`24` Thus, it
is not possible to state that this CLP service directly shortens lengths
of stay if there is greater proportional involvement in a patient’s
admission, except to state that a positive association between these two
variables has been demonstrated.

.. _S9:

Implications
============

Timeliness of referral was associated with shorter lengths of stay,
including for those with stays of more than 4 days. This correlation was
weaker for older than for younger patients. There are multiple and
complex factors that likely lead to this result, particularly the
greater likelihood of the older patients requiring an interpreter and
being born overseas, as well as a greater delay in contact with CLP
services and a longer length of stay when compared with younger
patients. Given the ageing population, further exploration of these
factors should be a priority for CLP services, as this is a group where
CLP could have a considerable impact and cost-benefit. It is important
to evaluate whether better outcomes achieved through hospital-wide
education about mental health problems and emphasising clear pathways
for community care can be replicated.\ :sup:`2`

.. [1]
   **Rebecca Wood**, MBBS, FRANZCP, is a staff specialist psychiatrist
   in consultation liaison psychiatry at Sydney Local Health District
   and a clinical associate lecturer in the Discipline of Psychiatry,
   Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney; **Anne P. F. Wand**,
   MBBS, FRANZCP, is a staff specialist psychiatrist in consultation
   liaison psychiatry and psychiatry of old age in the South Eastern
   Sydney Local Health District, a clinical lecturer in the Discipline
   of Psychiatry, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney and
   conjoint senior lecturer in the School of Psychiatry, Faculty of
   Medicine, University of New South Wales. **Glenn E. Hunt**, PhD, is
   an associate professor and principal research fellow at Sydney Local
   Health District and the Discipline of Psychiatry, Sydney Medical
   School, University of Sydney.

.. [2]
   NS, not significant.

.. [3]
   Data for seven patients could not be calculated because of
   consultation on day of admission (REFLAG = 0).

.. [4]
   Data for 14 patients could not be calculated because of a REFLAG = 0
   (*n* = 7) or LOS = 1 (*n* = 7).

.. [5]
   Data for seven patients could not be calculated because of
   consultation on day of admission (REFLAG = 0).

.. [6]
   Data for 14 patients could not be calculated because of a REFLAG = 0
   (*n* = 7) or LOS = 1 (*n* = 7).

.. [7]
   NS, not significant.

.. [8]
   Data for five patients could not be calculated because of
   consultation on day of admission (REFLAG = 0).
