========================
YouTube and ‘psychiatry’
========================



Robert Gordon
John Miller
Noel Collins
:Correspondence: Noel Collins (noel.collins@sabp.nhs.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   YouTube is a video-sharing website that is increasingly used to share
   and disseminate health-related information, particularly among
   younger people. There are reports that social media sites, such as
   YouTube, are being used to communicate an anti-psychiatry message but
   this has never been confirmed in any published analysis of YouTube
   clip content. This descriptive study revealed that the representation
   of ‘psychiatry’ during summer 2012 was predominantly negative. A
   subsequent smaller re-analysis suggests that the negative portrayal
   of ‘psychiatry’ on YouTube is a stable phenomenon. The significance
   of this and how it could be addressed are discussed.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

YouTube (`www.youtube.com <www.youtube.com>`__) is a video-sharing
website created in 2005, which now provides a platform for 2 billion
clip viewings every day.\ :sup:`1` The website's viewership statistics
are eye opening. More than 1 billion unique users visit YouTube each
month. Over 6 billion hours of video content are watched each month and
100 hours of video are uploaded to YouTube every minute. It is available
in 61 countries and across 61 languages, and according to Nielsen,
YouTube reaches more US adults aged 18-34 than any cable
network.\ :sup:`2`

Clip content is varied, uncontrolled and often anonymous. Whereas clips
are uploaded and accessed by diverse individuals, groups and political
bodies across the globe, universal access is restricted in some
countries. In China, for example, YouTube access was blocked by the
government in 2009 as a response to Tibetan content.\ :sup:`3` YouTube
website administrators also reserve the right to remove uploaded content
should users violate specified terms and conditions. Video files that
ignite social political unrest, violate copyright and intellectual
property protection laws, or breach national security legislation are
likely to be removed. According to the YouTube terms of service,
material which is obscene, defamatory or unlawful must not be
submitted.\ :sup:`4` Despite these restrictions, the YouTube platform is
largely an unregulated medium which is being used to circulate
extraordinarily varied material. This includes sharing and disseminating
health-related information, particularly among younger
people.\ :sup:`5,6` Against this backdrop, there is growing concern that
internet social media are being increasingly used to communicate an
anti-psychiatry message.\ :sup:`7` However, to our knowledge, this has
never been confirmed in any published systematic analysis of YouTube
content. This descriptive study aimed to determine whether YouTube
portrayed ‘psychiatry’ in a positive, neutral or negative light. In view
of the enormity of the viewership statistics, we consider the
implications of this.

.. _S1:

Study
=====

On 12 July 2012 we examined YouTube on default search settings using the
solitary search term ‘psychiatry’. We believed this to be the most
appropriate description of the discipline as a whole and the most likely
reductionist YouTube search term for the specialty. Other possible
search terms such as ‘mental health’ were discounted owing to the
conceptual overlap with psychopathology and other constructs and the
likelihood of generating broad and irrelevant search results. YouTube
ranks search results according to relevance gained from the title of the
clip, descriptive language within ‘relevant keywords’ and ‘video tags’,
and the video description itself. Furthermore, the higher the number of
‘comments’ a video possesses, the higher the ‘authority signal’ becomes
(i.e. the inherent video popularity, which also promotes a higher
ranking).\ :sup:`8`

The first 100 clips of more than 1000 ranked results were viewed
independently by two researchers (R.G. and J.M.) and categorised as
positive, negative or neutral in their representation of psychiatry. No
explicit criteria were used in categorising clips, which were assigned
to each category according to the global impression of reviewer
regarding the overall theme of each clip. Clips were assigned ‘neutral’
as a default if no overall negative or positive theme was identified.
Disagreements in clip category were arbitrated by a third reviewer
(N.C.). The number of views and clip length were also recorded.
Non-functioning, deleted or repeated clips were excluded from analysis.
Browser software at the time of examination was up to date and there was
no disagreement between non-functioning clips observed on different
computers.

.. _S2:

Study results
=============

The kappa agreement between observers was 76%. The observers excluded 20
clips from analysis. The majority of eligible clips portrayed psychiatry
negatively (51%) compared with neutrally (29%) and positively (20%)
(`Table 1 <#T1>`__). Negative clips were viewed more frequently and were
longer than both positive and neutral clips. A subsequent smaller
re-analysis of the first ten ranked clips on 14 July 2013 (five
negative, two positive, three neutral) and 13 August 2014 (six negative,
one positive, three neutral) revealed similar findings. A selection of
analysed clips is provided in `Box 1 <#box1>`__.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Characteristics of negative, positive and neutral clips on 12 July
      2012

   ========= =============== ============== ============
   Clip type Eligible clips, Average number Average clip
             *n* (%)         of clips views length
   ========= =============== ============== ============
   Negative  41 (51)         77 035         14m 49s
   \                                        
   Positive  16 (20)         54 234         9m 34s
   \                                        
   Neutral   23 (29)         7244           7m 20s
   ========= =============== ============== ============

Common themes of negative clips related to the process of diagnosis and
treatment. In particular, psychiatric diagnoses were criticised for
being invalid, unreliable and a non-scientific mechanism of social
control. Other concerns included stigma and the ‘labelling’ of
individuals with diagnoses, administering toxic psychotropic medication
to children and the potential harm of psychiatric treatment. Themes of
positive clips included the benefits of psychiatric research,
improvements in treatment and an anti-stigma video (‘Beards and Bowties’
by Dr Kamran Ahmed: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=70loMcIqd9Q).
Neutrally themed clips were largely educational in nature, including a
cartoon portrayal of the proposed neurotransmitter mechanism of bipolar
affective disorder.

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

This study reveals that the representation of ‘psychiatry’ on YouTube in
July 2012 was predominantly negative. Subsequent clip analyses in 2013
and 2014 suggest that this is a stable phenomenon. The source of
negative YouTube clips was unclear owing to blind authorship. However,
there were three ‘regularly negative’ authors of clips promoting a
seemingly ‘anti-psychiatry’ campaign.

What does a search term of ‘psychiatry’ mean? Content analysis of clips
suggested the discipline of psychiatry itself was the implied meaning of
‘psychiatry’ in the majority of clips. Although other medical
specialties also suffer from negative portrayals on YouTube, this is
usually topic-specific such as paediatric immunisation or objections to
tanning by dermatologists.\ :sup:`9-11` ‘Psychiatry’ as a medical
discipline appears uniquely targeted on YouTube for negative
representation.

Why is portrayal of psychiatry on YouTube negative? The YouTube medium
itself is vulnerable to extreme content owing to blind authorship,
presentation of opinion as fact and the distinct lack of any peer review
or editorial process.\ :sup:`3` The online anti-psychiatry campaign has
been linked to Scientology, disgruntled patients and psychiatrists,
critical social scientists, humanistic psychologists and journalists
sceptical towards psychiatry.\ :sup:`7` It has also been suggested that
an anti-psychiatry group now exists as a patient-based consumer
movement.\ :sup:`7` This online antipsychiatry message may be
increasing,\ :sup:`7` with the release of DSM-5 being a particular nidus
of further criticism.\ :sup:`12` The negative online representation of
‘psychiatry’ may also be an extension of long-standing societal
scepticism of ‘psychiatry’ into a contemporary medium. It could also be
symptomatic of the overall failure of psychiatry to promote itself more
positively.

It is unclear whether information disseminated through social media
platforms influences health-related attitudes and behaviours.\ :sup:`6`
More educated viewers appear relatively resistant to inaccurate
information on YouTube, even when the message is framed as scientific
reasoning.\ :sup:`6` However, it does appear that social media websites
are becoming an increasingly popular source of health
information.\ :sup:`13` The spiralling volume of uncensored information
being uploaded to social video platforms such as YouTube makes it
difficult for heath consumers to discern reliable health information
from misleading content. Certain patient groups, such as younger adults
and people with anorexia, may be more vulnerable to extreme
content.\ :sup:`13` It is also unclear how the negative online
representation of psychiatry interacts with real-world stigma
surrounding psychiatric illness and its treatment.

**Box 1** A selection of clips from the original 2012 analysis

**Negative:**

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y_AC-JhPOI (The psychiatric drugging of
children & elderly)

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hy79C0v8elE (Psychiatry)

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PcuhhJ1BaMk (The DSM: psychiatry's
deadliest scam)

**Positive:**

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFs9WO2B8uI (RSA animate – the divided
brain)

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tTCwihayOv0 (Peggy Rodriguez, MD for UNM
Department of Psychiatry Residency Program)

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=89-LDCnP8qw (Anthony Rothschild, MD:
Brudnick Chair & professor of psychiatry)

**Neutral:**

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5N8LJjGjsfI (Ask the doctor: cardiology,
psychiatry, geriatric medicine)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qVkYHioCHpk (Psychiatry, Ain Shams
University, basic interviewing skills 1.wmv)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jq5F2XRt6QM (Psychiatrist vs
psychologist (mental health guru))

Despite negative representation, viewing rates of YouTube ‘psychiatry
clips’ are low compared with other content. The most popular
‘psychiatry’ clip, a music video by The Avalanches entitled ‘Frontier
psychiatrist’, including a parody of the psychotherapist and patient
encounter, attracted 2.3 million views. To give some perspective,
‘Gangham Style’, a music video by the South Korean musician Psy,
attracted 1.5 billion views, ‘Charlie bit my finger again’ 520 million
and the Taiwanese ‘Nyan cat’ animation 101 million views.

Although the effects of negative representations of psychiatry on social
media remain questionable, it is clear that YouTube content is capable
of exerting global impact. Sceptics of this need only heed the story of
Sonya the slow loris. In 2009, Dmitry Sergeyev uploaded a video of her
being tickled. Although illegal to have a captive slow loris as a pet
outside of Russia, this single viral video has increased the illegal pet
trade of these animals and has now led to the near extinction of the
species.\ :sup:`14`

.. _S4:

Psychiatry fighting back
------------------------

Accepting that negative representation of psychiatry on YouTube is a
concern, how can it be addressed? Psychiatrists, their professional
bodies and healthcare providers could start by recognising the influence
of social media and its potential for disseminating health information,
particularly in younger health consumers.\ :sup:`5` Promisingly, the
Royal College of Psychiatrists has launched its own YouTube channel
(`www.youtube.com/user/RCofPsychiatrists <www.youtube.com/user/RCofPsychiatrists>`__).
This currently has low impact, with its introductory clip displaying a
modest (2000) number of views, but it could eventually be a platform to
provide unbiased and accurate information and to convey a positive
message about psychiatry more generally. It may be as important to raise
awareness among younger people and vulnerable patient groups about the
trustworthiness of online information more generally.\ :sup:`13` Others
have suggested political leverage on YouTube to communicate more
objective information\ :sup:`6` or to carry explicit disclaimers when an
extreme view is represented (in the same manner as television). Further
options include the development of algorithms to automatically detect
and filter extreme videos before they become popular.\ :sup:`13`
However, these proposals are somewhat at odds with the overarching
YouTube ethos of free ‘self-broadcast’.

The authors thank Alberto Pavanello for his advice and encouragement
throughout.

.. [1]
   **Robert Gordon** is a CT2 psychiatric trainee in the Wessex Deanery
   and an academic clinical fellow in psychiatry at the Academic Centre
   of College Keep, Southampton, **John Miller** is a Masters student at
   the Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain, **Noel Collins** is an
   older adult consultant psychiatrist at Surrey and Borders NHS
   Foundation Trust, Godalming.
