=================================================================
Provision of neuropsychiatry services: variability and unmet need
=================================================================

Niruj Agrawal
Rahul Bhattacharya
Hugh RickardsCorrespondence to Niruj Agrawal
(niruj.agrawal@swlstg-tr.nhs.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method**

   Neuropsychiatry services remain underdeveloped and underprovided.
   Previous studies have shown variability in service provision in the
   UK. In this survey we approached all mental health and
   neuropsychiatric service providers within London to map current
   neuropsychiatric service provision and explore perceived barriers.

   **Results**

   All the specialist mental health service providers responded. There
   was huge variability in neuropsychiatric service provision within
   different parts of London. There was evidence of significant unmet
   need and variability in service pathways. Lack of earmarked funds for
   neuropsychiatry and disjointed funding stream for such services were
   identified by providers as a barrier.

   **Clinical implications**

   This study provides further evidence of an ongoing lack of adequate
   neuropsychiatric service provision. Reasons for variability and unmet
   need are discussed. Adoption of a previously proposed hub-and-spoke
   model of service provision and the removal of commissioning barriers
   through uniform national commissioning may help deal with this
   problem.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Neuropsychiatric conditions are frequently encountered in neuroscience
settings and are not uncommon in mental health services. However, the
provision and development of neuropsychiatric services has lagged behind
in the UK and globally.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` Attempts at establishing
the neuropsychiatric needs of the general population have taken two
different routes. Researchers have either assessed ‘mental health needs’
in neurology patients or have searched for ‘organic’ problems in general
psychiatric patients. A number of studies from Europe have estimated
psychiatric morbidity in neurology patients at 40-55%. A study from
London looking at neuroscience in-patients found a prevalence of
neuropsychiatric conditions of 55%.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` Similar figures were
reported from Scotland (47%) and additionally, a 30% prevalence of
conditions ‘not explained by organic cause’ in neurology out-patients
was described.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` A study from Scandinavia reported the
prevalence of psychiatric conditions in neurology patients as
55.1%.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` However, referral rates to mental health services
in this study were only 4.6%. Therefore, one should not assume that
these relatively high needs are always addressed. Data on assessment of
neurological or organic conditions in mental health patients are poor,
but these are estimated to be around 10%.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

Estimates of the prevalence of neuropsychiatric presentations in
specific neurological conditions range from 20 to 75%, depending on the
nature and severity of the condition, method of assessment and the
population studied.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)-(n.d.h)` Rates of neuropsychiatric
problems are generally higher in the specialist or tertiary centre
settings.

What constitutes a neuropsychiatric condition and which of those
conditions require specialist neuropsychiatric service input has also
been open to interpretation. We have defined neuropsychiatric conditions
under four broad categories in the accompanying paper.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`
Not all patients in those categories would require specialist
neuropsychiatric input. Neuropsychiatry services would see patients that
are complex and beyond the service provision capacity of either
neurology services or mental health services alone. Patients accessing
neuropsychiatry services should have problems that fall within one of
the four categories that define neuropsychiatric
conditions\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` and should meet at least one of the criteria
described in `Box 1 <#box1>`__.

Information on neuropsychiatry need and demand at a clinical services
level is available from two large-scale audits carried out in south
England, led by two of the most established providers of
neuropsychiatric services in the UK.\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.k)` The authors
concluded that geographical distance from a specialist service was the
most significant barrier to access to care. They also suspected there
was a lack of localised service provision for neuropsychiatry, both of
which contributed to unmet need. Both studies found unmet
neuropsychiatric need, particularly in areas geographically distant from
neuropsychiatry centres. It was concluded that there was emerging
consensus that a referral rate of less than 20 per 100 000 population
per year possibly signified unmet need in terms of service
provision.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`

**Box 1** Criteria for referring a neuropsychiatric condition to a
specialist neuropsychiatry service.

-  Complex

-  Requires specialist investigations

-  Requires specialist assessment

-  Requires specialist treatment

-  Requires neuropsychiatric clinical expertise, which lies outside of
   that which may be expected in either mental health or neurology
   services.

Neuropsychiatric care pathways and commissioning are not standardised
and are highly variable across the UK. We suspect that neuropsychiatry
service provision and access to care for patients are likely to be
influenced by other complex factors over and above the well-established
‘geographical distance’ from a centre of neuropsychiatry. In this study
we aimed to explore whether there is still geographical variation in
neuropsychiatry service usage. Rather than exploring this from a purely
service provider perspective, we invited both service providers and
service commissioners to share their views. Through this process we
aimed to minimise potential bias of data on variability obtained in
previous studies solely from tertiary referral centres. The ‘top-down’
approach of assessing variability purely from one specialist service
provider perspective may be prone to bias as more than one provider may
be catering to the needs of the population in an area and indeed some
services may be provided locally outside large tertiary centres.

.. _S1:

Method
======

Two separate regional cross-sectional surveys were carried out. R.B. and
N.A. devised two standardised questionnaires: one for commissioners and
the other for service providers. The questionnaires were developed
through iteration and in consultation with the national questionnaire
survey into neuropsychiatry services.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Questions were
very broad and open ended to establish the current state of affairs
rather than to prove or disprove an *a priori* hypothesis. Mapping of
existing neuropsychiatry services in London was completed. Mapping of
services was carried out by an electronic search for neuropsychiatric
services by inputting words ‘neuropsychiatry’ and ‘London’ into a
generic search engine. In addition, information on existing
neuropsychiatry services was obtained through the Faculty of
Neuropsychiatry at the Royal College of Psychiatrists and by calling all
the major mental health trusts in the London area. All specialist mental
health providers were identified within the target geographical area.
National or tertiary level referral centres providing neuropsychiatry
services and neurorehabilitation to the population of London, including
public and private or independent providers, were also identified.
Senior management for each provider were contacted electronically with
the questionnaire and this was followed up by a telephone call.

All local mental health commissioners from primary care trusts (PCTs)
were contacted using a similar method. The survey attempted to assess
existing provision and service usage for neuropsychiatry to capture
variation within the well-defined geographical units (boroughs covered
by PCTs). We discovered there was a centralised regional (strategic
health authority (SHA) level) specialist commissioning panel for
neurorehabilitation in London that commissioned services related to
acquired brain injury across the city. We approached it with the
commissioning questionnaire for our survey. We also explored the
commissioners' and providers' perceptions of neuropsychiatry and
perceived barriers to neuropsychiatry service and commissioning. Data
were verified and cross-checked between providers and commissioners,
although it was recognised that commissioners often went to more than
one provider for different elements of neuropsychiatry services. Data
captured were subjected to descriptive analysis and no inferential
statistics were used.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

Data were collected from the local PCT commissioners and from the
London-wide specialist commissioning group referred to above. Most local
commissioners reported on commissioning that took place through generic
mental health streams, as opposed to the specialist stream referred to
by the specialist commissioning group. Mental health commissioners were
requested to report actual figures, however, if these were not available
they were asked to offer estimated figures based on the available data.
There were 31 boroughs and 30 PCTs in London, which covered a population
of 185 000 to 399 000 each (average 284 000). Response rate from the
PCTs was very good (83%) and 100% responses were received from the
providers of neuropsychiatric services in the area. We were not made
aware of any patients going out of area from London for neuropsychiatric
need, on the contrary, providers in London see a number of patients from
outside the local area.

The number of patients for the specialist commissioning group ranged
from 3 to 76 per year (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). Therefore, there was a 25-fold
variation in incidence among the 30 referring geographical units within
London. About half the PCTs (*n* = 15) were able to provide an estimate
of the number of neuropsychiatry patients they funded: from 4 to 472 per
year. The variation of incident referrals at the unit PCT mental health
commissioning level was a staggering 118-fold. The variation in
population between the 31 boroughs and the PCT catchment areas was
approximately two-fold. In `Fig. 1 <#F1>`__, bars 6 and 19 represent
patients commissioned through specialist panels from two PCTs. For
commissioning of neuropsychiatry through local commissioning they
functioned as one unit and are represented as bar 7.

.. figure:: 299f1
   :alt: Breakup of neuropsychiatry cases funded.
   :name: F1

   Breakup of neuropsychiatry cases funded.

The commonest mode of commissioning of neuropsychiatry services was to
tertiary services followed by local services. Funding streams for
certain conditions were identified to be other than mental health, for
example through acute care, physical health, neurosciences or older
adults, or even Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT).
Brain injury rehabilitation was commissioned through the pan-London
specialist commissioning group referred to earlier. Certain services,
which were not specifically commissioned, were provided by mental health
trusts (therefore commissioning of these services remains unclear).

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

.. _S4:

Variability in service pathways
-------------------------------

Neuropsychiatry is a complex discipline which requires a highly skilled
workforce dealing with a range of conditions. Different service models
have been proposed to meet neuropsychiatric needs. In one of the models,
neuropsychiatry services are based at a ‘tertiary level’, accepting
referrals from psychiatry, neurology, geriatrics and general
medicine.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` In London, though most neuropsychiatric
service provision was at a tertiary level (`Fig. 2 <#F2>`__), no clear
service models or pathways of neuropsychiatry services emerge from the
data. The lack of consistency of neuropsychiatry service provision in a
relatively small geographical area is quite striking.

.. figure:: 300f2
   :alt: Variability in neuropsychiatric service provisions and
   commissioning. IAPT, Improving Access to Psychological Therapies.
   :name: F2

   Variability in neuropsychiatric service provisions and commissioning.
   IAPT, Improving Access to Psychological Therapies.

Internationally, different models for neuropsychiatry service provision
have been reported. In Ireland, an in-patient neuropsychiatric service
is closely aligned to neuroscience services and receives referrals from
neurology and neurosurgery.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` Although neuropsychiatric
services are commonly aligned to large neuroscience centres, successful
neuropsychiatric services have been set up aligned to district or local
general hospitals. There is a published report of such a service from
the UK.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` Although there has been mention of community
outreach model in line with stroke-related
rehabilitation,\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` there is little evidence that
neuropsychiatry has adapted to such a service model. Most
neuropsychiatry service models from outside the UK refer to a liaison
consultation model.\ :sup:`(n.d.i),(n.d.q)` In the UK, the College's
Faculty of Neuropsychiatry working group proposed a hub-and-spoke model,
with the hub closely allied to the neurosciences centre but the spokes
working closely with services in the community.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`
Currently, there is no evidence that this model has yet been adopted
consistently in London. There is an urgent need to create clear
neuropsychiatry service pathways and a hub-and-spoke model is likely to
be the best option.

.. _S5:

Continued unmet need in neuropsychiatry
---------------------------------------

This study found huge variability in annual rates of funded
neuropsychiatry cases in the London area. This may to some degree
represent poor data collection, or it may reflect real variability in
the provision of neuropsychiatry services. The rate of referral in some
areas was as low as 2 per 100 000 population, and estimates of referral
below 20 per 100 000 have been proposed to represent an unmet local need
for neuropsychiatry services.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` This study once again
found evidence that there continues to be very significant unmet need in
neuropsychiatry within London, despite the presence of a number of
well-recognised neuropsychiatry services. There appears to be very
little progress in meeting neuropsychiatric need in recent
years.\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.k)` Barriers to commissioning, which may be
responsible for the current state of affairs and are proving to be
persistent, need to be explored.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`

.. _S6:

Continued lack of equitable care
--------------------------------

This survey continued to find significant variation in the number of
patients accessing neuropsychiatry services in the different London
areas served by different PCTs. Earlier audits by tertiary referral
centres for neuropsychiatry had identified a significant variation in
service usage from different areas. A south London study showed up to 34
times' variation in neuropsychiatry cases per 100 000 population,
ranging from 0.910 to 30.8.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` A north London audit also
discovered variation, although on a slightly smaller scale ranging from
1.7 to 25, which amounted to almost 15 times' variation between the
highest and lowest referring boroughs or counties.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)`

Whereas these previous studies took a provider-facing approach, our
study examined variation in service usage from both secondary and
tertiary provider perspectives as well as local and specialist
commissioner perspectives. It revealed a more acute variation in
neuropsychiatry provision in London. There was approximately 25-fold
variation across boroughs for head-injury-related admission for
neuropsychiatric rehabilitation. This is similar to the variations noted
above. This is in spite of the relatively homogeneous ‘caseness’ for
acquired head injury, a relatively well-established service provision
across London and the specialist commissioning panel dedicated to brain
injury rehabilitation. Variability for out-patient neuropsychiatry
provision was much more marked. The level of variability of provision in
different areas of London cannot be explained by differences in
demographics, which at best can explain a small degree of variation in a
relatively small geographical area. This study shows that there is lack
of equitable access to neuropsychiatry care in different parts of London
that requires careful exploration and explanation.

.. _S7:

Reasons for variability and inadequate provision
------------------------------------------------

This study concurs with the findings from the other two London studies
that geographical distance from neuropsychiatry centres does adversely
affect service usage. However, it indicates that there are other factors
that contribute to this variability, given that the geographical
distance from a centre of neuropsychiatric provision in London is not
excessive.

We hypothesise that factors that present as barriers to care in
neuropsychiatry include contractual arrangements, funding streams,
awareness of neuropsychiatry among commissioners and providers, and
national strategic drivers which have an impact on service provision.
Areas local to tertiary or national neuropsychiatric services may have
better communication with commissioners to overcome these barriers and
more favourable contractual arrangements to minimise barriers to funding
approval, compared with services located at a distance. Local mental
health commissioners were more aware of neuropsychiatry as a discipline,
its boundaries, funding streams and local needs when they were working
in areas in close proximity to tertiary or national service provider. We
also found that, in areas located in close proximity to neuropsychiatry
centres, ‘secondary’ mental healthcare was sometimes provided by the
same provider as the neuropsychiatry service, which may have minimised
funding and pathway barriers.

.. _S8:

Limitations
-----------

The study was carried out within the area of Greater London, which may
raise concerns about generalisability of the data to the rest of the UK.
London traditionally has a better level of neuropsychiatry service
provision and has well-known services that received referrals from
outside London. Data from previous studies\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.k)` show
that the provision of neuropsychiatry services outside London is not as
good and the variability and unmet need is likely to be even more acute.
Hence, the data from this study are pertinent to the whole of the UK and
any solutions to deal with unmet need and variability should be
applicable country wide. Indeed, given that a similar state of affairs
has been reported anecdotally elsewhere in Europe,\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` we
believe the lessons learnt from this work are global.

The study looked into commissioning and provision from the mental health
perspective and incorporated neurorehabilitation specialist
commissioning. However, neuropsychiatry services are located at the
interface of neurology and psychiatry and therefore the study may have
failed to capture any neuropsychiatry service provisions that were
embedded within acute healthcare setting. However, evidence of huge
variability, unmet need and the fact that some boroughs had no local
neuropsychiatric commissioning arrangements reasonably close to areas of
neuropsychiatric service provision strongly suggests that provision for
neuropsychiatry in London remains inequitable and inadequate.

The study surveyed service providers and commissioners and can only
comment on the responders' understanding, knowledge and perception of
how services were aligned, and provides proxy measures as opposed to
real ones. The participants' responses might be affected owing to a lack
of coherent understanding around caseness in neuropsychiatry. We have
proposed a clearer definition of what constitutes a neuropsychiatric
condition in Box 2 in the accompanying paper,\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` and have
defined the threshold criteria for when a referral should be made to a
neuropsychiatric service for such conditions in `Box 1 <#box1>`__ in
this paper. In our opinion, a combination of a clear definition of
neuropsychiatric condition and the threshold criteria will help resolve
the issue of caseness.

This study provides further evidence of a continuing unmet need,
significant variability of provision and lack of consistent service
models and pathways in neuropsychiatry in the Greater London area. We
believe this is representative of the situation in the rest of the UK,
where the problem may be even worse given that London has a higher level
of neuropsychiatric service provision with a few regional and national
centres. The reasons for such variability need to be explored and
minimised. Barriers to commissioning and provision\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` need
to be explored and removed. A hub-and-spoke model of neuropsychiatry
provision closely allied with neurosciences centres\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`
should be adopted widely to bring consistency of pathways. National
commissioning with a mandate for abolishing undesirable variability and
unmet need is the real solution, but one that is not without significant
challenges.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.q.

.. [1]
   **Niruj Agrawal** MBBS, MD, MSc, Dip CBT, FRCPsych, Consultant
   Neuropsychiatrist and Honorary Senior Lecturer, St George's Hospital,
   London, UK; **Rahul Bhattacharya** MBBS, DPM, MSc, MRCPsych,
   Consultant Psychiatrist, East London NHS Foundation Trust, Honorary
   Clinical Senior Lecturer, Barts and the London School of Medicine and
   Dentistry, London; **Hugh Rickards** MD, FRCPsych, Consultant in
   Neuropsychiatry, Honorary Reader in Neuropsychiatry, Department of
   Neuropsychiatry, University of Birmingham.
