=================================================================================================
Learning about Emotions in Illness: Integrating Psychotherapeutic Teaching into Medical Education
=================================================================================================



Paramabandhu Groves [1]_

:date: 2015-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 150f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

Reading *Learning about Emotions in Illness*, I found myself reflecting
on my emotional response to the book – I was moved, and surprised at
being moved. Partly, it reminded me of my own time as a medical student
participating in the student psychotherapy scheme, which gave me my
first opportunity of being useful as a trainee doctor, as opposed to
being someone in the way. The supervision group was a wonderful and
constant haven in which to reflect within the busyness and ever-changing
landscape of medical training. Partly, I was simply moved by some of the
accounts of people who as students had participated in either of the
schemes described in the book, as they grappled with their own and their
patients’ emotional responses, especially to physical illness.

The book describes two approaches aimed at helping students learn how
psychotherapeutic understanding can help them with their patients: the
student psychotherapy scheme and student Balint groups. There are
accounts of the scheme both from its supervisors and from participants,
and there is also a chapter on research into the two schemes. The
University College London student psychotherapy scheme has a long
pedigree, having run for over 50 years and surviving various
organisational changes. It has spawned other schemes such as in Bristol
and Heidelberg. The scheme allows medical students to take on a patient
for psychotherapy for a period of about a year. At its inception,
allowing untrained students to practise psychotherapy was an audacious
move. However, patients are carefully selected and the process is well
supervised, and studies seem to indicate that patients have a good
outcome. For students, the scheme often leaves an indelible mark, with a
number of people citing it as a highlight of their medical training.

By its nature the psychotherapy scheme can only take on a limited number
of students, and numbers wanting to participate outstrip the available
places. Modified student Balint groups were introduced at University
College London as an alternative. These meet in small groups for a
period of 11 weeks and are used to reflect on students’ emotional
responses to patients they have seen, to help foster, in Balint’s terms,
a patient-centred rather than an illness-centred approach.

Participants in the scheme seem more likely to become psychiatrists – a
point to be noted given the recruitment shortage. However, the real
value of these schemes is in helping to develop doctors who can tolerate
difficult emotions that arise in patient–doctor interactions and to be
alive to the often unspoken emotions that our patients communicate. In
other words, regardless of specialty, to make better doctors.

.. [1]
   **Paramabandhu Groves** is a consultant psychiatrist at Islington
   Specialist Alcohol Treatment Service, Camden and Islington NHS
   Foundation Trust, London, UK, email: paramabandhu.groves@candi.nhs.uk
