========================================================================
Understanding Medical Education: Evidence, Theory and Practice (2nd edn)
========================================================================



Brian Lunn [1]_

:date: 2015-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 103f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

Why should a jobbing psychiatrist be interested in a medical education
textbook? Simply put, it is that we have shifted from an era of ‘See
one, do one, teach one’ to one where an evidence base is available for
education, not just for treatments. This is particularly the case for
medical education, where the need to evidence pedagogic practice for
regulators has been a priority for many years and has driven research to
support and drive practice. This is an increasingly important issue. The
General Medical Council, in *Recognition and Approval of Trainers*, has
set out the standards it requires for clinicians to be trainers, with an
implementation date of 31 July 2016, and a similar standardised approval
process is well underway for undergraduate teaching.

*Understanding Medical Education* is a good place to start for those
wishing to build their knowledge of the evidence base to inform their
teaching. With a strong cast of the ‘usual suspects’ in the field, it
delivers a broad range of chapters covering the breadth of educational
topics. The book is set out in themed sections allowing selection of
topics of interest. For the determined reader, read sequentially they
build from basic foundations through strategy and assessment to research
and finally, a ‘Staff and Students’ section that covers issues related
to learners and teachers. This all finishes with an excellent chapter on
educational leadership.

This should not be seen as a book targeted at the academic community.
Even though one or two chapters may not affect most doctors’ teaching
practice (e.g. the chapter on curriculum design), they will nonetheless
enhance understanding of the choices that went into learning and
teaching strategies.

So at the end of this, a reasonable question might be, ‘Is it worth my
time buying/borrowing this book?’ If you already have a strong
background in pedagogic theory, then it gives up-to-date monographs
collected together in one place but perhaps nothing new, so it may be
one you borrow rather than buy (and this is not a criticism). If you are
developing your knowledge or wish a reference to support your teaching,
whether undergraduate or postgraduate, then the answer is indubitably
‘Yes.’

.. [1]
   **Brian Lunn** is Professor of Medical Education, School of Medical
   Education, Newcastle University, UK, email:
   brian.lunn@newcastle.ac.uk
