===========================
The methamphetamine problem
===========================
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: Commentary on … Psychiatric morbidity and socio-occupational dysfunction in residents of a drug rehabilitation centre\ `† <#fn1>`__
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Niall Galbraith

:Correspondence: Niall Galbraith (n.galbraith@wlv.ac.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   This paper introduces the reader to the characteristics of
   methamphetamine. Explored within are the drug's effects on those who
   consume it as well as the history and prevalence of its use. The
   highly addictive nature of methamphetamine is compounded by its
   affordability and the ease with which it is produced, with North
   America and East Asia having become established as heartlands for
   both consumption and manufacture. The paper discusses recent cultural
   depictions of the drug and also the role that mental health
   professionals may take in designing and delivering interventions to
   treat methamphetamine addiction.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _S1:

The nature of methamphetamine
=============================

Methamphetamine (‘meth’) is a stimulant which increases levels of
monoamines (particularly dopamine, but also noradrenaline and serotonin)
in the central nervous system. Its pharmacological effects occur via a
number of neurochemical processes, including disruption of
vesicular\ :sup:`1` and transporter\ :sup:`2` functioning, through the
inhibition of monoamine oxidase\ :sup:`3` and the facilitation of
tyrosine hydroxylase.\ :sup:`4` Like other stimulants, such as cocaine
and amphetamine, it produces feelings of euphoria, alertness and
increased energy. Unlike cocaine though, a single dose of
methamphetamine sustains these effects for many hours. Methamphetamine
can be smoked, snorted, injected or swallowed. The psychological effects
of long-term use include hallucinations and delusions, depression,
suicidality and aggression.\ :sup:`5` Withdrawal may exacerbate these
symptoms, while also leading to fatigue and intense craving.\ :sup:`6`
Long-term health effects are considerable, and include neural damage and
associated cognitive impairment,\ :sup:`7` cardiovascular
damage,\ :sup:`8` dental disease\ :sup:`9` and stroke.\ :sup:`10` The
drug is also associated with risky sexual behaviour, resulting in a high
prevalence of sexually transmitted disease.\ :sup:`11` Methamphetamine
is also noted for its addictiveness. Evidence shows that addiction
occurs more rapidly than with cocaine\ :sup:`12` and that unlike with
amphetamine, methamphetamine-seeking behaviour may persist even when
tolerance is reached.\ :sup:`13` The trajectory of methamphetamine use
over a 10-year period has been found to resemble that of heroin more so
than that of cocaine.\ :sup:`14` Methamphetamine is also associated with
criminality\ :sup:`15` and social decline.\ :sup:`16` It therefore
represents a major public health, social and political dilemma.

.. _S2:

Who uses methamphetamine and where?
===================================

Across the world, methamphetamine use as a recreational drug has
increased significantly since the 1990s, and it is reported as the
second most widely misused substance, exceeded only by
cannabis.\ :sup:`17` In the USA during the 1960s and 1970s,
methamphetamine was produced and trafficked mainly by motorcycle gangs,
mostly in California.\ :sup:`18` Patrons were typically White, male,
blue-collar workers, but the drug has since become popular among
white-collar workers, students, ethnic minorities and women,\ :sup:`19`
and manufacturing has spread to Midwestern states.\ :sup:`20` One of the
principal factors in its rise is the ease with which it can be
manufactured. The chemicals necessary for its production (e.g.
methylamine, ephedrine or pseudoephedrine) are relatively easy to
obtain, as is the equipment required for the ‘cooking’ process. This has
led to a cottage industry in methamphetamine production, with home-based
laboratories being commonly uncovered by law enforcement agencies in the
USA\ :sup:`21` and in other parts of the world, particularly in
Asia.\ :sup:`22` In addition to the home lab phenomenon, there exist
industrial producers of methamphetamine, who manufacture and transport
large quantities of the drug.\ :sup:`23` In North America, large-scale
production occurs in both Mexico and Canada and the product is then
brought across the border for sale within the USA. In the USA itself,
4.7% of respondents to a national survey admit to lifetime use of
methamphetamine.\ :sup:`24`

Data from Asia also indicate high levels of use. Japan has a long
history of misuse, dating back to the 1940s,\ :sup:`23` when military
stocks of methamphetamine flooded the market, giving rise to high
incidence of misuse among young people. A second epidemic occurred in
the 1970s, when use soared among blue-collar workers. This crisis has
now stabilised and Japan's methamphetamine users now represent an aging
population. Since the 1990s, the popularity of methamphetamine has
spread to other East Asian countries. By 2007, 63% of worldwide
methamphetamine seizures occurred within the Southeast Asian region, and
it is estimated that half of the world's methamphetamine users are found
there.\ :sup:`25` The Mekong region of Myanmar, close to the border of
Thailand and China, is identified as Asia's most prolific production
centre for methamphetamine. From there the drug is transported across
the borders for sale in neighbouring countries.\ :sup:`25` In Myanmar,
it is usually pressed into pill form, known colloquially as yaba (‘crazy
medicine’). Thailand has suffered its own epidemic, with methamphetamine
treatment admissions rising dramatically in the late 1990s,\ :sup:`26`
but evidence of increasing methamphetamine use is also found in Brunei,
Laos, the Philippines\ :sup:`22` and Cambodia.\ :sup:`27`

In Europe, the meth epidemic has not yet arrived, perhaps because there
is already a congested market for stimulant drugs, although the Czech
Republic and to a lesser extent Slovakia have a history of high
methamphetamine use.\ :sup:`28` In Australia, use has increased in
recent years but not dramatically.\ :sup:`29` In South Africa, the past
decade has seen a significant increase in treatment admissions for
methamphetamine.\ :sup:`30` This increase in methamphetamine use is
positively associated with risk-taking sexual behaviour,\ :sup:`31`
which if unchecked may in turn exacerbate an already urgent HIV
epidemic.

.. _S3:

Cultural depictions of methamphetamine
======================================

The emergence of methamphetamine as one of the most widely used
recreational drugs is associated with its rise in the media.
Methamphetamine has become a cultural phenomenon, in much the same way
that heroin, MDMA (contracted from 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine;
ecstasy) and cannabis had become popularised already. The most obvious
cultural reference to methamphetamine is in the hugely successful
American drama series *Breaking Bad*. This drama describes the exploits
of a terminally ill chemistry teacher who chooses to become a
manufacturer and then seller of methamphetamine, initially to guarantee
financial security for his family after his death. The series focuses on
the corruption of the main character and the erosion of his
relationships with those close to him. What is notable about the series
though is that the problem of devastating effects of methamphetamine on
individuals and communities occupies only a minor part in the story. The
series has done much to publicise the existence of methamphetamine to
households across the world, but in not fully exploring its sinister
effects (other than the moral degeneration of those who manufacture it),
the series runs the risk of sanitising or normalising this destructive
drug to the wider society.

At the other extreme, also in the USA, there has been a widely
publicised campaign to highlight the unpleasant physical effects of
methamphetamine addiction. The ‘Faces of Meth’ project\ :sup:`32`
exposes police custody photographs of users, showing images of the same
individual at different points in time, so as to longitudinally
chronicle the ravages of the drug on physical appearance. These before
and after photos – which reveal apparently common features of long-term
methamphetamine use: skin damage (caused by obsessive picking) and
dental ill health (or ‘meth mouth’ as it is colloquially
known)\ :sup:`33` – are designed to shock and appal observers. The
effectiveness of the scheme is difficult to assess due to the absence of
trials, however, the use of fear and shock is not always an effective
deterrent in health campaigns and is generally regarded as inferior to
positive reinforcement approaches.\ :sup:`34`

The Faces of Meth-type approach has come under criticism from Naomi
Murakawa,\ :sup:`35` who argues that its focus on the visual effects of
methamphetamine, mostly in White methamphetamine users, represents a
type of social panic. Murakawa argues that historically, drug panics in
the USA have been constructed in line with racial prejudices (e.g.
Chinese-focused opium scares, Mexican-focused cannabis scares and
Black-focused crack scares). Methamphetamine addiction is often
described along racial lines as a ‘White trash’ phenomenon. Murakawa
claims that decayed or missing teeth mark prevailing fears over the
decline in White social status, as traditional representations of
American so-called ‘White trash’ typically depict poor dental health as
a visual indicator of lower class.

Given the prevalence of methamphetamine use across the globe,
considerable effort has been put into designing effective treatment
programmes for its users. Broadly speaking, these interventions are
pharmacological, psychosocial or community-based prevention approaches.
The evidence in favour of pharmacological treatments is mixed, although
some promising findings with modafinil, bupropion and naltrexone have
been reported.\ :sup:`36` Psychosocial interventions have proved
effective in the short term, but more evidence is needed to demonstrate
long-term benefits.\ :sup:`37` Community-based prevention schemes have
also shown evidence of benefit.\ :sup:`38` The promise shown by such
interventions is encouraging, given the addictiveness of
methamphetamine, the intensity and duration of cravings experienced by
those who go through withdrawal\ :sup:`6` and also the psychological
comorbidity. Interestingly for mental health professionals, there is
evidence that the cost-effectiveness of treatment\ :sup:`39` and
prevention\ :sup:`38` approaches may compare favourably with
alternatives, such as, for example, interventions by law enforcement to
disrupt the supply of the precursor chemicals needed for methamphetamine
production.\ :sup:`40` Furthermore, given the advance of this drug
across Asia and North America and its potential for expansion across
thus far untapped markets (e.g. Europe and Africa), the further
development of robust treatment programmes for the future is urgently
needed.

.. [1]
   **Niall Galbraith** is Senior Lecturer in Psychology, University of
   Wolverhampton, West Midlands, UK.
