==================================================================================================
The changing face(book) of psychiatry: can we justify ‘following’ patients' social media activity?
==================================================================================================

Chantal Cox-GeorgeCorrespondence to Chantal Cox-George
(cc0172@my.bristol.ac.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   Individuals with mental health issues may post information on social
   networking sites that can provide an insight into their mental health
   status. It could be argued that doctors (and specifically
   psychiatrists) should understand the way in which social media is
   used by their patients to gain a better insight into their illnesses.
   However, choosing to actively monitor a patient's social media
   activity raises important questions about the way in which medical
   students, qualified clinicians and other healthcare professionals
   obtain information about patients. While this may be framed as a mere
   form of ‘collateral history-taking’, there are obvious practical and
   ethical problems with doing so. Here, a case is made against
   monitoring the social media activity of patients involved with
   psychiatric services.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In 2013, nearly one in four people worldwide actively used social
networking sites, a statistic predicted to increase rapidly throughout
this decade.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Given that so many people are using social
networking sites, it may be no surprise to find that many people with
mental health issues have a social media presence too. For example,
there are a plethora of ‘pro-ana’ (pro-anorexia) websites, blogs and
Facebook groups in existence for individuals with eating disorders.
These have proven to have both therapeutic and potentially dangerous
effects on illness behaviour.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.c)`

People with mental illness may post information online that provides an
insight into their current mental health. If this is the case, then
doctors (and specifically psychiatrists) should understand the way in
which social media is used by patients as it may allow them to gain a
better insight and, subsequently, provide better care.

To explore these premises, I consider the act of looking at a patient's
Facebook page, Twitter activity or personal blog as merely another form
of ‘collateral history-taking’. Focusing specifically on the Facebook
‘status update’ – a way in which individuals may post their current
thoughts and feelings (with a time and date stamp) – I ask whether this
is a way to access a patient's mental state in real time. Given that the
majority of Facebook profiles are public (meaning that the profile
owners have chosen not to opt into privacy settings), any updates posted
are available to not only Facebook ‘friends’ but also others within the
person's associated ‘networks’ and those outside, for instance
healthcare professionals.

A study carried out in the USA aimed to assess the prevalence of college
students' disclosures of depression symptoms on
Facebook.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` Despite the potential for stigma surrounding
mental health symptoms or diagnoses, a quarter of profiles observed
publicly displayed depression references. However, should we take this
statistic seriously? We may, wrongly, be talking about an
overrepresented population. It might be that patients with particular
mental health conditions or certain personality types are more likely
than others to frequent the likes of Facebook, Twitter and other forms
of social media more often. It has been suggested that there may even be
a correlation between excessive internet use and social anxiety,
depression and introversion.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` Furthermore, we cannot be
sure that the information posted in an update is accurate. Creating a
social media profile allows profile owners to be selective about the
aspects of their identity they wish to display and those they wish to
avoid putting into focus. The ‘online disinhibition
effect’\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` states that when people are online, they tend to
disclose more about themselves or act out more intensely or frequently
than they would in person. This suggests that we should exercise a
degree of caution when considering information posted online.

Nonetheless, even if the information posted online by individuals with
mental health issues is accurate, there appears to be a ‘fine line’
between monitoring and being meddlesome. Once a doctor has demonstrated
that their actions would be of benefit to the patient, the most pressing
question to consider next is whether they should ask the patient for
their consent. The Human Rights Act 1998 states that everyone ‘has a
right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his
correspondence’. This applies even if seeking a patient's consent will
have an effect on their future activity online. The obvious response to
this is that the information has already been made public, and so
patients have waived any rights that they had to privacy. Yet, a survey
of 492 bloggers demonstrated that people often disclose information
online with a particular audience and time period in mind, even though
the information may then become broadly available for an indefinite
period.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` Medical students and qualified clinicians should
be aware that accessing a patient's social networking profile through
covert and unauthorised means may form a basis, at least in the
patient's opinion, for the argument that they have infringed upon their
patient's private life.

Finally, if we proceed without consent and the patient finds out, there
may be serious effects on the psychotherapeutic relationship: a
relationship based on the active engagement of the patient which can no
longer happen if the patient does not trust the healthcare professional.
This is likely to have implications for the patient's health. There is
an implicit understanding that a patient's trust in their doctor is
unconditional. In response to the new dilemmas that may arise in
clinical practice due to the rise of social media use by both patients
and clinicians alike, the General Medical Council has reiterated the
importance of trust not only in a doctor's clinical practice but also in
their online behaviour.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`

If a psychiatrist takes it upon themselves to do further research on
their patient online and finds conflicting information, it is difficult
to see how this could be used without challenging the patient's
narrative. This is further complicated by the question of what to do
with any new discoveries about the patient that may surface. Options for
the psychiatrist may include: documenting new information in the
patient's notes, conferring with colleagues, telling the other members
of the multidisciplinary team involved in the patient's care, or
disregarding what they have seen for fear of future repercussions. It
is, however, important to consider whether the psychiatrist has a duty
of care to act on information of which they would have otherwise been
unaware.

While not specifically social media, the internet has been used as part
of risk assessment in accident and emergency settings before. The
information obtained from a Google search proved to be crucial in a
doctor's decision to classify a patient as high- rather than low-risk
for future suicidal intention.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` However, it would be a
slippery slope to suggest that one success justifies following the
social media activity of all of our patients. Whereas in theory actively
looking at a patient's social media profile might be advantageous, in
reality it is unethical (particularly without consent). If doctors plan
to use any information found for treatment, then they will have to
disclose their intentions to patients before they do so.

I would like to thank Dr Angelika Luerhs for her support while
researching this topic.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

.. [1]
   **Chantal Cox-George** is a medical student, University of Bristol,
   Bristol, UK.
