=========================================================================================================================================================
Age inclusive services or separate old age and working age services? A historical analysis from the formative years of old age psychiatry *c.*\ 1940–1989
=========================================================================================================================================================



Claire HiltonCorrespondence to: Claire Hilton (claire.hilton@nhs.net)
 [1]_

:date: 2015-4

:Abstract:
   The Equality Act 2010 made it unlawful to discriminate in the
   provision of services on the grounds of age. This legislation is open
   to interpretation, but it is affecting the way older people’s
   services are defined and provided. Historical evidence indicates
   that, since the 1940s, apart from psychiatrists working in dedicated
   old age services, most were unenthusiastic about working with
   mentally unwell older people and unsupportive of those who chose to
   do so. A historical analysis might shed light on current dilemmas
   about ‘all age’ or ‘old age’ services and inform decision-making on
   future mental health services.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Equality Act 2010\ :sup:`1` made it unlawful to discriminate in the
provision of services on the grounds of chronological age, but precisely
how the Act can be brought into effect to produce appropriate services
for older people is unclear. The Act has led to reconsideration of
whether dedicated services for older people, or ‘all age’ services, are
clinically most appropriate and legal, and to the Royal College of
Psychiatrists Old Age Faculty proposing new criteria to define their
specialty.\ :sup:`2` Key themes in public health policy and practice
recur and are re-addressed by each generation.\ :sup:`3` Some
reiteration of themes is inevitable and sensible in the context of
material changes in society and new medical discoveries. But attitudes
in society can be slow to change and some deep-seated cultural beliefs
endure, which, although not reproduced identically at different times,
provide antecedents of public resistance to health innovation.
Historical analysis can help clarify this process\ :sup:`4` and may
facilitate rational decision-making. This is particularly important for
new policies as ‘policy makers are constrained from behaving rationally
in many ways’: they, like the rest of society, are not value-free and
they are faced with influences of past policy that may restrict
options.\ :sup:`5` This paper derives from a historical study concerning
the formative years of the specialty of old age psychiatry until it was
recognised by the Department of Health in 1989. It would be difficult to
undertake a reflective historical analysis of the years 1990–2014,
partly because of its recency and also because of methodological
difficulties such as accessing government documents under the ‘30 year
rule’. Historical evidence from the formative years may nevertheless
help inform current decision-making on planning mental health services
for older people.

.. _S1:

The very beginning: the 1940s
=============================

There was little enthusiasm for working specifically with older mentally
ill people in the 1940s: ‘After all, they had to consider the medical
personnel as well as the patients’\ :sup:`6` one psychiatrist commented
at a psychiatry conference. Geriatric medicine was new, and contrary to
cultural beliefs that emphasised inevitable decline in old age, the
early geriatricians demonstrated that age-appropriate specialist
treatment could reverse much physical impairment.\ :sup:`7` Birth rates
had been falling and infant mortality increased at the beginning of the
Second World War.\ :sup:`8` Population projections were that one in six
of the population would be of pensionable age by 1961. Welfare planners
were not to know that this was a significant overestimate. The
government prioritised supporting families and young children and
William Beveridge’s plan for the welfare state gave older people less
priority.\ :sup:`9`

Joseph Sheldon’s study of older people noted their ‘mental vigour and
”guts’”, and concluded that ‘living in the environment they are used to,
of having something to do, and of being still able to feel necessary to
the world’ were important for their well-being.\ :sup:`10` This was an
innovative message for health and social care authorities, who tended to
focus on the minority who needed intense support, rather than the well
majority. Such evidence challenged widespread negative
assumptions,\ :sup:`11` including in the medical profession that tended
to neglect mentally ill older people.\ :sup:`12`

.. _S2:

The first old age psychiatry services *c.*\ 1950–*c.*\ 1970
===========================================================

In the 1950s, dedicated old age services were almost nonexistent. A
report in the *Guardian* commented that mental hospitals ‘should be
regarded as treatment centres for the mentally ill and not as depositing
grounds for the senile for whom nothing can be done’.\ :sup:`13` The
very presence of older people in mental hospitals was deemed, by some
psychiatrists, to undermine care for those ‘more in need of active
treatment, having to be denied admission’,\ :sup:`14` i.e. younger
people. Brice Pitt (later professor of old age psychiatry) said: ‘The
hospital... was like a castle, a good registrar would fend off the
elderly, as those who got in were bound to stay, bound to be dumped by
their family’.\ :sup:`15`

Once admitted, older people mainly by-passed the assessment wards and
were admitted directly to long-stay back wards.\ :sup:`16` Potentially
reversible physical and psychiatric disorders often remained
undiagnosed.\ :sup:`17` Grudging medical attention given to older
people\ :sup:`18` contrasted with that given to younger people on
forward-looking wards that became hotbeds of intervention with new
treatments\ :sup:`19` and rehabilitation.\ :sup:`20` Emil Kraepelin’s
influential opinion prevailed: most old age psychiatric disorder was
irreversible senile dementia,\ :sup:`21,22` the ‘result of the natural
wear and tear of the body’.\ :sup:`23` This stereotypical view of the
inevitability of decline undermined proactive approaches to treatment.
Evidence from geriatric medicine about treatment, rehabilitation and
support for families\ :sup:`24` had not permeated mental hospital
practice. Psychiatrists working across all ages offered little to older
people.

In the early 1950s, at Crichton Royal Hospital, Dumfries, rather than
admitting older people directly to back wards, in order to improve
outcome, all patients regardless of age began to be admitted to acute
admission wards. This all age approach failed: the admission wards
filled with older people. Their needs were different: different
presentations of the same illnesses, different sensitivities to
medication, slower rehabilitation and negative staff expectations of
recovery could undermine treatment. Also, mixing older, frail, restless
and confused people with acutely disturbed younger people was not
conducive to safety or well-being.\ :sup:`16,25` In response, at
Crichton Royal in 1958, Ronald (Sam) Robinson established a dedicated
comprehensive old age psychiatry service, a successful prototype for
others to emulate.\ :sup:`26`

In 1959, the medical committee at the Bethlem-Maudsley psychiatric
teaching hospital in south London analysed recent publications about the
needs of older people (see, for example, National Old People’s Welfare
Coucil\ :sup:`27`). Several consultants were consulted in this analysis,
but Felix Post, the only consultant working specifically with older
people, was not.\ :sup:`28` Reasons were not given, but perhaps an old
age psychiatrist’s opinion was not considered relevant, implying that
the really important clinicians worked with younger people. This
mirrored leaving out geriatricians from a British Medical Association
committee in 1954 when planning geriatric services\ :sup:`29` and later
events at the Royal College of Psychiatrists.\ :sup:`30` The
Bethlem-Maudsley committee concluded that better services for older
people would relieve ‘pressure caused by aged and infirm people’ in
mental hospitals: this would give more scope for treating younger
patients. Post repeatedly tried to improve services for his patients
during the 1950s and 1960s, an impossible challenge for a lone
psychiatrist advocating for older people. The Bethlem-Maudsley’s
prioritisation of younger people and ambivalence towards older people
persisted. It included proposals to reduce beds in the old age wards and
re-designate them to other departments,\ :sup:`31` and seemed to
perpetuate an inferior share of resources for older people.

Elsewhere, there was also ambivalence among general psychiatrists
towards treating older people. At Claybury Hospital, Essex, in 1966,
some general consultants wanted to keep their older patients with
treatable conditions, but hand over those thought to be incurable: ‘the
general psychiatrists were dead keen to get us to take their old
schizophrenics’ recollected Pitt. Others wanted to keep their caseload
of older people perceived as needing little clinical input: it
conveniently boosted their numbers.

In all age services, where no old age psychiatrist effectively advocated
for older people, they were treated inequitably; similar happened at
policy level. For example, the Worcester Development Project, a
feasibility study of comprehensive community and district general
hospital mental health services to replace a local psychiatric hospital,
did not automatically include older people.\ :sup:`32` In Northern
Ireland, in 1970, the Ministry commented that older people ‘often have
to go through the general admission unit, to the distress of younger
patients and the detriment of the service’.\ :sup:`33` It did not
mention that older people might be distressed by younger patients, or
that the NHS was meant to be universal.

.. _S3:

Old age services begin to increase: 1970s
=========================================

In the 1970s, there was a tendency to plan for younger before older
mentally ill people. *Hospital Services for the Mentally Ill*, in 1971,
mentioned ‘psycho-geriatric’ assessment but did ‘not deal with services
for elderly patients whose mental illness symptoms are the result of
ageing or physical disease or both’. It promised further
guidance.\ :sup:`34` The mental health charity MIND and the Royal
College of Psychiatrists were disappointed by the
exclusion.\ :sup:`35,36` Not mentioning older people did not necessarily
exclude them, but left ambiguities rather than a sense of direction and
responsibility for provision. It conveyed that their particular needs
were unimportant and discouraged the development of specific services,
despite increasing clinical evidence of benefits from active
interventions.\ :sup:`37,38`

A geriatrician noted that psychiatric hospitals were becoming ‘silted
up’ with older mentally ill people, at least partly because
psychiatrists ‘do not wish to treat’ them.\ :sup:`39` Tony Whitehead, an
old age psychiatrist, commented that psychiatrists should stop
‘pretending that the old were not their concern’.\ :sup:`40` The logical
course to avoid competing with younger people was to provide dedicated,
resourced services.\ :sup:`41` In 1972, the Department of Health and
Social Security’s (DHSS) *Services for Mental Illness Related to Old
Age*, based on recent clinical experience in a few places, recommended
appointing a psychiatrist with ‘special responsibility’ for older people
in each health authority catchment area.\ :sup:`42` Progress was
slow.\ :sup:`43` The DHSS acknowledged that ‘old people are almost
inevitably neglected among the competing demands of acute work with
younger people’\ :sup:`44,45` and, in 1976, reiterated the need for ‘at
least one consultant in each district’ to lead clinically and to develop
services for older people.\ :sup:`46`

The Royal College of Physicians of London suggested reasons for
underprovision of dedicated services for geriatric medicine that were
equally applicable to old age psychiatry. They included the need for
adequate resources and ‘fundamental changes in society’s attitude to old
people’.\ :sup:`47` The general psychiatric leadership of the Royal
College of Psychiatrists made disparaging comments about old age
psychiatry: it might create ‘a vacuum for unsuitably qualified people’
and ‘It was necessary to preserve standards and maintain some
unity’.\ :sup:`48` These comments implied their view that
‘psychogeriatrics is a dead end job for which no psychiatrist in his
right mind applies’.\ :sup:`49` Their stereotypical attitudes revealed
prejudices about working with older people.

Older people accumulated in mental hospitals. In 1978, in England and
Wales, people over 75 years old occupied 20 000 mental hospital beds
(25%),\ :sup:`50` but that age group accounted for only 5.6% of the
total population.\ :sup:`51` To some degree, the need for institutional
care reflected age-related degenerative disorders and the needs of
ageing long-stay patients with illnesses dating back many years. Other
factors affecting bed use were less justifiable: clinically unnecessary
admissions; low expectations of recovery; patients remaining in hospital
when they no longer required treatment and they could have been better
supported elsewhere; limited provision of domiciliary services and
community residential care; unsupported families being unable to cope
with the care of older people;\ :sup:`52` and potentially curable
conditions such as depression remaining undiagnosed.\ :sup:`53` In
addition, they were given less opportunity than younger people for
community and rehabilitation services, probably at least partly related
to their perceived low economic value,\ :sup:`54` a yardstick of success
in Western society.

.. _S4:

Into the 1980s
==============

Attitudes to illness and disability in old age did not generally
improve, at least not sufficiently to influence service provision
widely. A joint geriatric, psychiatric and nursing report in 1987 noted
that ‘the low worth of old people and their therapeutic potential still
persist despite the dramatic evidence to the contrary’.\ :sup:`55`
Attitudes outside old age specialties were often derisory, in contrast
to the rewarding nature of the work experienced by staff doing the
job.\ :sup:`56,57` A lecturer at a nursing conference in 1982 commented:
‘the thought of being permanently posted to a psychogeriatric ward fills
newly qualified nurses with dread’.\ :sup:`58` The president of the
Royal College of Psychiatrists, Thomas Bewley, commented: ‘it was quite
difficult to discover what percentage of a psychiatrist’s sessions were
spent on caring for old people, part of the problem being that the
general psychiatrist might have fears about being labelled as a
psychogeriatrician’.\ :sup:`59`

In some places, general psychiatrists were unwilling to share resources
with those taking responsibility for older people;\ :sup:`60` resources
might have been even less for older people if no one was specifically
advocating for them. For example, the admired old age psychiatric
service at Redruth, Cornwall, which hosted numerous visiting
dignitaries, including Prime Minister Edward Heath and teams from
abroad, consistently faced ‘half-hearted understanding rather than
fervent support’ from the local general psychiatrists.\ :sup:`61` The
precise level of resources was probably less important than local
colleagues’ willingness to offer a commensurate share of existing
resources. The problem of providing adequately for older people meant
that old age psychiatrists’ roles included: ‘occasional militancy... to
gain a fair share of scant resources, to put them to best use, to make
do with too little while wheeling, dealing, and fighting for
more’.\ :sup:`62` As in earlier decades, meetings about old age
psychiatry service development took place without old age psychiatrists
and risked overlooking older people’s mental illnesses.\ :sup:`63,64`

There were few formal studies comparing clinical effectiveness of old
age and all age psychiatric services. One study conducted in 1985/6
compared ‘specialised’ and ‘non-specialised’ services treating older
people with mental illness. Despite difficulties in the sampling method,
which were likely to minimise differences, it indicated outcomes ‘in
favour of the specialised services’, such as for teaching, research and
having beds in general hospitals rather than in psychiatric
hospitals,\ :sup:`65` suggesting that dedicated services provided more
forward-thinking services. Methodologically ideal randomised studies
were lacking, and even well-designed studies risked creating artificial
environments of case selection, staffing levels and
case-load.\ :sup:`66` Comparative studies often did not state clinical
outcomes,\ :sup:`67` although some noted better outcomes for depression
treated by old age services.\ :sup:`68` Better outcomes could irritate
colleagues of equal status who do not like to be told by others that
they can do the job better: challenges to professional skills are linked
with ambivalence towards emerging new specialties,\ :sup:`69` risking
undermining developments.

General practitioners (GPs) mentioned advantages of having old age
psychiatric services ‘closely allied’ to primary healthcare, but this
was sometimes almost synonymous with shortage of resources.\ :sup:`70`
Where dedicated old age mental health services existed, GP referral
rates of older people increased significantly: at Crichton Royal,
between 1974 and 1984, a 16% increase in the population over 65 was
associated with a 150% increase in referrals,\ :sup:`71` suggesting that
GPs valued the interventions provided.

.. _S5:

Discussion
==========

‘Age’ can be measured in different ways.\ :sup:`72` Usually in health
service planning, ‘chronological age’ was used. A ‘chronological’
retirement age is arbitrary, but men’s retirement and pension age, 65
years, was socially acceptable to define and establish services for
older people.\ :sup:`73` In clinical work, staff knew the limits of
their responsibilities and it could constructively guide GPs to refer
patients to the appropriate psychiatric team. Chronological age cut-offs
remain inseparable from certain services. They are used at both ends of
life for administrative matters such as for leaving school or receiving
a state pension or to enable population needs to be estimated and plans
implemented. Age-related physiological and social factors affect illness
in old age and may interact, requiring a distinct body of clinical
knowledge and skills to permit optimum treatment. Illnesses in childhood
and adolescence also present differently from in adulthood with
different diagnostic and treatment implications. Not all adolescents
reach ‘maturity’ at the same chronological age, and not all older people
age at the same rate. In childhood and adolescence, separate services
based on chronological age are acceptable. Similarly, old age services
may be necessarily and appropriately different, rather than bearing
overtones of negative discrimination.

An alternative definition of age is ‘cultural age’, combining
chronological age with aspects of function (‘functional age’), degree of
independence and capacity for self-care, coupled with the understanding
of old age within a community’s value system.\ :sup:`74` It relates to
society’s expectations of outcome of treatment and priorities about
providing health services. Those factors are not neutral and might
affect providing and planning services for older people.

How best to ensure non-discriminatory services for older people remains
unclear. In line with their understanding of the Equality Act, the Royal
College of Psychiatrists’ Old Age Faculty has proposed criteria for
services based on ‘cultural’, rather than ‘chronological’,
age.\ :sup:`2` This might, however, be discriminatory, given the
subjective implications of the former, and since it raises issues of
whether it could reliably provide appropriate services for people who
need them. Who would decide on robust clinical grounds, for example,
which patients should be referred to which service? Ambiguous lines of
responsibility for older patients might contribute to undermining
treatment for them.

Negative attitudes towards treating older people persist widely in the
NHS and there is evidence that older people are still unwelcome in
hospitals.\ :sup:`75–77` Times have changed, legislation has changed,
but attitudes appear similar. The World Psychiatric Association recently
noted that combating ageism was part of the remit of services for older
people;\ :sup:`78` taking that perspective might be difficult for those
also advocating for younger people, especially where there are resource
constraints. This reflects the historical evidence that services
improved where dedicated old age psychiatrists advocated for their
patients and were listened to.

General psychiatrists have repeatedly demonstrated a lack of interest
and desire to work with older people and excessively low expectations of
health improvement for them. Clinicians, managers and NHS planners
overlooked their needs when creating services and allocating resources.
A survey of health service commissioners in 2010 identified a
disconcerting pattern of government response: ‘Governments and
commissioners have shown a surprising failure to realise the
significance of the ageing population, adopt best practice and make
service development for older people a national priority’.\ :sup:`79`

Services for older people lag behind those for younger people (see, for
example, Hilton\ :sup:`80`). Since the 1970s, policies for older people
have appeared after those for younger people, reinforcing the idea that
the needs of older people are less pressing. The National Service
Frameworks for mental health in 1999 and for older people in
2001\ :sup:`81` are more recent examples. Two years might seem little,
but in the context of this being a repeated pattern, with reluctance to
provide for older people, and in the context of economic downturns,
including the financial crisis beginning in 2008, this has probably
cumulatively undermined service development. A recent government
strategy for mental health stated: ‘we will use the word ”people” to
encompass infants, children, young people, working-age adults and older
people’.\ :sup:`82` Age-equality is welcome, but has the
anti-discrimination agenda become so all-encompassing and the policies
so inclusive and watered down as to be meaningless? Will this pattern
prevent real differences from being recognised? All age government
strategies, however, have the potential to enhance equality in terms of
planning services and allocating resources to all age groups
simultaneously. By contrast, evidence of negativity towards older people
by general and all age psychiatrists reinforces the importance and
appropriateness of clearly defined, chronologically age-based, separate
services to ensure reliable, dynamic, enthusiastic and effective
psychiatric provision in old age.

Thanks to Tom Arie, Dave Jolley and Pat Thane for their comments.

.. [1]
   **Claire Hilton** is a consultant old age psychiatrist in North West
   London.
