===============================================================================
Voicing Caregiver Experiences: Wellbeing and Recovery Narratives for Caregivers
===============================================================================



Debbie Mountain [1]_
:Date: 2015-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 55f2
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

In this easy-to-read book, ten authentic carer stories of different
styles have been collected. Each has different themes, many of sadness
and loss, and they describe the roller-coaster ride that most have had
to endure until eventually finding stability and some acceptance of the
situation in their own and their loved ones’ lives. Tips between carers
are shared, especially those of encouraging and steering others towards
empowerment both in managing their own, often ignored, needs and to
negotiate the fragmented, bewildering and inconsistent care delivery
arrangements.

The most notable theme is that of hope. The stories demonstrate the
process of finding hope, not a superficial denial of the challenges that
lie ahead, but something worthy of respect. This hope is borne in
adversity, is effortful and those who do find it have to overcome years
of difficult associations to have future positive expectations.

Another theme is that of the care triangle between service users, carers
and professionals. Many speak of how devastating some professional
attitudes and practices can be, leaving wounds that take years to heal.
Many also speak of positive relationships with professionals that have
the capacity to become pillars of strength.

These stories are of heroes, and their own contribution to their
relative’s wellness is often under-recognised, overlooked and
underestimated. In addition, their own care needs are often ignored as
their caring role becomes engulfing. Many require active encouragement
and permission to attend to their own wellness. When we as professionals
see carers presenting as fraught or distressed, we should honestly ask
ourselves ‘What would we do?’ After reading these stories, I am doubtful
any of us, even experienced clinicians, would know what it takes to
manage some of the situations described, let alone find the peace than
many carers achieve.

.. [1]
   **Debbie Mountain**, consultant psychiatrist, Royal Edinburgh
   Hospital, Edinburgh, email: debbie.mountain@nhslothian.scot.nhs.uk
