===========================================================================
Illness perceptions in adolescents with a psychiatric diagnosis in Pakistan
===========================================================================

Nazish Imran
Muhammad Waqar Azeem
Mansoor R. Chaudhry
Zeeshan ButtCorrespondence to Nazish Imran (nazishimrandr@gmail.com)
 [1]_
:Date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To assess adolescents' perceptions of their
   psychiatric illness and the role of various demographic factors in a
   Pakistani setting. Adolescents with various psychiatric diagnoses
   were interviewed using a structured questionnaire including the
   Illness Perceptions Questionnaire–Revised (IPQ-R).

   **Results** Fifty-two adolescents with various psychiatric illnesses
   were interviewed; their mean age was 12.7 years and the majority
   (67%) were female. Males had significantly higher scores on timeline
   and emotional representation (*P*\ <0.05), suggesting strongly held
   beliefs about chronicity of their illness and anger and worry about
   their condition. Adolescents' own emotional state, stress, family
   problems and bad luck were endorsed by participants as some of the
   causal factors in their mental illness.

   **Clinical implications** Despite the importance of early
   intervention in psychiatric problems, engaging youth in the treatment
   process in Pakistan remains difficult. Better understanding of how
   adolescents perceive their psychiatric difficulties may play a
   significant role in developing culturally sensitive interventions and
   better utilisation of services.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The prevalence of child psychiatric disorders is reported to be high in
Pakistan,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` but engaging children and families in
treatment remains challenging. Illness perceptions which are unique to
different cultural groups have been found to be associated with
families' engagement and help-seeking behaviours. Previous research has
focused mainly on parental beliefs and identified various barriers which
hinder help-seeking,\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.c)` but much remains to be
known about how adolescents themselves perceive their illness. With
changes evident in Pakistani society in the past few decades,
adolescents' own views along with their families' perceptions are likely
to influence their healthcare decisions. The current knowledge about
Pakistani adolescents' perceptions of their illness, stigma and
help-seeking behaviour is limited, despite assertions about adolescents'
capability of ‘making decisions and choices on the basis of their own
representations of health threats and illness’.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` To
address this knowledge gap, the current study focuses on the beliefs of
adolescents regarding their psychiatric illness and treatment in the
context of Pakistan's unique cultural, religious and social context and
attempts to determine whether various demographic factors have any role
in these perceptions. Insight into these factors may help in addressing
the underutilisation of services by young people in Pakistan and to
identify ways of engaging them in effective treatments.

.. _S1:

Method
======

The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of King Edward
Medical University (KEMU). Participants were 11- to 18-year-old
adolescents recruited from Child and Family Psychiatry Department of the
KEMU/Mayo Hospital out-patient services. The adolescents included in the
study had axis I psychiatric diagnoses (conversion disorder, major
depression, schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder,
obsessive–compulsive disorder, generalised anxiety disorder and conduct
disorder) and were taking psychotropic medications. Adolescents who were
acutely ill or had intellectual disability, attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and pervasive developmental disorders were
excluded from the study because of the developmental nature of these
disorders. Following informed consent from parents and assent from
adolescents, a questionnaire was used to collect the demographic and
relevant clinical information. The ICD-10 diagnostic criteria were used
to assess the psychiatric diagnosis.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` The Illness
Perceptions Questionnaire-Revised (IPQ-R) was used to glean the young
people's perceptions of their illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` IPQ-R has various
subscales reflecting different dimensions of illness perceptions:
timeline (chronicity of illness), consequences (impact of illness on
adolescent life), personal control (perception of their own control of
their illness), treatment control (controllability of illness by
treatment), illness coherence (adolescents' own understanding of their
illness), timeline cyclical (cyclical nature of illness), emotional
representations (feeling of emotions such as sadness, anger about their
illness) and causes. Each statement is rated on a 5-point Likert scale
ranging from 1, strongly disagree to 5, strongly agree, and addition of
scores of various items yields subscale scores, except for causes in
which individual items are scored as such. IPQ-R has been used in
previous studies of adolescents with mental illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` The
Cronbach alpha ranged from 0.79 for the timeline cyclical dimension to
0.89 for the timeline acute/chronic dimension. The questionnaire was
administered to adolescents in an interview format to eliminate literacy
concerns. Data were analysed using SPSS version 20. Descriptive
statistics were used for socio-demographic information, and means and
standard deviations of different subscales of IPQ-R were calculated.
Independent samples *t*-test was used to compare the means of IPQ-R
subscales across categories of binary variables such as gender, address
etc.; *P*\ <0.05 was considered as significant.

.. _S2:

Results
=======

Fifty-two youths were interviewed, with a mean age of 12.7 (s.d. 2.13)
and the majority (67%, *n* = 35) being female. More than two-thirds of
participants (71%, *n* = 37) lived in urban areas and almost half of the
families had a nuclear family set-up (only parents and siblings) (52%)
with monthly income of less than 15 000 Pakistani rupees. Family history
of psychiatric illness was present in 21% (*n* = 11) and 15.4% (*n* = 8)
had a history of psychiatric admission. Mean duration of illness was
14.4 months, ranging from less than 1 month to more than 30 months.
Almost half of the participants had education up until the seventh
grade.

Conversion disorder with comorbid emotional difficulties (depression and
anxiety severe enough to warrant the use of psychotropic medication in
addition to psychological treatment) was the diagnosis in 56% (*n* = 29)
of patients. Other diagnoses were major depression (17.3%, *n* = 9),
schizophrenia (5.8%, *n* = 3), bipolar affective disorder (3.8%, *n* =
2), obsessive-compulsive disorder (5.8%, *n* = 3), generalised anxiety
disorder (1.9%, *n* = 1) and conduct disorder (1.9%, *n* = 1).

The mean scores of illness perceptions subscales along with standard
deviation are presented in `Table 1 <#T1>`__. Overall, the study sample
perceived their illness' nature to be chronic and cyclical. The
perception of significant negative consequences as a result of their
mental health difficulties and a negative emotional response were also
observed. There was a general perception of having some personal control
of their illness as well as a positive belief in treatment role.
Adolescents generally felt that they had a coherent model/understanding
of their illness.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Participants' mean scores, standard deviation, median and range of
      subscales of IPQ-R

   +-----------------+-----------------+-------------+----------------+
   | Cognitive       | Items, *n*      | Mean (s.d.) | Median (range) |
   | processes       | (maximum        |             |                |
   |                 | possible score) |             |                |
   +=================+=================+=============+================+
   | Illness         |                 |             |                |
   | perceptions     |                 |             |                |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-------------+----------------+
   | Timeline        | 6 (30)          | 16.4 (2.2)  | 16 (10)        |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-------------+----------------+
   | Consequences    | 6 (30)          | 17.5 (2.4)  | 18 (12)        |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-------------+----------------+
   | Timeline        | 4 (20)          | 11.0 (2.2)  | 11.5 (12)      |
   | cyclical        |                 |             |                |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-------------+----------------+
   | Personal        | 6 (30)          | 18.8 (2.2)  | 19 (10)        |
   | control         |                 |             |                |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-------------+----------------+
   | Treatment       | 5 (25)          | 12.6 (3.2)  | 13 (16)        |
   | control         |                 |             |                |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-------------+----------------+
   | Illness         | 5 (25)          | 14.8 (2.2)  | 15 (10)        |
   | coherence       |                 |             |                |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-------------+----------------+
   | Emotional       | 6 (30)          | 16.2 (3.5)  | 16 (10)        |
   | representation  |                 |             |                |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-------------+----------------+

`Table 2 <#T2>`__ shows the comparison of mean scores of IPQ-R
subcategories across binary variables. Males had significantly higher
scores on timeline and emotional representation, which suggests strongly
held beliefs about chronicity of their illness and emotional
representation (anger, worry) about the condition. Patients living in a
nuclear family set-up had better beliefs about controllability of
illness by treatment than those living in a joint/extended family
system. The rest of the comparisons were not statistically significant.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Comparison of mean scores of subcategories of IPQ-R for binary
      variables

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | Tim   | Tim   | Co    | Per   | Trea  | Il    | Emot  |
   |       | eline | eline | nsequ | sonal | tment | lness | ional |
   |       | (acut | cyc   | ences | co    | co    | cohe  | repr  |
   |       | e/chr | lical |       | ntrol | ntrol | rence | esent |
   |       | onic) |       |       |       |       |       | ation |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
   | G     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ender |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 17.5  | 11.0  | 17.6  | 18.9  | 12.5  | 14.8  | 17.8  |
   |  Male | (     | (2.3) | (1.7) | (1.7) | (3.3) | (2.7) | (     |
   |       | 2.4)\ |       |       |       |       |       | 3.4)\ |
   |       |  `\*  |       |       |       |       |       |  `\*  |
   |       | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |
   |       | 2>`__ |       |       |       |       |       | 2>`__ |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     F | 15.8  | 11.0  | 17.4  | 18.8  | 12.7  | 14.8  | 15.4  |
   | emale | (1.9) | (2.2) | (2.7) | (2.5) | (3.1) | (1.9) | (3.4) |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | F     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | amily |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 16.4  | 11.0  | 17.5  | 18.9  | 13.8  | 15.4  | 16.3  |
   |    Nu | (2.5) | (1.8) | (1.8) | (2.2) | (     | (2.2) | (3.7) |
   | clear |       |       |       |       | 3.0)\ |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       |  `\*  |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       | <#TFN |       |       |
   |       |       |       |       |       | 2>`__ |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 16.4  | 10.9  | 17.5  | 18.9  | 11.0  | 14.3  | 16.2  |
   | Joint | (1.9) | (2.8) | (3.0) | (2.4) | (2.6) | (2.0) | (3.5) |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Ad    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | dress |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 16.3  | 10.9  | 17.3  | 18.8  | 12.4  | 14.5  | 15.9  |
   | Urban | (2.2) | (2.4) | (2.3) | (2.0) | (3.2) | (2.2) | (3.8) |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 16.3  | 10.9  | 18.0  | 19.0  | 13.0  | 15.6  | 17.0  |
   | Rural | (2.4) | (2.1) | (2.8) | (3.0) | (3.3) | (2.0) | (2.9) |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | F     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | amily |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | hi    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | story |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 16.9  | 11.4  | 17.6  | 18.0  | 13.7  | 15.0  | 17.1  |
   |   Yes | (3.0) | (1.5) | (2.2) | (2.8) | (2.6) | (2.0) | (2.9) |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 16.2  | 10.8  | 17.4  | 19.0  | 12.7  | 14.8  | 16.1  |
   |    No | (2.0) | (2.5) | (2.5) | (1.9) | (3.0) | (2.3) | (3.7) |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Pre   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | vious |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | admi  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ssion |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 16.1  | 10.6  | 16.7  | 17.7  | 12.6  | 16.0  | 17.3  |
   |   Yes | (1.8) | (2.2) | (1.7) | (2.3) | (2.5) | (1.6) | (3.4) |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 16.4  | 11.0  | 17.6  | 19.0  | 12.6  | 14.6  | 16.0  |
   |    No | (2.3) | (2.3) | (2.5) | (2.2) | (3.3) | (2.2) | (3.5) |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

   IPQ-R, Illness Perceptions Questionnaire-Revised.

   *P*\ <0.05 (calculated by applying *t*-test)

`Table 3 <#T3>`__ shows the adolescents' understanding of various
factors contributing towards their illness. Various psychological
factors were clearly endorsed by the majority of respondents to be the
cause of their emotional difficulties.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Participants' responses to illness attribution (causal) items of
      IPQ-R

   ========================================= ========================
   IPQ-R causal items                        Participants agreeing
                                             or somewhat agreeing
                                             to factor's contribution
                                             towards their illness
                                             *n* (%)
   ========================================= ========================
   Psychological attributions                
       Stress or worry                       21 (40)
       My mental attitude                    15 (29)
       (e.g. thinking about life negatively) 
       Family problems or worries caused     20 (39)
       my illness                            
       My emotional state (e.g. feeling      24 (46)
       down, lonely anxious, empty)          
       My personality                        18 (35)
   \                                         
   Risk factors                              
       Hereditary (‘it runs in my family’)   7 (13)
       Diet or eating habits                 10 (19)
       Poor medical care in my past          21 (40)
       My own behaviour                      19 (37)
       Aging                                 –
       Smoking                               –
       Alcohol                               –
   \                                         
   Immunity                                  
       A germ or virus                       9 (17)
       Pollution in the environment          10 (19)
       Altered immunity                      6 (12)
   \                                         
   Accident or chance                        
       Chance or bad luck                    20 (39)
       Accident or injury                    15 (29)
   ========================================= ========================

   IPQ-R, Illness Perceptions Questionnaire-Revised.

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

The present study provides insight into how adolescents in Pakistan
understand their psychiatric illnesses. We observed poor mental health
literacy among the adolescents in our study with regard to the nature,
treatment and prognosis of their psychiatric illness. In comparison to a
study of illness perceptions among Western adolescents with mood
disorder,\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` adolescents in our study believe their illness
to be more chronic with serious adverse consequences. They also showed
more emotional reactions (anger, sadness and worry) and appear less
optimistic about the role of treatment in controlling their symptoms.
Multiple factors such as cross-cultural differences, limited knowledge
of available services, myths about possible causative factors and
treatment for psychiatric illnesses, negative expectations of services
by families, in addition to stigma, shame and reluctance to seek
treatment may play a role in these beliefs as well as in
underutilisation of services.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)-(n.d.i)` Furthermore,
children and adolescents with behavioural and emotional disorders either
do not receive treatment or do not take advantage of available services
in high-income countries.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.c)` Despite various
psychoeducational measures even in high-income countries, literature
suggests poor understanding among adolescents about the causes, nature
and treatment of psychiatric health issues.

Depression in adolescents has been associated with most stigmatising
attitudes.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` In a study of 8- to 18-year-olds, 28% of
respondents would prefer to ‘wait for depression to go away’ and 40%
‘would try to think and act like normal’. Adolescents from higher
socioeconomic status, of younger age at the start of treatment and with
worries about public perception are associated with self-labelling and
self-stigma.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` These results are of concern as
adolescents' own perceptions regarding their illness, stigma of
treatment and concerns regarding confidentiality are considered to play
an important role in professional help-seeking attitudes and
behaviours.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` A significant proportion of children and
adolescents with behavioural and emotional disorders in high-income
countries either do not receive treatment or do not take advantage of
available services.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`

Our respondents' belief of treatment being not too helpful is likely to
lead to reluctance to seek help or adhere to treatment. Misconceptions
about psychiatric medications being addictive, need for medications to
be taken for longer periods of time and slowness in learning because of
medications may all contribute towards pessimistic views regarding
psychiatric treatment.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` The majority of families perhaps
prefer to seek help from informal sources such as the family, friends,
religious scholars and faith healers, rather than mental health
professionals, because of stigma. As a result, treatment needs of young
people with a psychiatric illness remain largely unmet. There is a great
need for evolving strategies to improve adolescents' perceptions about
the effectiveness of treatment and to seek professional help for their
emotional problems.

Gender differences were also observed in the study sample, with males
being more concerned about chronicity of their illness. They also scored
high on emotional representation, suggesting that they felt more shame,
anger and became upset while thinking about their emotional and
behavioural problems. This may be because of society's overall
expectations for males to be stronger and able to manage their illness
by themselves. It is important to highlight that the study sample is
mainly composed of adolescents already in contact with mental health
services and thus their perceptions might be different from perceptions
of adolescents in the general population. The males' perception of
showing ‘emotions’ as weakness in some studies\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` may also
explain stronger feelings of shame and anger among our sample who had to
seek help because of the severity of their symptoms. Gender differences
have been highlighted in previous research, with boys experiencing more
stigma regarding mental illness, service use and
treatment.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` Similarly, the positive perceptions of the
role of treatment in helping their symptoms we observed in females is
consistent with the results of previous studies.\ :sup:`(n.d.l),(n.d.p)`

The majority of adolescents in the study endorsed psychological and
personal factors playing a role in their illness causation (i.e. my
mental attitude, my emotional state, my personality, my own behaviour,
poor medical care in my past) rather than genetic and immunological
causes. Cultural differences have been observed in previous research on
beliefs about causation of mental illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` In a few
studies, however, adolescents did endorse genetics and biological
factors, stress and personal responsibility as causes of mental illness
in general.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)-(n.d.s)` More negative causal attributions as
compared with the general public, i.e. regarding illness as being caused
by their own bad behaviour, is seen in adults and children with mental
illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` These beliefs about causes of mental illness in
turn influence public attitudes towards the patients, with studies
reporting stigmatising attitudes, beliefs of lack of willpower and
personal failure to overcome the illness.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)-(n.d.v)`
Children were blamed for their depression and ADHD by one in four peers
in a study of stigma of mental illness among children.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)`
Factors which are beyond patient control such as genetics and other
biological causes are associated with less negative
perceptions.\ :sup:`(n.d.v),(n.d.w)` Patients who attribute their
illness to psychological factors have been shown to express more
emotional reactions to their illness, as appears to be the case in the
present study sample.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` Another interesting finding was an
endorsement of bad luck by the study sample.

Pakistani culture has specific emphasis on religion and God's will,
which can affect how adolescents perceive their mental illness. This is
also seen in studies of Asian and Hispanic youth.\ :sup:`(n.d.x)`
Anti-stigmatising strategies for adolescents in Pakistan need to take
into account these cultural variations in beliefs about causation of
these illnesses in order to address stigma as well as to develop
effective, culturally sensitive psychological therapies to improve
adolescents' sense of well-being.

.. _S4:

Limitations
-----------

There were several limitations to this study. The sample size was small
and was composed of people already utilising mental health services,
thus results may not be generalisable to non-service-users in the
general population. Furthermore, in-depth interviews in addition to a
structured questionnaire are considered more helpful in understanding
illness perceptions. It would also have been helpful to look at the
attitudes towards professional help-seeking and determine if illness
perceptions in our sample were associated with help-seeking behaviours.
There was also no control group.

Despite the limitations, the study is important mainly because of its
focus on adolescents' own understanding of their illness, its causation
and the role of treatment. This significant area was largely ignored
until now. It is difficult to develop psychoeducational programmes for
the youth in Pakistan without understanding their own conceptualisation
of the difficulties they are experiencing. Because of significant
cultural, social and religious differences, multiple strategies need to
be applied in improving mental health literacy among the youth. The
stigma of psychiatric illness and treatment needs to be addressed to
improve take-up of services. Counselling provision in schools and an
awareness programme prepared and delivered in collaboration with
paediatricians and family physicians may be more acceptable and helpful
in engaging young people and families in services. Further research with
a large sample, including representation from multiple sites, and in
particular qualitative studies, are needed to understand and improve
adolescent illness perceptions as well as attitudes towards seeking
professional mental health services.

This study was presented as a poster at the 60th Annual Conference of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry in Orlando, USA,
in 2013.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.x.

.. [1]
   **Nazish Imran** MBBS, MRCPsych (London), Associate Professor, Child
   and Family Psychiatry Department, King Edward Medical University/Mayo
   Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan; **Muhammad Waqar Azeem** MD, DFAACAP,
   DFAPA, Chief of Psychiatry, Albert J. Solnit Children's Center, and
   Associate Clinical Professor, Yale Child Study Center, Yale
   University School of Medicine, Connecticut, USA; **Mansoor R.
   Chaudhry** MD, MCPS, MD Psych, Assistant Professor, Department of
   Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences, Central Park Medical College
   Lahore, Pakistan; **Zeeshan Butt** MD, Resident Internal Medicine,
   Prince George's Hospital Center, Cheverly, Maryland, USA.
