============================================
Payment by results in forensic mental health
============================================



Luke Gibbons
Lucy McCarthyCorrespondence to Luke Gibbons
(luke.gibbons@nottshc.nhs.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   Forensic mental health services are low-volume, high-cost services.
   Payment by results (PbR) is the UK s latest attempt to improve
   efficiency and controls pending behaviours within the secure
   services. This article discusses the utility of the PbR mechanic in
   forensic mental health. It explores PbR implementation in
   non-forensic mental health settings, similar funding processes
   internationally, and early PbR implementation work in the UK's secure
   services. Finally, the article discusses the challenges faced when
   implementing PbR in forensic mental health services and puts forward
   possible next steps in determining the utility of PbR in forensic
   mental health.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The majority of mental health services in England, including forensic
mental health services, have previously been funded via block contracts,
with annual budgets set and agreed between commissioners and service
providers. Providers then distribute the finances, balancing
governmental directives and strategies against local priorities.
However, it has been reported that block contracting offers very little
incentive to improve efficiency and control spending
behaviours.\ :sup:`1` Payment by results (PbR), soon to be called
pricing and currency, is ‘the payment system in England under which
commissioners pay healthcare providers for each patient seen or treated,
taking into account the complexity of the patient's healthcare
needs’\ :sup:`2` that attempts to address such issues. It is England's
answer to a case-mix approach, in which funding involves the use of a
predefined average care package, which is applied with a fixed price
when certain diagnoses or factors are present. In 2003, this method of
commissioning started to be rolled out in areas of physical healthcare
and now the PbR mechanism is utilised in the bulk of elective
in-patient/out-patient and emergency procedures. The government believes
that it will provide more clarity on what to expect from services and
achieve better, more efficient outcomes.\ :sup:`3`

.. _S1:

PbR: key concepts
=================

Within the scheme, when operating for physical health purposes, a
currency represents a unit of healthcare for which a payment is made and
a tariff represents the price paid for each currency. Consequently,
varying patients are grouped into healthcare resource groups (HRGs), in
accordance with similar consumption of National Health Service (NHS)
resources. In mental health services, ‘clusters’ are used as the
so-called currencies, which in turn define a relevant care pathway and
ultimately the contract between commissioners and service
providers.\ :sup:`4` Similar to HRGs, clusters represent individuals
with similar needs, requiring similar resources. Whether the PbR
mechanism can be applied to a mental health domain is questionable.
Owing to the complex nature of human condition and the often long-term
nature of mental disorders, it would be naive to think that categorising
mental health patients into discrete groups would be as simple as
categorising patients with similar physical health problems.\ :sup:`5`
Consequently, any success of the PbR mechanism in the physical health
domain does not necessarily mean that it is transferable to a mental
health domain.

.. _S2:

Are the positive effects of PbR smoke and mirrors? Evidence from non-psychiatric settings
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Several countries operate mechanisms that attempt to match resources
more directly to measured needs. This particular approach seems sensible
for both commissioners and healthcare providers, as theoretically
hospitals are prospectively reimbursed in accordance with diagnosis.
Thus, any additional funding needed for a mismatch between diagnosis and
service will result in financial loss for the hospital. Alternatively,
any funds left unspent will result in profit for the service provider,
offering incentive for careful management of funds.\ :sup:`6` In
addition, it has been reported that PbR may result in reductions in
length of stay and shorter waiting lists for elective
procedures.\ :sup:`7` On the surface, PbR looks beneficial to
commissioners, patients and possibly the service providers.

The seeming efficiency in terms of the management of finances, reduction
in patient waiting times and shortened length of in-patient stay may not
be all it seems. Reservations over taking such consequences at face
value are held by the International Council of Nurses,\ :sup:`8` who
fear that such ‘positive’ effects may actually result in patients being
discharged too soon (‘quicker and sicker’), placing an extra burden on
other support networks. It is possible that the PbR process in acute
care does not offer monetary rewards for results as such, but rather it
remunerates activity,\ :sup:`1` and activity that may not be necessary
or in the patient's best interest.

.. _S3:

‘Gaming’ in mental health services
----------------------------------

Consistent and significant mismatches between clustering and ICD-10
diagnosis may be down to service providers ‘cherry picking’ cheaper
cases and manipulating patient coding into higher tariffs.\ :sup:`9`
These fraudulent processes can be broken down further, illustrating how
the system may be manipulated: ‘cream skimming’ or adverse election of
lower-cost patients; ‘skimping’ or a reduction in quality of care;
‘up-coding’, which refers to the categorisation of patients into
higher-income clusters than what is clinically necessary; and ‘dumping’,
which is the selective, inappropriate referring of patients to other
care settings.\ :sup:`10` Such openness to fraudulent processes or
‘gaming’ is of interest to not only commissioners and service providers,
but also auditors and researchers.

.. _S4:

Informing funding through diagnosis: problems and international perspectives
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The use of diagnosis to inform funding has been questioned in countries
that have already rolled out similar schemes.\ :sup:`11` Mason &
Goddard\ :sup:`11` reviewed the international literature on PbR in
mental health along with an economic assessment of the approach in
England. It is acknowledged that mental health treatment often extends
far beyond the hospital sector and thus, by putting a limit on funding a
care package, mental health patients' treatment may be cut short. There
is evidence that individuals with mental health problems are more likely
to experience physical ill health and are more likely to have greater
non-clinical needs, such as educational, social and/or employment
support.\ :sup:`12` The interface between in-patient and community care
poses problems in predefining care pathways and currencies, as prognosis
and course of treatment is highly variable, regardless of similar mental
health diagnoses.

‘Length of stay’ has been found to be a major explanatory variable for
cost variation between ‘similar’ patients, which would be particularly
relevant for the NHS as a whole, if not for individual service
providers, and a fair payment system must be able to compensate by being
flexible enough to make appropriate adjustments for patients.\ :sup:`11`
US health providers recognise such variation between mental health
patients in both in-patient and outpatient settings and consequently
operate a per diem system: there is recognition of the complexities of
psychiatric problems coexisting in mental health patients and so funds
are distributed on a day-to-day basis, taking into account average costs
that are adjusted to account for diagnosis and comorbidity.

Alternatively, the Canadian methodology separates length of stay into
three separate parts that are defined through resource intensity,
allowing for an adjustment to payments for interrupted stays.\ :sup:`1`
This is a vital consideration as, by comparison, the within-class
homogeneity of the Australian and New Zealand mechanisms (the two
systems that have the most resonance with the UK's) resulted in the
systems never being rolled out to direct funding. However, they were
never rolled out to direct funding, in the main because of within-class
resource homogeneity. It is extremely difficult to classify resource
consumption of different patients even though they may have similar
diagnoses.

Both the American and Canadian methodologies account for outliers and
facilitate flexibility around length of stay. The conversion of costs to
price is not a simple exchange. The English methodology does acknowledge
the need for review dates and results in some flexibility. Nevertheless,
the date defines cluster episodes and costs, and so the malleability of
care clusters may be somewhat limited when compared with its American
and Canadian counterparts.

.. _S5:

PbR in forensic mental health
=============================

The complexities of care for individuals who have mental health problems
make PbR a difficult mechanism to employ with this population. It is
noted that even though the rollout of PbR in mental health services has
begun, it is still in its infancy. The acute hospital setting had a
decade of development and refining. PbR in mental health services has
yet to result in subsequent national tariffs and therefore block
contracting still informs funding. Such complexities may be further
extenuated when a forensic mental health population is considered.

.. _S6:

Development of forensic clusters
--------------------------------

The Mental Health Clustering Tool (MHCT)\ :sup:`13` describes 21
clusters of mental health symptoms and treatment needs observed in
general psychiatry. The tool is designed to assess and group individuals
according to their clinical needs and resource consumption. It is a
pivotal tool in PbR. It has been modified by a group of forensic
practitioners to account for risk profiles and personality disorders, in
an attempt to make it suitable for a forensic population.\ :sup:`14`
This modified version is called the forensic MHCT.

The modification of the MHCT leaves serious doubts about the suitability
of the subsequent forensic MHCT. A multidisciplinary team working in
forensic services was convened and split into small groups. They then
applied the MHCT to both fictitious and real patients in order to
identify actual or possible issues when applying the MHCT to their
forensic patients. To the best of our knowledge, there are no
statistical underpinnings of the forensic clusters. Only the original
clusters, devised through non-forensic samples, have any statistical
underpinnings,\ :sup:`15` and these do not allay concerns over the
statistical foundations of the tool.

.. _S7:

Forensic clusters and pathways: research so far
-----------------------------------------------

McCann & Green\ :sup:`14` carried out pilot work to test the utility of
the forensic MHCT and another ‘grouping’ instrument developed by
forensic practitioners, the Five Forensic Pathways (5FP),\ :sup:`14`
which uses data from the HCR-20,\ :sup:`16` HoNOS-Secure\ :sup:`17` and
patient's offending history. Small sample size precluded sufficient
statistical analysis, making it difficult to draw conclusions from the
study.

.. _S8:

Other considerations
--------------------

.. _S9:

Adaptability of PbR
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is not yet possible to see whether clustering routes lack specificity
with regard to individual needs and resource consumption or whether such
routes actually avoid creating complexities that could hinder the
applicability of PbR to forensic mental health services. PbR guidelines
recognise that patients' needs change over time and that frequent
re-assessment and clustering is needed to continually provide
individuals with the appropriate care.\ :sup:`18` The booklet states
that ‘lessons are still being learnt’ about how well the PbR system
reflects, and how well it accommodates, the dynamic needs of forensic
mental health patients, highlighting the need for further research. If
it is not known how the system adapts with changing patient needs then
it cannot be used to define an individual's care funding.

.. _S10:

Patient outcomes and effects on funding requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Outcome measures are a further consideration in investigating the
utility of PbR within forensic mental health. In England, the Department
of Health is looking at outcome measures far more now than they did
previously.\ :sup:`19` In non-forensic settings, there is scope for
outcome measurements in a set of quality indicators: clinician-related
outcome measures (CROMs), patient-reported outcome measures and
patient-reported experience measures.\ :sup:`20` How such outcome
measurements transfer to a forensic setting has to be explored. Quality
indicators in a forensic setting could include the percentage of
patients with a forensic MHCT and 5FP score at admission and subsequent
care pathway approach meetings. Similarly, CROMs could include
HoNOS-Secure measurements.

However, such proxy measures undertaken when patients are contained
cannot reliably inform on how a patient will behave or feel on release
into society. Patients discharged from secure care are vulnerable to
re-admission, re-offending and mortality,\ :sup:`21,22` and therefore
insight into how clusters and treatment pathways relate to patients'
routes after discharge is imperative. A shorter length of stay, for
instance, does not portray a positive outcome if the individual in
question is subsequently re-admitted or re-convicted as a result of
being discharged too soon. A patient's course after discharge should be
considered as part of the clustering process, having a role in informing
funding and not merely being used as an evaluative tool. Therefore, even
though outcome measurements may be transferrable from non-forensic
mental health to forensic settings, there are further considerations
that should be undertaken due to the nature of the patient population.

.. _S11:

Next steps
==========

The utility of PbR within forensic mental health needs thorough
examination. Currently, the only insight has been gained through small
preliminary investigations conducted by proponents of PbR. The system
has already been rolled out within acute hospital settings and the
application of the process to non-forensic mental health is well
underway. Even so, the Royal College of Psychiatrists released a
statement at the beginning of 2014, expressing concerns over
PbR.\ :sup:`23` More specifically, they highlight reservations over the
statistical analyses underpinning the 21 clusters, the range (or lack)
of complexity involved in the clustering process, whether the clusters
allow for best evidence-based practice, the lack of outcome measures and
consequent effect on costs of patient care and ultimately, concerns that
the current system would risk severe destabilisation financially and
organisationally.

The reservations over the implementation of the mechanism in general
mental health generates concern as PbR in forensic mental health is in
its comparative infancy. Indeed, the forensic MHCT clusters and the
pathways in the 5FP have no statistical underpinnings.

To determine the utility of PbR in forensic mental health, the
relationships between diagnoses, care needs assessments and outcomes
post-discharge need to be explored. Economic assessments of the
treatment costs throughout in-patient and post-discharge accommodation
need to be undertaken. There needs to be a profile of economic outcomes
for each care cluster if the PbR mechanism is to be rolled out within
forensic mental health and ultimately define patient funding. There is a
clear and urgent need for research focusing on how the forensic MHCT can
be used (if at all) to best cluster patients and what complexities and
difficulties exist in the clustering process.

.. [1]
   **Luke Gibbons** is a Research Assistant, Nottinghamshire Healthcare
   NHS Trust, East Midlands Centre for Forensic Mental Health,
   Leicester, and **Lucy McCarthy** is a Senior Research Fellow,
   Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Trust
