================================================================================================================================
Children and Young People’s Improving Access to Psychological Therapies: inspiring innovation or more of the same?\ `† <#fn1>`__
================================================================================================================================



Sami Timimi

:Correspondence: Sami Timimi (stimimi@talk21.com)  [1]_ [2]_

:date: 2015-4

:Abstract:
   In 2007 the UK Government announced a substantial expansion of
   funding for psychological therapies for those presenting with common
   mental health problems. This ‘Improving Access to Psychological
   Therapies’ (IAPT) project was widely welcomed, however, evidence
   backed, economic, and conceptual critiques were voiced from the start
   and the project remains controversial. In 2011, the UK government
   announced it was extending the IAPT project to encompass services for
   children and young people with the aim of ‘transforming’ the way
   mental health services are delivered to them. Here I critically
   reflect on the problems associated first with IAPT and then with
   CYP-IAPT and ponder whether CYP-IAPT is significantly different to
   the problematic adult IAPT project or more of the same.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _S1:

Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT)
==================================================

For those who believe that psychological therapies help people, there
was much to celebrate in a plan to dramatically increase access to these
therapies and decrease waiting times, allowing more people with common
mental health problems, such as anxiety and depression, to recover.
However, from the start IAPT has had a mixed reputation in professional
circles, although this has not yet affected its continued expansion. Why
did it become so controversial? One of the main reasons has been the
‘fetishisation’ of certain therapeutic modalities (particularly
cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT)) resulting from an adherence to a
primarily technical understanding of the nature of mental health
problems and their solutions. This stance marginalises the evidence base
that points to the limitations of the technical paradigm, sets up an
artificial hierarchy of desirability and efficacy for psychotherapies
(and therefore psychotherapists), encourages medicalisation and leads to
claims about efficiency that has not been matched by the available
evidence.

The technical model assumes that: mental health problems arise from
faulty mechanisms or processes of some sort involving abnormal
physiological or psychological events occurring within the individual;
that these mechanisms or processes can be modelled in causal terms and
are not context-dependent; and that treatments can be designed and
delivered in a manner that is independent of relationships, contexts and
values.\ :sup:`1` Thus, like National Institute fore Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) guidelines, IAPT’s foundational paradigm follows a
pathway that assumes that a correct diagnosis (of mild to moderate
depression for example) will enable the correct choice of a technical
intervention to be made. In this linear formatting, process-driven
protocols are central and relational and other contextual issues are of
secondary importance – issues to be negotiated to enable satisfactory
adherence with the required ‘correct’ treatment.

From a purely evidence-based point of view, this technical model for
delivering mental healthcare has little to support it. Whereas factors
outside of therapy (the real-life challenges and histories) have by far
the biggest impact on outcomes, within treatment, the factor that has
the biggest impact on outcomes is the therapeutic alliance (as rated by
the patient) with matching treatment model to diagnosis having a small
to insignificant impact.\ :sup:`2,3` This relationship between the
alliance and outcome seems remarkably robust across treatment modalities
and clinical presentations.\ :sup:`4` The search for the ‘active
ingredients’ of a psychological therapy is anyway likely to be doomed to
failure because it depends upon the false assumption that such
ingredients are delivered by therapists in a uniform manner regardless
of the state, requirements and input of the patient.\ :sup:`5` After
all, although the utterances of a patient may not have a direct impact
on the chemical activity of a drug, they will in the two-way process of
a well-delivered talking therapy. Thus we should not be surprised that
attempts to find the active ingredients of, for example, CBT have
failed, as studies have shown that most of the specific features of CBT
can be dispensed with, without adversely affecting outcomes.\ :sup:`6,7`
Countless reviews and meta-analyses have found that no clear pattern of
superiority for any one treatment model has emerged,\ :sup:`8,9` a
finding that extends into evaluations of NHS psychotherapy services,
where non-specific factors such as the therapeutic relationship accounts
for the variance in outcomes rather than the therapeutic model
used.\ :sup:`10`

As a result, the IAPT process, which insists on one or two modalities,
ends up limiting choice for patients, despite the lack of evidence
supporting such a stance. It is possible, of course, that choice had to
be sacrificed to maximise the efficiency that may come from
standardisation, but the evidence here provides no encouragement either.

Not surprisingly, the IAPT project leaders have reported favourable
results being delivered by their services;\ :sup:`11,12` however, their
reports do not include comparisons with the costs and outcomes achieved
by non-IAPT services. The first independent evaluation of the initial
IAPT pilot sites found little difference between the IAPT sites and
comparator services. What differences there were in outcomes were not
significant 4 months after treatment and had disappeared at 8 months,
but IAPT treatments had cost more per patient, than those provided in
neighbouring boroughs.\ :sup:`13` According to reports compiled by the
Artemis Trust,\ :sup:`14,15` which evaluated data from the subsequent
national roll out, the average number of patients achieving recovery for
a fixed expenditure of £100 000, when treated by an IAPT service was far
lower (49) than for pre-IAPT primary care counselling services (115) or
voluntary sector counselling services (78). In addition recovery rates,
as a percentage of patients referred, was lower for IAPT services than
comparable services (pre-IAPT primary care therapy services, university
counselling services and employee assistance programme counselling
services).

This is a truly remarkable achievement. The government have spent large
amounts of taxpayers’ money creating an expensive service that provides
little choice and has poorer outcomes than cheaper alternatives that
were already in existence before IAPT. In terms of efficiency this has
parallels with many large-scale government contracts, whether in
information technology (we all know about the billions wasted trying to
link up NHS information technology systems for example), building or
procurement, where large amounts are put into monopoly contracts, that
overcharge and deliver poor quality products that never quite work the
way they were meant to.

Perhaps IAPT has helped reduce medicalisation? Again the answer is No.
Prescriptions for antidepressants have continued to rise with little
evidence that introducing IAPT has had any meaningful impact on these
trajectories. Numbers of people claiming disability living allowance in
the UK for a mental health problem has also continued to rise with
psychiatric disorders as the reason for receiving disability benefits
rising from 30.9% of claimants in 2000 to 44.8% in 2013, with the
biggest subcategory (over 50%) being for people given a diagnosis of
depression (information retrieved from
http://tabulation-tool.dwp.gov.uk). If current national models of mental
health service delivery were effective, we would not see this picture of
steadily worsening long-term outcomes in parallel with steadily
increasing expenditure.

We should again not be surprised by these findings. The technical model
locates the challenges and dilemmas that people face in late capitalist
neoliberal cultures as happening in people’s heads rather than in the
wider contexts of their lived experience. The task of therapies such as
CBT is that of helping the person adjust and learn to deal with the
pessimistic thoughts that have come to dominate their life. Although I
have no problem appreciating the usefulness of this approach for many
people, the fetishisation and commodification of ‘suffering’ at the
cultural/political level acts to create new markets for ‘treatment’
while simultaneously obscuring the brutal nature of our winner/loser
culture through individualising people’s problems. An approach that
fails to appreciate the social, cultural and political dimension of
distress is thus unlikely to address the problem of the expanding
medicalisation of suffering.

.. _S2:

Children and Young People’s IAPT (CYP-IAPT)
===========================================

As with the adult outcome literature, there is little evidence to
support that matching a treatment model to a diagnosis differentiates
which treatment is more likely to work and which is not in children and
young people.\ :sup:`16,17` It seems that ‘evidence-based’ treatments
for youth tend to come out as superior to usual care, only if the
‘evidence-based’ treatment was developed by the researcher.\ :sup:`18`
Technical factors appear irrelevant. Thus, a meta-analysis of component
studies found that the theoretically purported critical ingredients of
CBT are not specifically ameliorative for child and adolescent
depression and anxiety as full CBT treatments offered no significant
benefit over treatments with only components of the full
model.\ :sup:`19`

When real-life clinical outcomes from Child and Adolescent Mental Health
Services (CAMHS) are examined the picture is even less encouraging.
Research has found that 40–60% of youth who begin treatment drop out
against advice.\ :sup:`20` Furthermore, although the effect size for
outcomes in controlled studies is large, in traditional treatment in
community CAMHS effect sizes are close to zero\ :sup:`21` with little
difference found in outcome between treated and untreated
children.\ :sup:`22,23`

Other evidence finds that service transformation projects including
allocating extra resources have a negligible impact on outcomes. The
Fort Bragg evaluation described the implementation, quality, costs, and
outcomes of a $94 million demonstration project designed to improve
mental health outcomes for children and adolescents who were referred
for mental health treatment. Outcomes in the experimental service were
no better than those in the treatment as usual group, despite the
considerable extra costs incurred.\ :sup:`24,25` This finding was then
replicated in the Stark County evaluation study where again there were
no differences in outcomes when compared with care received outside the
new system, despite the extra expenditure.\ :sup:`26`

These are sobering findings suggesting that, just as with adults,
traditional, medical/technical model approaches do not appear to provide
much ‘added value’ in terms of improving the outcomes and efficiency of
services.

.. _S3:

Did the above findings have an impact on the design of the CYP-IAPT project?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In 2011 IAPT gave birth to the CYP-IAPT project. This upstart announced
it was going to strike out in a new direction. But like many children
who criticise their parents, the values they carry was already part of
their histories, and the bold new direction they boasted about amounted
to new directions in the scope of implementation without any
recognisable change in the underlying paradigm. Indeed, CYP-IAPT decided
to start by focusing on improving the skills of the existing CAMHS
workforce and to achieve this by training staff in the manualised
implementation of CBT or parenting management treatment (in phase 1). As
far as the basics go CYP-IAPT was, therefore, no different to its parent
IAPT project. However, another and more interesting objective of the
CYP-IAPT project was that of ‘service transformation’. Here the plan was
to influence the whole CAMHS team to use more feedback-informed
approaches including use of session-by-session outcome ratings. Having
been involved in a successful ‘service transformation’ project with my
own team involving implementing session-by-session outcome monitoring
and developing an outcomes database for the team, I was flattered to be
invited to join the CYP-IAPT steering group. Perhaps CYP-IAPT was going
to go in a new exciting direction after all. My resulting flirtation
with CYP-IAPT proved to be a short lived, but fascinating, insight into
how bureaucratisation happens when large monolithic programmes are
attempted.

Instead of building on existing and successful service transformation
projects that have been developed in other countries and in the
UK\ :sup:`16` (and I must declare a potential conflict of interest here
– at present ideological rather than financial), the service
transformation CYP-IAPT aimed for used the same expensive technological
paradigm adhered to by the inefficient IAPT project. The millions given
to this programme is being spent on sending CAMHS clinicians to train in
the delivery of manualised treatments (such as CBT or parent
management). These clinicians’ time then needs to be backfilled, and
once trained they are to come back and deliver these therapies in
diagnostic-based pathways. A course for managers and extensive
implementation checklists have been developed adding greater complexity
to service transformation while missing out on learning from whole
service projects that have already demonstrated how you might achieve
improved outcomes and efficiency. This choking bureaucratisation seems
to happen whenever such national projects are attempted in CAMHS.

For example, the CAMHS Outcomes Research Consortium (CORC) has been
operating as a UK national project since 2004 with the aim of
instituting a common model of routine outcome evaluation and data
analysis. However, return rates for second scores on the main
patient-rated outcome measure have run at 10–25% or lower for years,
thus no reliable and therefore valid outcome data has, at any point,
been produced. No matter what they did they could not improve the return
rate because the project failed to connect with the reality that
front-line clinicians’ face. Such national projects are at constant risk
of morphing into ever more complex systems that offer little to help the
daily practice of hard-pressed clinicians and therefore little to offer
patients.

In my own service we have continued to develop an ‘outcome orientated’
approach\ :sup:`16` drawing on the successful American ‘Partners for
Change Outcome Management Systems’ (PCOMS) model.\ :sup:`27` Indeed,
PCOMS is recognised as an evidence-based model by the USA ‘Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration’ (SAMHSA) National
Registry of Evidence-based Programs and Practices on the basis of
sufficient randomised controlled trial research. Although it would be
insulting and disrespectful to the diversity of opinions in our CAMHS
service to claim our project has been a runaway success without immense
and problematic aspects, what I can, I believe, claim is that drawing on
and building on models that have already demonstrated improved outcomes,
improved efficiency, improved recovery rates and decreased
medicalisation; has engaged clinicians, proved cheap and efficient and
built a database of outcomes for the whole service in under a year. I
can tell you my own outcome data for open and discharged cases as well
as the outcomes for the team I work with and our service as a whole. We
have simple formats that provide our commissioners with the sort of
whole-service outcome data they have never previously had. We did not
need expensive formulaic trainings, just building on the existing skills
of the workforce and providing a feedback mechanism that helps us focus
on recovery and enhancing reflective practice.

.. _S4:

Conclusion
==========

The evidence from a variety of outcome studies provides important
pointers for how we should design our services. Extra-therapeutic
factors are by far the biggest factor influencing outcomes, which should
help us have a little more humility about the task of helping people
experiencing mental distress. When we deliver services, matching model
of treatment to diagnosis is not only a waste of time (given its
clinically insignificant impact on outcomes), but fetishising approaches
denies patients choice and flexibility, leading to more potential for
disengaging from treatment if the model used is not connecting
meaningfully for them (a major problem in delivering our Western
psychotherapies with marginalised groups such as ethnic minorities). It
is clear to me, and an increasing number of psychiatrists, psychologists
and researchers that our allegiance to the technical model for
understanding mental distress and behavioural deviance is a big mistake.
Meaningful transformations in mental healthcare are unlikely to come
through projects like IAPT and CYP-IAPT that can not see this. Instead
what we get when we go down the technical route is reduced potential
patient choice, poor value for money, increasing medicalisation and
bureaucracies that alienate clinicians.

I realise that in the face of powerful well-funded organisations, I am
powerless to influence meaningful change. But given the overwhelming
evidence and so many critics, perhaps together we can foment enough
momentum to make possible a more informed national debate to take place
that would lead to a more evidence-based approach and future reform of
well-intentioned but misguided projects like CYP-IAPT.

.. [1]
   **Sami Timimi**, FRCPsych, is a consultant child and adolescent
   psychiatrist for Child and Family Services at the Horizon Centre,
   Lincoln.

.. [2]
   See *Bulletin* comment, p. 100, this issue.
