=============================================
Should psychiatrists ‘Google’ their patients?
=============================================



G. Alice Ashby
Aileen O'Brien
Deborah Bowman
Carwyn Hooper
Toby Stevens
Esther Lousada
:Correspondence: G. Alice Ashby
(alice.lomax@swlstg-tr.nhs.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   Since its beginnings in the 1980s the internet has come to shape our
   everyday lives, but doctors still seem rather afraid of it. This
   anxiety may be explained by the fact that researchers and regulatory
   bodies focus less on the way that the internet can be used to enhance
   clinical work and more on the potential and perceived risks that this
   technology poses in terms of boundary violations and accidental
   breaches of confidentiality. Some aspects of the internet's impact on
   medicine have been better researched than others, for example,
   whether email communication, social media and teleconferencing
   psychotherapy could be used to improve the delivery of care. However,
   few authors have considered the specific issue of searching online
   for information about patients and much of the guidance published by
   regulatory organisations eludes this issue. In this article we
   provide clinical examples where the question ‘should I Google the
   patient?’ may arise and present questions for future research.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _S1:

Background
==========

The internet is a part of everyday life and access to it is growing at a
startling rate. According to the United Nations' specialised agency for
information and communication technologies (the International
Telecommunication Union), by the end of 2014, 3 billion people,
approximately 43% of the world's population, will have access to the
internet, compared with 60 million people in 2000. The number of
mobile-broadband subscriptions will reach 2.3 billion globally by the
end of 2014, almost five times as many as in 2008.\ :sup:`1` Social
media has also weaved its way into people's lives over the past decade.
There were 802 million daily active users and 1.28 billion monthly
active users of the social media site Facebook in March 2014, and over
80% of the daily users of Facebook are based outside the USA and
Canada.\ :sup:`2` According to the Office for National Statistics, the
UK has one of the highest rates of social media use in Europe, with
almost half of all adults (48%) using social networking sites such as
Facebook and Twitter.\ :sup:`3`

Some aspects of the internet's impact on medicine have been better
investigated than others. Various authors have looked at whether email
could be used as an acceptable form of communication between doctor and
patient.\ :sup:`4,5` Psychiatrists have also looked into the possibility
of using video teleconferencing for psychotherapy.\ :sup:`6` The use
(and misuse) of social media by doctors, in terms of professionalism and
boundary violations, has been studied.\ :sup:`7,8` This has led to a
plethora of professional regulatory bodies and other medical
organisations publishing guidelines to help doctors navigate the
internet in general and social media in particular.\ :sup:`9-13` The
published guidance is reasonably thorough: guidelines concentrate on the
advice given to professionals about their use of social media sites, and
their profile on them. Professionals are advised against forming
friendships with patients online. However, professional bodies are often
behind the curve in doing this. For example, the UK's General Medical
Council guidelines were first published on the 25 March 2013,\ :sup:`9`
a full 9 years after Facebook was founded.\ :sup:`14`

The issue of searching online for patient information has caught the
imagination of doctors and ethicists writing in the
blogosphere.\ :sup:`15-17` Many raise concerns about the potential
ethical ‘slippery slope’ of Googling your patient, but raise examples
where it may be justifiable. However, there has been little discussion
in formal medical ethics and law literature about this issue. There is
also a paucity of official guidance to help doctors navigate their way
through this particular online minefield. For example, the British
Medical Association's guidance on social media does not refer to this
issue at all and the Royal College of Psychiatrists in the UK has not
yet issued any guidance in relation to this kind of online activity.
Where professional guidance does touch upon the issue of ‘online
searching’ it focuses on the problems that can arise when patients
‘Google’ their doctors rather than the other way around. We are not
aware of any legal cases in this particular area either. In sum, there
is an apparent regulatory lacuna in terms of whether and if so, how,
doctors should use the internet to dig around in their patients' digital
backyards.

The lack of research and guidance in this area is increasingly
problematic because a great deal of information about patients is now
available at the click of a search box button. Many of us are
documenting our lives online far more than might have ever been expected
20 years ago and doctors and patients can now find out a huge amount
about each other online with relatively little effort.\ :sup:`18` In
addition many patients post personal information online that could
potentially harm them or have an impact on clinical assessments by their
healthcare professionals and a growing number of doctors admit to using
the internet to search for general clinical information.\ :sup:`19`

Clinton *et al* provide the only comprehensive review of the literature
on the ethical difficulties surrounding searching online for information
about patients, something they term ‘patient-targeted Googling’
(PTG).\ :sup:`20` They provide a list of questions for psychiatrists to
consider before deciding whether to use PTG, shown in Box 1.\ :sup:`20`
They argue that PTG can be an acceptable clinical tool but warn against
‘unbridled PTG simply because online information is legally available in
the public domain’. They describe possible conflicts, such as using
‘Google Earth’ to look at photographs of a patient's large house, when
the person has not paid for psychotherapy (the authors are based in the
USA), and compare this with driving past the patient's house, which
would be considered by many to be a boundary violation.\ :sup:`20` This
raises questions about whether such media reconstitute the meaning of
boundary violation: is looking at ‘Google Earth’ as intrusive as going
to look at someone's house in person? The internet, whether we like it
or not, has caused pre-existing boundaries to blur.

In this paper we will look at the potential benefits and harms related
to internet searching being used as a clinical investigative tool and
propose some questions for future research. In this article we use the
word ‘Google’ as a verb intentionally, as it has become part of our
everyday English language, meaning ‘to use an internet search engine to
find information’.

.. _S2:

Checking conflicting and falsified information
==============================================

Internet searching for information about patients may mean finding
things you did not expect, that the patient had not shared or had even
lied about. Should we use the internet to investigate factitious
disorder or malingering?

Volpe *et al* discuss a case involving a 26-year-old patient who had
requested a prophylactic bilateral mastectomy with reconstruction
because of an extensive family history of cancer, where there was
suspicion among the clinical team that some of the history was
fabricated.\ :sup:`21` In the paper Volpe, Blackall and Green argue that
‘uninvited patient Googling’ is bad practice for three reasons. First,
it bypasses the personal relationship and makes it too easy to terminate
a relationship with a patient, and to avoid discussion of personal
topics. Second, it erodes provider-patient trust. Third, it represents
an invasion of privacy. They also make the point that it is unclear why
a healthcare professional would not just ask the individual in person if
they had any concerns about them. In the same paper, George, Baker and
Kaufmann argue for the opposite position.\ :sup:`21` They note that it
would be ‘irresponsible not to exhaust all resources in learning about a
patient with such troubling red flags’. They argue that the finding of a
factitious disorder via the patient's two Facebook pages ‘saved a team
of professionals from aiding and abetting a fraudulent, deceptive and
self-injurious scheme’, stopping them from breaking their oath to first
‘do no harm’.\ :sup:`21`

Clinton *et al* ask how the discovery of important information found
online would then be broached with the patient and how this information
should be documented in the medical notes.\ :sup:`20` Interestingly, no
author we could find in a literature search had considered whether an
online search could be performed with the patient's informed consent
and, perhaps, in the patient's presence. In the Volpe *et al* case, for
example, the surgical and genetics teams used an internet search in what
they believed to be the patient's best interests, without telling her
beforehand. What is also not explained is how the patient was told she
would not be having surgery and what reasons the patient was given for
this decision.

.. _S3:

Uncovering dangerous lifestyle choices
======================================

Doctors could Google their patients in order to investigate concordance
with advice about treatment and lifestyle changes, including advice
about not driving or misusing various drugs. Psychiatrists, in
particular, might be interested in discovering whether a patient with
psychosis is drinking alcohol heavily or using other substances, which
might cause or exacerbate psychotic symptoms.

Farnan *et al*'s main concern is that ‘digitally tracking the personal
behaviours of patients, such as determining whether they have indeed
quit smoking or are maintaining a healthy diet, may threaten the trust
needed for a strong patient-physician relationship’.\ :sup:`22` The
violation of trust might occur because patients assume that doctors do
not perform such searches (i.e. the violation relates to a real, or
perceived, deceit) or because they feel that such activity violates
important boundaries. Gabbard *et al* note that the boundary violation
may be the nub of the problem.\ :sup:`23` It is hard to imagine how the
doctors in the Volpe *et al* case, described above, approached their
patient with the information found on her Facebook accounts. If the
information was related to her – as it presumably was – it is hard to
see how this could have led to a positive, therapeutic, outcome. Indeed,
the patient may well have felt betrayed by the team caring for her.

Of course, if a doctor can find out about such things as alcohol and
drug misuse by searching in the ‘online public domain’, the same holds
true for other people. Accessing information on an internet search
engine or social media site would be much easier for a patient's future
employer than accessing a person's medical records without their
consent. In an era of recovery-oriented medicine, including supporting
people to return to work, perhaps we should be proactively and openly
discussing online presence, for example as part of the employment
support provided by a community psychiatry team?

.. _S4:

Mistaken identity
=================

Another problem may arise from the fact that many people have the same
names. How do we know information found on Google about a patient is
actually about them? If you Google one of our names (G.A.L.), an online
namesake is a character from the film ‘The Devil's Advocate’, in fact
‘Alice Lomax’ in the film is Satan's child's mother. We doubt anyone is
actually confused by this, but clearly less obvious confusions might
happen, and the simple answer is that identities online cannot be
absolutely confirmed. Furthermore an individual may use pseudonyms, or
internet information might obviously be wrong, as anyone can post
anything.

If, however, we had asked for informed consent from the patient to do
the search in the first place, especially if they were present during
the search, the potential for confusion could be reduced because they
could identify any obvious errors with ease. The patient could also more
openly discuss with their doctor any negative – and potentially
defamatory – comments posted about them online by other people and it
would also help doctors identify situations where the patient was the
victim of ‘cyber-bullying’.

.. _S5:

Delusions of grandeur or reality?
=================================

An internet search can act as a form of collateral history. For example
consider a man who presents with an exuberant, energetic persona, speaks
rather quickly and loudly, and then tells his doctor he knows some
Royals and has written a famous book or been in a film. Googling his
name might immediately clarify whether these were grandiose delusions
and this information might also make a difference in determining whether
or not the patient is diagnosed with mania in the context of bipolar
disorder.

Clearly the difficulty with this is that something being online does not
mean it is true. It is possible to ‘be who you want to be’ online; to
invent an ideal persona or avatar is almost as simple as revealing
information about yourself that ‘you did not want to be made public’.
However, we suspect that many clinical psychiatrists have used Google
for this purpose before, as often multiple references, or references on
trusted sites, can give reassurance that what someone is saying is true.
There is a clear negative side to this however. Patients in psychiatry
may be particularly vulnerable to not being ‘believed’ and routine
Googling to check what the person has said might reinforce this tendency
and stigma.

.. _S6:

Mental health monitoring using social media
===========================================

Consider a long-term patient with severe depression, who has regular
appointments with a community psychiatry team. Could someone from the
mental health team monitor the patient's mental state via their social
media feed or blog, with their consent? Assuming people write honestly
and use the same websites regularly, social media can give a unique,
time-relevant insight into a person's mental state. For example a
Facebook ‘status’ or a ‘tweet’ on Twitter might often include
information about how a person is feeling. The posting of certain
pictures and videos or even ‘emoticons’ (cartoon faces depicting
different emotions) might also reveal important insights into the
patient's current frame of mind.

Clearly, if psychiatrists were to monitor mental state in this way, it
would fundamentally change how mental health systems work, but it is not
as far fetched as it sounds. It would not necessarily involve a person
constantly watching the millions of messages streaming via a forum,
Facebook or Twitter feed, which would clearly be impossible. The
technology to automatically flag the use of certain phrases in emails or
on social media already exists, and a team at Dartmouth University in
the USA, involving computer scientists and psychiatrists are developing
this technology to help prevent suicide, as part of *The Durkheim
Project*.\ :sup:`24`

Familiarity with the internet does depend on age. Marc Prenksy describes
‘digital natives’ as compared with ‘digital immigrants’, born before the
‘rapid dissemination of digital technology in the last decades of the
20th Century’.\ :sup:`25` He, fairly terrifyingly asserts that today's
average university graduate has ‘spent less than 5,000 hours of their
lives reading, but over 10,000 hours playing video games [and] 20,000
hours watching TV’ and that ‘as a result of this ubiquitous environment
and the sheer volume of their interaction with it … think and process
information fundamentally differently from their predecessors’. There is
evidence that young people who self-harm find it easier to express their
feelings honestly and openly in an online forum than during a
face-to-face consultation and would prefer this.\ :sup:`26`

This suggests to us that we should be open to different methods of
communication with different age groups, as not doing so means we may
miss vital information. In the mastectomy case described above, George,
in the paper with Volpe and colleagues, goes further, and suggests we
should use all the resources we have where there are ‘red flags’, and
that not using an internet search would be negligent in some
cases.\ :sup:`21` This tracking would, potentially, allow interventions
to be made, for example to intervene urgently if a patient was suicidal.
Clearly the difficulty with this is that doctors cannot check the online
‘statuses’ of all their patients all the time, and it would be difficult
to gauge where responsibilities would stop and what the standard duty of
care amount to in such cases. In addition, tracking a patient's blog, or
social media feed might actually, quite rightly, increase a sense of
paranoia.

.. _S7:

Safeguarding vulnerable adults online
=====================================

Given that anyone and everyone can read what is openly online, an online
search can sometimes protect vulnerable adults from abuse from others.
Cyber-bullying, for example, involves threatening or derogatory messages
posted on social media sites or online chat forums. It might also
include things like encouragement to lose weight in anorexia nervosa or
messages inciting self-harm or violence. Discussing this issue openly
with patients and carers, in the same way that psychiatrists would
openly discuss other risk issues, seems sensible. Also imagine a young
man with paranoid schizophrenia who is in hospital, very unwell with
psychosis, and finds it frustrating that no one ‘believes’ what he is
experiencing. He tells his psychiatrist to look at his blog online, in
order to full understand what he means. The team agree that with
informed consent it is acceptable to do this search and they proceed
with the online search. In the process they find that the blog, which
has almost daily entries, gives good information about when the patient
started to become unwell since there is marked evidence that his thought
disorder and delusional beliefs increased in severity over the course of
the past few weeks. However, the team also see that in one blog post,
the patient has included sensitive personal information about himself,
including his home address. They discuss this with him, and how
vulnerable this might potentially make him, and arrangements are made
for the blog post to be taken down.

In this situation the patient has given permission for the online search
and has, in fact, asked the team to specifically read his online blog.
In such cases searching online for information seems reasonable.
However, this kind of scenario raises deeper ethical questions about
whether mental health professionals should be proactively discussing
online presence with patients, not just to find out information about
deteriorating mental state, or to help holistically with recovery, but
also to safeguard vulnerable individuals and potentially assess risk to
others, for example by discovering threats made online in the context of
illness.

.. _S8:

Only Googling when there is no other option
===========================================

Searching for information about a patient online should also clearly be
done on a ‘need to know’ basis and not purely out of curiosity or
voyeurism. Imagine a core trainee being called to a forensic psychiatry
in-patient unit on-call, which they do not usually work on, to examine a
patient who might have a chest infection. We would not expect this
doctor to search online to find out what crime was committed by the
patient because this information has no bearing on the patient's
physical problem and will not help the doctor to provide whatever
treatment the patient may need. In fact, the internet search might even
have an impact on the ability of the doctor to treat the patient in an
impartial and non-judgemental manner, especially if the crime was
especially heinous.

Of course, doctors have the right to protect themselves from harm and
the need to perform a risk assessment may mean that the doctor would
need to know about any danger posed by the patient. However, there would
be no indication for an internet search in this case as other members of
the team would know the patient's history well and would be able to
inform the doctor if the patient was dangerous. The doctor could also,
of course, consult the patient's notes if no other team members were
available to consult.

.. _S9:

To consent or not to consent?
=============================

Would it be better practice to routinely ask consent and is informed
consent possible for a Google search in psychiatry? The key elements of
consent for an intervention in medicine usually include patient
competence, the health professional giving clear information about
potential benefits and risks and voluntariness. Many psychiatric
patients fulfil all of these requirements and could, thus, consent to an
online search. However, some of the patients in whom an online search
may be a useful ‘investigation’ may not have the mental capacity to
consent.

Likewise, patients on a psychiatry ward or in clinic may feel coerced
into allowing an internet search, feeling that a ‘no’ will mean doctors
will get suspicious or carry out a more ‘invasive’ online search without
their consent. It is also worth pointing out that some patients might
want to delete a few posts and images before the search is carried out
because they deem some information to be ‘embarrassing’ (for example a
photograph of them when they were an ‘awkward’ teenager). This does not
seem unreasonable but it might be difficult if the doctor wants to
conduct the search immediately. We are also concerned about the
discussion about risks and benefits: if we do not know exactly what we
will look for or find, is discussing the relative merits of a search
possible? It is unusual for a doctor to discuss every possible finding
of a magnetic resonance imaging scan or blood test with a patient before
carrying it out, but of course the standard expected would be that
relevant information is shared.

Informing patients would neuter the problem associated with deceit,
however, it would not deal with the problem of potential boundary
violations and it would not solve the potential for coercion either. The
only way around these problems would be to seek consent from every
single patient and make it clear that any refusal would be honoured. In
other words, perhaps we should seek consent to search online for
information about patients just like we ask for consent to speak to a
relative or friend to discuss a patient's condition? If we were to do
this openly, perhaps the risk that patients might become upset or angry
about the process might be reduced and, as Chretien & Kind note, this
would help to limit foreseen harms.\ :sup:`27` There may be situations
where risk to the patient, or to others, means that a Google search is
appropriate without the patient's consent.

.. _S10:

Mental health specific concerns
===============================

Some of the ethical issues raised may be more pertinent to psychiatry
than to other branches of medicine. Many patients will have experienced
the validity of what they are saying being doubted by their doctors. If
psychiatrists embrace PTG it could be seen as another paternalistic
intervention. The capacity of patients in psychiatry will by the nature
of their conditions be more likely to be impaired than in other branches
of medicine. They may well lack capacity to understand the consequences
of what they post on Facebook if, for example, manic and may cause
damage to work and social relationships as a result. This raises
difficult questions for concerned family and professionals about looking
at posts on the internet, and even trying to get posted information
removed.

.. _S11:

Conclusions and proposals for future research
=============================================

Many questions remain unanswered about the acceptability of Googling
patients, especially those with mental ill-health, from an ethical and
legal point of view. There is clearly an urgent need for this topic to
be addressed in the ethics and medical law literature.

Should psychiatrists Google patients at all? Should they do it
routinely, for all their patients? Should they ask for consent each and
every time? Should they share the information with the patient? These
kinds of questions urgently need to be addressed by ethicists and
psychiatrists alike. We feel that when making a decision to Google a
patient, it would be appropriate to work through a list of questions and
reflect on how one would respond, the most important question being ‘why
am I doing this internet search, and is it likely to help my patient?’

Further analysis of the legality of conducting Google searches is also
needed. Given that the kind of online searches we are talking about here
would only involve looking for information that is already in the public
domain it is not clear that this activity could be considered unlawful.
However, the lack of case law in this area makes the legality of the
activity harder to judge.

We feel that clear guidelines are needed from the bodies that regulate
health professionals on the use of internet searching, and where these
newly emerging doctor-patient boundaries lie, especially within
psychiatry. We propose that more empirical research is needed on this
topic. For example, we would like to know how widespread the practice of
PTG is among health professionals, and whether this varies depending on
age, experience or professional group. Much more qualitative information
is needed about the views of patients, their friends and families, and
healthcare professionals about this kind of activity: the problems it
might cause and potential benefits.

Failing to make use of modern technology when this technology can
improve patient care is not an option. Failing to discuss the merits and
demerits of using online searchers in an open and honest fashion is not
really an option either. The reality is that the internet has become an
integral part of our daily lives and medicine as a whole, and psychiatry
in particular, need to get to grips with what this means for modern
medical practice.

.. [1]
   **G. Alice Ashby** is a specialist registrar/ST6 in psychiatry in the
   South West London and St George's Mental Health Trust. **Aileen
   O'Brien** is a senior lecturer in general adult psychiatry in the
   Institute of Medical and Biomedical Education, St George's,
   University of London and honorary consultant at the South West London
   and St George's Mental Health Trust. **Deborah Bowman** is a
   professor of bioethics, clinical ethics and medical law at the
   Institute of Medical and Biomedical Education, St George's,
   University of London. **Carwyn Hooper** is a senior lecturer in
   medical ethics and law at the Institute of Medical and Biomedical
   Education, St George's, University of London. **Toby Stevens** is a
   medical student at St George's, University of London. **Esther
   Lousada** is a medical student at St George's, University of London.
