=========================================================================================================
Patient characteristics and predictors of completion in residential treatment for substance use disorders
=========================================================================================================



Giles Newton-Howes
James StanleyCorrespondence to Giles Newton-Howes
(giles.newton-howes@otago.ac.nz)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To identify the patient characteristics and rates
   of retention in a residential rehabilitation drug and alcohol service
   (Springhill) based on an eclectic model of care. Patients were
   assessed using the Alcohol and Drug Outcome Measure (ADOM), a brief
   tool designed for the New Zealand setting. We looked at correlations
   between demographic, social and drug use parameters. Logistic
   regression assessed the relative impact of each variable on
   completion.

   **Results** The 183 patients who completed the data collection did
   not differ from 47 non-completers by demographic data; 62.2% of
   patients completed the programme, with equal number of men and women.
   One in five participants was Maori, the indigenous minority. Alcohol
   (51.9%) was the commonest drug of misuse, with methamphetamine
   (16.4%) and cannabis (14.2%) also significant. Completers were more
   likely to be Maori, have conflict with family and housing problems,
   although the last became non-significant in logistic regression.

   **Clinical implications** Retention rates are higher in Springhill
   than in comparable programmes. Ethnicity and family conflict predict
   completion, although the reasons for this are unclear. ADOM is an
   effective tool that can be used in a clinical setting to enable
   analysis of service provision.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Substance use disorders (SUDs) are relapsing and remitting disorders
that affect a significant proportion of the community. One-year
prevalence rates of alcohol use disorders range from 3.5%\ :sup:`1` to
8.7%,\ :sup:`2` with lifetime rates for SUDs reaching 12.3%.\ :sup:`3`
The commonest age of onset for alcohol and drug problems is early
adulthood,\ :sup:`4,5` although the diagnosis may not be stable at this
point.\ :sup:`6` Not only are SUDs common, they cause significant social
morbidity,\ :sup:`1` physical morbidity\ :sup:`7` and
mortality.\ :sup:`8` The reasons for ongoing use in the face of such
difficulties is unclear, however, this may be due to the compulsive
nature of substance use.\ :sup:`9` Despite this, recovery from alcohol
use is an achievable goal,\ :sup:`10` hastened by effective management
strategies.

A wide range of treatment options are used clinically, adopting both
harm reduction\ :sup:`11` and abstinence\ :sup:`12` models. The latter
is often the preferred choice, yet the success of these treatments is
well known to be poor.\ :sup:`13` The most intensive intervention for
addiction is residential rehabilitation,\ :sup:`14` used in most
countries and considered integral by almost half addictions
clinicians.\ :sup:`15` Drop-out remains a major difficulty for
residential programmes\ :sup:`16,17` and improved retention is related
to improved outcomes.\ :sup:`18` Patient factors such as family
involvement and employment improve retention,\ :sup:`19` as do
interpersonal factors such as the therapeutic alliance.\ :sup:`20` A
number of programme factors may also be important, including the ratio
of counsellors to patients and a structured programme of therapy, as
well as a balance between contributing to the community, specific
addictions work and free time.\ :sup:`21` Psychopathology has not been
found to be correlated with outcome\ :sup:`22,23` and this is
interpreted as support for residential treatment for patients with drug
use disorders and coexisting mental disorder.\ :sup:`24,25`

Developing routine assessment of residential interventions enables both
description of patients presenting to these services and analysis of
outcome. Although previous research is a useful guide, it may not be
generalisable. Country and culture are two factors that may have an
impact on alcohol and drug use and its management.\ :sup:`26,27`
Similarly, the attitudes and beliefs of addictions clinicians are of
significance in deciding who is referred for residential
treatment.\ :sup:`28` Differences in culture,\ :sup:`29`
policy,\ :sup:`30` funding and politics\ :sup:`31` shape service
provision and necessitate country-specific research. They also point to
the need for country-specific, ideally easy to implement, research tools
that have the capacity to translate into routine clinical practice. Only
one New Zealand study has examined residential interventions,\ :sup:`23`
despite the importance of understanding this costly intervention and for
whom it is most appropriate. This study supported a ‘non-discriminating
approach’ to referral but did not use New-Zealand-specific measures and
assessed a long-term treatment setting. Replication and assessment in
short-duration residential treatment settings is important to both
compare outcomes and examine possible differences.

For these reasons, we investigated the outcomes in a short-duration
(8-week), eclectic residential programme using a locally designed and
validated tool and report on factors that were associated with programme
completion.

.. _S1:

Method
======

In total, 230 clients consecutively admitted to the Springhill
residential rehabilitation programme were included in this study. These
clients were admitted during 2011/2012. All completed standard clinical
documentation on admission to Springhill and in addition were asked to
complete an Alcohol and drug Outcome Measure (ADOM) on admission and
discharge. The research was approved by the Southern Health and
Disability Ethics Committee and the local district health board.

.. _S2:

The programme
-------------

Springhill runs an 8-week residential rehabilitation programme for all
substance use disorders. Up to 15 patients can be admitted at any one
time. Patients undergo managed withdrawal with their referring teams
before admission if this is considered necessary, particularly from
high-dose alcohol. It is unique in New Zealand insofar as the clinical
programme is delivered by clinicians from a district health board (a
public health provider) but the facility is governed by a private trust.
All clinicians are registered health practitioners with clinical
expertise in addiction treatment. The programme has input from a
substance misuse psychiatrist and general practitioner with a special
interest in addictions providing medical oversight. The programme is
abstinence based, including abstinence from tobacco, and draws on
principles from the 12-step programme, cognitive-behavioural therapy,
family systems theory and some elements of a therapeutic community. In
this way it is similar to residential programmes elsewhere\ :sup:`32`
and would best be considered as eclectic. Each week is structured around
facilitated large group sessions with all clients, supplemented by
individual and family work. Exercise and involvement in the running of
the facility are part of the programme. Each client has an individual
therapist to work with alongside the group and all clients are reviewed
medically and have access to psychiatric review if necessary. At the
conclusion of the programme clients are referred back to their community
addictions providers.

.. _S3:

Client characteristics
----------------------

Patients are accepted primarily from secondary addictions services in
the community when this intervention has been ineffective as judged by
their community clinician. There are few specific exclusion criteria and
referrals are assessed on a case by case basis. Referrals are received
from the lower North Island of New Zealand and include both rural and
urban settings. Programme entry requires that there is a service to
refer the client back to on completion. In the case of abrupt discharge
each client has a person whom they have agreed to be contacted, with the
referring service contacted the following day. If there are clinical
concerns, a psychiatric crisis team is available to undertake assessment
as deemed necessary. A clinical diagnosis of alcohol or drug dependence
is a requisite for consideration for admission. Judicial direction is a
specific exclusion criterion (i.e. clients cannot be legally directed
into treatment at Springhill).

.. _S4:

The ADOM tool
-------------

The ADOM is a brief tool to collect outcome data and measure
improvements after intervention in substance dependence, specifically in
a New Zealand setting. Part A of the tool is validated\ :sup:`24` and
part B is similar to other tools used to collect information on social
support and context, in line with other addictions rating
instruments.\ :sup:`33` Part A focuses on drug use, particularly number
of days' use in the past 4 weeks and total use of alcohol in units, this
being the most prevalent drug of misuse in New Zealand. Tobacco use is
measured as average number of cigarettes a day. Part B asks clients to
rate the frequency of problems in multiple social domains as a result of
drug dependence, again in the past 4 weeks. These include problems
related to physical health, mental health, conflict in interpersonal
relationships, difficulties with work or other structured activity,
housing and criminal activity. These are self-reported on a 1–5 Likert
scale. A score of 1 represents no difficulty in the social variable
measured, whereas a score of 5 represents daily or almost daily
problems. These variables were measured for the 4 weeks preceding
admission during engagement with community alcohol and drug services.
This allowed for a measure of current social problems and can allow for
examination of changes on these scales over time. The advantage of a
self-report measure is its acceptability to patients and the reporting
of perceived difficulty as assessed by the client.

.. _S5:

Data collection and analysis
----------------------------

At admission basic demographic information was collected from the
patient and the ADOM tool was completed by the patient with their
admitting therapist. At discharge, all patients completed discharge
paperwork with their discharge therapist and the ADOM tool was again
administered at this point. If clients were discharged outside of
working hours they were contacted the following day to complete the ADOM
if this was possible. All analysis was carried out in SPSS 19 for
Windows and undertaken by one of the authors (J.S.).

The primary goal of this analysis was to identify what, if any, factors
were associated with retention in the programme to 8 weeks or attrition
over the 8 weeks. The purpose of this analysis is to provide services
with information about clients who are at greater likelihood of
succeeding to completion. All demographic and ADOM data used in this
analysis are based on the measures collected at admission.

Descriptive statistics on sociodemographic and basic clinical
characteristics (as collected at admission) are reported as means,
standard deviations and proportions as appropriate. Logistic regression
analysis was used to examine unadjusted relationships between each of
the potential predictor variables and the outcome of completing the
programme (defined as 8 weeks' participation in the residential
programme). The predictor list set was developed *a priori*.

To consider the potential impact of confounding on the modelled
estimates, subsequent logistic regression analysis looked at adjusted
estimates for programme completion. Adjusted results are presented in
four blocks. First, sociodemographic variables (age, gender and
ethnicity) were entered into the model. Block two consisted of adding
the primary drug of dependence as identified by the patients themselves
(simplified to alcohol, cannabis, amphetamine and other drugs (e.g.
opioids) and no drug specified). The third block included adding
physical and psychological health variables and finally, social
variables including work, paid employment, housing and crime. The model
was developed to identify for whom completion was most likely as a proxy
marker for positive long-term outcomes.

.. _S6:

Results
=======

.. _S7:

Patient demographic data
------------------------

During the study period 230 patients were admitted to Springhill, of
whom 183 (80%) completed ADOM data on admission and discharge. The 47
patients for whom complete data were not available did not differ from
the included patient data-set on basic demographic data. Overall, 143
patients (62% of all admitted patients) completed the 8-week programme
(including 2 patients who stayed 9 weeks and 1 patient who stayed 10
weeks). For those included in the analysis the average age was 37 years
with equal numbers of men and women. The majority of clients (74%) were
White, 21% were Maori and the remainder identified with other ethnic
backgrounds. At the time of admission 33% of clients had a partner,
although 1 in 5 declined to answer this question. These variables are
similar to those of clients not included in further analysis and similar
to the demographic of the region (`Table 1 <#T1>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Demographic and drug use of the client group

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Client      | Analysed    | Missing     | Total (*n*  | *N* valid   |
   | status (at  | data (*n* = | data (*n* = | = 230)      | by question |
   | admission)  | 183)        | 47)         |             |             |
   +=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
   | Age, years: | 37.4 (11)   | 36.2 (11.5) | 37.1 (11.1) | 230 (100%)  |
   | mean (s.d.) |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Gender      |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Male    | 96 (52.5%)  | 20 (58.8%)  | 116 (53.5%) | 217 (94.3%) |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Female  | 87 (47.5%)  | 14 (41.2%)  | 101 (46.5%) |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Ethnicity   |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Maori   | 39 (21.3%)  | 3 (23.1%)   | 42 (21.4%)  | 196 (85.2%) |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     White   | 136 (74.3%) | 9 (69.2%)   | 145 (74%)   |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Other   | 8 (4.4%)    | 1 (7.7%)    | 9 (4.6%)    |             |
   | specified   |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | R           |             |             |             |             |
   | elationship |             |             |             |             |
   | status      |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Partner | 51 (32%)    | 8 (36%)     | 59 (33%)    | 181 (79%)   |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     No      | 108 (68%)   | 14 (64%)    | 122 (67%)   |             |
   | partner     |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Main drug   |             |             |             |             |
   | at          |             |             |             |             |
   | admission   |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Alcohol | 95 (51.9%)  | 9 (33.3%)   | 104 (49.5%) | 210 (91.3%) |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             | 26 (14.2%)  | 7 (25.9%)   | 33 (15.7%)  |             |
   |    Cannabis |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     A       | 30 (16.4%)  | 5 (18.5%)   | 35 (16.7%)  |             |
   | mphetamine, |             |             |             |             |
   | other\ `a   |             |             |             |             |
   |  <#TFN1>`__ |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     None    | 32 (17.5%)  | 6 (22.2%)   | 38 (18.1%)  |             |
   | selected    |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | Substance   |             |             |             |             |
   | use in past |             |             |             |             |
   | 4 weeks by  |             |             |             |             |
   | main drug   |             |             |             |             |
   | of          |             |             |             |             |
   | depe        |             |             |             |             |
   | ndence,\ `b |             |             |             |             |
   |  <#TFN2>`__ |             |             |             |             |
   | days:       |             |             |             |             |
   | mean (s.d.) |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Alcohol | 13.2 (9.5)  | 11.1 (4.9)  | 13.1 (9.2)  | 95 (91.3%)  |
   | (*n* = 104) |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             | 16.4 (11.8) | 12.7 (12.8) | 15.6 (11.9) | 26 (78.8%)  |
   |    Cannabis |             |             |             |             |
   | (*n* = 33)  |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |     Amphe   | 4.2 (7.6)   | 9.3 (12.7)  | 4.9 (8.4)   | 23 (85.2%)  |
   | tamines\ `c |             |             |             |             |
   |  <#TFN3>`__ |             |             |             |             |
   | (*n* = 27)  |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   |             | 12.4 (12.8) | 13.5 (11.7) | 12.5 (12.6) | 183 (79.6%) |
   |  Cigarettes |             |             |             |             |
   | (*n* = 230) |             |             |             |             |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

   A total of 8 clients reported using other substances outside the main
   categories.

   Days' use represents the number of days' use of the substance
   identified as the primary drug of dependence by the client. The
   exception is mean number of days nicotine used; this is for the whole
   sample.

   Amphetamine usage among those with amphetamine as main drug at
   admission.

.. _S8:

Drug use variables
------------------

The commonest drug of dependence in the sample was alcohol with 51.9% of
clients identifying this as their most problematic drug. Amphetamine,
primarily methamphetamine (16.4%), and cannabis (14.2%) were the other
significant primary drugs of misuse. Thirty-two patients could not
identify a primary drug of misuse, having problems associated with
multiple drug use. Eight patients identified sedatives, opioids or other
drugs as their primary drug of dependence with no more than three in
each group. Twelve patients used the intravenous route for drug
administration in the 4 weeks before admission, with 3 patients sharing
needles.

Patients with primary alcohol dependence drank on average 14 units a day
in the month before admission, with alcohol consumed for 13 of the past
28 days. Those with cannabis dependence smoked on 16 of the past 28 days
on average. The 27 patients with amphetamine dependence used on 4 of the
28 days before admission. All groups were engaged in community alcohol
and drug out-patient programmes prior to their admission. Tobacco
smoking was common in this group despite the admission criteria to
Springhill identifying it as a smoke-free rehabilitation facility, with
the expectation of discharge if smoking occurred during the admission.

.. _S9:

Social variables
----------------

A quarter of clients stated their drug use led to daily physical health
problems, with almost two-thirds identifying physical health problems
occurring at least weekly and directly related to their drug use. Mental
health problems occurred on a daily basis for one in seven patients,
with three-quarters identifying mental health difficulties related to
the use of drugs of dependence. Social difficulties were also common:
20% of patients recorded daily conflict with family or friends and
almost two-thirds recognised conflict at least weekly. Recreational and
work were similarly compromised, with 83% and 67% of clients
respectively identifying problems at some point. Housing was a daily
problem for three-quarters of clients. Despite the specific exclusion of
referrals from the judicial systems, more than 90% of clients identified
crime (other than the use of illicit substances) as related to their
drug use, with more than half stating this was an almost daily problem.

.. _S10:

Univariate predictors of programme completion
---------------------------------------------

Sociodemographic, clinical and social variables were examined as
univariate predictors of programme completion using logistic regression
(`Table 2 <#T2>`__). Identifying as Maori, conflict with family and
problems with housing were associated with increased rate of retention.
Only ethnicity had an odds ratio greater than 2. Drug of dependence was
not associated with programme completion and no association was found
between coexisting mental health problems and programme completion.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Unadjusted odds ratios for completion of the 8-week residential
      rehabilitation programme among respondents with complete data (*n*
      = 183)

   ========================================= =================== ====
   Factor                                    Odds ratio (95% CI) *P*
   ========================================= =================== ====
   Age (analysed in 5-year blocks)           1.13 (0.98, 1.29)   0.10
   \                                                             
   Gender                                                        
       Male                                  0.97 (0.53, 1.77)   0.92
       Female                                1 (reference)       
   \                                                             
   Ethnicity                                                     
       Maori                                 2.31 (1.02, 5.23)   0.04
       White/other                           1 (reference)       
   \                                                             
   Primary drug of dependence                                    
       Alcohol                               1 (reference)       0.74
       Cannabis                              0.69 (0.29, 1.68)   
       Amphetamine/other                     0.66 (0.29, 1.54)   
       None selected                         0.85 (0.37, 1.95)   
   \                                                             
   Physical health problems\ `a <#TFN4>`__   1.05 (0.87, 1.27)   0.64
   \                                                             
   Mental health difficulties\ `a <#TFN4>`__ 1.02 (0.83, 1.24)   0.97
   \                                                             
   Conflict with family\ `a <#TFN4>`__       1.30 (1.04, 1.62)   0.01
   \                                                             
   Social role difficulties\ `a <#TFN4>`__   1.17 (0.96, 1.42)   0.08
   \                                                             
   Employment problems\ `a <#TFN4>`__        1.10 (0.92, 1.32)   0.24
   \                                                             
   Housing problems\ `a <#TFN4>`__           1.47 (1.10, 1.96)   0.03
   \                                                             
   Crime\ `a <#TFN4>`__                      1.11 (0.87, 1.41)   0.40
   ========================================= =================== ====

   Odds ratios are increase in odds of completion per one unit in change
   in the scale.

.. _S11:

Regression modelling of programme completion
--------------------------------------------

Logistic regression was carried out using a four-block, sequential
adjustment method. Regression estimates (presented as odds ratios and
95% confidence intervals) are presented in `Table 3 <#T3>`__. Model A
included age, gender and ethnicity as predictors of treatment, model B
added in the primary drug of dependence, while model C added scores
measuring physical health, mental health and levels of conflict with
family. The fully adjusted model (model D) added variables on social
role, employment, housing and crime.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Logistic regression of factors associated with completion of
      residential treatment programme among clients with complete data
      (n = 183)

   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | Model | Model | Model | Model |       |       |       |       |
   |       | A     | B     | C     | D     |       |       |       |       |
   +=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
   | Age   | 1.14  | 0.07  | 1.12  | 0.14  | 1.1   | 0.231 | 1.08  | 0.38  |
   | (per  | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   | 5     | 0.99, |       | 0.96, |       | 0.94, |       | 0.91, |       |
   | y     | 1.32) |       | 1.31) |       | 1.29) |       | 1.27) |       |
   | ears) |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | G     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | ender |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 1.01  | 0.97  | 1.03  | 0.92  | 0.81  | 0.55  | 0.80  | 0.54  |
   |  Male | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   |       | 0.55, |       | 0.56, |       | 0.41, |       | 0.39, |       |
   |       | 1.87) |       | 1.92) |       | 1.61) |       | 1.63) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     F | 1     |       | 1     |       | 1     |       | 1     |       |
   | emale | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   |       | refer |       | refer |       | refer |       | refer |       |
   |       | ence) |       | ence) |       | ence) |       | ence) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Ethn  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | icity |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       | 2.48  | 0.03  | 2.57  | 0.030 | 2.83  | 0.02  | 2.82  | 0.02  |
   | Maori | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   |       | 1.08, |       | 1.10, |       | 1.18, |       | 1.15, |       |
   |       | 5.66) |       | 5.98) |       | 6.75) |       | 6.92) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |     W | 1     |       | 1     |       | 1     |       | 1     |       |
   | hite/ | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   | other | refer |       | refer |       | refer |       | refer |       |
   |       | ence) |       | ence) |       | ence) |       | ence) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Pr    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | imary |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | drug  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | of    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | depen |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | dence |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       | 1     | 0.93  | 1     | 0.92  | 1     | 0.95  |
   |    Al |       |       | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   | cohol |       |       | refer |       | refer |       | refer |       |
   |       |       |       | ence) |       | ence) |       | ence) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       | 0.72  | 0.70  | 0.74  |       |       |       |
   |   Can |       |       | (     | (     | (     |       |       |       |
   | nabis |       |       | 0.27, | 0.26, | 0.26, |       |       |       |
   |       |       |       | 1.89) | 1.93) | 2.08) |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       | 0.88  |       | 0.91  |       | 0.94  |       |
   |    Am |       |       | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   | pheta |       |       | 0.35, |       | 0.36, |       | 0.36, |       |
   | mine/ |       |       | 2.17) |       | 2.28) |       | 2.47) |       |
   | other |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       | 0.93  |       | 0.88  |       | 0.88  |       |
   |  None |       |       | (     |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   | sel   |       |       | 0.40, |       | 0.36, |       | 0.36, |       |
   | ected |       |       | 2.19) |       | 2.13) |       | 2.15) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Phy   |       |       |       |       | 1.09  | 0.46  | 1.11  | 0.434 |
   | sical |       |       |       |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   | h     |       |       |       |       | 0.86, |       | 0.86, |       |
   | ealth |       |       |       |       | 1.39) |       | 1.42) |       |
   | pro   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | blems |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | \ `a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 5>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | M     |       |       |       |       | 0.86  | 0.26  | 0.85  | 0.248 |
   | ental |       |       |       |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   | h     |       |       |       |       | 0.66, |       | 0.64, |       |
   | ealth |       |       |       |       | 1.12) |       | 1.12) |       |
   | di    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | fficu |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | lties |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | \ `a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 5>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Con   |       |       |       |       | 1.47  | 0.01  | 1.44  | 0.031 |
   | flict |       |       |       |       | (     |       | (     |       |
   | with  |       |       |       |       | 1.12, |       | 1.03, |       |
   | f     |       |       |       |       | 1.93) |       | 2.00) |       |
   | amily |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | \ `a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 5>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | S     |       |       |       |       |       |       | 1.01  | 0.96  |
   | ocial |       |       |       |       |       |       | (     |       |
   | role  |       |       |       |       |       |       | 0.74, |       |
   | di    |       |       |       |       |       |       | 1.38) |       |
   | fficu |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | lties |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | \ `a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 5>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Emplo |       |       |       |       |       |       | 1.13  | 0.25  |
   | yment |       |       |       |       |       |       | (     |       |
   | pro   |       |       |       |       |       |       | 0.92, |       |
   | blems |       |       |       |       |       |       | 1.39) |       |
   | \ `a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 5>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Ho    |       |       |       |       |       |       | 1.35  | 0.078 |
   | using |       |       |       |       |       |       | (     |       |
   | pro   |       |       |       |       |       |       | 0.97, |       |
   | blems |       |       |       |       |       |       | 1.89) |       |
   | \ `a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   | 5>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
   | Crime |       |       |       |       |       |       | 1.00  | 1     |
   | \ `a  |       |       |       |       |       |       | (     |       |
   | <#TFN |       |       |       |       |       |       | 0.73, |       |
   | 5>`__ |       |       |       |       |       |       | 1.36) |       |
   +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

   Odds ratios are increase in odds of completion per one unit in change
   in the scale.

In the fully adjusted regression model (model D), only increasing
conflict with family and ethnicity (being Maori) significantly predicted
completion of the residential rehabilitation programme. Of all
variables, being Maori more than doubled the odds of programme
completion. Drug use was not predictive of completion. Notably, there
was significant use in the 28 days prior to admission and no medical
detoxification offered. This suggests clients did not leave
rehabilitation because of withdrawal phenomena. Housing problems were
not significantly associated with programme completion in the full
model, but the magnitude of the observed odds ratio and confidence
interval (OR = 1.35, 95% CI 0.97, 1.89) suggest that such problems might
also be associated with increased rates of programme completion. The
modelling was reviewed using ordinal regression with weeks completed
from 1 to 8 as the step-wise variable. This statistical model was
largely the same as the linear regression, with the only alteration
being the somewhat increased association between criminal activity and
completion. Using ordinal modelling criminal activity significantly
predicted greater length of stay (regression model available on
request).

.. _S12:

Discussion
==========

The current research uses a specific tool, ADOM, to assess patient
characteristics and potential indicators of programme completion within
a residential rehabilitation setting in New Zealand. The ADOM tool was
acceptable to patients with high completion rates, despite more than a
third of patients leaving the service early. It was easily intercalated
into routine clinical care and specific researchers were not used to
collect this information, indicating its capacity for translation for
routine use (see
`www.matuaraki.org.nz/supporting-workforce/adom <www.matuaraki.org.nz/supporting-workforce/adom>`__).
The potential for use throughout New Zealand would allow for in-depth
understanding of addiction service use and potentially prediction of
service matching.

Patients entering rehabilitation report high ongoing use of alcohol and
other drugs, despite being engaged in community treatment programmes
prior to entry. This implies difficulties for some patients with SUDs
despite community intervention and the need to develop and deliver
alternative interventions. Alcohol remains the most significant drug of
dependence in those referred for residential support, although
methamphetamine use is common. Low opioid use and low injecting rates
may reflect the effectiveness of opioid substitution regimes.\ :sup:`34`
The need for a drug-free environment is well recognised as a component
in recovery for some patients and this is likely to remain the case.
Completion rates of greater than 60% are high, with other programmes
reporting rates as low as 16%,\ :sup:`35` and likely reflect a physical,
social and therapeutic environment that is acceptable to patients. The
lack of association between specific alcohol or drug use and completion
demonstrates the ability to remain in a residential setting despite the
varying biological impact of different drug classes and argues for a
generic approach to treatment rather than one that is drug specific.

Significant morbidity is reported in physical, psychological and social
domains by the patients in this study.These problems are directly
related to drug use and small changes in use are likely to be associated
with significant benefits to health, relationships and well-being.
Previous economic analysis indicates major benefits associated with
effective addictions intervention also.\ :sup:`36` The relative failure
of community intervention for this cohort argues in favour of
residential intervention, particularly if retention is high, and implies
improved prognosis. This is the case for Springhill and may relate to
positive longer-term outcomes.\ :sup:`37,38` Follow-up studies will
enable further examination of longer-term benefits and overcome the
limitation of using completion as a proxy marker for improved prognosis.

Identifying who is likely to benefit most from residential treatment
allows for a more targeted approach to management. Prior research has
recommended a ‘non-discriminatory approach to referral’ and no clear
indicators are apparent in the current literature base. Using regression
analyses to consider the impact of several factors likely to alter
treatment completion, we are able to show that Maori, the indigenous
minority in New Zealand, and those with conflict in the home are more
likely to complete the programme. The programme includes the capacity
for patients to engage with a cultural assessment but does not include
individual or group activities that are specifically culturally
oriented. Previous research identifies greater social morbidity in Maori
in an out-patient addictions setting\ :sup:`39` and greater satisfaction
with a culturally specific service. Cultural factors have been a point
of focus in policy debate about the provision of services,\ :sup:`29`
with some advocating for a culturally appropriate approach research
methodology frame, although support (and the application) of this is
very limited. The current findings suggest Maori manage well in a
generic eclectic setting. This does not indicate a generic service is
likely to outperform a culturally specific service; rather, Maori are
more likely than clients of other ethnicities to complete this
programme. Ethnicity is not a proxy marker for social disadvantage as
measured by social role difficulties, employment, housing problems and
crime in this study as the linear regression of model D elucidates.
Understanding the impact of homelessness in dependence is
complex,\ :sup:`40` although the parsimonious explanation of having
basic needs met does not preclude the potential for recovery and may be
an important component of successful recovery.

The findings of this research are circumscribed by the limitations
related to a naturalistic cohort design. Not all questions were
completed by all patients and this leads to a weakening in the analysis,
however, the advantage of developing the data collection as part of
routine care confirms its utility and capacity for translation from
research to routine use. The benefits of using a country-specific tool
may counterbalance the restrictions of its limited use. The outcome
measure of programme completion is useful,\ :sup:`37,41` however,
long-term abstinence is a more powerful outcome. Follow-up studies are
necessary to assess this.

This study highlights the acceptability for some of a residential
setting to address their substance dependence. Significant pre-entry
drug use, despite community care, does not prevent engagement and
abstinence-based programme completion. Maori and homeless patients
engage well and these factors predict retention. ADOM is a potentially
valuable tool for monitoring outcome from a residential setting and has
wider potential use in New Zealand.

.. [1]
   **Dr Giles Newton-Howes** BA, BSc, MBChB, MRCPsych, FRANZCP is senior
   lecturer at the Department of Psychological Medicine, Wellington
   School of Medicine, Otago University, Wellington, New Zealand, and
   honorary senior lecturer at Imperial College London, UK. **Dr James
   Stanley** PhD is a research fellow at Wellington School of Medicine,
   Otago University.
