========================================================
*Bulletin* comment: Ever-expanding empires\ `† <#fn1>`__
========================================================

:Date: 2015-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The development of policy and governmental decisions at the highest
level ought to be based on sound information, research or expert advice.
Further, once change has been implemented and new practices set up there
needs to be ongoing assessment, monitoring and reflection on the
relative merits of the situation. Depending on the findings it might be
necessary to make further changes: sometimes these alterations may even
result in a complete reversal of the newly implemented practice.

The plan to increase the availability of psychological therapy for
individuals with the more common mental disorders was clearly a good
one. However, in practice the evidence for its effectiveness failed to
materialise; research originating from two pilot sites was flawed giving
an unbelievable impression of it doing good. Hopes of returning
thousands of people with mental health issues to full-time employment
were also unmet. Incredibly, the response to such an unconvincing
success has been the further expansion of the service into the provision
of talking treatments for children and young people experiencing a wide
range of psychological problems.

No one can argue against the expansion of psychological services so that
much needed appropriate treatment can be given to people with genuine
problems. However, any plan consuming millions of public money ought to
show convincing effectiveness on all fronts before it is blindly
expanded.
