=======================================================================================
Advance care planning and palliative medicine in advanced dementia: a literature review
=======================================================================================

Ketan Dipak Jethwa
Oluwademilade OnalajaCorrespondence to K. D. Jethwa
(kdjethwa@doctors.org.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-4

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To assess the factors that affect the clinical
   use of advanced care planning and palliative care interventions in
   patients with dementia. A literature search of Medline, Embase and
   PsycINFO was performed to identify themes in advanced care planning
   and palliative care in dementia.

   **Results** In total, 64 articles were found, including 12 reviews,
   and three key areas emerged: barriers to advanced care planning,
   raising awareness and fostering communication between professionals
   and patients, and disease-specific interventions.

   **Clinical implications** Most of the studies analysed were carried
   out in the USA or Continental Europe. This narrative review aims to
   help guide future primary research, systematic reviews and service
   development in the UK.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Advance care planning is a targeted intervention that promotes autonomy
for end-of-life decisions. It is particularly important in dementia
where the illness impairs individuals’ decision-making abilities.
Patients with advancing dementia experience significant comorbidities
such as malnutrition and dehydration. They may have no advance care plan
(ACP) in place and this can pose difficult management questions for
their families and attending physicians concerning palliation and
end-of-life care.

.. _S1:

Method
======

A search of Medline, Embase and PsycINFO was performed to investigate
the current literature on ACP and palliative care in dementia. The
following search protocol was used: ([‘advance care plan*’] AND
[‘palliat*’ OR ‘palliative care’ OR ‘end of life’] AND [‘dementia’ OR
‘Alzheimer’s’]).

.. _S2:

Results
=======

The search produced 64 journal articles, including 12 reviews. The
titles and abstracts of these articles were reviewed. Those published in
English and pertaining explicitly to palliative interventions or advance
care planning in dementia were looked at more thoroughly.

The majority of the studies found were conducted in the USA or
Continental Europe. This limits the generalisability of study findings
to practice in the UK. For example, in the USA artificial nutrition is
commonly used, whereas in the UK the National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines for dementia :sup:`(n.d.a)` state that
artificial nutrition should not commence if there is resistance to
eating or difficulties in swallowing, related to progression of the
disease. Differences in service configuration between countries also
limit the generalisability of these studies, especially when considering
the role of different agencies in delivering care. Assertive outreach in
general psychiatry clearly demonstrates this. In the USA it is
associated with improved outcomes and cost-effectiveness; however, these
findings have not been replicated in Europe because of differences in
the way services are organised. :sup:`(n.d.b)`

The purpose of this literature review was to identify key themes for
future research and development and how they may relate to practice in
the UK.

.. _S3:

Discussion
==========

Our review of the relevant papers identified the following themes:

barriers to advanced care planning raising awareness and fostering
communication between families and health professionals management
issues specific to patients with dementia.

.. _S4:

Barriers to advanced care planning
----------------------------------

Patient-centred care involves the assessment of physical illness and its
functional impact with consideration of the patient’s preferences, needs
and values, whereas ACP is a tool that aims to enhance individual
autonomy in addressing end-of-life care. This approach becomes
challenging when patients lack capacity to make their own decisions. At
present, relatively few patients have such care plans in place. The
reasons for this are multifactorial and are likely to represent both
patient- and health professional-specific barriers.

In a Spanish study, a cohort of patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease
and ‘proven decision-making capacity’ were supported by a
multidisciplinary team (MDT) to draw up an ACP. :sup:`(n.d.c)` Of the 15
patients recruited only 1 drafted a plan. Psychiatric comorbidities
(depression and anosognosia), complex family dynamics and a reluctance
to engage with the process were cited as patient factors contributing to
poor uptake. This initial study highlights the importance of identifying
and managing psychiatric disorders in patients with cognitive
impairment. This is especially important as improvement in affective
symptoms may also result in some improvement in cognitive function,
especially in the early stages of dementia.

Delivering advanced care planning and palliative care in acute general
hospitals has also been investigated. An intervention, supporting
carers, was delivered when a patient with severe dementia was admitted
to hospital. :sup:`(n.d.d)` A designated team discussed the various
advanced care planning and palliative care options available and
supported the formulation of an ACP. Thirty-three patients were
recruited and even though discussions were well received only 7
eventually wrote an ACP. The poor uptake in this study may be related to
the reluctance of carers to engage with the process because of the
distress associated with the hospital admission of a relative. In
addition, there is the possibility that once a patient has been admitted
to hospital a carer may feel compelled to continue with management of
the acute medical problem. In a cross-sectional survey of patients and
their spouses it was found that there was moderate agreement between
patients and their spouses when considering end-of-life care.
:sup:`(n.d.e)` However, if there was discord, spouses were more likely
to ask for treatment. Despite this ambivalence, advanced care planning
is important. Nursing models that emphasise advanced care planning,
communication and comfort are associated with higher levels of
satisfaction among family members when they are asked to reflect on
their experience of the end-of-life care given to their relative.
:sup:`(n.d.f)`

In this category, the following areas for service development and
medical education were noted:

identification and management of psychiatric comorbidity identification
of appropriate settings for the delivery of ACP interventions
exploration of the patients’ and families’ ideas, concerns and
expectations.

.. _S5:

Raising awareness and fostering communication between families and health professionals
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In a Dutch post-mortem chart review of 198 patients, advanced care
planning and palliative care were discussed with 11% of patients.
:sup:`(n.d.g)` In this study, 62% of patients had palliative care
records, 49% of cases were discussed at an MDT meeting and 76% of
patients had a physician order limiting life-sustaining treatment. The
current paucity of ACP and targeted palliative care interventions in
dementia may relate to a poor understanding of the condition and its
natural history. Dementia is a progressive and terminal disease. In a
multi-site observational study, 94% of physicians thought of dementia as
‘a disease you can die from’ compared with 43% of families.
:sup:`(n.d.h)` However, in another study, :sup:`(n.d.i)` 19% of the
physicians questioned stated that they did not discuss ACP options with
patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Of the 81% who did
discuss advanced care planning, 47% addressed end-of-life care
specifically. In families where dementia was understood as a terminal
condition, patient comfort was rated more highly than in those where
dementia was not viewed as terminal. This may reflect acceptance of the
diagnosis and an understanding of the natural course of the condition,
thus giving families the opportunity to prepare both materially and
psychologically.

The physician plays a key role in ensuring patients receive appropriate
palliation and end-of-life care. In a multicentre cross-sectional survey
of 594 nursing homes in Belgium, it was found that patients were more
likely to receive palliative care if they had input from a general
practitioner (a doctor who may initiate palliative care). :sup:`(n.d.j)`

However, more often than not, these decisions are taken when patients
are very dependent and have lost capacity. :sup:`(n.d.k)` This may be
following admission to an acute hospital. In a small survey of health
professionals (*n* = 16), including physicians and specialist nurses,
respondents reported feeling most confident in managing pain.
:sup:`(n.d.l)` There was, however, significant variation in the
knowledge of opioid dosing, management of constipation and artificial
nutrition in patients with advanced dementia. Given that these patients
may not be able to articulate their discomfort, which may only manifest
as increasing agitation, it is important that clinicians recognise and
manage reversible causes of distress. The complexity of the illness and
non-specific presentations mean the medical team may feel ill prepared
to deal with specific end-of-life issues. This uneasiness is also
present among nursing staff and can result in poor communication between
staff and patients/carers. :sup:`(n.d.m)` To tackle this, a
role-play-based teaching package was delivered to palliative medicine
fellows :sup:`(n.d.n)` who afterwards felt more able to discuss ACP and
identify caregiver burden. This type of teaching is effective but labour
intensive. A 2-day residential course, the ‘Dementia Difference
Workshop’, has been developed in Canada. At a focus group 1 year after
the initial training session respondents reported feeling more confident
in communicating with patients about ACP and that the course had led to
a change in their practice. :sup:`(n.d.o)` Internet-based e-learning is
another alternative. :sup:`(n.d.p)` However, although online courses are
effective at delivering information, they may not directly help improve
learners’ communication skills. Both role-play and internet-based
teaching methods are used in UK medical education and provide a key
opportunity for raising awareness.

Advanced care planning discussions are associated with an increased rate
of plan formulation. :sup:`(n.d.q)` It is important that such
discussions are undertaken in a supportive manner/setting to ensure
understanding and involvement. Patients’ educational level also seems to
be an important factor, affecting understanding and uptake.
:sup:`(n.d.r)` The use of audiovisual media can help overcome this and
make the material more readily accessible. Lack of communication and
support are frequently cited as sources of stress for caregivers,
especially when patients are admitted to nursing homes. :sup:`(n.d.s)`

It is important to clearly and accessibly document the capacity
assessment, patients’ preferences and their proxy (if appropriate). This
is important for medico-legal reasons, as patients’ wishes may also
change. A retrospective chart review of 93 US patients :sup:`(n.d.t)`
enrolled in a ‘program of all-inclusive care for the elderly’ found that
patients had on average two (range 0–4) documented discussions per year
considering end-of-life issues. It was found that, after adjusting for
the number of medical comorbidities, including dementia, the longer the
patient was enrolled the less aggressive they wanted their medical care
to be. At enrolment 34.4% of patients requested full medical treatment
while shortly before death this figure was much lower at 6.5%. The
enrolment period ranged from 1.0 to 6.4 years with 46% enrolled for more
than 3 years. It is, however, unclear whether this change was related to
perceived or actual deterioration in health, reduced quality of life or
awareness of the natural history of dementia. The recommendations of the
Nuffield Dementia Report 2009, which propose a form of proxy
decision-making in collaboration with the family, have been suggested as
an alternative to legally binding advance decisions which may not be
flexible enough to allow for changes in patients’ preferences.
:sup:`(n.d.u)`

Key areas for service development and medical education in this category
were:

educational interventions for doctors and other health professionals to
raise awareness of ACP and palliative care in dementia improving access
to advance care planning and palliative care information for patients
standardising documentation and ensuring services are dynamic to follow
changes in patients’ wishes.

.. _S6:

Management issues specific to patients with dementia
----------------------------------------------------

The timing and triggers for palliative intervention remain unclear. It
may be instigated in a number of settings including nursing homes,
hospices or acute hospitals. In a sample of 198 patients, identified in
a post-mortem study, 54% had dementia and 95% experienced one or more
‘sentinel events’ before the initiation of palliative care.
:sup:`(n.d.g)` These included febrile illness, pain or behavioural
disturbance.

In the UK, the majority of patients with dementia are admitted to
hospital. Lack of clinical improvement or worsening clinical
biochemistry are common indications for palliation. This may include
discussions with families about ‘do not resuscitate’ (DNR) orders, the
cessation of active treatment and initiation of symptom control.
End-of-life care is initiated by senior physicians. In addition, junior
doctors need to be supported in managing acute behavioural disturbance
and general deterioration. There is scope to develop a targeted
management framework that takes into account the benefits and
side-effects of treatment. :sup:`(n.d.v)`

The acute hospital plays a key role in the palliative care delivered to
patients. Hospital admissions are related to an excess of sentinel
events in the community. The capacity of hospices and nursing homes to
instigate supportive or palliative measures is currently limited. In the
USA, a retrospective cohort study :sup:`(n.d.w)` of 240 patients
investigating ‘do not hospitalise orders’ (DNHOs) discovered that 83.8%
of patients had a DNHO in place and 24.6% of patients had a hospital
transfer in the 6 months preceding death. Factors found to be
independently associated with DNHO were: aged older than 92 years,
nursing home stay of more than 2 years, eating problems and the
surrogate decision maker not being the patient’s child. A qualitative
study in the north-east of England, using semi-structured interviews and
including representatives from community, hospital and ambulance
services, :sup:`(n.d.x)` found uncertainty among staff about whether
current services could meet patients’ wishes. The main concerns
highlighted included: responsibilities of different groups, aspects of
ACP that are legally binding and inconsistencies between the forms used
by different agencies. Clarification of roles, standardisation of
documentation and shared care between primary and secondary care are
organisational and legal issues that need to be addressed to facilitate
continuity of care.

Intervention offered by special care units is a relatively
under-researched area. A post-mortem review of the care of 422 nursing
home residents (263 had dementia) by semi-structured interviews with
care staff and 293 family caregivers found that patients with dementia
had less shortness of breath, but required more physical restraint or
sedative medication for behavioural disturbance. :sup:`(n.d.y)` Patients
in residential care had more skin ulcers, poorer hygiene, less use of
restraint and higher use of emergency medical services. This study was
performed in the USA and no difference was found between patients with
or without dementia in terms of pain, ACP, life-prolonging interventions
or hospice use.

A further longitudinal study of 323 patients in 22 nursing homes in
Boston, USA was performed. :sup:`(n.d.z)` It revealed that 43.7% of
patients were cared for in a special care unit where they were more
likely to receive treatment for dyspnoea, had fewer hospitalisations and
were less likely to be fed via a nasogastric tube. Special care units
are nursing homes where the structural design, training and activity
programmes provide a supportive social environment for patients with
dementia. Patients in standard nursing homes were more likely to receive
analgesia, had fewer pressure ulcers, and antipsychotics were less
frequently used. Staff in special care units reported higher levels of
satisfaction. :sup:`(n.d.aa)` Staff in special care units may have more
experience in managing patients’ personal care needs and behaviours,
whereas those in nursing homes may have more experience in assessing and
managing pain and pressure sores. A probable confounder in this study is
the possibility that patients with more behavioural disturbance and
higher care needs are more likely to be cared for in special units. The
primary care physician may be in the best position to recognise when
referral to a hospice or specialist unit is required. :sup:`(n.d.ab)`

Key areas for service development and medical education in this category
are:

integration of dementia and pre-existing palliative care services
integration of dementia and general medical services identification and
management of causes of behavioural disturbance in dementia facilitating
transfer of information and patient records between primary and
secondary care legal issues surrounding the use of ACPs.

.. _S7:

Advanced care planning and palliative care in UK dementia services
------------------------------------------------------------------

The 2008 *End of Life Care Strategy* published by the UK Department of
Health was the first comprehensive strategy for dying people.
:sup:`(n.d.ac)` There have subsequently been a number of initiatives to
improve advanced care planning and end-of-life care for patients with
dementia, cancer and other chronic conditions.

The National Council for Palliative Care
(`www.ncpc.org.uk <www.ncpc.org.uk>`__) has a section charged
specifically with improving the provision of end-of-life care in
dementia. In particular they are working on strengthening ties with
pre-existing dementia services and palliative care services to ensure
access and coordination between services. In some areas they are working
closely with Admiral Nurses
(`www.dementiauk.org/what-we-do/admiral-nurses <www.dementiauk.org/what-we-do/admiral-nurses>`__),
specialist mental health nurses with additional training in dementia
care. Given the unpredictability of the illness and questions over the
timing and triggers for palliative intervention, integration of these
two services will be invaluable in ensuring ACPs are drawn up and that
appropriate end-of-life care is available when patients require it.

In 2012, the prime minister announced that dementia is now a national
priority. :sup:`(n.d.ad)` A Challenge on Dementia scheme was set up to
raise awareness and improve services. One of its key aims is advanced
care planning. The scheme highlights the following as examples of good
practice that should be replicated across the country: a community-based
approach using dementia-friendly environmental design and non-invasive
assistive technology to help people remain in the community, and a
psychiatry and general practice intervention to facilitate end-of-life
care in the community. At a time of financial constraint and increasing
demand for already stretched accident and emergency services, these
interventions have been welcomed as means of reducing costs.

The experience of dementia special care units can offer insights that
may be transferable to general hospital or nursing home settings.
Patients in special care units experience greater comfort, treatment for
dyspnoea and are less likely to be fed by a nasogastric tube. Having
‘dementia wards’ in general hospitals staffed by physicians,
psychiatrists and specially trained nursing staff will help ensure
patients receive appropriate medical care and pastoral support. In the
community, ensuring nurses have generic medical skills, such as setting
up subcutaneous fluids, will reduce the requirement for hospital
admissions and will increase the nurses’ experience and confidence in
delivering complex palliative interventions.

.. _S8:

Limitations
-----------

The heterogeneity of study methodology, setting, reported outcome
measures and small sample sizes reduce the generalisability of our
findings. For example, end-of-life care discussions in out-patient and
in-patient settings have different confounders, which will affect
responses and outcomes. The majority of the studies are also
retrospective or use post-mortem data that are open to recall bias
and/or have incomplete/inconsistent data collection. More studies need
to be undertaken in the UK, with larger sample sizes and standardised
methods of reporting outcomes, to ensure applicability in the UK and
comparison between studies.

This review has focused on the organisational factors associated with
advanced care planning and palliative care in dementia. However, the
disconnect between the willingness of carers and health professionals to
discuss these issues, :sup:`(n.d.ae)` and the low levels of uptake and
engagement reported in the studies reviewed, call for more exploration.
This would require a wider review incorporating psychosocial literature
exploring personal, cultural and other influences that shape people’s
expectations towards death and end-of-life care. The role played by a
lack of information, misperceptions about the course of the illness and
the setting in which advanced care planning interventions are delivered
have been cited in the studies reviewed as possible contributing
factors.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R23

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R24

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R26

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R27

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R28

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R29

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R30

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R31

      n.d.ae.

.. [1]
   **Ketan Dipak Jethwa** is a CT1 senior house officer in general
   psychiatry at Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust and an
   academic clinical fellow at the University of Warwick and
   **Oluwademilade Onalaja** is consultant old age psychiatrist at
   Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust.
