======================================
Psychiatry: Past, Present and Prospect
======================================



Elaine Murphy [1]_

:date: 2015-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 104f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

The editors of this prodigiously ambitious collection of personal essays
hint that they strived with some difficulty to extract from their
distinguished authors personal views of how psychiatry has developed
during the course of the past 50 years. The editors did not want a
series of academic reviews but more the experience and wisdom gleaned
during successful careers. This is history but as reminiscence, memoir
as well as critical scientific review. The editors have achieved
magnificently what they set out to do and nearly all the individual
essays are worth spending time absorbing. The book is quite simply the
best account, a searingly honest one, of the progress we have made over
the working lifetime of the internationally renowned authors of the
essays, nearly all like your reviewer at the tail end of their careers.

Every practising psychiatrist and trainee should read this book. I did
not just read it, I devoured it, but readers beware, I put down the
finished book with a disturbing sense of disappointment. Have we really
changed the prospects for our patients’ lives so little in 50 years? Has
so much neuroscientific research, psychopharmacology, sociology and
changing political environments produced so little? I fear so. ‘What’s
past is prologue’, as pronounced by Shakespeare in *The Tempest*. The
real story is yet to be revealed.

The perennial indecisiveness about the boundaries of psychiatry’s
responsibilities, the repeated creation of social movements that
ultimately fail to shift patients’ life chances, the deficiency in
translating what we know from social psychiatric studies into practical
treatment modalities, the ever-shifting ethical sands of risk and
restraint and the almost total lack of significant improvement in
medications after imipramine in 1940 and clozapine in the 1960s, all
this makes disturbing reading. Yet many essays contain scholarly reviews
of fruitful paths of research that have not quite yielded success yet,
such as Peter McGuffin on genetics, Steven Hyman on neuroscience, Edwin
Harari on personality disorders. We are always on the brink, looking
upwards but not quite over the brow of the hill just yet. Inevitably,
the reader is drawn to areas of one’s own personal interest. This
reviewer turned straight away to George Szmukler’s entertaining review
of the vicissitudes of legal controls versus professional judgement,
Paul Mullen and Danny Sullivan’s pithy and sceptical account of the
development of forensic psychiatry and Julian Leff’s *cri de coeur*
bemoaning the loss of social psychiatry developments from its exciting
origins. Why have we not implemented what we know from social skills
training and education for patients with schizophrenia, for example? I
fear the answer is that mental health services have plenty of doctors
and nurses but insufficient numbers of educationalists, social work
interventionists and behavioural trainers. The administrative context in
which psychiatry is practised has remained almost unchanged in the past
50 years, asylums are gone but the care and treatment has barely
changed. Scientific endeavour plods on, our understanding of aetiology
makes modest progress, but clinical practitioners must do the best they
can with inadequate tools, today just as our colleagues did 50 years
ago.

I have one criticism and this is not of the authors or editors. Oxford
University Press should surely have produced this book in a
better-quality format. It is printed in a small font (although not as
small as this journal!) and the cover is somewhere between dull and
unfathomable; it looks cheap. A tome so rich in content deserves a more
sumptuous coat.

.. [1]
   **Elaine Murphy** is a crossbench member of the House of Lords,
   London, UK, email: elaine@robb-murphy.org.uk
