==========================================================================================
Epidemiology on demand: population-based approaches to mental health service commissioning
==========================================================================================



James B. KirkbrideCorrespondence to James Kirkbride
(j.kirkbride@ucl.ac.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   One in three people will experience a mental health problem in their
   lifetime, but the causes and consequences of psychiatric morbidity
   are socially patterned. Epidemiological studies can provide
   aetiological clues about the causes of disorder, and when they can
   provide robust estimates about risk in different strata of the
   population these can also be used translationally, to provide
   commissioners and service planners with detailed information about
   local service need. This approach is illustrated using a newly
   developed population-level prediction tool for first-episode
   psychosis, PsyMaptic. Such public mental health prediction tools
   could be used to improve allocation of finite resources, by
   integrating evidence-based healthcare, public health and epidemiology
   together.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

One in three people will experience a psychiatric health disorder in
their lifetime, according to recent estimates from a whole-population
epidemiological study in Denmark.\ :sup:`1` Such burden is not shared
ubiquitously across populations, but is highly patterned, be it by
largely unknown, rare or non-specific genetic variants and
abnormalities, observable phenotypes (age, gender, ethnicity) or
environmental exposures (including, but not limited to, socioeconomic
position, education, substance use, prenatal insults, childhood
adversity, traumatic life events and neighbourhood social disadvantage).
For example, the incidence of psychotic disorders is several times
higher in some sociodemographic groups, such as certain migrant and
ethnic minority groups,\ :sup:`2` most notably among Black Caribbean and
African groups in England\ :sup:`3` and Moroccan and Surinamese groups
in The Netherlands,\ :sup:`4` where excess rates are around 3–5 times
greater than in the background population. Rates also vary in highly
replicable ways by age and gender, with young men particularly at risk
of psychotic disorder.\ :sup:`5`

While some of this patterning may be stochastic\ :sup:`6` (genetic risk
under non-assortative mating) or under biological control (risk by age
or gender), the risk sets for, and consequences of, psychiatric
disorders will also be shaped by socially patterned forces, which are
disproportionately likely to affect poorer, more marginalised and
vulnerable members of society, who are likely to shoulder the burden of
our psychiatric morbidity. In terms of risk, this patterning may arise
as a function of exposure to adverse environmental factors (independent
or arising from gene-environment correlation),\ :sup:`6` genetic risk
due to assortative mating,\ :sup:`7` epigenetic modifications\ :sup:`8`
or the role of cognitive impairment on risk of psychiatric disorder
(which probably lies on the causal pathway between genes, environment
and disorder).\ :sup:`9,10` The consequences of psychiatric morbidity
are also subject to strong social patterning, meaning some sections of
society might be doubly disadvantaged.\ :sup:`11` For example, with
respect to psychotic disorders, people may experience social decline or
drift,\ :sup:`12` probably beginning premorbidly and usually sustained
after the onset of first-episode psychosis (FEP), as a consequence of
the onset of psychotic symptoms, especially negative
symptoms,\ :sup:`13` and cognitive impairment.\ :sup:`14` This decline
may continue or become exacerbated after onset of disorder as a result
of additional issues, including side-effects from medication and stigma
and discrimination experienced by people following psychosis onset.
Social isolation,\ :sup:`15` unemployment\ :sup:`16` and drift into more
disadvantaged communities\ :sup:`17` are likely to be commonplace, in
addition to the deleterious, and possibly synergistic,\ :sup:`18` risk
associated with these exposures.

.. _S1:

Early intervention for psychosis
================================

While we have yet to elucidate clear, specific aetiologies through which
genetic and environmental factors operate to cause psychosis,
epidemiological studies can provide reliable, accurate estimates about
the risk of disorder in different communities, based on both incidence
(risk) and prevalence (risk and consequences) of psychotic
disorder.\ :sup:`5,19` Such data should be a valuable resource for
mental healthcare service commissioners, who must make difficult choices
about the efficient and effective allocation of finite resources for
mental and physical health disorders throughout the population. The
visionary commissioning of early intervention in psychosis (EIP)
services,\ :sup:`20` for example, was highly concomitant with a public
mental-health-based approach for psychotic illness, based on available
evidence. Thus, arising from evidence that a longer duration of
untreated psychosis was associated with worsening functional, clinical
and social outcomes,\ :sup:`21-23` EIP services sought to intervene
early in the initial presentation of psychotic symptoms.\ :sup:`24,25`
This approach partly targeted improving the consequences of illness
onset and was a universal public health measure, broadly aimed at the
group for whom a first episode of psychosis was most common – people
under 35 years old.\ :sup:`5` Some EIP services also provided early
detection of psychosis provision at the stage which precedes psychosis,
termed clinical high risk state,\ :sup:`26` which focuses on preventing
transition to a first episode of psychosis.\ :sup:`27,28` This approach
used both selective (young people with a family history of psychosis)
and indicated (young people with early signs and symptoms of psychosis
including a decline in functioning) prevention criteria to manage risk
of disorder.

Accumulating evidence suggests that EIP services provide benefits across
a plethora of individual, healthcare and societal
outcomes.\ :sup:`29-31` They are seen favourably by young people
experiencing psychotic symptoms,\ :sup:`32` given the holistic service
model that targets a range of domains, including mental and physical
health, identity and well-being, family involvement and vocational
support. They reduce the risk of compulsory treatment and suicide in
young people with psychosis,\ :sup:`33,34` and fewer people with
psychosis in EIP services are unemployed than in standard mental health
services,\ :sup:`16` although this figure remains stubbornly high when
compared with their population-based peers.\ :sup:`35` There is also a
strong economic argument for EIP services. It is estimated that the NHS
would save up to £44 million per year from fewer in-patient admissions
if EIP were fully deployed,\ :sup:`36` and there is consistent evidence
that EIP provides long-run, sustained economic incentives over standard
care;\ :sup:`37-40` there is evidence that every pound invested in EIP
services results in £18 of downstream savings.\ :sup:`36` Psychotic
disorders, more generally, also have pernicious effects on society. This
can be measured acutely via lost economic productivity, with disorder
onset typically coinciding with the age at which people have just
completed their educational or vocational training and are about to
enter the labour market.\ :sup:`41` In the most severe cases, lost or
reduced economic productivity may persist across the entire working age.
The total societal cost of psychotic disorders in England has been
estimated at £11.8 billion per year.\ :sup:`35` By keeping more people
in employment and improving other social outcomes,\ :sup:`29` EIP
services will provide long-term benefits to individuals, the economy and
society over time.

Despite the strong rationale for such services, EIP have not been
universally accepted or implemented.\ :sup:`42` Services have faced a
number of criticisms (see McGorry et al\ :sup:`43` for an introduction),
some better supported than others, including a lack of sufficient
evidence for individual benefit when care is not sustained,\ :sup:`44`
cherry-picking of ‘easier’ cases,\ :sup:`45` inadequate flexibility of
EIP service delivery in rural communities,\ :sup:`46` diversion of
resources from standard mental healthcare services,\ :sup:`42`
case-loads being either below\ :sup:`47` or in excess of government
targets,\ :sup:`48` and delays in treatment within mental health
services in some regions threatening to jeopardise the very purpose of
early intervention.\ :sup:`34,49,50` This background of criticism has
coincided with an increasingly difficult commissioning
landscape\ :sup:`51` where, despite ring-fenced NHS expenditure,
real-term cuts to mental health services of 2% have been particularly
keenly felt in EIP services, which have come to be viewed in some trusts
as an unaffordable luxury.\ :sup:`34` A recent audit by the mental
health charity Rethink found that 50% of EIP services have experienced
healthcare cuts in the past year alone, with a parallel perception by
staff that the quality of service has also been reduced.\ :sup:`34`
Continued removal, reduction or restructuring of EIP services now
threatens to undermine one of the National Health Service's (NHS's)
exemplar models of integrated healthcare,\ :sup:`52` at a time when
other areas of healthcare delivery are moving towards such
models.\ :sup:`53` Indeed, this perverse logic runs counter to National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommendations that EIP
should be provided for everyone in their first episode of psychosis,
irrespective of age.\ :sup:`52`

.. _S2:

Towards integrated healthcare
=============================

Since the long-term clinical, social and economic benefits of EIP are
most likely to be achieved when a full EIP package is
implemented,\ :sup:`54` which includes providing physical health checks
and supported employment opportunities, clinical commissioning groups
(CCGs) should favour full-fidelity EIP models.\ :sup:`52,55` This is
undoubtedly challenging in stringent economic times, when commissioners
must make difficult decisions about the allocation of a finite set of
resources across the spectrum of healthcare services. While piecemeal
implementation of EIP services may provide the illusion of integrated
healthcare for young people with severe mental health problems,
piecemeal solutions are only likely to deliver piecemeal results,
leaving services as precariously positioned to deliver expected results
as they currently find themselves.

The integrated healthcare model envisaged by the Department of Health
has the potential to offer an alternative approach to difficult
decisions about resource allocation across health and social
services,\ :sup:`53` intractably founded on the fundamental principle of
evidence-based decision-making. I suggest there are three aspects of the
evidence base that need appraisal and integration to maximise the
efficiency and effectiveness of resource allocation in an integrated
healthcare model (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). First, reliable and robust evidence
about the epidemiological characteristics of any given disorder are
required to understand whether and how risk varies between different
members of the population, with a view to identifying those groups who
are at greatest risk (empirical epidemiology). Second, services and
treatments that have been shown to provide patient benefit in terms of
prevention, reduced relapse or re-admission or improved quality of life
and clinical and social prognosis must exist (evidence-based
healthcare). Such care packages should also ideally have demonstrable
cost-effectiveness over the medium- to long-term. Finally, a precise
understanding of local population characteristics is required to
understand how epidemiological risk translates into the public health
impact of different disorders in different populations (evidence-based
public health). An understanding of local needs is seen as central to
the government's move towards integrated health,\ :sup:`53,56`
particularly as, with the exception of psychosis, less than a quarter of
people experiencing mental health disorders are likely to be receiving
any kind of treatment.\ :sup:`56-58` This will only be achieved if the
Department of Health, working alongside CCGs, can integrate these three
strands of the evidence base to develop a detailed understanding of the
multifaceted needs of local populations, and thereby allocate finite
resources as efficiently as possible in response to dynamic local health
issues.

.. figure:: 244f1
   :alt: Three dimensions required for evidence-based integrated
   healthcare.
   :name: F1

   Three dimensions required for evidence-based integrated healthcare.

.. _S3:

Evidence-based EIP services
===========================

With respect to EIP services, an integrated evidence base has allowed us
to develop, validate and refine an online planning tool for the
prediction of FEP at the population level, based on local need. The
prediction tool combines empirical estimates about the risk of
developing psychotic illness by major sociodemographic and environmental
factors,\ :sup:`5,59` such as age, gender, ethnicity and population
density, with information about the population structure of different
local authorities in England and Wales. This gives rise to the expected
number of new FEP cases that would occur in a given population each
year, providing commissioners with guidance on likely resource needs for
psychotic disorders. We have made predictions freely available for every
local authority in England and Wales, broken down by age and gender, in
an online repository known as PsyMaptic (Psychiatric Mapping Translated
into Innovations for Care, `www.psymaptic.org <www.psymaptic.org>`__).
The predictions from the tool have been validated in East
Anglia\ :sup:`60` by comparing the predicted number of FEP cases with
those empirically observed in a population at risk of nearly 1.4 million
people over 2.5 years. We have recently published a revised version of
this tool (version 1.1), which makes several important updates to
improve its predictive accuracy (`Table 1 <#T1>`__). Importantly, the
new version simultaneously accounts for the effects of population
density and socioeconomic deprivation,\ :sup:`61` both of which are
associated with the incidence of psychotic disorders, is validated over
a longer period (3.5 years), and uses the latest population statistics
for England and Wales, estimated from the 2011 census.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Model comparisons between PsyMaptic versions 0.5 and 1.1

   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      | Version 0.5          | Version 1.1          |
   +======================+======================+======================+
   | Models tested        | 7                    | 36                   |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Denominator source   | 2009 mid-year census | 2011 census          |
   |                      | estimates            |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Observation period,  | 2.5                  | 3.5                  |
   | years                |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Person-years at risk | 1397 305             | 2 021 663            |
   | (16–35 years)        |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Minimum level of     | Local authority      | Local authority      |
   | geography            |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Best-fitting model   | Age group, gender,   | Age group, gender,   |
   | covariates           | age\* sex            | age\* sex            |
   |                      | interaction,         | interaction,         |
   |                      | ethnicity,           | ethnicity,           |
   |                      | population density   | population density,  |
   |                      |                      | extent of            |
   |                      |                      | deprivation,         |
   |                      |                      | quadratic for extent |
   |                      |                      | of                   |
   |                      |                      | deprivation          |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Observed FEP cases   | 522                  | 676                  |
   | (ICD-10), *n*        |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Predicted FEP cases  | 508 (459, 559)       | 667 (610, 722)       |
   | (ICD-10), *n* (95%   |                      |                      |
   | CI)                  |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Equivalised RMSE     | 19.0                 | 16.3                 |
   | (EIP                 |                      |                      |
   | l                    |                      |                      |
   | evel)\ `a <#TFN2>`__ |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | Equivalised RMSE     | 7.8                  | 6.4                  |
   | (LAD                 |                      |                      |
   | l                    |                      |                      |
   | evel)\ `a <#TFN2>`__ |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | EIP correct (*n* =   | 5                    | 5                    |
   | 6)\ `b <#TFN3>`__,   |                      |                      |
   | *n*                  |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   |                      |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
   | LAD correct (*n* =   | 19                   | 19                   |
   | 21)\ `b <#TFN3>`__,  |                      |                      |
   | *n*                  |                      |                      |
   +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

   FEP, first-episode psychosis; EIP, early intervention psychiatry;
   LAD, local authority district; RMSE, root mean squared error.

   RMSE gives a measure of how closely each predicted value was to the
   observed value, either at LAD or EIP level. Lower scores indicate
   better model fit. Versions 0.5 and 1.1 used different denominators
   and direct comparisons between the original RMSE values for version
   0.5 (published in Kirkbride *et al*\ :sup:`60`) and version 1.1 were
   not possible, so equivalised RMSE values for model 0.5 are presented
   based on the denominator used in model 1.1.

   The number of times the observed value fell within the 95% CIs of the
   prediction at EIP level (out of 6) or LAD level (out of 21). Both
   models perform equivocally at LAD and EIP levels in terms of number
   correctly predicted. However, the lower overall RMSE scores for model
   1.1 provide clear evidence of improved fit, favouring model 1.1.

.. _S4:

Population-level psychosis prediction
=====================================

Some of the aforementioned criticisms of EIP implementation (such as
shortfalls or overestimates of expected case-loads) may have arisen as a
direct result of the lack of tools to inform healthcare planners and
commissioners about variation in need for services at the population
level. Our tool overcomes part of this challenge by providing
epidemiology ‘on demand’, centred on local population need and
underpinned by a robust evidence base for FEP. It is important to
recognise that PsyMaptic is only one of a suite of health informatics
that commissioners will require to make effective decisions about the
provision of local mental healthcare. For example, PsyMaptic predicts
the expected incidence of ICD-10 clinically relevant FEP (F10–33), as
confirmed by detailed OPCRIT review of case notes
(http://sgdp.iop.kcl.ac.uk/opcrit/). It does not currently predict the
additional resources required by EIP services to manage referrals who
may present with underlying psychopathology, but require signposting to
other, more appropriate services. Other data, such as the National
Mental Health Minimum Dataset, which more accurately reveal all service
use (not limited to those meeting clinical threshold for disorder),
should be used in conjunction with such tools to inform commissioners
about the probable additional burden of non-psychotic clinical
psychopathology that EIP services may see, but were not originally
provided for in the Policy Implementation Guide.\ :sup:`20` It should be
apparent that this problem becomes greater the earlier one tries to
intervene, since early prodromal symptoms may be transitory or have
relatively low specificity to later psychotic disorder.\ :sup:`62` The
recent trend in some CCGs to re-organise services around a clinical
staging approach, with EIP services superseded by generalised youth
mental health services,\ :sup:`63` might be a service-side response to
this phenomenon, but the non-specific (and perhaps non-clinical) nature
of some early mental health symptoms will be a challenge for delivering
effective, evidence-based youth mental healthcare, particularly where,
for justifiable clinical and social reasons, services may delay formal
diagnosis. We recommend that service commissioners use PsyMaptic as one
part of a suite of evidence-based information available to them.

PsyMaptic provides proof-of-concept that empirical psychiatric
epidemiology can be used to inform mental health service provision and
public mental health. Predictions are prone to error, and we welcome
observations from services where the tool performs well and where it
does not, to enhance future versions. If similar forecasting could be
applied to other mental or physical health disorders which have a robust
empirical epidemiology, CCGs would have more complete information on
which to make funding decisions across all health services in their
locality, helping to drive the important demand for parity of esteem
between physical and mental health.\ :sup:`64` Fortunately, a growing
range of tools is becoming available for services, CCGs and the
Department of Health to make evidence-based decisions. PsyMaptic is one
of a number of health indicators being used by Public Health England.
For example, community mental health profiles,\ :sup:`65` which detail
the prevalence of various mental health disorders as well as risk
factors and the wider determinants of health, are available for all
local authorities in England. A further tool, by UCL Partners, is
providing comprehensive mental health needs assessments,\ :sup:`66`
drawing on a range of data sources and providing estimates of local
economic savings from intervention, including those for FEP and clinical
high-risk states.

.. _S5:

Conclusions
===========

Translational epidemiological tools have the potential to arm
commissioners with evidence to allocate increasingly finite resources
more efficiently across populations, centred on local need. The Health
and Social Care Information Centre already publishes public mental
health statistics which provide relatively comprehensive data for
secondary mental healthcare. However, this information is not routinely
combined with local estimates of variation in the incidence of different
mental health disorders, using tools such as PsyMaptic (currently
restricted to psychotic disorders). This synthesis would then allow for
the potential size of the local unmet mental health need to be
estimated, which can then be used to effectively inform local joint
strategic needs assessments (JSNAs). This in turn informs commissioning
and health and well-being board strategies. Therefore, routine inclusion
of such information in JSNAs could have a very large role in reducing
the size of mental health unmet need.

.. [1]
   Dr James Kirkbride is a Sir Henry Dale Fellow at the Division of
   Psychiatry, University College London, UK.
