========================================================================================================================================================================================
Lorna Wing OBE, MD, FRCPsych Formerly psychiatrist and physician, Social Psychiatry Unit, Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, co-founder of the UK National Autistic Society
========================================================================================================================================================================================

Christopher Gillberg
:Date: 2015-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 52f1
   :alt: Lorna Wing. © Rex Features.
   :name: F1

   Lorna Wing. © Rex Features.

The psychiatrist and autism researcher Lorna Wing, OBE, has died at the
age of 85. Lorna Wing was the figurehead of autism knowledge and the one
person in the field of autism research who always had it right, right
from the start. She has been a pioneering figure both clinically and
scientifically. A whole world including colleagues, patients and
relatives mourn her death. She contributed to a better quality of life
for millions of people with autism.

Lorna Wing studied medicine at University College Hospital Medical
School, London and specialised in general psychiatry shortly after
qualification. After obtaining her specialist diploma she was appointed
in the mid-1960s to a position in the Social Psychiatry Unit at the
Institute of Psychiatry, where she worked until she retired. In the
1960s Lorna, with other parents, was deeply involved in the formation of
the UK National Autistic Society, aiming to develop better services for
children and older people with autism. The organisation established the
first specialist schools for children with autism and later also adult
services.

After retirement from university employment, Lorna continued to be
professionally active. In 1991, together with Judith Gould, under the
auspices of the National Autistic Society, she co-founded the Centre for
Social and Communication Disorders for diagnosis, assessment and
guidance for people of all ages. In 2008 this was re-named the Lorna
Wing Centre for Autism. Lorna Wing specialised in general psychiatry
after medical school and worked in the 1960s, 70s and 80s at the
Institute of Psychiatry in London, where her landmark studies on social
communication disorders changed the concept of autism. Her early
epidemiological work together with her husband John and Victor Lotter,
and later with Judith Gould resulted in a new delineation of the
syndrome, a so-called triad of impairments in the areas of social
interaction, social communication and social imagination, which later –
in a modified form – became the definition of autism. The three problem
areas are still referred to as ‘Wing’s triad’.

In the 1980s Lorna Wing launched the concept of an autism spectrum, and
– together with our group in Gothenburg – she was among the first to
realise that autism could be considered dimensionally, have very many
different aetiologies and affect all age groups and people at all levels
of intellectual abilities. When, together, we published reports in the
1990s stating that the likely prevalence of autism was about 1%, other
groups considered this to be overstated, but time has supported the
claim, and Lorna had it right, right from the start.

In 1981, Lorna Wing launched the term Asperger’s syndrome in a
scientific paper in *Psychological Medicine*. She described Hans
Asperger’s ‘autistic personality disorder’ and speculated about outcome
and aetiology. Thanks to this publication, Hans Asperger’s findings from
the 1940s were also introduced to the English-speaking part of the
world. Since then, Asperger’s syndrome has become one of the most talked
about diagnoses and concepts in clinical medicine.

Based on her vast experience of individuals within the autism spectrum,
she outlined different trajectories for development into adulthood: the
active-but-odd, passive, aloof and rigid groups. Together with our group
she was involved in friendly debates about whether or not all people
might actually be reasonably characterised as falling into one of these
subgroups and it is only the addition of autism that makes each subgroup
stand out much more clearly as a ‘specific type’.

Together with Judith Gould, Lorna Wing developed the most comprehensive
autism diagnostic interview in the field, the DISCO (Diagnostic
Interview for Social and COmmunication disorders). This instrument is
widely used both in clinical settings and research to help in the
diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders and related conditions. The DISCO
has been translated into several languages and is used all over the
world.

Lorna and John Wing had a daughter, Susie, who had severe autism. When
Susie died unexpectedly at the age of 49, I remember Lorna’s
devastation. She described how Susie had never been able to clearly
express her emotions, but how, when Lorna or John came home after work,
her face would light up. Lorna said that the feeling that filled her
then was absolutely wonderful, unlike anything else.

Lorna Wing published several influential books and about 60 major
scientific papers, the last one in 2013, at the age 85. She was the
recipient of many honours including the Order of the British Empire.

Lorna Wing also contributed to the development of the recent ‘autism
pride’ movement. She believed, and would let people know that she did,
that to be really successful in science and arts you need to have some
clear autism traits. She also believed that most of us have some such
traits. One of her favourite sayings was that ‘nature never draws a line
without smudging it; you cannot separate into those ”with” and ”without”
traits as they are so scattered’.

Lorna Wing was one of those rare individuals without a false note in
her. She was one of the gentlest people, always generous with her time
if she believed she could be of help, humble, but never meek. She had a
fierce intellect, but she used it in such a way that some of her
contemporaries did not understand what hit them until it was too late.
She would not suffer pomposity. She had the greatest sense of humour,
and hearing her special laugh (and she did laugh a lot) was always a
treat and it would put everyone around her in a good mood.

To paraphrase Winston Churchill: ‘Rarely has one person had such an
enormous impact on the lives of so many people with autism’. Lorna Wing
will live on in many of us who had the great privilege to count her as a
true friend.
