===============================================================================
Brain fag syndrome: a culture-bound syndrome that may be approaching extinction
===============================================================================

Oyedeji A. Ayonrinde
Chiedu Obuaya
Solomon Olusola AdeyemiCorrespondence to Oyedeji A. Ayonrinde
(deji.ayonrinde@slam.nhs.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To explore the current salience of ‘brain fag’ as
   a nosological, diagnostic and clinical construct in modern West
   African psychiatry. A semi-structured questionnaire and vignette
   based on classical symptoms of brain fag syndrome were used to
   explore current knowledge, explanatory models and practice among
   Nigerian psychiatrists.

   **Results** Of 102 psychiatrists who responded, 98% recognised the
   term ‘brain fag syndrome’ and most recognised the scenario presented.
   However, only 22% made a diagnosis of brain fag syndrome in their
   practice preferring diagnoses of anxiety, affective and somatic
   disorders.

   **Clinical implications** A decreasing number of Nigerian
   psychiatrists are making a diagnosis of ‘brain fag syndrome’. We
   found strong evidence of nosological and diagnostic decline in the
   syndrome in its place of birth. This may signal the early extinction
   of this disorder or nosological metamorphosis from a ‘culture-bound’
   syndrome in West African psychiatric practice.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In 1960 Raymond Prince,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` a founding figure in the field
of transcultural psychiatry, published a seminal paper describing unique
cultural observations in Nigeria, a newly independent country in British
West Africa. At the time, Prince (a Canadian psychiatrist) had been
working in Yoruba-speaking south-western Nigeria. In the paper he
described a cluster of symptoms he observed in Nigerian students, which
were associated with study and manifesting a range of emotional and
somatic complaints. Given the recurrent reference to mental exhaustion
(‘brain fag’) Prince named this symptom cluster ‘brain fag syndrome’.

Distinctive symptoms of the syndrome were: intellectual
impairmentsensory impairment (chiefly visual)somatic complaints, most
commonly of pain or burning in the head and neckother complaints
affecting the student's ability to studyan unhappy, tense facial
expressiona characteristic gesture of passing the hand over the surface
of the scalp or rubbing the vertex of the skull. Citing Prince: “‘Most
often the symptoms commenced during periods of intensive reading and
study prior to examinations or sometimes just following periods of
intensive study … The patients generally attribute their illness to
fatigue of the brain due to excessive “brain work”.’ (p.
561)\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`” As Price elaborated, it is for this reason that
the term brain fag syndrome has been used. The expression seems to be
used by Nigerians generally to describe any psychiatric disturbance
occurring in ‘brain workers’. Exploring the unfamiliar nature of the
presentation, brain fag was at the time ascribed to ‘a clash between
Western and African cultural values’.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`

This unfamiliar clinical presentation and manifestation of distress was
initially felt to be a culture-bound syndrome localised to southern
Nigeria. Subsequently, further reports were published from other African
regions.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.c)` These case reports and student
population surveys highlighted psychological distress associated with
study in some African students.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.c)` Over the
decades, there has been some debate by predominantly African
psychiatrists as to whether this actually constitutes a unique
nosological entity, cultural manifestation or unique amalgamation of
more established mental disorders.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)-(n.d.e)` An
interesting review of brain fag syndrome literature by Ola *et
al*\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` details the different arguments.

While reference is made to brain fag syndrome in both the tenth edition
of ICD-10\ :sup:`7` and the ‘Glossary of Culture Bound Syndromes’ in the
fourth edition (revised) of DSM-IV-TR,\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` the current
relevance to clinical practice is uncertain. The DSM IV-TR described
brain fag syndrome as a culture-bound syndrome attributed to overwork
and affecting West African students. Characterised by a loss of ability
to concentrate, learn, remember or think and usually accompanied by
sensations of pain, pressure or tightness around the head or neck and
blurred vision, a condition which ‘can resemble certain Anxiety,
Depressive and Somatoform Disorders’.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` The newer DSM-5,
however, is less detailed regarding brain fag and cites it as an example
of a cultural anxiety syndrome.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`

Nigerian psychiatric services, although based on Western models, are
also familiar with the assessment and treatment of West African cultural
presentations of affective, psychotic and anxiety disorders. Competition
with traditional and faith healers abounds as do belief systems about
emotional distress. The ICD-10 is primarily used for diagnostic
classification, although DSM classification is also recognised. Medical
instruction and scholarship is in English and the majority of
practitioners are at least bilingual and speak one or more indigenous
languages.

The limited diagnostic clarity about the validity of this culture-bound
syndrome\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` justifies an exploration of the existence of
brain fag in modern West African psychiatry. A factor analysis and
differentiation of somatic symptoms in Africans with
depression\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` and the validation of burning and crawling
sensations in the Brain Fag Syndrome Scale are important empirical steps
towards this.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` If a prevalent disorder, the exponential
growth in secondary and tertiary educational institutions (online Fig.
DS1) would potentially have an impact on the mental well-being of
millions of adolescents and young adults with health and resource
implications. Conversely, if the diagnostic status is unclear, the
pathologisation of young people may lead to inappropriate help-seeking
or impair education.

When brain fag syndrome was originally described in Nigeria in 1960,
Western models of psychiatric care were in their infancy, with only four
indigenous, linguistically and culturally embedded psychiatrists in the
country. International psychiatrists from the UK, the USA, Canada
(including Raymond Prince) and Germany made significant contributions to
service development and the training of mental health professionals in
the country. While the number of mental health professionals has shown
sustained growth over the years, the number of psychiatrists remains
grossly inadequate, with an estimated 0.15 psychiatrists per 100 000
Nigerians.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` Unfortunately, 25% migrate within 5 years of
completing training.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` Such specialist workforce changes
may influence skill stability.

There have been no known surveys to date of West African mental health
professionals on their opinions and practice relating to brain fag
syndrome.

.. _S1:

Aim
===

This study aimed to explore awareness of brain fag, its aetiology,
diagnosis, explanatory models and management by psychiatrists in
Nigeria, where this disorder was originally described.

We sought to explore the nosological salience of brain fag syndrome
among contemporary West African psychiatrists in Nigeria and to
ascertain whether it is still regarded as a distinct disorder or an
idiomatic expression. We were also interested in exploring the
historical course of the syndrome over time. Opportunities to explore
the modern and cultural history of disorders do not arise often in
anthropological medicine.

.. _S2:

Method
======

A semi-structured, self-administered questionnaire that incorporated
both coded and written text responses was designed as a survey of
‘psychological distress’ among students. It was mailed to psychiatrists
in tertiary, secondary and private psychiatric facilities across
Nigeria. Electronic copies were also disseminated. Further uptake was
facilitated at the conference of the Association of Psychiatrists in
Nigeria, the key professional body for psychiatrists. Questions were
clustered into the following categories: clinical experience in
psychiatry (number of years of practice, seniority)setting of clinical
practice (e.g. teaching hospital, specialist psychiatric hospital,
general hospital and private practice)geographical region of
countryclinical case-load and number of patients seen per month.
Respondents were presented with a vignette (`Box 1 <#box1>`__)
describing classic brain fag features in a student. Though based on core
diagnostic features of brain fag syndrome, the term ‘brain fag’ was
withheld from respondents until the end of the questionnaire.
Respondents were asked a few short questions (e.g. ‘Are you familiar
with this type of presentation in your practice?’), the frequency and
approximate number of patients with this unnamed symptom cluster they
had seen in the past 12 months. It is worth stressing that these
questions referred to symptoms in the vignette and not a specific
diagnosis of brain fag syndrome.

**Box 1** Vignette presented to psychiatrists in the study

A 20-year-old student presents complaining of ‘burning heat or pain in
the head and neck’.The student also experiences difficulty
concentrating, assimilating and recalling things studied, as if ‘the
brain … is dead or not working’.Vision is sometimes blurred. Sleep has
also been poor.The student wishes to pursue further studies and is
concerned about the implications of this experience.

From the vignette, the psychiatrists were then asked to consider a
diagnosis and differential diagnosis as they would in routine clinical
practice such as anxiety disorder, depressive disorder, somatisation
disorder, psychotic disorder, or another category. In addition, they
were asked to proffer aetiological explanations for the presentation as
well as the therapeutic options that they would offer the individual in
the scenario. This was a free-text section so as to allow folk, social
and other non-medical explanatory models. A content analysis of these
responses was carried out to identify themes.

The concept of brain fag syndrome was introduced in the final part of
the questionnaire to minimise contamination or bias to the earlier
responses. This section explored whether the respondent had ever heard
of brain fag syndrome and whether they made this diagnosis in routine
clinical practice. The psychiatrists were encouraged to provide
additional comments or alternative explanations, views and opinions on
any aspect of the study.

Questionnaires were returned by prepaid envelope, hand delivery and
electronically.

In addition, five decades of historical context into psychiatric
services in Africa and the genesis of brain fag syndrome were obtained
through personal communication with current and retired psychiatrists,
as well as an anthropological field worker and interpreter used in the
original work. Full qualitative details are outside the scope of this
paper, but are being prepared for publication in another paper.

.. _S3:

Results
=======

Overall, 102 responses were received from all regions of the country.
The national response rate of 36%, while relatively low, overcame
logistical challenges and showed a good geographical, ethnic and
clinical spread across Nigerian mental health services. Interestingly,
this rate mirrored a mail survey of psychiatrists by the World Health
Organization and the World Psychiatric Association (Nigeria 36%, USA
21%, UK 22%, South Africa 24%) across 44 countries\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` and
was also similar to other non-incentivised physician
surveys.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)`

So as not to restrict opinions, more than one diagnostic response was
permitted to some questions, therefore some totals were over 100%.

.. _S4:

Psychiatrist characteristics
----------------------------

Forty-four percent of respondents were registrars, 33% senior
registrars, 21% consultants and 2% psychiatric medical officers. The
mean number of years of experience in psychiatry was 6.3 with a median
of 4 years and a range of 1-37 years (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). The doctors saw
an average of 152 patients per month.

.. figure:: 158f1
   :alt: Distribution plot of the respondents' number of years'
   experience in psychiatry
   :name: F1

   Distribution plot of the respondents' number of years' experience in
   psychiatry

.. _S5:

Location of practice
--------------------

Sixty-nine (68%) of the psychiatrists were from the south of Nigeria and
33 (32%) were from the northern regions. This distribution closely
reflects the regional density of psychiatric services in the country.

.. _S6:

Awareness of symptoms in the brain fag questionnaire vignette
-------------------------------------------------------------

The majority of psychiatrists (95%) were familiar with the presentation
in the vignette in their routine practice and 84.3% (*n* = 86) had seen
patients with similar symptoms within the past year (`Fig. 2 <#F2>`__).
On average, each psychiatrist saw 14.2 patients presenting with vignette
symptoms annually, approximately 0.78% of their annual clinical
case-load or 1:128 patients.

.. figure:: 158f2
   :alt: Number of patients with brain fag symptoms seen in past year
   :name: F2

   Number of patients with brain fag symptoms seen in past year

.. _S7:

Nosology of symptoms and signs
------------------------------

The vignette symptoms were classified as an anxiety disorder by 49% of
psychiatrists, while 37% considered brain fag syndrome; 36% felt the
presentation was consistent with a depressive disorder and 30%
associated it with somatisation disorder.

.. _S8:

Aetiological explanations and attributions
------------------------------------------

Nigerian psychiatrists suggested a number of possible aetiological
factors for the brain fag syndrome core criteria vignette symptoms
(`Table 1 <#T1>`__). Content analysis observed explanatory themes
attributed to the following causes: mental disorders (9.23%),
psychogenic (24.10%), educational difficulties (32.31%), sociocultural
(9.23%), interpersonal (3.59%), biological (9.74%), substance misuse
(4.61%) and demographic factors (1.02%) while 6.15% of the psychiatrists
gave no aetiological explanation.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Causes of vignette symptoms suggested by respondents (*n* = 195)

   ====================================== ============================= ===
   Category                               Subcategory                   *n*
   ====================================== ============================= ===
   Mental disorder (*n* = 18, 9.23%)      Somatisation                  14
   \                                      Anxiety                       2
   \                                      Depression                    1
   \                                      Psychiatric history           1
   \                                                                    
   Psychogenic (*n* = 47, 24.10%)         Stress                        29
   \                                      Psychological                 12
   \                                      Poor coping mechanisms        3
   \                                      Behavioural                   2
   \                                      Loss                          1
   \                                                                    
   Study and education (*n* = 63, 32.31%) Educational concerns          31
   \                                      Influence of foreign language 10
   \                                      Intensive study               9
   \                                      Desire to succeed             7
   \                                      Fear of failure               2
   \                                      Goal failure                  1
   \                                      Motivational factors          1
   \                                      Low productivity              1
   \                                      Modernisation through study   1
   \                                                                    
   Sociocultural (*n* = 18, 9.23%)        Socioeconomic                 11
   \                                      Cultural                      3
   \                                      Environmental                 3
   \                                      Witchcraft                    1
   \                                                                    
   Substance misuse (*n* = 9, 4.61%)      Psychostimulants              
   \                                                                    
   Interpersonal issues (*n* = 7, 3.59%)  Personality                   4
   \                                      Strained relationships        1
   \                                      Family disharmony             2
   \                                                                    
   Organic/biological (*n* = 19, 9.74%)   Genetic                       13
   \                                      Biological                    2
   \                                      Sympathetic activity          2
   \                                      Trauma                        1
   \                                      Malaria                       1
   \                                                                    
   Demographic (*n* = 2, 1.02%)           First born                    1
   \                                      Male gender                   1
   ====================================== ============================= ===

   Unknown (*n* = 12, 6.15%)

.. _S9:

Management
----------

Nearly half of the psychiatrists (46.47%) advocated the use of
psychological therapies such as psychotherapy, counselling,
cognitive-behavioural therapy and family therapy in the management of
the symptoms. Psychotropic medications (e.g. antidepressant,
anxiolytics) were suggested by 42.75%. Lifestyle changes such as
changing study methods and sleep hygiene were recommended by 4.83% of
the respondents (`Fig. 3 <#F3>`__).

.. figure:: 160f3
   :alt: Management of brain fag symptoms
   :name: F3

   Management of brain fag symptoms

.. _S10:

Recognition of brain fag syndrome
---------------------------------

Ninety-eight percent of the psychiatrists surveyed had heard of brain
fag syndrome. However, only 22% of them actually made this diagnosis in
their daily clinical practice.

There was a significant association between the duration of practice in
mental health services and the diagnosis of brain fag syndrome (*P* =
0.007), with those practising for more than 5 years making the diagnosis
more frequently than those practising for 5 years or less (59% *v*. 41%,
*P* = 0.003), despite all but one being aware of the diagnostic features
of brain fag. Similarly, seniority in clinical practice was associated
with the diagnosis of brain fag (*P* = 0.003), with consultants
diagnosing more than their junior colleagues. There was no difference in
proportion of psychiatrists diagnosing brain fag when comparing
respondents from different states and regions of Nigeria (*P*>0.05).
Also, the level of specialisation of institutions was not associated
with a difference in likelihood of diagnosing (general hospital 23% *v*.
teaching hospital 20%, *P*>0.05). Using binary logistic regression
analysis, the only independent predictor of diagnosing brain fag
syndrome was the seniority of clinician (*P* = 0.008). Registrars were
least likely to make a diagnosis compared with consultants (odds ratio
0.1, 95% CI 0.03-0.38, *P* = 0.001).

.. _S11:

Discussion
==========

These important findings suggest that the less experienced
psychiatrists, who are more likely younger, made a diagnosis of brain
fag syndrome least. It is unclear whether they found brain fag less
attractive than their senior colleagues or if this may reflect
differences in training (postcolonial *v*. contemporary) and diagnostic
emphasis between the groups (A. Ayonrinde, personal communication, 2012)
Should this trend persist, we foresee decline and possible extinction in
the use of this diagnosis among Nigerian psychiatrists, critically
within the society in which this culture-bound syndrome was originally
described.

.. _S12:

Symptom recognition and diagnostic instability
----------------------------------------------

We observed diagnostic inconsistencies among Nigerian psychiatrists
presented with the vignette with features of brain fag syndrome.
Although familiar with the presentation (98%), and some consideration
given to brain fag, the majority of psychiatrists preferred the more
familiar ICD-10 diagnoses to a culture-bound syndrome. The phrase ‘brain
fag’ was once a familiar idiom of distress during the earlier
educational years of some senior clinicians, however, it is no longer
common cultural parlance within Nigerian society. High rates of term
recognition may also be a consequence of postgraduate psychiatric
training where brain fag is taught as a disorder with a West African
history. In fact, the authors (of Nigerian ancestry) with cultural and
clinical experience of Nigerian mental health services have rarely heard
use of the term brain fag outside academic circles.

The clinical and cultural consonance of the psychiatrists surveyed in
this study enriches the findings as they span several decades of
experience, clinical centres, ethnic and geographical regions. Their
clinical and social awareness of emotional distress among students gives
useful insight into the contemporary concept of brain fag.

Our finding of diagnostic fluidity and heterogeneity between anxiety,
somatisation and depressive disorders is consistent with the DSM-IV-TR
statement that brain fag syndrome can resemble anxiety, depressive and
somatoform disorders.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)`

The diagnostic instability evident here calls into question whether
brain fag syndrome is a homogenous or unique diagnostic entity, or
actually a symptom co-variant of other somatisation, anxiety and
affective disorders. The weight of cognitive and somatic complaints has
been observed to differentiate from core features of depression in
Nigeria and may well confirm unique culture-specific
presentation\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` as was proposed in the
1960s.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`

Educational concerns, intensive or excessive study and the drive for
success were the most common explanatory models for the vignette (32%).
The emphasis on education and ‘study’ in the brain fag narrative may
unwittingly bias clinicians towards cerebral and mental symptoms,
thereby distracting from other somatic complaints. We hypothesise that
brain fag was probably a historic idiomatic expression of impaired
mental function with presentation of somatic complaints. Sleep
impairment, poor attention and concentration and somatic complaints in
an anxious or depressed individual would understandably impair
educational activity – whereby symptoms worsen the potential to study
rather than study triggering a mental disorder.

The brain fag explanatory models presented biological, psychological,
social and stress models of illness. To date these aetiological links
are lacking in robust empirical evidence. Further exploration of the
somatic manifestations of common tropical diseases such as malaria would
be insightful. Interestingly, one respondent cited ‘witchcraft’. Beliefs
in evil spirits, curses and malevolent forces are not uncommon in West
African cultures. Psychoactive substance use and their effects such as
impaired concentration and sleep difficulties and somatic effects may
also easily mimic the brain fag symptoms.

.. _S13:

Management
----------

The preference for psychological therapies appears to reflect the
aetiological attributions given to the symptoms such as stress,
educational aspirations and interpersonal difficulties. To date there
has been mainly anecdotal evidence or brief reports on treatments for
brain fag.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)` It is unclear from our findings what the
response is to these therapeutic interventions and the degree of symptom
relief. Given that the majority of psychiatrists were of the opinion
that the symptom clusters were features of somatisation, anxiety and
affective disorders, the additional choices of psychotropic medication
are understandable.

Improving our understanding of the causes of brain fag symptoms has
potential benefits in terms of identifying susceptible individuals and
subsequently being able to manage them more appropriately. The fact that
nearly a third of respondents pointed to educational concerns as a
factor in the development of brain fag could have a significant
influence on educational and public health interventions, policies as
well as practice. Inaccurate information regarding causative factors and
the care of mental distress in students carries a risk of prolonging
mental distress. This confusion may result in individuals with
depression or an anxiety disorder believing themselves to experience
brain fag and abandoning education.

There is a need for improved understanding of mental disorders ascribed
to study in this West African culture given the cultural salience of
education as a key to success and social mobility. It remains unclear
whether brain fag is a mental sequel of educational difficulties or the
somatic, neurotic, cognitive and affective manifestation of distress in
students. Significantly more research is required into cultural concepts
of distress,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` an important consideration for the ICD-11.

Over half a century on from the original observations on brain fag it
seems that our understanding of this culture-bound disorder has not
advanced much. This study found that a large proportion of psychiatrists
in Nigeria were familiar with and regularly manage students who present
with anxiety, affective, cognitive and somatic symptoms. However, these
African psychiatrists in the home of the brain fag syndrome infrequently
consider this diagnosis in their routine clinical practice.

The semiotic salience of brain fag as a distinct, relevant and
contemporary culture-bound syndrome is not supported by our findings in
Nigeria. Idiomatic and syndromic use of the term brain fag became
extinct in 19th- and 20th-century Britain, before its resurgence in
Africa.\ :sup:`(n.d.q),(n.d.r)` Should the modern decline in brain fag
persist, this culture-bound syndrome may well face diagnostic
extinction.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.r.

.. [1]
   **Oyedeji A. Ayonrinde** MBBS FRCPsych MSc is a Consultant
   Psychiatrist at Bethlem Royal Hospital, South London and Maudsley NHS
   Trust, London, UK; **Chiedu Obuaya** MBBS BSc MRCPsych is a
   Consultant Psychiatrist, Camden and Islington NHS Foundation Trust,
   London, UK; and **Solomon Olusola Adeyemi** MBBS FMCPsych is a
   Consultant Psychiatrist, Federal Neuro-Psychiatric Hospital, Kaduna,
   Nigeria.
