===============================================================================
New patient assessment in old age psychiatry: the importance of risk assessment
===============================================================================



Svetlana Hemsley
Rebecca McKnight
Aneeba Anwar
Sarah Jones
Lola MartosCorrespondence to Rebecca McKnight
(rebecca.mcknight@oxfordhealth.nhs.uk\  [1]_
:Date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** In recent years, the role of non-medical
   community mental health team (CMHT) clinicians has widened to include
   new patient assessments. It is unclear whether all professionals have
   the skills and confidence to undertake these to a high quality. This
   project investigated which professionals are doing new assessments,
   evaluated their quality and explored the assessors' unmet training
   needs. The study was based on the data extracted from electronic
   notes and a complete audit cycle in South Oxfordshire Older Adults
   CMHT; this was a cross-sectional study across Oxfordshire older
   adults services.

   **Results** Most new assessments (72.4%) were done by non-medical
   clinicians; the majority were missing important information,
   especially relating to medications and risk assessment. Only 75% of
   assessors felt at least ‘partially confident’ to do assessments and
   found them stressful, with 86% keen to undertake further training.

   **Clinical implications** Simple measures such as an assessment form,
   a programme of training seminars and adequate supervision, delivered
   to all CMHT clinicians, can ensure high-quality assessment in diverse
   clinical environments.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The discipline of psychiatry has seen many changes in practice over
recent years. One major change has been the shifting roles of the
multidisciplinary team to include some clinical duties traditionally
undertaken by psychiatrists. New patient assessments are one task now
frequently delegated to the wider multidisciplinary team.\ :sup:`1`
Non-medical clinicians often have capacity to see the increasing number
of referrals arising from an aging population and are a more affordable
option than psychiatrists.

Psychiatrists are taught assessment skills gradually throughout their
training. Formal teaching in assessment occurs throughout medical school
and the foundation programme; skills are then enhanced and specialised
within psychiatry through weekly supervision, workplace-based
assessments and postgraduate examinations. The same structure (focusing
on assessment) is not necessarily in place for non-medical
professionals. The revised General Medical Council (GMC) *Good Medical
Practice* document provides guidance to doctors needing to delegate
tasks to colleagues: ‘When delegating care you must be satisfied that
the person to whom you delegate has the knowledge, skills and experience
to provide the relevant care or treatment; or that the person will be
adequately supervised’.\ :sup:`2` Typically, non-medical clinicians are
provided with a weekly team meeting in which to discuss patients with
psychiatrists as well as regular individual supervision. It has been
assumed that this is providing appropriate support and supervision.
However, there is limited evidence pertaining to the skills and
confidence that non-medical staff have in assessing newly referred
patients. A report by the Royal College of Nursing has highlighted a
need for continuing postgraduate education to ensure high standards of
community psychiatric nursing, including updating skills as an
individual's role within a team changes.\ :sup:`3` Similarly, the recent
Francis inquiry emphasised the importance of ensuring individuals'
skills are appropriately matched to their duties to ensure global
high-quality care within the National Health Service (NHS).\ :sup:`4`
Being asked to perform skills beyond a clinician's training can be
stressful and reduce performance as well as leading to
burn-out.\ :sup:`5`

We hypothesised that as non-medical clinicians have been asked to
undertake new patient assessments, a skills gap has emerged. We designed
a service evaluation to test this hypothesis. The aims were to identify
which professionals are undertaking new assessments, investigate the
quality of these assessments and explore the level of confidence
individuals have in carrying out this work. The primary method of
investigation was a complete audit cycle, complemented by a
cross-sectional survey.

.. _S1:

Method
======

This was a service evaluation undertaken in the three community mental
health teams (CMHTs) of the South Locality Older Adults Service (Oxford
Health NHS Foundation Trust). South Oxfordshire has a population of
approximately 134 300, including 33 200 people over 60 years of
age.\ :sup:`6` The service evaluation was made up of three components
occurring between June 2012 and July 2013 (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). All of the
components of the service evaluation were carried out in the same group
of clinicians.

.. figure:: 228f1
   :alt: Timeline of events
   :name: F1

   Timeline of events

.. _S2:

Audit cycle
-----------

The aim was to determine if existing practice meets agreed standards as
to what information should be recorded during a routine new patient
assessment. The initial audit covered the period 1 June to 31 July 2012,
re-audited for 1 June to 31 July 2013. All consecutive new referrals
were included. No international or nationally agreed guidelines as to
how a new patient should be assessed could be located in either 2012 or
2013, so the proxy standard used within Oxford Health NHS Foundation
Trust was chosen. This includes the completion of each section of the
‘core assessment’ and ‘risk assessment’ of our RiO electronic notes
system
(`www.servelec-group.com/Healthcare/RiO.html <www.servelec-group.com/Healthcare/RiO.html>`__).
Medical records were reviewed (by R.M.) first in November 2012 and then
in August/September 2013: an audit tool form was completed for each
individual. For each part of the assessment, if any comment was present
pertaining to that area it was marked ‘yes’. This included explanations
as to why information was not available at that time. During October
2012–January 2013, a pilot set of 2-h training seminars and interactive
workshops covering common psychiatric presentations were delivered
weekly to multidisciplinary team clinicians. A new patient assessment
form was introduced at the same time (available as online supplement
DS1).

.. _S3:

Cross-sectional survey of non-medical clinicians' training needs
----------------------------------------------------------------

We devised a 21-item questionnaire (online supplement DS2) covering
confidence surrounding current assessment and education, plus unmet
training need. This was distributed by email to 50 non-medical staff in
3 older-adult CMHTs. These included nursing staff, occupational
therapists, social workers, mental health practitioners and
psychologists. Healthcare assistants and support workers were excluded
as they do not undertake new patient assessments. Participants returned
an anonymous hard copy to their team manager.

.. _S4:

Retrospective evaluation of professionals undertaking new patient assessments
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

All patient contacts (new and follow-ups) covering the period 1 March
2012 to 30 April 2013 were downloaded from the RiO electronic notes
system. The profession of the assessing clinician was recorded as
‘medical’ (consultants and junior doctors) or ‘non-medical’ and
proportions in each category calculated.

Upon the completion of the audit cycle and survey, and using feedback
from the pilot training sessions, a programme of training in assessment
skills was devised. This will be delivered by psychiatrists over 7 weeks
on a yearly basis to all CMHT clinicians. Staff turnover and sickness
will be closely monitored.

.. _S5:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

All results were entered into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet for basic
analysis. Audit data were analysed with SPSS v. 21 for Windows using
unpaired chi-squared tests with α = 0.05.

.. _S6:

Results
=======

.. _S7:

Audit cycle
-----------

In the initial audit, 40 consecutive referrals were received; this
increased to 62 in 2013. The demographic profile of the sample remained
unchanged for both audit cycles (`Table 1 <#T1>`__). The professionals
conducting assessments were community psychiatric nurses (CPNs; 64%),
psychiatrists (20%) and occupational therapists (16%). Of the
psychiatrists, there were three consultants and three psychiatric
trainees.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Results from audit cycle: sample characteristics

   ============================== ==== ====
   \                              2012 2013
   ============================== ==== ====
   Gender, male (%)               44.0 42.5
   \                                   
   Age, mean (years)              79.5 80.0
   \                                   
   Referral from primary care (%) 93.0 95.0
   \                                   
   Time from assessment to        4.4  3.8
   documentation complete (days)       
   ============================== ==== ====

In 2012, the proportion of assessments clearly marked ‘new assessment’
and properly structured with subheadings was 45%; this increased to 75%
in 2013 after the introduction of an assessment form (*P* = 0.003). In
2012, the information most frequently omitted from assessment was
medication history, family history, use of substances and risk
assessment (`Table 2 <#T2>`__). With non-psychiatrist clinicians, there
was a tendency to list all living family members under family history
rather than record the presence or absence of mental disorder. However,
this was not the case in assessments done by psychiatrists (e.g. 2013:
83% *v.* 0%). By 2013 there had been a significant improvement in
recording of psychiatric history, medications, substance use, mental
state examination and risks (`Fig. 2 <#F2>`__). However, out of 17 RiO
subsections, only 7 had been completed in at least 75% of assessments.
Psychiatrists were significantly more likely to record at least 90% of
RiO sections than non-medical staff (81% *v.* 10% respectively;
*P*\ <0.001).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Results from audit cycle: assessments

   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        | Assessments containing |      |         |
   |                        | any information        |      |         |
   |                        | relating               |      |         |
   |                        | to the subject, %      |      |         |
   +========================+========================+======+=========+
   | Reason for referral    | 82.5                   | 90.9 |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Comment on who was     | 80                     | 82   |         |
   | present at the         |                        |      |         |
   | interview              |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | History of presenting  | 90                     | 89.3 |         |
   | complaint              |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Past medical history   | 52.5                   | 59   |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Past psychiatric       | 52.5                   | 72.7 | 0.0213  |
   | history                |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Medications            | 40                     | 76   | 0.003   |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Family history         | 42.5                   | 44   |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Personal history       | 50                     | 48.5 |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Social history         | 92.5                   | 85   |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Alcohol                | 22.5                   | 45.5 | 0.002   |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Smoking                | 17.5                   | 45.5 | <0.0001 |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Substance use          | 15                     | 45.5 | 0.013   |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Forensic history       | 20                     | 28.7 |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Pre-morbid personality | 35                     | 28.7 |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Collateral history     | 80                     | 71.2 |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Mental state           | 50                     | 66.7 | 0.04    |
   | examination            |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Risk assessment        | 35                     | 66.7 | <0.001  |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Diagnostic impression  | 80                     | 77.2 |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   |                        |                        |      |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+
   | Management planning    | 95                     | 89.3 |         |
   +------------------------+------------------------+------+---------+

   Chi-squared test. Non-significant *P* values not given.

.. figure:: 230f2
   :alt: Change in contents of new patient assessments 2012-2013.
   \*\ *P*\ <0.05.
   :name: F2

   Change in contents of new patient assessments 2012-2013.
   \*\ *P*\ <0.05.

Evaluation of cognition is an important part of assessment in older
adults. In 2012, 70% of assessments included information on cognition
and bedside cognitive tests; this fell to 58% in 2013 (*P* = 0.04).
However, for patients referred with cognitive impairment, more than 95%
had evidence of cognitive testing in both years.

.. _S8:

Cross-sectional survey of assessment confidence and unmet training needs
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This survey took place between the two audits but before the pilot
intervention (`Table 3 <#T3>`__). Overall, 36 questionnaires were
returned (72%), representing CPNs (50%), social workers (17%) and
occupational therapists (17%). Three-quarters (75%) of respondents felt
at least ‘partially confident’ to assess a new patient, with 22%
reporting ‘no confidence’. Similarly, 75% reported feeling ‘stressed or
unsupported’ while doing the assessment. Less than half of staff (44%)
reported familiarity with the ICD-10 criteria for mental health
disorders,\ :sup:`8` and only 25% felt confident to use them to aid
diagnosis. The majority of staff (80%) felt confident to ‘cluster’
patients according to type and severity of illness.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Cross-sectional survey results (*n* = 36 respondents in total)

   ======================================================= ===========
   *n* = 36                                                Respondents
                                                           %
   ======================================================= ===========
   Profession of assessing clinician                       
       CPN                                                 50
       Social worker                                       17
       Occupational therapist                              17
       Psychologist                                        9
       Support worker/other                                8
   \                                                       
   Level of confidence in assessing a new patient          
       Confident                                           25
       Less confidence                                     50
       No confidence                                       22
       No comment                                          2.8
   \                                                       
   Familiarity with ICD-10 criteria                        
       Yes                                                 44
       Partly                                              39
       No                                                  17
   \                                                       
   Confidence in using ICD-10 criteria to make a diagnosis 
       Confident                                           25
       Less confidence                                     33
       No confidence                                       28
       No comment                                          11
   \                                                       
   How often you feel stressed, unsupported when           
   assessing a newly referred patient?                     
       Most of the time                                    64
       Sometimes                                           11
       Not at all                                          22
   \                                                       
   Would you like an opportunity to undertake              
   training in the following? (yes/no)\ `a <#TFN3>`__      
       Information on mental disorders                     75
       Assessment and diagnosis of mental disorders        86
       Updates from recent research                        94
   \                                                       
   Six disorders clinicians would most like training       
   on (in preference order)                                
       Bipolar disorder                                    94
       Depression                                          83
       Anxiety disorders                                   80
       Schizophrenia                                       72
       Personality disorder                                69
       Dementia                                            58
   \                                                       
   Preferred method of teaching (in order)                 
       Teaching seminars (1–2 hours)                       83
       Short courses (1–2 days)                            77
       E-learning resources                                47
       Formal academic course and qualification            39
   \                                                       
   How important is it to you to gain an                   
   accreditation that is recognised by your                
   employers and other organisations for the               
   training that you undertake?                            
       Very important                                      39
       Quite important                                     46
       Not important                                       13
       No comment made                                     2
   \                                                       
   What would be the most important reason to              
   you to undertake further training?                      
       To improve my clinical practice                     86
       For personal development                            8
       To enhance my CV                                    0
       To increase the likelihood of promotion             5
       Other reason                                        0
   ======================================================= ===========

   CPN, community psychiatric nurse.

   Only ‘Yes’ responses given.

In all, 86% were keen for training in assessment, diagnosis and
management of mental disorder. The conditions for which training was
most frequently requested were (in order) bipolar disorder, depression,
anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, personality disorders and dementia.
The most popular methods of delivering training were seminars (83%) and
1-day short courses (78%). Most staff (85%) felt it was essential to
have accreditation recognised by employers for attending training.

.. _S9:

Retrospective evaluation of professionals undertaking new patient assessments
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Between March 2012 and April 2013, 485 new patient assessments were
carried out within South Locality CMHT. In total, 41 individual
clinicians were involved in the assessments, with 84% of assessments
being conducted by one person. The breakdown of professionals involved
was as follows: 60% CPNs, 20% psychiatrists, 16% occupational
therapists, 4% social workers. The majority of new patient assessments
were carried out by non-medical clinicians: 72.4% *v.* 27.6%. Similarly,
86.2% of follow-up contacts were carried out by non-medical staff. Of
the new assessments by medical staff, 58% were done by consultants.

.. _S10:

Staff turnover and sickness
---------------------------

During the period from June 2012 to June 2013 the turnover of
non-medical clinicians within the CMHT was 50% (compared with 12% trust
wide).\ :sup:`8` The average within the trust at that time was 8%. At
the time of the initial audit, 12% of staff were on long-term sick
leave, including two band 7 nurses (1.8% trust wide).

.. _S11:

Discussion
==========

This service evaluation investigated which professionals are undertaking
new patient assessments and investigated unmet training needs of the
clinicians involved. We hypothesised that a skills gap has emerged as
more non-medical clinicians have started to participate in assessments
and that they find these new duties very stressful; our results
corresponded with this hypothesis.

The Royal College of Psychiatrists recommends that CMHTs should ‘ensure
the appropriate numbers of professionals with appropriate skills and
competencies are in place to respond to local needs … for
assessment’.\ :sup:`9` Our surveys and audit clearly show that the
majority of new patient assessments are now being done by non-medical
clinicians and that they frequently do not feel confident to undertake
this role. Not only does this pose clinical risks, but also contributes
to rising financial costs due to high rates of stress-related sickness
and rapid staff turnover. Our local experience is that many staff on
long-term sick leave are experiencing ‘stress, anxiety or depression’;
this tallies with national data.\ :sup:`5,8` The way that mental health
services commissioning is now linked to diagnostic clustering means that
poor knowledge of diagnostic categories and grading of severity of
mental health disorders could have financial implications. These
implications could be reduced by providing appropriate training.
Adequate knowledge of the local area and its resources is also important
and this is hard to achieve with high staff turnover.

Our initial audit highlighted the poor quality of risk assessments
undertaken during new patient assessments. Recent publications have
alerted us to the need for high-quality risk assessment in older adults,
especially for suicide and self-harm.\ :sup:`10` This was an area of
great concern in the 2012 audit, but the 2013 re-audit demonstrated that
very simple measures – an assessment form and some pilot teaching
sessions – made a significant improvement in our teams' skills and
documentation. Similarly, Huh *et al*\ :sup:`11` report that a 1-day
course in suicide risk assessment for healthcare professionals working
with older adults was highly effective at increasing staff confidence
and the quality of risk assessment. The Department of Health has
previously emphasised the need to provide a range of flexible approaches
to education and training,\ :sup:`12` and this is especially important
as we increasingly recognise different styles of learning and diversify
our working patterns. Key to this will be standardising access to
training, for example making sure that all professionals have similar
amounts of study leave provision.

We demonstrated that the majority of staff would like to undertake
further training in the form of seminars or short courses, and would
like accreditation for this. We have been unable to find any similar
audit or research data with which to compare our results, but the Royal
College of Nursing reports similar findings.\ :sup:`3` Their survey of
over 800 UK mental health nurses found that 89% would like further
training in ‘acute mental health conditions’ and the favoured delivery
methods were also teaching sessions or short courses. This work only
included nurses, whereas our study includes all non-medical clinicians,
but the demographics are otherwise similar. It could be argued that the
‘team’ nature of CMHTs (e.g. having staff supervision and a
multidisciplinary team meeting at which new cases are presented to the
consultant) allows for appropriate clinical guidance, but we have found
it can be difficult to provide such guidance when faced with a lack of
information gathered at an initial assessment.

.. _S12:

Limitations
-----------

The main limitation of this service evaluation is the sample size and
the fact that it covers only one geographic area. It might also be hard
to generalise to outside older adult psychiatry. The response rate for
the questionnaire was low, which may be partially explained by the work
having occurred during the holiday season, but other ways of reaching
staff need to be investigated. It should also be remembered that staff
have highly variable experience in terms of the years of practice; we
cannot expect newly qualified colleagues to be comparable to those with
more years of service and we did not collect this information.

.. _S13:

Assessment training
===================

We propose to improve standards in new patient assessment and increase
clinicians' skills and confidence in our area by providing a
comprehensive training programme within normal working hours for all
non-medical clinicians and junior doctors in the CMHT. This will be
delivered as seven 2–3-h interactive seminars and will cover general
assessment, risk assessment and management of common disorders
presenting to old age psychiatry (see online supplement DS3). It will be
provided at least yearly to include all incoming staff and, while led by
consultants, will provide a platform for psychiatric trainees to enhance
their teaching skills. Re-audits of new patient assessment structure and
content will occur yearly.

Assessment is the foundation of high-quality management in psychiatry:
we should work hard to ensure that all clinicians are appropriately
skilled and supported to manage the vulnerable patients presenting to
our services.\ :sup:`13` Psychiatrists should take a leading role in
delivering appropriate knowledge whereas mental health trusts should
facilitate training and seek ways to encourage and reward aspiration.

We thank all staff of the South Locality team for assisting with data
collection and providing support with the project. Special thanks go to
Marion Evans who downloaded the RiO data to establish who had undertaken
assessments between 2012 and 2013.

.. [1]
   **Dr Svetlana Hemsley** and **Dr Aneeba Anwar** are specialist
   trainees in old age psychiatry, **Dr Rebecca McKnight** is an
   academic clinical fellow in psychiatry, *Sarah Jones* is a service
   manager and **Dr Lola Martos** is a consultant psychiatrist, all
   working at the South Locality Older Adults Community Mental Health
   Team, Abingdon Mental Health Centre, Oxford Health NHS Foundation
   Trust, Abingdon, UK.
