==========================================================================================
Investigating the usefulness of a metacognitive training group programme for schizophrenia
==========================================================================================



Lorna Jane Howe
Ian D. Brown
:Correspondence: Ian Brown (ian.brown@sheffield.ac.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2015-6

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To examine the usefulness of a
   cognitive-behavioural therapy-based group intervention, metacognitive
   training for schizophrenia (MCT), in a ‘real-world’ clinical setting.
   In total, 164 participants completed 327 questionnaires at the end of
   MCT group sessions; rating the perceived usefulness, helpfulness to
   recovery, change in knowledge and anxiety. Non-parametric statistical
   tests were used to analyse the data.

   **Results** Participants indicated positive responses in terms of
   perceived usefulness, helpfulness to recovery and increased knowledge
   following group attendance. Significant positive correlations were
   found between: (a) usefulness and helpfulness to recovery, and (b)
   helpfulness to recovery and change in knowledge. There were
   significant negative correlations between: (a) usefulness and
   anxiety, and (b) helpfulness to recovery and anxiety.

   **Clinical implications** The results suggest that MCT is a useful
   and effective evidence-based psychological intervention. It supports
   the use of cognitive-behavioural interventions in the treatment of
   individuals experiencing psychosis, although further evaluation is
   needed.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The need for psychological interventions for psychosis is increasingly
recognised\ :sup:`1` and cognitive–behavioural interventions have
emerged as potentially effective approaches that should be considered in
the treatment of schizophrenia.\ :sup:`2` The rationale for such
approaches stems from mounting evidence that cognitive biases may
trigger or maintain symptoms in schizophrenia, especially rigidly held
unusual beliefs, frequently described as delusions within the
literature.\ :sup:`3` Individuals with the diagnosis may show evidence
of attributional biases, jumping to conclusions, bias against
disconfirmatory evidence, overconfidence in errors and problems with
theory of mind.\ :sup:`4` In light of these findings, an evidence-based
group cognitive training programme has been developed called
metacognitive training for schizophrenia (MCT)\ :sup:`5` (metacognitive
can be defined as thinking about one’s own thinking). The programme aims
to provide psychoeducation on cognitive biases to help alter
individual’s current problem-solving repertoire and prevent
relapse.\ :sup:`5,6` Research has confirmed the feasibility of MCT and
provided support for its efficacy in reducing positive symptoms and
cognitive biases related to schizophrenia in 29 countries including
Germany\ :sup:`7,8` and Switzerland.\ :sup:`9,10`

However, although there is already support for the efficacy of
MCT\ :sup:`7,8` exploring its effectiveness within the local service was
deemed important and, if necessary, adapting the service on the basis of
feedback. This was reinforced by a health trust-wide initiative to
promote clinical effectiveness through service-user feedback. It was
considered important to examine individual sessions/modules as well as
the broader programme experience (collapsing across attended modules).
The open nature of the programme was such that participants could enter
the programme at different points in the cycle: comparison of individual
modules would show whether different entry-points to the programme were
seen to be similarly useful/effective and identify particular foci for
improvement. Three specific aims emerged from local service needs: to
(a) explore the perceived utility and effectiveness of each MCT module,
(b) explore the overall perceived utility and effectiveness of MCT group
attendance (collapsing across sessions attended), and (c) examine the
interrelationships between post-session ratings of perceived group
utility, effectiveness and self-reported anxiety.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Participants
------------

Flyers inviting individuals to attend MCT sessions were disseminated to
potentially suitable participants through professionals within the local
community mental health team and acute in-patient ward. There were 164
participants; 105 attended only one session and 59 attended multiple
sessions (mean 3.8 sessions, range 2–17). The mean age of participants
was 42.7 (range 16–85); excluding 18 participants who did not give their
age. Seventy respondents indicated they were male (43%) and 82 female
(50%). Participants were not asked for details of their diagnosis in
order to ensure the sessions were as non-invasive as possible.

.. _S3:

Procedure
---------

At the end of each session, participants were given a questionnaire to
rate the utility and effectiveness of the programme. Throughout eight
cycles (64 sessions) of the group, 327 questionnaires were completed.

.. _S4:

Measures
--------

The questionnaire was developed by the group facilitator (a clinical
psychologist) based on the questionnaire used by the authors of
MCT.\ :sup:`5` It took approximately 5 min to complete and covered
demographic information, questions that created a unique anonymised code
to track participants through the programme and questions providing
quantitative data on either a five-point or ten-point Likert scale
(`Appendix <#APP1>`__).

.. _S5:

Description of the programme
----------------------------

| The MCT programme consisted of eight sessions on a weekly basis
  lasting approximately 45 min, facilitated by a clinical psychologist.
  There were different modules each week, which consisted of
  familiarising participants with the Table 1Programme
  content\ :sup:`11`\ Module titleTarget domainOverview of
  exercisesModule 1a & 1b:
| Attribution – blaming and
| taking creditSelf-serving bias *v.*
| depressive attributional biasDifferent reasons for positive and
  negative events are contemplated.
| Explanations that account for various causes are preferred to single
| explanationsModule 2a & 2b:
| Jumping to conclusions IJumping to conclusions/
| liberal acceptance/bias
| against disconfirmatory
| evidenceSituations leading to rash decisions are discussed and
  disadvantages are
| emphasised. Disjointed pictures are shown that ultimately display
  objectsModule 3a & 3b:
| Changing beliefsBias against disconfirmatory
| evidenceCartoon sequences are shown in backward order. Individuals
  learn to
| withhold strong judgements until adequate evidence has been
  collectedModule 4a & 4b:
| To empathise ITheory of mindIncomplete cartoon strips and pictures of
  human faces are presented,
| and participants are asked how the people depicted might feel. The
  first
| intuition is often wrong, showing that relying solely on facial
  expression
| can be misleading and multiple cues should be usedModule 5a & 5b:
| MemoryOverconfidence in errorsFactors that may promote or impair
  memory acquisition are discussed.
| Complex scenes are displayed with two typical elements each removed.
| Participants learn to differentiate between false and correct memories
| by their vividnessModule 6a & 6b:
| To empathise IITheory of mind/need for
| closureDifferent features guiding theory of mind are discussed.
  Cartoon
| sequences are presented, and the perspective of one of the characters
  is
| consideredModule 7a & 7b:
| Jumping to conclusions IIJumping to conclusions/
| liberal acceptanceSimilar to module 2, the disadvantages of hasty
  decisions are outlined.
| Paintings are also displayed, and the correct title must be inferred
  from
| four optionsModule 8a & 8b:
| Self-esteem and moodMood and self-esteemCauses, symptoms, and
  treatment of depression are discussed. Typical
| depressive cognitive patterns are presented. Strategies to help
  enhance
| self-esteem and improve mood are also discussed target domain (for
  example jumping to conclusions, attributional style), using everyday
  examples and illustrations projected from a computer screen. Two
  cycles of the programme were available; each cycle involved the same
  targets but with different group exercises. It was an open group that
  individuals could join at any time. The manual, modules and other
  resources were downloaded cost-free from
  `www.uke.de/mct <www.uke.de/mct>`__. `Table 1 <#T1>`__ outlines the
  content of the group programme.\ :sup:`11`

.. _S6:

Results
=======

Data was not normally distributed, therefore, non-parametric tests were
used and the median and interquartile ranges (IQR) are reported
throughout.

.. _S7:

Utility and effectiveness of each module
----------------------------------------

`Table 2 <#T2>`__ shows the descriptive statistics for each module of
the group programme; 266 out of 327 participants’ completed
questionnaires were included; 61 were excluded because of missing data.
Mann–Whitney *U*-tests were used to compare differences between ratings
given for parallel sessions within each module. No significant
differences were found; therefore, the two cycles of the programme were
considered equivalent and the data was pooled.

| As `Table 2 <#T2>`__ shows, ratings for each module seemed fairly
  positive in terms of usefulness, change in knowledge and helpfulness
  to recovery. A Kruskal–Wallis test was conducted to investigate
  whether there were any significant differences in perceived utility
  and effectiveness between Table 2Median (interquartile range) ratings
  by module\ `a <#TFN1>`__\ Median (IQR)Module\ *n*\ UsefulnessKnowledge
  – priorKnowledge – postChange in
| knowledgeHelpfulness
| to recoveryAnxiety
| (session-end)1314.0 (3.0–5.0)4.0 (1.0–6.0)7.0 (4.0–9.0)2.0
  (0.0–4.0)5.0 (3.0–10.0)4.0 (1.0–6.0)2354.0 (3.0–5.0)5.0 (3.0–7.0)6.0
  (5.0–8.0)1.0 (0.0–3.0)5.0 (3.0–9.0)5.0 (1.0–7.0)3334.0 (3.5–4.5)4.0
  (1.0–6.0)6.0 (5.0–8.0)2.0 (0.5–4.0)6.0 (4.5–9.5)4.0 (1.0–6.0)4354.0
  (3.0–4.0)4.0 (1.0–5.0)6.0 (5.0–8.0)3.0 (1.0–4.0)6.0 (4.0–7.0)4.0
  (1.0–8.0)5344.0 (3.0–4.25)3.0 (1.0–6.25)7.0 (4.0–7.0)2.0 (1.0–3.88)5.0
  (2.0–7.0)4.5 (1.0–6.25)6364.0 (3.25–5.0)4.0 (1.25–7.0)7.0 (5.0–9.0)2.0
  (1.0–4.0)6.0 (3.0–7.0)4.0 (1.0–6.0)7284.0 (3.0–4.0)4.0 (1.0–7.75)7.0
  (4.25–8.75)2.0 (1.0–3.75)5.0 (4.0–7.0)3.5 (1.0–5.0)8344.0 (3.0–5.0)4.5
  (2.0–6.25)7.0 (3.75–9.25)1.0 (0.0–3.0)4.5 (2.0–8.0)5.0 (1.75–8.0) [2]_
  modules. No significant differences were found on usefulness (*H* (*n*
  = 154) = 2.738, *P* = 0.908), change in knowledge (*H* (*n* = 157) =
  11.558, *P* = 0.116), and helpfulness to recovery (*H* (*n* = 154) =
  5.057 *P* = 0.653). To ensure that each rating was independent, only
  the first observation from each of the 59 individuals who attended
  more than one session was taken, and some individuals were excluded
  because of missing data. This suggested that ratings for each module
  were comparable and it was concluded that evaluating the group as a
  whole to evaluate the remaining aims of this paper was justifiable.

.. _S8:

Overall utility and effectiveness of group attendance
-----------------------------------------------------

Subsequent analyses collapsed data across sessions to produce
individual-level summaries. Thus, each unit of observation represents a
separate individual, and each data-value represents the average score
for that individual, across the sessions that they attended. In this
way, all observations are independent and comparable, facilitating
descriptive and inferential analyses of aggregated individual-level data
that reflect the overall impact of group attendance.

On average, participants reported that sessions were fairly useful
(median 4) and helped towards their recovery somewhat (median 4.5).
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks tests were conducted for individual-average
ratings of change in knowledge. Participants reported a highly
significant increase in knowledge from pre-group (median 4.5) to
post-group (median 5.5), *z* = –5.79, *P*\ <0.001.

Although there were overall (sample-level) changes in knowledge,
inspection of individual change-scores seemed Table 3Spearman’s rho
correlations for overall group ratings (*n* = 150)Helpfulness to
recoveryChange in
knowledgeAnxiety\ *rPrPrP*\ Usefulness0.288<0.001–0.0530.514–0.301<0.001Helpfulness
to recovery0.2060.010–0.1940.018Change in knowledge–0.0400.625 to show
that some individuals reported no change or negative change between pre-
and post-group. Specifically, 20% (32/159) reported zero or negative
changes in knowledge. It was not possible to compute accurate reliable
change estimates\ :sup:`12` for knowledge items, as available estimates
of test–retest reliability are conflated with intervention effects.
Those who showed zero and negative changes would not be able to
demonstrate reliable improvement in any analysis of reliable change.

.. _S9:

Interrelationships between group utility, effectiveness and self-reported anxiety
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Spearman’s rank order correlation coefficient (i.e. Spearman’s rho)
was performed to explore the interrelationships between group ratings
(`Table 3 <#T3>`__). The Spearman’s rho revealed significant positive
correlations between (a) usefulness and helpfulness to recovery and (b)
helpfulness to recovery and change in knowledge. Furthermore, there were
significant negative correlations between (a) usefulness and anxiety and
(b) helpfulness to recovery and anxiety.

.. _S10:

Discussion
==========

Participants indicated positive responses towards MCT in terms of
perceived usefulness and helpfulness to recovery. Changes in outcome
measures revealed an overall increase in knowledge following group
attendance, although at an individual level some individuals did not
report any increase in knowledge (this is discussed further in the
Limitations section).

No particular sessions were perceived as more useful or effective than
others. This supports the clinical application of all components of the
programme and could be seen to support the open format of the group,
since all entry-points are generally comparable in terms of utility.

It seems that the more useful participants found the group, the more
they found it helpful towards their recovery – and vice versa. In
keeping with the aims of the group, helpfulness to recovery was also
positively correlated with change in knowledge. By increasing an
individual’s awareness of cognitive biases and providing corrective
experiences, it could be expected that an individual would report an
increase in knowledge and related recovery (in terms of decreased
symptoms).\ :sup:`5` However, it is acknowledged that ‘recovery’ is a
complex term and, although recovery from clinical symptoms can be seen
as an outcome, individuals may continue to experience psychological
distress while achieving ‘personal’ and ‘social’ recovery.\ :sup:`13,14`

Interestingly, self-reported anxiety was negatively correlated with
perceived usefulness and helpfulness to recovery. This suggests that the
more anxious participants were, the less useful and helpful towards
their recovery the group was – and vice versa. This may have important
clinical implications for future practice, which are discussed below.

.. _S11:

Limitations
-----------

Despite participants’ responses supporting the utility and effectiveness
of MCT, which met various criteria for statistical significance, a
number of limitations must be noted. The frequency of zero and negative
individual-level change-scores suggests that some participants did not
demonstrate knowledge improvements. From the available data it is
unclear why this may be. It could be hypothesised that because the
programme was an open group, establishing group cohesion was difficult.
Therefore, although some individuals may have benefitted from the social
processes of the group, some may have found the situation unhelpful and
possibly anxiety-provoking. This may have had an impact on their ability
to process and retain the information.

As participants were not specifically asked about their diagnosis,
individuals who did not experience psychosis may have been included. As
such, the programme content may not be suitable for those individuals
and they may not have benefited from the group. Nevertheless, it is
suggested that individuals with various mental health difficulties may
benefit from MCT as the focus is on providing a neutral ‘common ground’
for discussing thinking styles, rather than individual
symptoms.\ :sup:`11` However, this remains to be investigated and was
beyond the scope of this paper.

It is also noted that some participants only attended the group once or
a few times. This may be a behavioural indication that the intervention
was not working. On the other hand, it may indicate that individuals
were in the process of recovery and felt they no longer needed MCT.
There are also contextual issues to consider; for instance, those
participants who were in-patients may have been discharged and reluctant
to return to the group because they were feeling better or a desire to
disassociate with the hospital environment.

The service-developed questionnaire also had a number of shortcomings
that may have affected the results. Change-scores were based on
retrospective measures that may have resulted in inaccurate estimates,
or participants may have felt obliged to respond in accordance with
perceived demand characteristics. Furthermore, the items do not map onto
the specific targets of MCT, including the expected reduction of
positive symptoms and cognitive biases. In addition, it was difficult to
establish what ‘recovery’ meant to respondents and how they evaluated
this. As mentioned above, recovery is a very complex and individual
experience and the quantitative data did not capture this.

.. _S12:

Clinical implications
---------------------

Despite the limitations, the results address the aims of the paper and
suggest that MCT can provide a useful and effective evidence-based
psychological intervention to participants within a local service. In
addition to meeting local service needs, this paper contributes to the
broader evidence base for MCT and supports the use of
cognitive–behavioural interventions in the treatment of individuals
experiencing psychosis.\ :sup:`2,7,8`

The results have provided some important insights that may help to
inform future clinical practice. Correlations suggested that individuals
may need support to manage their anxiety in order to facilitate the
processing of programme content (for example using relaxation and
‘ice-breaker’ exercises at the beginning of sessions). It may also be
useful for the group facilitator to have an open dialogue with
participants about the effects of the group and recognise that not
everyone may benefit from MCT. Furthermore, as some individuals did not
appear to benefit from the group, more selective inclusion criteria may
be needed (for example ensuring only individuals with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia/psychosis are included). It may also be useful to
implement the recently developed individualised MCT programme on a
one-to-one basis with some clients who may not benefit from a group
format.\ :sup:`15`

The MCT programme showed promising results in promoting knowledge and
was helpful for recovery and therefore further evaluation of the MCT
group programme is needed in the future. There were various design
limitations of the questionnaire that would need to be addressed in
order to improve future evaluation: (a) some participant demographics
should be collected, including diagnosis, (b) measures of change should
be taken before and after sessions in order to overcome problems with
retrospective accounts, (c) items should map more tightly to the
theoretical targets of MCT and could include objective tests (for
example multiple-choice questions) *v.* subjective items that are more
open to bias, (c) space for qualitative data should be provided under
each question – particularly in relation to ‘recovery’ and what
participants found helpful/unhelpful, and (d) questions about the impact
of the facilitator’s style of delivery. This would allow exploration of
what influences on outcomes relate to programme content or facilitator’s
presentation skills.

.. _S13:

Questions on the evaulation form
================================

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T4

   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | How     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | much    |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | kn      |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | owledge |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | did you |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | have on |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | the     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | topic   |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | being   |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | covered |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | prior   |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | to this |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | s       |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | ession? |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | 1       | 2 | 3       | 4      | 5 | 6       | 7 | 8       | 9 | 10      |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | None at |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   | A great |
   | all     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   | deal    |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | How     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | much    |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | kn      |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | owledge |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | do you  |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | feel    |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | you     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | have    |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | now on  |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | this    |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | topic?  |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | 1       | 2 | 3       | 4      | 5 | 6       | 7 | 8       | 9 | 10      |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | None at |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   | A great |
   | all     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   | deal    |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | How     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | much do |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | you     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | think   |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | today’s |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | session |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | has     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | helped  |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | your    |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | re      |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | covery? |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | 1       | 2 | 3       | 4      | 5 | 6       | 7 | 8       | 9 | 10      |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | None at |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   | A great |
   | all     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   | deal    |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | Overall |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | how     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | useful  |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | did you |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | find    |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | the     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | s       |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | ession? |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | Un      |   | Fairly  | Unsure |   | Fairly  |   | Very    |   |         |
   | helpful |   | un      |        |   | helpful |   | helpful |   |         |
   |         |   | helpful |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | How     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | anxious |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | do you  |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   | feel?   |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   |         |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | 1       | 2 | 3       | 4      | 5 | 6       | 7 | 8       | 9 | 10      |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+
   | None at |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   | A great |
   | all     |   |         |        |   |         |   |         |   | deal    |
   +---------+---+---------+--------+---+---------+---+---------+---+---------+

.. [1]
   **Lorna Jane Howe** is a Clinical Psychologist at Cambian Healthcare.
   **Ian D. Brown** is a Clinical Psychologist and Honorary Researcher
   at the University of Sheffield.

.. [2]
   *n* represents the number of participants providing ratings for each
   module. Usefulness was rated on a five-point scale anchored at: 1,
   ‘unhelpful’ and 5, ‘very helpful’; knowledge, helpfulness to recovery
   and anxiety were all rated on a ten-point scale anchored at 1, ‘none
   at all’ and 10, ‘a great deal’.
