============================================================================================================
‘Spirituality’ and ‘cultural adaptation’ in a Latino mutual aid group for substance misuse and mental health
============================================================================================================



Brian T. Anderson
Angela Garcia
:Correspondence: Brian T. Anderson
(brian.anderson@ucsf.edu)  [1]_

:date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   A previously unknown Spanish-language mutual aid resource for
   substance use and mental health concerns is available in Latino
   communities across the USA and much of Latin America. This kind of
   ‘4th and 5th step’ group is a ‘culturally adapted’ version of the
   12-step programme and provides empirical grounds on which to
   re-theorise the importance of spirituality and culture in mutual aid
   recovery groups. This article presents ethnographic data on this
   organisation.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Group Higher Power (a pseudonym, to protect confidentiality) is a mutual
aid group in Northern California for Latinos with substance use problems
and other mental health concerns. (By ‘Latinos’ we are referring to a
very diverse population of persons from Latin America or their
descendants. We do not mean in any way to present Latinos as a
homogenous group.) It is a ‘4th and 5th step’ group (grupo de Cuarto y
Quinto Paso, henceforth ‘CQ’), a variation of the 12-step recovery
programme that was founded in Mexico in 1991.\ :sup:`1` New members join
Group Higher Power by completing seven preparation meetings followed by
a 2-day *experiencia espiritual* (spiritual experience) in a secluded
mountain forest preserve a couple hours from where the group holds its
nightly meetings. During the experience, the new members complete the
4th and 5th steps of the 12-step programme: step 4, ‘We made a searching
and fearless moral inventory of ourselves’; step 5, ‘We admitted to God,
to ourselves, and to another human being the exact nature of our
wrongs’.\ :sup:`2` Afterwards, they are encouraged to attend the nightly
meetings, which usually open with the meeting coordinator reading the
bye laws of the group, including: ‘Here is a 4th and 5th step group. We
are a group of men and women that maintains itself by our own
contributions’. In a traditional Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) group, the
coordinator would next say: ‘The only requirement for being here is that
you wish to stop drinking’. But at Group Higher Power, the coordinator
says: ‘The only requirement for being here is that you wish to transcend
the pain in your life, and to stop suffering’.

Unlike in AA, CQ members may identify as an *alcohólico* (alcoholic), a
*drogadicto* (drug addict), an *enfermo emocional* (emotionally ill,
used interchangeably with *neurótico* (neurotic)) or any combination of
these. ‘To be an *enfermo emocional*\ ’ is an idiom of
distress\ :sup:`3` that signifies a ‘spiritual’ ailment thought to be at
the root of addiction, depression and other ‘neuroses’. The idiom also
indicates a correct form of treatment which members learn to engage in
and provide to others in the spiritual experience – a dramatic,
cathartic style of testimony.

This form of ‘spiritual healing’ can be found in CQ groups like Higher
Power located throughout Mexico, the USA, Central America and in some
parts of South America and Europe. Because there is no central
organisation that unites all CQ groups, it is impossible to know exactly
how many there are (see directory of US groups affiliated with the Amor
y Servicio branch of CQ:
`www.amoryserviciousa.org/directorio <www.amoryserviciousa.org/directorio>`__).
That said, our preliminary ethnographic findings suggest that CQ is
growing rapidly in Mexico and the USA, making it a community-based
mental health resource for potentially thousands of Latinos across North
America.

The apparently rapid growth of CQ is important from a public health
perspective and interesting for theorising what makes psychotherapy
‘cultural adapted’. Mutual aid groups for addiction are known to be
cost-effective interventions.\ :sup:`4` Latinos in the USA have a
disproportionate burden of substance use,\ :sup:`5,6` and yet they are
underserved in the areas of substance use and mental health
treatment.\ :sup:`7,8` There is therefore a pronounced need for
accessible, community-based and culturally adapted care for Latinos in
the USA.\ :sup:`9,10` Alcoholics Anonymous may meet this need for some,
but whereas Latinos in the USA are thought to recommend AA equally as
often as other ethnicities,\ :sup:`11` Project MATCH\ :sup:`12` suggests
that AA has trouble attracting and retaining Latinos in the USA.
Interestingly, Project MATCH also found that, relative to White
Americans, Latinos who do attend AA display higher levels of
involvement, including ‘God consciousness’,\ :sup:`13` after out-patient
alcohol treatment and several authors have suggested that the
incorporation of spiritual and religious elements into culturally
appropriate substance use treatment for Latinos merits further
examination.\ :sup:`7,12–14` However, the majority of Latinos in the
Project MATCH study sample were south-western Hispanos and it is likely
that their responses are not representative of other Latino groups in
the USA, such as Puerto Ricans, Mexican–Americans and Mexicans.

Highly spiritual and religious behaviour can already be found in
Spanish-speaking AA groups in the USA\ :sup:`15` and especially in
Mexico,\ :sup:`2` where AA has become over the past several decades the
most prevalent source of substance use treatment in the
country.\ :sup:`16,17` But even members of these groups sometimes
criticise CQ as being overly religious and refer to CQ derogatorily as a
‘religious sect’. So, if CQ is as popular among USA-based Latinos as our
qualitative data suggest, we propose this may be due to how CQ
incorporates a culturally appropriate form of spirituality into their
recovery programme. In this article, we present ethnographic data on the
therapeutic practices of Group Higher Power, which largely resemble
those of other CQ groups we have observed in the USA and Mexico. In
doing so we attempt to offer a qualitative understanding of
‘spirituality’ in CQ and more specifically, how the ‘spiritual
experience’ is configured as a treatment for being *enfermo emocional*.
Through this we enquire into how this form of mutual aid spirituality
may mediate a successful cultural adaptation of the 12-step programme
for underserved Latinos in the USA.

.. _S1:

Data collection and study aims
==============================

The ethnographic data presented here come from an ongoing
anthropological study of drug addiction, violence and treatment
modalities for substance-using Latinos in Mexico and the USA. CQ has
been a central focus of our ethnographic fieldwork since January 2013.
We have observed and documented the therapeutic practices and living
conditions of members of ten CQ groups (4 in Mexico) as well as several
other 12-step groups that are specifically for Latinos.\ :sup:`15,16` We
have also conducted dozens of formal and informal interviews with
12-step group members, their family members and health professionals in
both countries. Many of the 12-step members had participated in more
than one kind of 12-step group over their lifetime (e.g. CQ and AA) and
so we were able to gather information on CQ from interviewees who were
not currently active CQ members. We have observed one spiritual
experience hosted by Group Higher Power. In accordance with exploratory
qualitative research methods,\ :sup:`18` research sites and participants
were selected by convenience, as dictated by the opportunities and
challenges inherent in maintaining relationships with a dynamic and
mobile population over several months. Iterative interpretive analysis
of research materials (field notes, interview transcripts, photographs
and videos) was conducted to better understand the emic categories of
illness, health and healing. This study has been approved by the
Institutional Review Board of Stanford University. A draft of this
article in Spanish was presented to Group Higher Power, and it is being
published with the group's blessing.

.. _S2:

Group Higher Power – characteristics
====================================

On its surface, Group Higher Power looks like other Spanish-language
12-step groups in the USA.\ :sup:`15,19,20` Nightly meetings are held
from 19.00 to 21.00 in a suburban storefront in a predominantly Latino
neighbourhood. The membership consists of men and women ranging in age
from their 20s to their 60s. They mostly hail from Mexico, but some are
from Central America and many were born in the USA. Several members are
undocumented immigrants. Many speak English, but meetings and informal
conversations are conducted in Spanish.

.. _S3:

The setting
-----------

The main room of the group has large posters with the 12 steps and 12
traditions of AA, which are in Spanish and hang on the far wall above
the desk of the meeting *coordinador* (coordinator) and the podium where
members stand and share their testimonials. Between the posters of the
12 steps and the 12 traditions hang framed portraits of Bill W and Dr
Bob, the co-founders of AA. The other three walls of the room are
adorned with one or two images of Jesus Christ and many more colourful
framed certificates and plaques that Group Higher Power has received for
giving *compartimientos* (‘sharings’ or testimonies) at the anniversary
celebrations of other CQ groups in California, Nevada and Utah. By the
dates on the certificates, most groups in this part of the country have
only been in existence for 3 to 4 years; a few have been around for up
to a decade.

There is a small room in the back where *ahijados* and *ahijadas*
(‘sponsees’) can receive *apadrinamiento* (counsel) from their
*padrinos* and *madrinas* (sponsors, also known as godfathers and
godmothers) in private. And like in so many other Latino 12-step groups,
on the wall near the main entrance hangs a black-and-white print of a
man, shirtless, dishevelled and shackled, with the words *Reconozco mi
derrota ante el alcohol* (I recognise my ruin from alcohol) (`Fig.
1 <#F1>`__).

.. figure:: 193f1
   :alt: Picture hanging in all 12-step Latino groups' meeting rooms.
   Photograph by the author
   :name: F1

   Picture hanging in all 12-step Latino groups' meeting rooms.
   Photograph by the author

.. _S4:

Group members
-------------

Unlike in Latino AA groups, members of Group Higher Power are explicitly
seeking help for more than just their alcoholism; they say they want to
cure their ‘emotions’. To be an *enfermo emocional* is to have suffered
traumatic and painful events in one's past, often as a child, and then
to go through life with the memories of these events smouldering in the
unconscious, causing the person to repeatedly hurt others and
themselves. This pain is what CQ members say they used to try to avoid
when they drank alcohol and used other drugs. The same pain led other
members not to use substances, but instead to be ‘neurotic’ or unhappy
and self-destructive. Like the ‘dry drunk’ in AA, the *enfermo
emocional* displays the same harmful behaviours of an alcoholic who is
abstinent but not in recovery, namely lying, being violent and generally
suffering from ‘ego’. The prescribed treatment is lifelong dedication to
CQ's spiritual path, which starts with completing a spiritual
experience.

This is why in the back of the Group Higher Power main meeting room
there is another, medium-sized room where the seven preparation meetings
are held for newcomers, called *escribientes* (‘writers’), who will soon
undergo their first *escritura* (‘writing’, meaning spiritual
experience). There is no podium in this room, but there is a wooden desk
behind which a coordinator sits, with two other members to his right and
left, usually a man and a woman. Some days up to a dozen *escribientes*
at a time are being prepared in this room, sitting in their brown, metal
folding chairs facing the desk, above which also hang portraits of Bill
W and Dr Bob. A couple of *escribientes* typically trickle in late,
apologising for not being able to get off of work in time at the factory
or cleaning houses. The usual attire is jeans, old tracksuit bottoms,
well-worn tennis shoes, but there is also the occasional nice fleece or
stylish watch. After everyone is offered coffee or water, the first
prayer of the night, the Serenity Prayer, is recited and then the
meeting begins.

.. _S5:

The meeting
===========

The members share their testimonies with the *escribientes*, weaving in
the benefits they have received from being in the group, like gaining
insight into their emotional problems. One man shared: ‘When I came to
the group, I had just smoked $100 of crystal meth. I wanted to die … It
wasn't until the experience when I realised things were wrong; I had
erased those memories. In the experience, I remembered these dark
things. I remembered my dad dying, and when I was molested as a child.’

Testimonies also often include mention of a transformation or rebirth in
the experience that has helped the person stay sober. It is common for
CQ members to admit that they were actually drunk or high when they went
for their first experience, but then after that day they no longer
needed to drink, smoke or use.

Over the seven preparation meetings, the *escribientes* are gradually
introduced to the cathartic style of testimony that is at the very core
of CQ's ‘emotional’ therapy. When ‘sharing’ their testimony, members
frequently cry, swear and shout, even to the point of sometimes becoming
totally distraught. The *escribientes* do not practise giving testimony
in the preparation meetings; they do not even speak for the duration of
the 2-hour meetings. Instead, they are instructed to sit and reflect on
what is being shared with them. Once, after a meeting, an *escribiente*
asked the meeting coordinator: ‘Do they always use so many bad words?’
She continued: ‘Because I was thinking about bringing my daughter here,
but now I don't know; I don't want her to hear those things’. The
coordinator smiled from behind the desk and counselled her with a phrase
that is often said at the beginning of the preparatory meetings: ‘If you
hear strong language, don't focus on the words, focus on the feelings’.
This is the heart of what the *escribientes* are being trained to do –
to engage in a reflective, contemplative practice in which they identify
with the testimonies of the group members to learn to identify these
same emotions in themselves and then release them during the spiritual
experience.

.. _S6:

The spiritual experience
------------------------

At Group Higher Power's spiritual experience each *escribiente*
underwent their 4th step by writing a ‘moral inventory’ for about
24-hours straight, with no sleep, little food and lots of coffee. They
were instructed to be ‘100% honest’ while answering questions about
their lives; these questions are standard across CQ groups and come from
the 12-step literature. The 4th step culminated in a celebratory moment
in which the *escribientes* and the members held hands in a circle
formed around a large wooden cross, crying, reciting prayers and singing
Christian hymns in Spanish backed up by a CD playing over a pickup
truck's stereo. The *escribientes* were encouraged to have visions of
God while they looked up into the starry night sky.

A *padrino* in Mexico City with significant experience in CQ said that
the point of the experience is to get the *escribiente* to go through a
*colapso a fondo del ego* (‘when the ego hits bottom’) because that is
when ‘your spirituality starts to flow’. Group Higher Power members joke
that they ‘enter the fourth dimension’ during the experience, meaning
that they go into a trance-like state. It is this state that lets them
do the emotional healing that they say they cannot achieve with a
psychologist, a doctor, not even a traditional AA group. Many cite the
spiritual experience as their reason for why they stay in CQ, and why CQ
has helped them make behavioural changes that they could not achieve
otherwise.

After the experience, the members will attend nightly meetings and
continue to rehearse and refine the dramatic testimonial style they
learned in the experience. They will stand at the podium, look out of
the corners of their eyes, and try to re-enter their painful or shameful
memories, recounting them for the group, complete with details of the
sights, sounds and smells of what it was like to be there. The meetings
are brought to a close with the lights off and everyone standing in a
*cadena de amor y servicio* (chain of love and service), holding hands
in a large circle. As Christian worship songs are softly played in the
background, members are instructed figuratively to leave in the room
what they heard and felt that night by whispering it to God. They recite
the Serenity Prayer, the AA Responsibility Declaration and the Our
Father, and then the meeting is over.

.. _S7:

Discussion
==========

What exactly is it about CQ spirituality that makes this mutual aid
organisation especially culturally adapted for Latinos? One observation
that seems clear is that the kinds of dramatic public testimony, group
prayer and healing and rebirth practices in CQ resemble those of the
Pentecostal and Charismatic Catholic movements, which are currently
quite popular in Mexico.\ :sup:`21,22` While true, this does not explain
with any real specificity why this would make CQ spirituality congruent
with Latinos' cultural frames and therefore a popular choice for those
seeking psychological help.

Based on their meta-analysis of psychotherapy studies, Benish *et
al*\ :sup:`23` propose that the key factor for enhancing the cultural
adaptability of psychotherapy is the incorporation of an ethnic
minority's ‘illness myth’. This suggests that we should consider more
closely the CQ idiom of distress, *enfermo emocional*, as a key to what
makes CQ culturally adapted for Latinos. CQ emic understandings of being
an *enfermo emocional* are sculpted out of a psychodynamic language of
neurosis, the unconscious and childhood trauma. The fact that this
aetiological discourse is flourishing within a spiritual healing
movement might at first seem paradoxical, yet it arguably makes good
sense given psychoanalysis' historical ties with religion in Mexico. One
of Mexico's better known early champions of Freudian thought, the
Catholic monk Gregorio Lemercier, actually attempted in the 1960s to use
psychoanalysis to revitalise monastic life,\ :sup:`24` whose traditions
of intensive contemplative practices and spiritual retreats have strong
parallels with much of what we see in CQ's modifications and
interpretations of the 12-step programme.

The highly ‘spiritual’ nature of being *enfermo emocional* has further
implications for CQ's acceptance by Latinos that become even clearer
when we consider how 12-step programmes are often criticised for
disempowering their members by encouraging them to submit to a higher
power and to identify as sick addicts who will forever be in recovery.
In CQ, the *enfermo emocional* takes this a step further and is not only
eternally in recovery, but they are also intermittently ‘mad’. CQ
members sometimes describe their spiritual experience as a form of
*locura* (madness); and Mexican AA members and clinicians alike not only
allege that CQ's cathartic practices are crude and ineffective, but some
have even warned the public against participating in the CQ spiritual
experience because of case reports of individuals who have developed
psychosis or died by suicide shortly after their experience.

Nevertheless, perhaps it is by making its recovery programme even more
‘spiritual’ than AA that CQ is able to invert these concerns of clinical
ineffectiveness and harm, turning the submission to a higher power into
a much more positive experience. In Asad's critique of the secular
notions of agency and pain,\ :sup:`25` he delineates how the modern
narrative of agency makes clear that agency must be used to avoid
suffering (p. 71). Moreover, one who gives into religious ‘emotions’
(glossed ‘passions’) is said to lack the prized agency of a rational
subject. To counter these assumptions, Asad pushes us to consider a
notion of sanity which, instead of turning on the ideal of self-control,
‘presupposes knowing the world practically and being known practically
by it’ (p. 73). He asserts that this ‘allows us to think of moral agency
in terms of people's habitual engagement with the world in which they
live, so that one kind of moral insanity occurs precisely when the pain
they know in this world is suddenly no longer an object of practical
knowledge’ (p. 73). According to this alternative understanding of
agency, sanity and pain, CQ members could submit to a higher power,
enter a state of *locura* in the spiritual experience and dive into the
passions of their ‘sick emotions’, and actually thereby maintain, or
even regain, their *sano juicio* (‘sanity’), as the 2nd step says can
happen (‘[We] Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could
restore us to sanity’\ :sup:`2`). But for this to be a healthy process
requires CQ groups to provide a practical purpose for members to relive
their suffering night after night through the testimonies. And hence the
prayer circle that ends every nightly meeting and spiritual experience,
the *cadena de amor y servicio* (chain of love and service), points up
the symbolic importance of service in CQ's practice of spiritual
healing. Service, including sharing one's testimony and counselling
one's sponsee, is the suture that stitches together CQ sociality and
repairs the psychic wounds of the *enfermo emocional*. Given how
important sponsorship is in AA in Mexico relative to the USA,\ :sup:`26`
we propose that CQ capitalises on this Mexican proclivity for service to
create a mutual aid environment where sectarian notions of agency and
suffering can be more fully embodied, thereby allowing CQ members to
more adequately respond to the spiritual ‘illness myth’ of the *enfermo
emocional*.

Finally, we must stress that reports on the rapid uptake of CQ
throughout North America are to this point based on qualitative data
alone and they require triangulation with quantitative measures (our
research team is currently preparing a survey of CQ groups in Northern
California). Moreover, other elements beyond spirituality need to be
considered to understand why CQ might be a highly ‘culturally adapted’
form of AA for Latinos. The role of family involvement in CQ should not
be underestimated, especially since membership is not restricted to
‘alcoholics’, but can also include ‘drug addicts’ and ‘neurotics’ who do
not use substances. Also, larger issues of political economy, state
insecurity and violence should not be overshadowed by a narrow interest
in ‘cultural adaptability’ when trying to understand why a grassroots
treatment modality such as CQ is reported to be growing rapidly in
underserved, displaced and marginalised communities. In the
neighbourhoods where CQ seems to be growing the quickest, families must
deal with poverty, a lack of access to healthcare and the general social
fragmentation that Mexico's drug war-related violence has wrought on the
country for the past decade. Detailed consideration of these factors is,
however, beyond the scope of this article.

We thank all the compañeros and compañeras who participated in this
research. We also thank Dr Guilherme Borges and Dr Martha Romero of the
Instituto Nacional de Psiquiatría Ramón de la Fuente Muñiz for their
generous consultation and Mónica Martínez, Michael Nedelman and Keith
Humphries for their collaboration.

.. [1]
   **Brian T. Anderson** is a Resident Physician in the Department of
   Psychiatry, University of California – San Francisco, San Francisco,
   USA, and **Angela Garcia** is an Assistant Professor in the
   Department of Anthropology, Stanford University, Stanford, USA.
