=========================================================================================================
Severn School of Psychiatry education fellowships: a new way to promote educational practice and research
=========================================================================================================



Rob Macpherson
Sherlie Arulanandam
Guy Undrill
Simon Atkinson
Steve Arnott
Sian Hughes
Hannah Toogood
Karl Scheeres
Luciana MatoneCorrespondence to: Rob Macpherson
(rob.macpherson@glos.nhs.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-4

:Abstract:
   This paper describes a model of training in leadership and project
   management skills for advanced trainees, using educational projects
   within the Severn School of Psychiatry. Fellowships lasting 1 year
   have been developed to enable trainees, working with a senior
   consultant trainer associated with the School of Psychiatry, to
   support important new educational initiatives. Linkage with the local
   university training and learning for health professionals research
   module has provided academic support for the trainees and the
   projects. Four examples for the first year of the programme are
   described and feedback from structured interviews with participants
   is presented. The development of the fellowships appears to have had
   wider benefits, in developing educational faculty in the School of
   Psychiatry and the trainees involved have had opportunities to extend
   their project management and leadership skills. The fellowship
   programme is continuing to develop, based on feedback from its first
   successful year.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _S1:

Background
==========

To increase the range of opportunities and quality of education within
the Severn School of Psychiatry, we have in recent years developed a
range of projects across the School. Although there is a strong group of
trainers, training programme directors, tutors and directors of medical
education (DME) who provide leadership, there is limited time within job
planned allowances across the senior trainer group to permit extensive
work within projects. Advanced trainees need to develop leadership
skills and we felt an obvious vehicle to promote this was through
co-leadership of educational projects. There are opportunities across
the School for projects in areas of educational theory, quality
assurance, review of educational processes, innovation and new methods
of training/assessment. The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ curricula
for advanced training in each specialty contain specific leadership
domains and recommendations for training in this area, but a survey of
advanced trainees :sup:`1` showed that many questioned how prepared they
felt for the role of consultant. The survey indicated they felt well
prepared for the clinical role, but less prepared for leading, designing
and changing services. There was felt to be a need for higher training
to engage with the entirety of the new consultant role.

A business internship model, which now operates across all areas of the
Severn School of Psychiatry, has provided opportunities for
project-based management training. Similar to the paired learning
initiative described elsewhere, :sup:`2` this has had wider benefits for
the trainee population and also to the organisations where trainees have
had opportunities to work on important trust management projects. We
noted that as well as preparing trainees for the management aspects of
their new consultant roles, it is important to prepare them fully for
the educational role as the majority will become trainers. A smaller
group will go on to develop higher-level training responsibilities, such
as tutor, training programme directors, DME or head of school role.
Project management has the potential to facilitate development across a
wide range of areas because of its multifaceted nature and the
requirement to work across a variety of interfaces.

.. _S2:

Programme description
=====================

The project aimed to offer four educational fellowships over 1 year,
allocated through competition. A number of senior faculty members took a
lead role in overseeing the programme: the head of the School of
Psychiatry (R.M.); the lead for the local MRCPsych core course (S.H.);
the regional advisor (G.U.); the lead from the local university training
and learning for healthcare professionals department (S.Atk.); and a
local director of medical education (S.Arn.). The fellowships were made
available by email invitation to all advanced trainees (approximately
50). Trainees were invited to submit an application to undertake a
fellowship, through writing a 500-word statement, expressing their
interest in this and their key relevant background skills. An assessment
framework was developed to rank submissions to decide on appointment and
fellows were appointed in the spring 2012, to start their fellowship
from August of that year.

Fellowships lasted a minimum of 1 year, with the fellows meeting monthly
for peer support, together with project leads and with educational
supervision from the teaching and learning for healthcare professionals
(TLHP) team. It was expected that trainees use non-clinical special
interest time for the project. Each project was overseen and co-led by a
consultant with a specific, related educational role. We suggested that
the educational fellow worked with a core trainee in his or her trust,
aiming to involve a wider number of trainees, to provide an interesting
and attractive opportunity for the core trainee and also to give
opportunities for the fellows to give academic/project supervision,
viewing the core trainee as a research assistant in this context.
Depending on commitments, core trainees were welcome to attend the
fellowship supervision sessions.

The work required was expected to vary across the different projects,
but some common requirements were set out: literature review and summary
of relevant evidence; liaison with key stakeholders including service
user and carer groups; liaison with the trainee group; development of
option appraisals; preparation of reports; presentation of material to
the wider educational community; and dissemination through deanery and
regional/national training forums.

The fellows were automatically enrolled on the TLHP research methods
module, with an expectation that each fellow attend two study days and
complete assignments, based on their fellowship project. On successful
completion of the course they would be awarded 20 credits at Masters
level (approximately one-third of the Masters course) and were able to
take this credit into any further work in this area. The costs of the
module (approximately £1200) were supported by the Deanery, other than
for one fellow who was funded directly by the DME. Meetings of the
project group were held in the Deanery and any costs for specific
activities related to projects were considered by the head of School, in
collaboration with the school of psychiatry manager in the Deanery. The
programme was managed through the School of Psychiatry and issues
arising reported to the board and wider deanery colleagues as necessary.
Further governance support was obtained as needed through the Severn
Deanery Executive team, who supported the project.

.. _S3:

Projects overview
=================

.. _S4:

Training across boundaries (TAB)
--------------------------------

This project, led by R.M. and S.Aru., explored the development of
training links between core psychiatry and medical/general practice
posts. It aimed to provide opportunities for exposure to different
medical specialties. Although this has been recommended in the
psychiatry training literature, there were no examples in the literature
that we could find to describe this. The project focused on core
training years two and three across two mental health trusts. The
project was carried out in a single 6-month period from February to July
2013. Trainees were encouraged to maintain a reflective log and ideally
complete a workplace-based assessment in their project. Up to six TAB
sessions were encouraged during the 6-month placement. The project was
relatively successful, 12 trainees undertaking a TAB placement in the
time specified. Placements included general practice, neurology,
paediatrics, endocrinology, emergency medicine and neuroimaging. The
programme was more trainee-led than expected. Feedback suggested
trainees had a range of valued, positive training experiences and this
project will be written up elsewhere.

.. _S5:

Supervision project
-------------------

This project, led by S.Aru. and L.M., focused on exploration of
educational supervision. It was noted that despite supervision being a
central aspect of psychiatric training, the literature was limited
regarding the activity occurring within supervision sessions. Nine
structured interviews of advanced trainees were carried out by L.M.
These focused on experiences of supervision and were transcribed, then
subjected to thematic analysis, with the expectation of disseminating
the results.

.. _S6:

Communication skills training project
-------------------------------------

This project was led by G.U. and H.T. The project noted a paucity of
literature relating to the evidence around communication skills
appropriate to basic psychiatric training. A programme of development of
the communication skills training within the core psychiatric trainees’
course was undertaken. This included use of videos and more systematic,
structured feedback. This was developed into more refined skills
assessment using simulation and is now being further developed with the
use of a software package to formally rate aspects of communication
skills and provide structured feedback to the interviewer.

.. _S7:

Developing knowledge and skills among core trainees
---------------------------------------------------

This project was led by S.H. and K.S. The project started from an
awareness of local and national difficulties in knowledge, skills and
competence within the core psychiatric trainee group. It was noted that
many trainees had problems passing the College clinical exam, despite
successful completion of clinical competence requirements in placements.
The project identified a range of different interventions potentially of
use to help core trainees. These included a mock clinical assessment of
skills and competencies (CASC) exam, additional communication skills
training, cultural awareness training, cognitive assessment and targeted
skills development. The project is being further developed in a second
round of educational fellowships.

.. _S8:

Results
=======

In the first year of the fellowship there were 12 supervision sessions.
Trainee attendance ranged from 5 to 11, in total 34 attendances across
the year. Consultant attendance ranged from 9 to 11, total 40
attendances across the year.

.. _S9:

Feedback from educational fellows
---------------------------------

The educational fellows reported that the administration of the
programme was effective and they felt well engaged in their projects and
the supervision programme. There was some concern about the way trainees
were linked to individual projects and the potential for trainee choice
about projects undertaken. However, it was noted that within the
projects there was substantial choice and multiple opportunities for
individual development. Supervision was found to be helpful,
particularly with regards to the attendance by the TLHP team. The
network of supervision provided a useful prompt to ensure that projects
did not stagnate and was found to be interesting, although in some cases
the individual’s supervision with project supervisors was felt to be
more helpful in terms of project design and problem-solving.

Communication outside supervision ranged from two to four times per
month, with trainees feeling they had appropriate levels of support. In
terms of challenges encountered during the project, the fellows reported
some difficulties in managing the project within time restraints and in
two cases a risk of the project escalating into an unmanageable, larger
scale research project. The trainees felt that more specific input from
an educational specialist could have been valuable across the programme
and that greater attention could have been paid to educational and
management theory alongside the practical experiences gained. The two
trainees who completed the TLHP research module found it helpful and
highly relevant to their involvement in the fellowship. One trainee
planned to attend the course at a later stage.

Trainees reported a range of different opportunities arising from their
involvement. These included the development of teaching, mentoring and
education research skills, as well as softer benefits such as increased
confidence and networking with research experts. Trainees also gained
understanding of the challenges of project management and dealing with
resistance. Issues around data protection and consent were sometimes
difficult and required negotiation with senior colleagues in the
Deanery. Liaison across different disciplines was valued and one trainee
reported that using formal project management systems such as a Gantt
chart had been valuable. Two of the trainees reported that the
fellowship had a significant impact in the development of leadership
skills and enabling reflection on leadership style. A range of different
skills including transactional, participative approaches were required
and it was noted that developing a non-hierarchical, inclusive style of
working with trainees and others had been important. It was felt that
attention to the development of leadership skills could be helpful in
future fellowship programmes. All four trainees recommended the
fellowship programme to other trainees and there were a range of other
comments including the suggestion that this was the most helpful
leadership/management training experience obtained so far.

.. _S10:

Feedback from the consultant leads
----------------------------------

This was obtained through a similar format. Advice from other consultant
colleagues and the TLHP team within supervision sessions was found to be
helpful, as was group support and input from trainees. It was noted that
working with bright trainees who were highly motivated and interested in
education enabled the development of a wider educational faculty. The
consultant group noted that there had been some specific problems around
transcription and information technology that had hindered the
completion of some projects. It was noted that in some cases there was a
process of continuing improvement/development, meaning that the
completion of one aspect of a project would open up further
developments. The consultants particularly valued the opportunity to
work closely with senior trainees and to develop a major project. It was
noted that issues around leadership and project management were
centrally involved throughout the project and this provided many
opportunities for training and learning. The fellowships also provided
opportunities for creative development that was not constrained by
bureaucracy and seemed to develop the skills of trainees who were likely
to become the senior trainers of the future. There was significant
learning around the area of leadership and project management in the
consultant group also, particularly around the balance between guidance
and instruction/direct facilitation. It was felt that ideally trainees
should be allowed to develop their skills by testing their own ideas
out. It was noted that coaching skills, rather than supervision or line
management was most helpful in this context. The consultants all
recommended the fellowship programme to other trainees and to other
consultant colleagues, particularly those involved in a senior
educational role.

.. _S11:

Discussion
==========

This paper presents a model for training advanced trainees in
leadership, education and management through co-development of
educational projects with senior educationalists in a school of
psychiatry. It was apparent that, as reported in other educational
literature, :sup:`3` effective leadership of the projects was associated
with being proactive and fully engaged with the group affected by the
project. The educational fellow and paired consultant needed to
integrate a clear project focus and vision, with effective
implementation, for projects to progress effectively. Five factors have
been associated with effective leadership :sup:`4` (`Box 1 <#box1>`__)
and recognition of these featured frequently in feedback from
consultants and educational fellows.

**Box 1** Factors associated with effective leadership :sup:`4`

Modelling the way – leading by example in a manner that is consistent
with leader’s stated values. Inspiring a shared vision – developing a
compelling vision of the future and enlisting the commitment of others.
Challenging the process – being on the look-out for opportunities to
improve the organisation and being prepared to experiment. Enabling
others to act – promoting collaborative working; empowering others;
building trust. Encouraging the heart – recognising individuals’
contributions; celebrating accomplishments.

Other feedback noted that a key process in this project was the
development of senior educational faculty (including the advanced
trainees) and the development of a collegiate culture based on the
principles of coaching and mentoring, which can have benefits for
educational satisfaction, academic and personal development. :sup:`5`
There were obvious benefits for senior faculty in participation in this
work and an aim of this project was to facilitate project management
across the School, giving opportunities for the consultants to complete
work that otherwise may not have been feasible. For the trainees, the
project enabled holistic development, encompassing academic learning and
the development of skills such as problem-solving and analysis. There is
a need for training organisations to provide a portfolio of learning
opportunities and resources, to facilitate the development of management
and leadership skills among senior trainees.

The joint supervision sessions were valued by all participants. Others
have noted :sup:`6` that it is the process of bringing many
constituencies into debates that facilitates transformation, rather than
restricting the process to a small number of consensual voices. Such
ideas fit naturally with theory around ‘sense making’, which emphasises
the role, after the initial impetus has been set by leaders, of
inclusive and widespread conversations and reflection, to explore new
possibilities and the emerging pattern of changes.

.. _S12:

Future plans
------------

It is hoped that a number of this first phase of projects will produce
publications and be presented at regional and College forums. The
fellowship programme is now in its second year and has recruited four
new trainees into new projects, with two new consultant leaders. The
fellows from year one are invited to continue to attend supervision
sessions as are the two consultants no longer actively working on
projects. Feedback from year one was used to plan for greater choice of
projects for trainees, increased academic and theory input to
supervision sessions and the involvement in the TLHP module has been
timed to fit better with the project timeline.

Work carried out in The Severn School of Psychiatry, Health Education
England SW.

.. [1]
   **Rob Macpherson** is a consultant psychiatrist and head of School of
   Psychiatry, Health Education England, Cheltenham. **Sherlie
   Arulanandam**, is an Advanced Trainee in the Department of Liaison
   Psychiatry at Bristol Royal Infirmary. **Guy Undrill** is a
   consultant psychiatrist for the Crisis Resolution and Home Treatment
   Team South West area, 2Gether Trust, Cheltenham and a regional
   advisor in Psychiatry, South West Region. **Simon Atkinson** is the
   director at Teaching Learning for Health Professionals at Bristol
   University. **Steve Arnott** is the director of medical education at
   the AWP NHS Trust, Bristol. **Sian Hughes** is a consultant in the
   crisis team at Bybrook Lodge, Blackberry Hill Hospital, Avon and
   Wiltshire Partnership Trust, Bristol. **Hannah Toogood** is a
   specialty registrar in learning disability psychiatry at New Friends
   Hall, Bristol. **Karl Scheeres** is a clinical teaching fellow at AWP
   NHS Trust, Bristol. **Luciana Matone** is a child and adolescent
   psychiatrist at Melksham Community Hospital, Oxford Health NHS
   Foundation Trust.
