====================================================================================================================================================================================
Psychiatric morbidity and socio-occupational dysfunction in residents of a drug rehabilitation centre: challenges of substance misuse management in a Bruneian context\ `† <#fn1>`__
====================================================================================================================================================================================



Hilda Ho
Anddy Maz Adanan
Radiah Omar
:Correspondence: Hilda Ho (hilda.ho@moh.gov.bn)  [1]_

:date: 2015-10

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** In 2011, a psychiatric clinic was started in
   Pusat Al-Islah, a drug rehabilitation centre. Our aim was to record
   self-reported socio-occupational dysfunction and patterns of drug
   misuse and to evaluate the usefulness of a psychiatric screening
   tool. A two-phased approach using the Self-Reporting Questionnaire
   (SRQ) and the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI)
   was used to examine the rates of psychiatric diagnoses.

   **Results** Methamphetamine was the most commonly misused substance
   in 94.5% of residents. High levels of socio-occupational dysfunction
   were reported. In total, 5.5% met criteria for major depressive
   disorder, 4.8% for lifetime psychotic disorder and 11.5% for suicidal
   ideation. In addition, 13.3% reported previous untreated mental
   health problems.

   **Clinical implications** A screening tool such as the SRQ can be
   used to identify those needing further psychiatric assessment.
   Interventions to address amphetamine misuse and associated
   socio-occupational dysfunction are required. Societal views and
   legislation influence the management of substance misuse problems in
   Brunei.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Pusat Al-Islah is a residential drug rehabilitation centre run by the
Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) in Brunei, a small country in Southeast
Asia. Residents are sent here after being convicted of drug use offences
and testing positively for illegal substances. This is a prison
diversion scheme that aims to rehabilitate drug misusers and reduce the
rates of reoffending by offering a residential rehabilitation programme
and post-release supervision. A small number are voluntary admissions.
Treatment is based on a therapeutic community model and residents stay
for up to 30 months. There is occupational training, Islamic religious
lessons and counselling. A general practitioner and primary care nurse
provide primary healthcare. In 2011, a psychiatric clinic was started.
This was an opportunity to examine psychiatric morbidity among
residents. The high prevalence of psychiatric morbidity in correctional
and drug-misusing populations has been highlighted elsewhere, but there
is no existing data for Brunei. This is a group who can be difficult to
engage in treatment. Admission into the centre is an opportunity to
screen for and treat any significant illness. Psychiatric morbidity is
likely to have an impact on rehabilitation. Those individuals with
mental disorders are more vulnerable to the adverse effects of
imprisonment and are at higher risk of suicide.\ :sup:`1` They may have
difficulty adhering to rehabilitation programmes.\ :sup:`2` We
hypothesised that there would be a high level of psychiatric morbidity
and socio-occupational dysfunction in this population. We also evaluated
the usefulness of a psychiatric screening tool. Finally, we consider the
challenges facing substance misuse management in the Bruneian context.

.. _S1:

Method
======

This was a cross-sectional study. Ethical approval was obtained from the
Research & Ethics Committee, Ministry of Health, Brunei Darussalam.
Those who were residing in Pusat Al-Islah on 1 January 2012 or admitted
by 31 March 2012 were approached to take part in phase 1 of the project
after giving written informed consent. The interviews were conducted by
three researchers, a consultant forensic psychiatrist (H.H.), a doctor
training in psychiatry (A.M.A.), and a senior psychiatric nurse (R.O.).

.. _S2:

Phase 1
-------

All residents were interviewed using the Self-Reporting Questionnaire-24
(SRQ-24)\ :sup:`3` between January and June 2012. This is a tool that
has been shown to have good sensitivity and specificity for identifying
psychiatric morbidity in primary healthcare settings.\ :sup:`3` As Malay
is the main language spoken in Brunei, we used a Malay language version
that has been used to examine psychiatric morbidity in a Malay-speaking
population.\ :sup:`4` Questions 1–20 relate to neurotic symptoms and
questions 21–24 to psychotic symptoms. Those who scored above a cut-off
score of 6 and above for the first 20 questions and/or 1 and above for
the last 4 questions, were entered into phase 2 of this study. This
cut-off has been suggested to have the best ‘trade-off’ between
sensitivity and specificity. Demographic details, educational and
employment history, drug misuse history, psychiatric history,
self-reported violence and offending history were also obtained. Data
regarding socio-occupational function were obtained using an open
questioning style. Any participant thought to require clinical
assessment was referred to the psychiatric clinic.

.. _S3:

Phase 2
-------

Residents proceeding to phase 2 were interviewed using the Malay version
of the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI, version
6.0).\ :sup:`5` The MINI is a short semi-structured diagnostic interview
for DSM-IV\ :sup:`6` and ICD-10\ :sup:`7` psychiatric disorders. It has
been shown to have good validity and interrater reliability.\ :sup:`5`
The Malay version has been shown to have good reliability in diagnosing
major depressive disorder and generalised anxiety disorder in a
Malaysian community setting.\ :sup:`8` The sections coding for the
following groups of disorders were used: major depressive episode,
suicidality, manic and hypomanic episodes, psychotic disorders and mood
disorder with psychotic features, generalised anxiety disorder. The
prevalence of these disorders was the main focus of the study as they
are common treatable causes of psychiatric morbidity. All interview
records were checked by the consultant forensic psychiatrist (H.H.) for
accuracy.

.. _S4:

Statistical analyses
--------------------

Data were analysed using the Statistical Package for the Social
Sciences, SPSS, version 16 for Windows.

.. _S5:

Results
=======

.. _S6:

Demographics
------------

In total, 195 residents were approached to take part and 165 residents
(140 (84.8%) men and 25 (15.2%) women) consented and were interviewed
for phase 1. Their mean age was 33.1 years (range 18–55, s.d. = 7.6).
The mean length of stay before the interview was 14.8 months (range
1–33, s.d. = 9.7). A total of 155 (93.9%) were admitted under an order
of the Courts or the Minister of Home Affairs; 10 (6.1%) were voluntary
admissions. Of participants, 161 (97.6%) had been born in Brunei; 91
(55.2%) were married, 95 (57.6%) had children under the age of 18 years
and 57 (34.5%) were unemployed at the time of admission. Well over half,
101 (61.2%) had not completed secondary school. All residents who
declined consent were men.

.. _S7:

Index offence
-------------

In total, 148 (89.7%) were admitted for a drug use offence alone, 16
(9.7%) were admitted for drug dealing in addition to a drug use offence.
Data were missing for 1 (0.6%) resident.

.. _S8:

Drug misuse history
-------------------

The mean age of starting drug misuse was 19.8 years (range 9–46, s.d. =
7.1). The mean time period from starting drug use to the interview was
13.7 years (range 1–35, s.d. = 7.1). Methamphetamines were the most
commonly misused substance. The drugs misused are described in `Table
1 <#T1>`__. The majority of residents reported using drugs at least once
a week and experienced some physical or psychological discomfort after a
period of abstinence (`Table 2 <#T2>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Type of substance misuse (*n* = 165)

   ====================================== ==========
   Substance misused                      *n* (%)
   ====================================== ==========
   Crystal methamphetamine                159 (96.4)
   \                                      
   Main drug misused                      152 (92.1)
   \                                      
   Other amphetamine/stimulants           23 (13.9)
   \                                      
   Cannabis                               61 (37.0)
   \                                      
   Cough medicine                         52 (31.5)
   \                                      
   Solvents                               16 (9.7)
   \                                      
   Opiates                                8 (4.8)
   \                                      
   ‘Pills’                                64 (38.8)
   \                                      
   Steroids                               2 (1.2)
   \                                      
   Intravenous drug misuse\ `a <#TFN1>`__ 7 (4.2)
   \                                      
   Alcohol problem\ `b <#TFN2>`__         102 (61.8)
   ====================================== ==========

   All methamphetamines.

   Residents who reported that they drank heavily or had an alcohol
   misuse problem.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Frequency of drug misuse, and symptoms after abstinence (*n* =
      165)

   =============================================== ==========
   \                                               *n* (%)
   =============================================== ==========
   Frequency of drug use                           
       Daily                                       72 (43.6)
       At least twice a week                       49 (29.7)
       Once a week                                 16 (9.7)
       1–3 times a month                           24(14.5)
       Less than once a month                      3 (1.8)
   \                                               
   Symptoms after abstinence                       
       Experienced physical (shaking, sweating,    115 (69.7)
       sleep disturbance) or psychological         
       (irritability, craving, anxiety) discomfort 
   =============================================== ==========

.. _S9:

Psychiatric history
-------------------

Of participants, 29 (17.6%) reported previous contact with psychiatric
services, 9 (5.5%) residents were taking psychiatric medication
(antidepressant, antipsychotic or mood stabiliser). In total, 13 (7.9%)
had previous admissions for psychiatric treatment, 5 (3.0%) had received
involuntary treatment under the Lunacy Act.\ :sup:`9` Twenty-two
participants (13.3%) reported experiencing mental health problems in the
past, for which they had not sought treatment. There were 16 (9.7%) who
reported experiencing previous suicidal ideation. In addition, 19
(11.5%) reported having a first- or second-degree relative with mental
health problems. Psychiatric case-notes were found for 26 (15.8%)
residents. When these were examined for recorded diagnoses, 13 (7.9%)
had a psychotic illness (schizophrenia or acute psychotic episode), 9
(5.5%) had a depression, 1 (0.6%) had bipolar disorder, 2 (1.2%) had
personality disorder and 1 (0.6%) had a child and adolescent mental
disorder, unspecified. A total of 13 (7.9%) were recorded to have been
non-adherent with treatment. Also, 9 (5.5%) participants had previous
self-harm documented.

.. _S10:

Forensic history
----------------

In total, 28 (17.0%) had previous admissions to Pusat Al-Islah; 61
(37.0%) had served at least one prison sentence; 20 (12.1%) had been
convicted of an previous offence without a prison sentence, 39 (23.6%)
had been remanded by the police but released without charge or
conviction. Also, 41 (24.8%) reported performing previous physical
violence such as assault.

.. _S11:

Socio-occupational function
---------------------------

Of all the participants, 75 (45.5%) reported problems with their
educational or work performance attributed to drug misuse. A total of 68
(41.2%) reported financial problems, 98 (59.4%) reported family
relationship problems and 22 (23.2% of those with children <18 years
old) reported having difficulty caring for their children adequately.
Sixty participants (36.4%) reported offending behaviour related to their
drug misuse. Also, 77 (46.7%) had a first-degree relative (parent, child
or sibling) who misused drugs and 14 (8.5%) had a spouse or partner who
misused drugs.

.. _S12:

SRQ scores
----------

The mean score for questions 1–20 was 3.6 (range 0–18, s.d. = 3.9) and
for questions 21–24 was 0.25 (range 0–3, s.d. = 0.7). A total of 40
(24.2%) residents, 31 men and 9 women, met criteria for entry into phase
2. When means were compared using the independent *t*-test, no
significant differences were found between the phase 1 and phase 2
groups for age (32.2 v. 33.4 years, P = 0.386), duration of drug misuse
problem (13.75 v. 13.5 years, P = 0.458) and age of starting drug misuse
(20.1 v. 18.9 years, P = 0.357).

.. _S13:

Phase 2
-------

Interviews occurred after phase 1 was completed, between August and
October 2012. Of the 40 residents who were eligible for entry into phase
2, 10 residents had been discharged and were invited for interview,
however, 7 discharged residents did not respond to the invitation for a
second interview, 1 resident was not cooperative. Therefore, 32
participants (23 men (71.9%) and 9 women (28.1%)) were interviewed.

In total nine (5.5%) met criteria for major depressive disorder (two
‘current’, six ‘previous’ and one ‘current and previous’) of whom three
(1.8%) met criteria for major depressive disorder with psychotic
features (‘current’, ‘previous’ or ‘current and previous’). Three (1.8%)
participants met criteria for previous manic episode, three (1.8%) met
criteria for hypomanic episode (‘current’ or ‘previous’) and six (3.6%)
met criteria for previous hypomanic symptoms. There were three (1.8%)
participants who met criteria for bipolar I disorder (‘current’ or
‘previous’), three (1.8%) met criteria for bipolar II disorder
(‘previous or current and previous’) and five (3.0%) met criteria for
‘uncategorised bipolar disorder’. Eight (4.8%) met criteria for lifetime
psychotic disorder, of whom five (3.0%) met criteria for current
psychotic disorder. There was one individual (0.6%) who met criteria for
current generalised anxiety disorder. A total of 19 (11.5%) met criteria
for suicidal ideation (15 at ‘low level’, 1 ‘medium level’ and 3 ‘high
level’) (`Table 3 <#T3>`__). Eight (4.8%) had more than one diagnosis.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   ================================================= =========
   Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview     *n* (%)
   (MINI) diagnosis                                  
   ================================================= =========
   Major depressive disorder                         9 (5.5)
   \                                                 
   Major depressive disorder with psychotic features 3 (1.8)
   \                                                 
   Manic episode                                     3 (1.8)
   \                                                 
   Hypomanic episode                                 3 (1.8)
   \                                                 
   Hypomanic symptoms                                6 (3.6)
   \                                                 
   Bipolar I disorder                                3 (1.8)
   \                                                 
   Bipolar II disorder                               3 (1.8)
   \                                                 
   Uncategorised bipolar disorder                    5 (3.0)
   \                                                 
   Lifetime psychotic disorder                       8 (4.8)
   \                                                 
   Current psychotic disorder                        5 (3.0)
   \                                                 
   Current generalised anxiety disorder              1 (0.6)
   \                                                 
   Suicidal ideation                                 19 (11.5)
   \                                                 
   >1 diagnosis                                      8 (4.8)
   ================================================= =========

.. _S14:

Discussion
==========

.. _S15:

Screening and diagnostic tools
------------------------------

The SRQ is easy and quick to use. The interviewers found that questions
1–20, which asked about depressive and neurotic symptoms, were more
easily understood than questions 21–24, which asked about psychotic
symptoms. In particular, question 22 referring to grandiosity was often
misunderstood. It was concluded that the first 20 questions would be a
useful screening tool for depressive and neurotic disorders, whereas the
psychosis questions should be amended. Of the 40 residents who entered
phase 2, 24 (60%) were found to have a diagnosis and/or suicidal
ideation when interviewed with the MINI. Thus, this method of
identifying patients with psychiatric disturbance appeared to have
produced a high ‘yield’. The MINI, although straightforward to use as a
diagnostic tool was time-consuming to administer. We concluded that the
SRQ could be used to screen residents on admission, and those scoring
above the cut-off referred for further assessment.

.. _S16:

Rates of mental disorders
-------------------------

Although the high prevalence of psychiatric morbidity in correctional
populations has often been highlighted in Western
countries,\ :sup:`10-13` there is less data available in non-Western
countries.\ :sup:`14` High prevalence of mental disorders have been
found in an Iranian prison population.\ :sup:`15` Similarly, high rates
of psychiatric morbidity were found in individuals who misused
methamphetamine detained in Taiwan.\ :sup:`16` This is the first
investigation of psychiatric morbidity in a drug-misusing population in
Brunei. Major depressive disorder was the most common diagnosis and was
observed in 5.5% of the sample, similar to the Taiwanese finding.
Lifetime psychotic disorder was found in 4.8% of residents, 3.0% of whom
had a current psychotic disorder. Although we attempted to exclude
psychotic symptoms directly associated with substance misuse, it is
possible that some findings may have been methamphetamine psychosis
rather than a primary psychotic disorder. Bipolar I disorder was
observed in 1.8% of residents and bipolar II disorder was similarly
observed in 1.8% of residents. The rates of psychotic\ :sup:`17` and
bipolar disorders\ :sup:`18` appeared to be higher than in the general
population, although no epidemiological data exist for the prevalence of
mental disorders in Brunei.

.. _S17:

Previous psychiatric disturbance and socio-occupational dysfunction
-------------------------------------------------------------------

We found substantial rates of psychiatric morbidity. Our results also
indicate substantial socio-occupational dysfunction, violence and
offending behaviour. Given that these were self-reported, it is likely
that they were underestimated. These findings emphasise the need for
psychiatric, psychological, behavioural and socio-occupational
interventions.

.. _S18:

Pattern of drug misuse
----------------------

Crystal methamphetamine is commonly available in Southeast Asia. It is
locally known as ‘syabu’ and was the most common drug of misuse found in
this sample. The first case of crystal methamphetamine misuse was
reported to the NCB in 1993. Since then its use has spread across the
country, affecting many lives and families. Drug supplies are
manufactured abroad and transported across the border from neighbouring
countries, often by land or water routes. Southeast Asia has a higher
consumption of amphetamine-type substances compared with the global
average. The neighbouring countries of Thailand, Malaysia, Cambodia and
Indonesia have seized record high amounts of crystalline methamphetamine
in the past few years. Annually, hundreds of illicit synthetic drug
manufacturing facilities have been seized in the region over the same
period.\ :sup:`19` The availability of crystal methamphetamine is likely
to contribute significantly to its popularity in Brunei. In contrast,
the country has not had a widespread heroin misuse problem, avoiding the
hazards associated with intravenous drug misuse. This pattern of drug
misuse should inform national drug treatment and rehabilitation
strategies. Substitute prescription such as methadone programmes used to
treat heroin addiction more common elsewhere, cannot be usefully applied
here.

We found that the rate of self-reported alcohol problems in this
population was very high (61.8%). This may reflect the conservative
Islamic view regarding alcohol use in Brunei, which may lower the
threshold for viewing alcohol consumption as problematic and increase
the likelihood of problems associated with its use.

.. _S19:

Societal views of drug and alcohol use
--------------------------------------

Societal views regarding drug and alcohol use are generally very
conservative. This is reflected in the heavy penalties imposed on those
convicted of drug misuse, dealing and trafficking offences.\ :sup:`20`
More than two-thirds of the population is Muslim and it is the official
religion of the state. It is expected that alcohol should not be
consumed at all by Muslims. The sale of alcohol is banned, and only
non-Muslim adults are allowed to take controlled quantities into the
country for personal use. Public drinking is not allowed. The phased
introduction of the Syariah Penal Code,\ :sup:`21` which began in April
2014, further increases the prospects of heavy punishment for those who
contravene the strict laws relating to alcohol use. Under this new law,
drinking alcohol is an offence for Muslims. Public drinking both in the
country and abroad, providing alcohol to a Muslim and abetment of a
Muslim to consume alcohol are listed as punishable offences for
non-Muslims. Those convicted of alcohol offences may be fined,
imprisoned and punished with whipping.

.. _S20:

Treatment for alcohol and drug misuse
-------------------------------------

Many people are reluctant to admit their problems or seek help, although
individuals can present themselves to psychiatric services.
Pharmaceutical preparations such as disulfiram and naltrexone are
available for the treatment of alcohol misuse. Structured community
alcohol or drug misuse treatment programmes run either by medical
services or the voluntary sector, are not available. There is limited
open discussion about drug and alcohol misuse problems. The cause and
impact of these problems locally and treatment and rehabilitation are
areas that have received little research attention. Rehabilitation in
Pusat Al-Islah, similar to other rehabilitation and training schemes in
the country, places a strong emphasis on Islamic religious counselling.
Psychological and behavioural treatment programmes require much
development.

Our clinical experience working in psychiatric treatment facilities
suggest that many individuals with substance misuse problems also have
mental health problems requiring multidisciplinary care. The government
provides largely hospital-based psychiatric services. Community,
subspecialist and multidisciplinary services are limited although there
have been some recent developments. New mental health legislation, in
the form of the Mental Health Order 2014, has been approved. This
legislation is designed to ensure the appropriate care of people with
mental disorders and is scheduled to be implemented on 1 November 2014.
The development of multisector partnerships is crucial to fully
addressing the complex needs of this population.

.. _S21:

Limitations
-----------

The two-phase design of this study may have reduced the accuracy of the
results. Residents with a current diagnosis in phase 1 may have
recovered before the phase 2 interview. However, the MINI allows for
previous and lifetime diagnoses to be coded. The Malay translations of
both tools may have limited validity in this population as the Malay
dialect spoken in Brunei is slightly different to standard written
Malay. The MINI interviewers were not masked to the diagnoses or
treatment received by participants. This study depended on
self-reporting of socio-occupational dysfunction as we were unable to
obtain official reports. It is likely that the true prevalence of
psychiatric disorders and socio-occupational dysfunction were higher
given the limitations. The sample size in this study was small, with
only 32 patients being finally assessed in phase 2. This may have
affected the accuracy of our findings. We suggest that any future study
should screen a larger sample of new residents on admission, with the
diagnostic interview conducted as soon as individuals with mental
disorders are identified. This would measure the incidence rates of
mental disorders more accurately.

In conclusion, this is the first study to examine psychiatric morbidity,
pattern of drug misuse and socio-occupational dysfunction in a Bruneian
population of drug misusers. It highlights the treatment and
intervention needs of this high-risk group and the challenges faced
locally.

We thank the staff of Pusat Al-Islah and the NCB for their assistance.
We thank David V. Sheehan and Christopher Gray of Medical Outcome
Systems for their permission to use the MINI.

.. [1]
   **Hilda Ho** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist and head of
   psychiatric services with the Ministry of Health, Brunei. **Anddy Maz
   Adanan** is a medical officer with the Ministry of Health, Brunei.
   **Radiah Omar** is a senior nursing officer with the Ministry of
   Health, Brunei.
