================
Bipolar Disorder
================

Lena Jawad [1]_
:Date: 2015-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

*Bipolar Disorder* is a pocket-sized book whose target audience is any
member of the multidisciplinary team involved in looking after a patient
with bipolar disorder.

It begins with an interesting glimpse into the history of bipolar
disorder and how the illness was documented in biblical texts as early
as 1000 bc. Its key themes include the diagnosis of bipolar disorder,
epidemiology, comorbidities, neurophysiology, genetics,
psychopharmacological and non-psychopharmacological management, and
managing ‘special’ populations with bipolar disorder (e.g. children,
pregnant women).

The text is easy to read and key points are excellently summarised in
boxes throughout. The book fulfils its aims (stated in the blurb) to a
very high standard, covering all important areas of bipolar disorder in
a way that is succinct and aids retention of knowledge. Although not
fully comprehensive, it helpfully lists references after each chapter to
guide the reader to further reading around the topic.

One of the main strengths of the book is its effective presentation of
information, using a combination of prose, bullet points and diagrams to
cater to the needs of a variety of learners. The chapter entitled ‘A
programmatic approach to treatment’ takes readers through a thorough
management plan, making the whole process more holistic – this is
something I will most certainly take from the book and apply to the
management of all my patients, regardless of their illness.

The only limitation is, perhaps inevitably, its emphasis on US Food and
Drug Administration-approved medications in its pharmacological
management chapter, which may not be as relevant to psychiatrists
practising in countries other than the USA. The book, however, does its
best to incorporate global knowledge of bipolar illness, with references
to a variety of countries.

I would wholeheartedly recommend this guide to anyone interested in
learning more about bipolar disorder or who simply requires a revision
of the key topics surrounding the illness.

.. [1]
   **Lena Jawad** MRCPsych is a core psychiatric trainee (year 3) at
   Broadmoor Hospital, West London Mental Health Trust, London, UK,
   email: lenajawad@doctors.org.uk
