============================================================
Debate: Can and should psychiatrists use online information?
============================================================

Elly O'Brien
Christopher Pell
:Date: 2015-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _S1:

Yes
===

When considering professional use of the internet, the focus tends to be
on access to information. Yet the development of Web 2.0 and the growth
of social media have transformed the internet from a largely read-only
medium to one that facilitates interaction and user-created content. I
will discuss some of the positive effects that online resources can have
on professional practice, looking not just at access to information, but
what we do with that information and how we interact online with fellow
professionals and the public.

Doctors can access the best evidence online during consultations: using
Google Scholar to identify relevant journal articles, consulting
guidance using the NICE app\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` or checking doses and
contraindications on the BNF mobile app (even when you have no mobile
signal). Sites that aggregate high-quality content from elsewhere, such
as NICE Evidence Search (`www.evidence.nhs.uk <www.evidence.nhs.uk>`__)
and Trip (`www.tripdatabase.com <www.tripdatabase.com>`__), make
searching for information and staying up to date quicker and easier.
Trip's ‘rapid review’\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` even allows you to search for
primary studies for an intervention in a particular population, then
compares the results to provide an overall score (although not designed
to replace a full systematic review, it provides a useful and rapid
overview of the evidence in an area).

The potential for variation in the quality of online information is
often cited as a criticism of it. Using high-quality resources helps to
reduce this risk, but the principles of critical appraisal apply to any
information, regardless of the medium. Wikipedia has been shown to be as
reliable as traditional textbooks in psychiatry,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` and
‘comes close to’ *Encyclopaedia Britannica* in accuracy.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)`
Wikipedia should not be written off as a resource in research, but its
contents must be subject to scrutiny and facts always cross-checked.

Online patient information is useful for patients, who can read it in
their own time and refer back to it if they have queries. NHS
Choices\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` offers a wealth of information for patients, and
NHS England's Information Standard\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` helps psychiatrists
to identify high-quality patient information from a variety of sources
(including the Royal College of Psychiatrists),\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` reducing
the need to produce leaflets in-house. Material with the Information
Standard is also included in NICE Evidence Search – so doctors can
retrieve high-quality patient information alongside clinical evidence.

Blogs can be used by patients much like a traditional diary, to express
themselves and track the course of their illness. Psychiatrists can also
direct patients to blogs that they may find useful to read. However,
there is huge variation in blogs, and are prone to a type of response
bias whereby only those with the most extreme experiences (whether
positive or negative) will blog about them; therefore, blogs should be
carefully vetted before being recommended to patients.

Educational and informative materials can also be shared and viewed
online as videos via YouTube (see the Royal College of Psychiatrists'
YouTube channel\ :sup:`(n.d.h)`) or presentations on SlideShare
(`www.slideshare.net <www.slideshare.net>`__). Following the ‘do once
and share’ principle, this gives material greater reach as well as
encouraging discussion and collaboration between professionals.

Twitter offers a forum for current awareness through discovering and
sharing new evidence and useful resources. It also provides a medium for
interactions between professionals, where they can discuss issues and,
potentially, crowdsource solutions. The Department of Psychiatry at the
University of Toronto runs the International Psychiatry Twitter Journal
Club,\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` allowing a large number of professionals from
around the world to discuss a paper. Those who cannot attend can catch
up or continue the conversation using the hashtag #psychjc. Conferences
also increasingly promote tweeting, allowing those unable to attend in
person to keep up with proceedings by monitoring the relevant hashtag.
Storify is a free tool that can be used to draw together various media
such as photos, videos and tweets from conferences (or anything with a
hashtag) to produce a record of the conference.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)`

Twitter also allows interaction beyond fellow professionals; for
example, the successful Twitter campaign last year that forced major
supermarkets to stop selling ‘mental health patient’ Halloween
costumes.\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` The campaign involved thousands of messages
from members of the public, professionals, politicians and charities.
Twitter also provides a valuable medium for promoting events such as
World Mental Health Day, aimed at breaking down stigma, addressing
misconceptions, advocating for patients' rights and giving patients a
voice.

There is a lot of scaremongering about social media for doctors.
However, arguably this is simply a new medium in which age-old problems
can arise. Indeed, the General Medical Council (GMC) guidance states
that: ‘The standards expected of doctors do not change because they are
communicating through social media rather than face to face or through
other traditional media’.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` So principles of patient
confidentiality, respect for colleagues and maintaining appropriate
boundaries with patients apply equally online and face to face.
Accepting ‘friend requests’ and ‘follows’ from patients or caregivers
requires careful consideration, especially with vulnerable patients. But
how different is this to psychiatrists having to decide how to deal with
bumping into a patient at the supermarket? Social media can blur the
distinction between the professional and the personal, but there are
solutions, such as separating these personas into different accounts and
increasing privacy settings (for example, having a protected account on
Twitter). What should not be overlooked is the potential of social media
for enabling interaction with patients and their caregivers, for new
dialogues that challenge professionals' perceptions of service users'
experiences and that create a more collaborative care model.

Psychiatrists must always question the information in front of them and
the source from which it originates, regardless of the medium. Online
resources enable psychiatrists to keep up to date with the latest
research and to engage with it in a more interactive way. Psychiatrists
now also have the opportunity to create and share their own high-quality
media to raise the profile of the profession, and to combat
misinformation and stigma. The use of online resources should not only
be encouraged but be considered essential in contemporary psychiatry.

.. _S2:

No
==

Social media and Web 2.0 are driving major social changes – one seventh
of humanity has signed up for a Facebook account since its inception
just a decade ago – and it would be naive to think that psychiatry would
ignore the many advantages these changes bring.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` More
than ever before we have access to the best-quality information,
opportunities for professional and public collaboration and engagement,
and multiple forums in which to raise awareness and standards in
psychiatry. Or so it would seem.

In reality, our ability to use these technologies in professional
practice has become fraught with difficulty as psychiatrists try to
adapt to this shifting landscape. Indeed, new avenues for problems seem
to crop up with alarming regularity, whether it be emerging legal
trends, fresh ways to be censured by the GMC, or even novel clinical
presentations such as addictive behaviour towards new
technology.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` Such was the concern about professional use
of the internet that the GMC update to *Good Medical Practice* now
clearly defines the expected standards of practice that UK doctors use
when going online.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`

Whether we can access professional information online is often dependent
on what is being searched for, and the location of the clinician. Many
of the internet resources we take for granted at home are blocked or
limited by internet filters. Websense and similar filters err on the
side of caution to protect National Health Service networks from malware
at the expense of many sharing and networking sites, rendering useful
resources such as Dropbox, Slide-Share, Twitter and YouTube all but
inaccessible from the hospital. Often, lack of hardware or mobile data
access within the hospital can make accessing information online a
frustrating exercise. Much more needs to be done to provide clinicians
with smart devices and to open up wireless internet access within
healthcare settings before we are truly able to take advantage of online
information.

Even assuming this is achievable, there is an emerging opinion that
doctors spend too much time staring at a computer screen and typing,
rather than engaging with, actively listening to and carefully thinking
about their patients. Furthermore, the illusion that such technologies
improve our workflows by allowing us to multitask (for example, by
searching for pertinent information during interviews or meetings) is
severely challenged by the finding that our cognitive abilities and
working memory are limited. The simple fact is that multitasking makes
us more distraction prone – so we perform multiple tasks with an
increasing lack of attention and efficiency.\ :sup:`(n.d.o),(n.d.p)`

Let us assume, though, that you have relatively unfettered access to the
internet and have easy access to a computer in a distraction-free
environment: should you use the internet to find professional
information?

An initial problem is quality control. In the ‘information age’ critical
appraisal is more than ever a vital skill, particularly with the
proliferation of open access online journals with seemingly
less-than-robust peer-review structures to safeguard article
accuracy.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` This takes up time that you may not have, yet
fails to provide the same level of coverage as a systematic literature
search.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` Although we like to think that we can sift out
the incorrect information, we are all prone to inherent biases when
analysing multiple sources of data. Interrogating Google or other search
engines for clinical information may compound this by selectively
presenting data according to the search engine's own algorithms, rather
than by the robustness of studies themselves.

The issue of quality of information costs us more time, as those
attending our clinics and hospitals may now come armed with information
they have uncovered online regarding their symptoms and treatments. In
each case the validity and relevance of the information must be
examined, before explaining to the individual why the ‘facts’ they have
found may not be quite as they seem. This also extends to information
that a patient may have learned online about their doctor, either
through rating sites or informally via a Google search. Social media has
considerably blurred the boundaries between our professional and private
personas. While some professionals strive to separate these two aspects
of their lives online, this is hard to achieve fully in practice.
Psychiatry is no stranger to boundary issues, however. As our patients
and their carers enter cyberspace, online interactions require care and
attention in order to avoid difficulties in subsequent clinical
interactions.

Although doctors are generally becoming more experienced at safely
managing their digital identities, many still do not fully understand or
adjust privacy settings on social media sites. Still other doctors fall
foul of expected professional standards in terms of what information
they make available online.\ :sup:`(n.d.s),(n.d.t)` With the increasing
integration of location-sharing functions to such sites, this opens up
new avenues for access and contact not previously available and may lead
to unwanted communication or harassment. Some go as far as to suggest
that professionals may wish to limit their use of social media so as to
reduce the risk of stalking.\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` All of this places
considerable onus on psychiatrists to be at least aware of their digital
footprint; better still, to actively curate their web presence and
privacy settings so that oversharing and misinformation are swiftly
identified and tackled. This same challenge extends to the specialty as
a whole, as any search of Google or YouTube for terms such as ‘ECT’ or
‘psychiatry’ can yield reams of misinformation.

And what of reciprocity? Can patients expect to have their online
identities scrutinised by healthcare staff prior to attending clinics,
or should this information (however publicly available) require their
explicit consent before being used in clinical decision-making?

It is questions such as this that highlight the rapidity with which
these technologies have changed the landscape of interpersonal
interactions within our society. With a mere decade of experience and
with new social media trends and websites constantly emerging, no-one
yet has a clear idea where the ethical, legal and professional
sensibilities will eventually settle. What is clear is that using online
information will necessarily change our practice, both by requiring
greater attention to and scrutiny of the information yielded, and by
changing the parameters of the doctor-patient relationship.

With our seeming acceptance of the erosion of personal privacy and our
constant searching, editing and sharing of information, we may
unwittingly be setting up as yet unknown difficulties and challenges for
professional practice in the future. Whether we can skillfully navigate
the minefields of professional information in the online world remains
to be seen.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R16

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R17

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R18

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R20

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R21

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-R22

      n.d.u.
