=============================================================
Alcohol dependence and driving: knowledge of DVLA regulations
=============================================================



Andrew Collier
Maggie Watts
Sujoy Ghosh
Peter Rice
Neil DewhurstCorrespondence to Andrew Collier
(andrew.collier@aaaht.scot.nhs.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-2

:Abstract:
   **Aims and Methods** The UK’s Driver Vehicle Licensing Authority
   (DVLA) requires individuals to report if they have a medical
   condition such as alcohol dependence. General Medical Council
   guidance indicates that medical practitioners should ensure patients
   are aware of their impairment and requirement to notify the DVLA.

   **Results** In a survey of 246 people with known alcohol dependence,
   none were aware of advice on driving given by medical practitioners
   and none had self-reported. In addition, 362 doctors, either
   attending a college symposium or visiting a college website, were
   asked about their knowledge of DVLA regulations regarding alcohol
   dependence: 73% of those attending the symposium and 63% of those
   visiting the website answered incorrectly. In Scotland, over 20 000
   people have alcohol dependence (over 1 million people with alcohol
   abuse), yet only 2548 people with alcohol problems self-reported to
   the DVLA in 2011.

   **Clinical implications** If the DVLA regulations were implemented,
   it could make an enormous difference to the behaviours of the driving
   public.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The dangers of driving while under the influence of alcohol are well
known. Alcohol remains a significant public health risk and has been
identified as the most important factor contributing to the occurrence
of severe to fatal automobile crashes. :sup:`1` Acute alcohol
intoxication affects the behavioural and coordinating functions
necessary for driving. :sup:`2` Alcohol consumption at lower levels also
interferes with performance on neurological and psychological tasks,
:sup:`3` which include a wide variety of cognitive processes, :sup:`4`
affects immediate memory span and short-term memory :sup:`5` as well as
motor speed and coordination. :sup:`6`

Driver licensing in Great Britain is governed by the third European
Commission Directive on the Driving Licence. :sup:`7` Annex III of the
directive provides the minimum medical standards for driving expected
across all member states. It states: ‘Driving licences shall not be
issued to, or renewed for, applicants or drivers who are dependent on
alcohol or unable to refrain from drinking and driving. After a proven
period of abstinence and subject to authorised medical opinion and
regular medical check-ups, driving licences may be issued to, or renewed
for, applicant or drivers who have in the past been dependent on
alcohol’. :sup:`7` The persistent misuse of drugs or alcohol, whether or
not misuse amounts to dependency, is a relevant disability in the Motor
Vehicles (Driving Licences) Regulations 1999.

Guidance from the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) states that
persistent alcohol misuse requires licence revocation or refusal until a
minimum 6-month period of controlled drinking or abstinence has been
obtained, with normalisation of blood parameters. Alcohol dependency
requires licence revocation or refusal until a 1-year period free from
alcohol problems. :sup:`8` Abstinence will normally be required and
medical reports from the driver’s general practitioner (GP) are
necessary, usually in conjunction with an independent medical report.

The aim of this study was to ascertain the knowledge of ‘recovering
alcoholics’ of the DVLA regulations related to driving a car while still
‘actively drinking’ and whether they could recollect whether their
health professional had given them appropriate advice. In addition, a
total of 362 senior doctors, either attending a Royal College of
Physicians (Edinburgh) symposium or visiting a Royal College of
Physicians (Edinburgh)/Royal College of Psychiatrists (Scotland)
website, were asked about their knowledge of DVLA regulations and
alcohol dependence. The terms ‘recovering alcoholics’ and ‘actively
drinking’ are recognised and regularly used by Alcoholics Anonymous.
:sup:`9`

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Patients
--------

In total, 246 ‘recovering alcoholics’ attending five different
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings in Ayrshire, Scotland were surveyed
during 2011. The individuals surveyed had all previously been heavy
consumers of alcohol (> 100 units/week). They had attended AA meetings
regularly for over 6 months and by self-report had been free of any
alcoholic intake for at least this period. Membership of the Fellowship
of AA is described in Tradition 3: ‘The only requirement for A.A.
membership is a desire to stop drinking’. :sup:`9` (Traditions and
‘Steps’ are the foundation of AA.) Of the sample, 194 (79%) were male
and the ages ranged from 21 to 80 years, median 57 years. As anonymity
is a very important aspect of AA, further demographic detail was not
collected. All individuals questioned were in possession of a current
driving licence and had the willingness and apparent capacity to provide
consent for participation in the survey. They were asked to complete a
brief, anonymous questionnaire (unsupervised) about their knowledge of
DVLA regulations and about the information that they had been given by
health professionals. Those involved in any drink driving offences were
excluded. The survey was undertaken with the full knowledge of
Fellowship of AA. However, as according to the AA Tradition 6: ‘Our
groups ought never endorse, finance or lend our name to any related
facility or outside enterprise, lest problems of money, property and
prestige divert us from our primary purpose’, :sup:`9` the work was
conducted independently of the Fellowship. The questionnaires were
distributed to members for completion before or immediately after AA
meetings (`Table 1 <#T1>`__).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Participant survey results

   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | Question                                             | Yes, *n* (%) |
   +======================================================+==============+
   | 1 Are you a recovering alcoholic?                    | 246 (100)    |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 2 Do you hava a driving licence?                     | 246 (100)    |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 3 Do you drive a car?                                | 246 (100)    |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 4 Did you problems with alcohol lead you to see your | 185 (71)     |
   | GP?                                                  |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 5 Do you recollect your GP giving you any advice     | 0            |
   | about driving?                                       |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 6 Have you ever been admitted to hospital due to     | 137 (56)     |
   | your alcohol problems?                               |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 7 When you were in hospital do you recollect getting | 0            |
   | any advice about driving?                            |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 8 Do you recollect if your GP or a hospital doctor   | 0            |
   | have ever asked you/told you to stop driving?        |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 9 Have you ever informed the DVLA that you have/had  | 0            |
   | a problem with alcohol?                              |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 10 Do you think that it would be sensible/reasonable | 223 (91)     |
   | to be told not to drive if you still had an active   |              |
   | problem                                              |              |
   | with drinking?                                       |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 11 Have you ever driven a car knowing that you were  | 246 (100)    |
   | under the influence of alcohol/were over the limit   |              |
   | (including the morning after)?                       |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 12 Have you ever driven a car when you were          | 194 (79)     |
   | withdrawing from alcohol?                            |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   |                                                      |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
   | 13 Did you ever stop driving or think of not driving | 103 (42)     |
   | while still actively drinking?                       |              |
   +------------------------------------------------------+--------------+

   GP, general practitioner.

.. _S3:

Doctors
-------

There were nine questions posed to doctors at the symposium and online:
three were based on alcohol-related problems, three on cardiology, two
on psychiatric issues and one on diabetes. Of the physicians who
attended the Royal College of Physicians (Edinburgh) symposium, 292 took
part in the survey and 70 doctors did so online.

The alcohol and driving question stated: ‘If a patient is admitted to
hospital with an alcohol dependence problem (requiring benzodiazepine
treatment for withdrawal symptoms) the patient must be advised to inform
the DVLA, who will revoke their licence for a year’. Respondents could
answer that this was true, false or that they did not know the answer.

.. _S4:

Results
=======

The 246 ‘recovering alcoholics’ answered all 13 questions (`Table
1 <#T1>`__). All 246 had a driving licence and drove a car; 185 (71%)
went to see their GP with an alcohol problem and 137 (56%) were admitted
to hospital with alcohol problems. None recollected their GP or a
hospital doctor asking them to stop driving. In addition, none had
informed the DVLA that they had a problem with alcohol.

At the symposium, 73% physicians answered the question incorrectly and
on the website 62% of physicians and psychiatrists gave an incorrect
answer; 9% of those at the symposium indicated that they did not know
the answer. With regard to questions on alcohol-related seizures and
alcohol misuse, 64% and 62% respectively answered incorrectly. The other
non-alcohol related questions demonstrated a higher level of knowledge
among the symposium audience (13–42% incorrect).

.. _S5:

Discussion
==========

This study has shown that awareness of individual responsibility among
recovering alcohol-dependent individuals is low and recollection of
discussion with health professionals about driving is non-existent. The
people we surveyed were regular attendees of AA meetings. This is likely
to be a group who have developed a high level of understanding and
insight into their alcohol problem and would be willing to engage in
open discussion with doctors. A few specialist alcohol services in
Scotland provide written information to newly referred patients alerting
them to their responsibilities regarding the DVLA, but it is not known
whether patients recall this (in the short or long term) and clearly
very few act on the advice. It is also probable that a significant
proportion of health professionals are not aware of the advice that they
should be giving in relation to driving and alcohol dependency and
alcohol misuse. These small but significant doctor surveys reflect that
knowledge of alcohol-related DVLA issues is poor among hospital doctors.
The Royal College of General Practitioners (Scotland) was invited to
participate but declined this opportunity. General practitioners form a
key professional group regarding health issues and driving. This lack of
knowledge in ‘recovering alcoholics’ may reflect a number of elements,
including lack of knowledge in health professionals, lack of willingness
of health professionals to discuss the issue or lack of recollection
from the individuals themselves. In addition, it is possible that health
professionals who are aware of the appropriate advice are unwilling to
discuss the topic in case it would adversely affect their relationship
with the patient. :sup:`10,11` In particular, there may be a reluctance
to raise the issue of driving in case this becomes a disincentive for
patients to be open about their drinking.

The DVLA guidelines :sup:`8` give advice on a number of medical
conditions that may affect driving, including diabetes mellitus,
epilepsy, sleep apnoea, dementia, psychiatric disorders, as well as
alcohol misuse and alcohol dependency. If a patient is admitted with a
‘first’ seizure, most doctors and health professionals would know to
advise the patient that they may not drive for a year. :sup:`12` In
addition, if a patient is started on insulin therapy, then most doctors
and health professionals, particularly those associated with the
management of diabetes, :sup:`13` would know that they should advise
their patient to inform the DVLA.

| The definition of alcohol misuse used by the DVLA – ‘A state which,
  because of consumption of alcohol, causes disturbance of behaviour,
  related disease or other consequences, likely to cause the patient,
  his/her family or society harm now, or in the future, and which may or
  may not be associated with dependency’ :sup:`8` – is helpful but can
  be difficult to interpret in the context of dealing with patients in
  an acute medical setting. The definition of alcohol dependence used by
  the DVLA – ‘A cluster of behavioural, cognitive and physiological
  phenomena that develop after Table 2 Notifications to DVLA on UK
  licence holders with alcohol misuse or alcohol dependence from all
  sources, 2006–201119 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Self-reported 378
  1268 1265 1176 1974 2548 Other (e.g. reported by
| doctor, family member) 41 26 52 24 83 168  [2]_ repeated alcohol use
  and which include a strong desire to take alcohol, difficulties in
  controlling its use, persistence in its use despite harmful
  consequences, with evidence of increased tolerance and sometimes a
  physical withdrawal state’ :sup:`8` – is much clearer and,
  particularly in relation to alcohol withdrawal, much easier to
  implement clinically. If more hospital doctors were aware of the DVLA
  repercussions of making the diagnosis of alcohol dependence or misuse,
  it may make the use of alcohol withdrawal regimens more problematic.
  For example, the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment – Alcohol
  (CIWA–A) scale :sup:`14` is commonly used in alcohol withdrawal
  situations in medical wards. Perfunctory attention to the history and
  frequent overreliance on unsubstantiated alcohol use can lead doctors
  to the inappropriate use of CIWA-A, which could have significant
  consequences on lifestyle and driving advice they give their patients.
  :sup:`15`

The responsibility for ensuring that the patient informs the DVLA lies
with the licence holder. The guidelines for fitness to drive are
available on the DVLA website (`www.dvla.gov.uk <www.dvla.gov.uk>`__)
and are revised every few months. The website states that the General
Medical Council (GMC) has issued clear guidelines to doctors with regard
to their responsibility to the DVLA: :sup:`16` ‘the DVLA is legally
responsible for deciding if a person is medically unfit to drive. They
need to know when the driving licence holders have a condition, which
may, now or in the future, affect their safety as a driver’. It also
states that if a patient has such a condition, the doctor should ‘make
sure that the patients understand that the condition may impair their
ability to drive’ and ‘explain to patients that they have a legal duty
to inform the DVLA about their condition’. In addition, it states that
doctors can ‘suggest that the patient seek a second medical opinion, and
make the appropriate arrangements for the patient to do so’ if the
patient is unwilling to accept the diagnosis (personal communication,
DVLA freedom of information request responses 2010/2011). Patients who
fail to notify the DVLA of a medical condition without reasonable excuse
are guilty of an offence. Failure to notify the DVLA also invalidates
their motor insurance cover. Current notification levels of alcohol
misuse and alcohol dependency received by the DVLA are very low (`Table
2 <#T2>`__). A small number are also reported through a third party
(which may be family, friend, health professional, etc.).

.. _S6:

Situation in Scotland
---------------------

In the Scottish population, the estimated prevalence of alcohol
dependence at 4.9% and of harmful and hazardous use at 27.9% indicates
around 20 000 people with dependence and over a million with harmful or
hazardous use. :sup:`17` A high proportion of these are likely to be
driving licence holders since approximately 86% of the UK adult
population has a driving licence of some sort, with 73% being full UK
licences. :sup:`18` Most licence holders obtain their licence in young
adulthood, before alcohol dependence develops. Therefore it is not
unreasonable to estimate that there may be in excess of 150 000 licence
holders with alcohol dependence in Scotland alone and a further 700 000
licence holders with harmful or hazardous use of alcohol. This
represents an enormous cohort of people who should be reporting their
alcohol problems to the DVLA. The Department for Transport report on the
attitudes of health professionals giving advice on fitness to drive
(including for people with alcohol and drug misuse and dependency)
contains a series of recommendations for improving such advice.
:sup:`19` Key among these are recommendations on the inclusion of a
question on fitness to drive in the exit examination for all relevant
medical specialties, the creation of clear, well-signposted guidelines
for use in general practice and the production of a clear flowchart for
common medical conditions to which healthcare practitioners can refer.

.. _S7:

Limitations
-----------

There were some limitations to the study. The questionnaires had not
been externally validated but the questions were simple, straightforward
and easy to understand. We accept that the group of ‘recovering
alcoholics’ questioned involved only a limited number of adults in
Ayrshire. AA meetings provided a venue where motivated individuals who
had recognised their problem with alcohol were present; it might be
considered that their recall of advice would be greater than that of
those who chose not to attend AA. Alternative methods for assessing
recall of medical advice, such as surveying patients at addiction
clinics, could have suffered from bias as the clinic staff became aware
of the study. A presumption was made that none of the attendees
experienced alcohol-related brain damage or other memory loss syndrome
and could recall accurately the discussions that they had had with their
medical advisers about their drinking. The study demonstrated
non-existent knowledge of the DVLA regulations relating to alcohol
dependence and misuse among a group of ‘recovering alcoholics’ plus a
poor level of knowledge in a group of senior doctors. Very importantly,
the figures obtained from the DVLA indicate very low levels of
self-reporting. During the 2011/2012 period there were 38 737
alcohol-related hospital discharges in Scotland :sup:`20` and almost 97
830 alcohol brief interventions completed, :sup:`21` which give numerous
opportunities for alcohol advice. If the DVLA regulations were
implemented, it could make an enormous difference to the understanding
and behaviours of the driving public.

.. [1]
   **Professor Andrew Collier** MD, FRCPE is Consultant Physician,
   Department of Medicine, Ayr Hospital, NHS Ayrshire and Arran, Ayr;
   **Dr Maggie Watts** MB BS, FFPH is Director of Public Health, NHS
   Western Isles; **Dr Sujoy Ghosh** MD, FRCPE is Clinical Research
   Fellow, NHS Ayrshire and Arran; **Dr Peter Rice** MB ChB, FRCPsych,
   FRCPE is Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist, Tayside Substance Misuse
   Services, Stracathro Hospital, NHS Tayside, Brechin; **Dr Neil
   Dewhurst** PRCPE is President, Royal College of Physicians
   (Edinburgh), Edinburgh.

.. [2]
   DVLA, Driver & Vehicle Licensing Agency.
