===================================================================================
Mobile telephone apps in mental health practice: uses, opportunities and challenges
===================================================================================



Justin Marley
Saeed Farooq
:Correspondence: Justin Marley (Justin.Marley@nepft.nhs.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   Smartphones are used by patients and clinicians alike. Vast numbers
   of software applications (apps) run on smartphones and carry out
   useful functions. Clinician- and patient-oriented mental health apps
   have been developed. In this article, we provide an overview of apps
   that are relevant for mental health. We look at clinician-oriented
   apps that support assessment, diagnosis and treatment as well as
   patient-oriented apps that support education and self-management. We
   conclude by looking at the challenges that apps pose with a
   discussion of possible solutions.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Mobile telephones are ubiquitous and have more recently evolved into the
smartphone, a combination of a handheld computer and mobile telephone.
Smartphones support software applications (apps) with specialised
functions. Some apps may be pre-installed on the telephone but many apps
are downloaded. Downloading apps (either free or for a nominal fee) is
straightforward. Apps are available for a large number of mental health
conditions and are also known as mHealth apps. Many of these apps have
already been investigated by researchers and include apps for
psychosis,\ :sup:`1` depression,\ :sup:`2` anxiety,\ :sup:`3` alcohol
use disorders,\ :sup:`4` smoking cessation,\ :sup:`5` sleep
disturbance\ :sup:`6` and weight loss.\ :sup:`7` In this article we will
avoid the more generic productivity apps (e.g. email apps) and will
instead focus on general clinical and mHealth apps as well as regulated
apps where possible.

.. _S1:

Clinician-oriented apps
=======================

.. _S2:

Assessment and diagnosis
------------------------

Smartphone apps can aid in diagnosis in two main ways: by supplying
clinicians with diagnosis-related information and less commonly through
data acquisition. Apps can be used in clinical encounters or remotely,
although the latter overlaps with self-monitoring. Apps have proven
useful in assessment and diagnosis in clinical practice. In one study,
50% of doctors reported that apps facilitated diagnosis during on-call
work whereas 43% reported apps helped them interpret laboratory
values.\ :sup:`8`

As an example, Lab Tests Online UK
(`www.labtestsonline.org.uk <www.labtestsonline.org.uk>`__) is a
peer-reviewed online resource for clinical laboratory tests with
corresponding apps for the iPhone and Android (`Fig. 1 <#F1>`__). The
app enables the clinician to look up explanations of test results
through a search facility or an index. The explanations are intended for
the general public but there is enough information there to be useful
for clinicians. Other useful features include news updates, information
on screening for populations and an index of conditions.

.. figure:: 289f1
   :alt: Screenshot from the desktop version of Lab Tests Online-UK
   :name: F1

   Screenshot from the desktop version of Lab Tests Online-UK

There are a large number of apps relating to the diagnosis. Many of
these are American apps that supply ICD-10 coding information for
billing purposes. There are a number of variations including apps that
convert between ICD-9 and ICD-10. The American Psychiatric Association
has produced a DSM-5 app that contains detailed information on the DSM-5
diagnostic categories as well as ICD-10 coding equivalents. The app
includes a series of instructive videos on many of the diagnostic
categories.

Less commonly, apps can also be used in conjunction with hardware
devices that connect to the smartphone. These apps may acquire and
process data from external appliances such as digital stethoscopes,
ophthalmoscopes and electrocardiogram (ECG) monitors. A similar
principle can be seen with the self-monitoring apps that can provide
clinicians with patient-collected data. Storing patient data on mobile
apps brings additional complications relating to the Data Protection Act
1998 as well as principles of patient confidentiality that need to be
worked through appropriately.

.. _S3:

Treatment
---------

Treatment-related mHealth apps can be broadly divided into medical and
psychosocial and may be professional or patient-focused.

.. _S4:

Medical apps
------------

In terms of UK practice, the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) produces both the *British National Formulary* (BNF)
app and an app for NICE guidance
(`www.nice.org.uk/about/what-we-do/nice-apps-for-smartphones-and-tablets <www.nice.org.uk/about/what-we-do/nice-apps-for-smartphones-and-tablets>`__).
The NICE BNF app offers a search facility to rapidly locate drug
information and contains the contents of the paper version of the BNF.
The app ensures that clinicians are able to access an up-to-date BNF
even in the busiest clinical environments. This is contingent on the
accessibility of the smartphone as well as regular updating of the app.
The NICE guidance app features indexed evidence-based guidance from NICE
on the management of a range of conditions. This app effectively
utilises the large storage capacity of current smartphones.

.. _S5:

Apps to assist in psychosocial interventions
--------------------------------------------

There are many psychology-related apps, including those listed on the
NHS Choices apps site (http://apps.nhs.uk) such as Phobia Free. Phobia
Free supports the use of exposure therapy for the treatment of phobias
in the form of games and augmented reality. Rizvi *et al* described an
app called DBT Field Coach that provided instructions, exercises and
reminders to help patients with borderline personality disorder manage
emotional crises.\ :sup:`9` The researchers found that the app helped
patients to self-monitor and complete homework assignments.

Another group of apps support patient education. One example is the
Brain Tutor 3-D/HD (online Fig. DS1) which features a 3-D magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) reconstruction of a brain
(`www.brainvoyager.com/Mobile/BrainTutorHD_iOS.html <www.brainvoyager.com/Mobile/BrainTutorHD_iOS.html>`__).
The clinician is able to select views of a virtual brain or an MRI
reconstruction of the head including the brain. All views support 3-D
manipulation of the images. For instance, the clinician may explain the
MRI findings to a patient and then proceed to demonstrate these on the
3-D models on their smartphone.

.. _S6:

Patient-oriented apps: education and self-management
====================================================

A large proportion of mental health apps are directed towards the
public. One example of this is Moodscope from NHS Choices
(http://apps.nhs.uk/), which enables a person to track their mood. The
scores can be stored and a patient may allow the clinician to access
their records to facilitate assessment. SAM (Self-Help Anxiety
Management) supports patients in managing panic attacks. These apps
support self-management of conditions including chronic illnesses
through diary functions and education. Such apps may be particularly
useful after discharge from specialist services or in-between
appointments.

Self-monitoring apps create personal health records which are
fundamentally different from clinical patient records in their function
and composition. Patients will be more empowered by holding their own
records and managing access rights to professionals. However, this is
accompanied by a variability in the quality of information held in the
records,\ :sup:`10` an expanding number of record systems and the
potential for further use of these records by third parties. The
divergence of app-based personal health records and clinical records
will generate complex interactions between these two systems.

.. _S7:

Challenges
==========

Smartphone apps present many challenges (`Box 1 <#box1>`__). One of the
primary difficulties is the regulation of mental health apps due to
their abundance. A number of studies have highlighted evidence of unsafe
medical apps\ :sup:`10` and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
the UK Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) and
NHS England have started to regulate apps. The NHS Choices website
identifies regulated clinical apps and lists a number of other
medication-related apps intended for professionals and patients. The
relevant regulator depends on the function of the app. For instance, the
MHRA would regulate apps classed as medical devices.

Self-certification has been suggested as one solution for the regulatory
challenges.\ :sup:`11` Lewis & Wyatt suggest a regulatory framework
which addresses challenges intrinsic and external (e.g. hardware) to the
app.\ :sup:`10` Charani and colleagues go one step further, arguing that
there needs to be a governance and legal framework in place for the use
of apps in clinical practice.\ :sup:`12` If clinicians or subject matter
experts have not been involved in app development this may influence its
quality and effectiveness. An absent evidence base for an app may limit
clinical uptake. Privacy and security are other challenges for the app
market.

The effectiveness of apps may also depend on the characteristics of the
patient population. In one study looking at smartphone apps for weight
loss, young adults considered simple weight measurement alone too narrow
in focus and advocated behavioural software features.\ :sup:`13` Access
to a smartphone was negatively correlated with age in one study looking
at consecutive patients in a neuropsychiatry and memory
clinic.\ :sup:`14`

**Box 1** Challenges of mental health apps

Extrinsic to the app: hardware constraints that limit the
apps.\ :sup:`15`

Intrinsic to the app

Relating to the patient or app user: concerns about how the data will be
used by the app service.

Relating to the clinician: accuracy of clinically related
processes\ :sup:`16`\ lack of medical involvement in app
development\ :sup:`17`\ insufficient information to keep doctors or
medical students interested.\ :sup:`18`

Relating to the healthcare service: deviation from or lack of evidence
based practice recommendations\ :sup:`3`\ patient confidentiality
issuesclinical risk emerging from use of apps.\ :sup:`19`

.. _S8:

Conclusions
===========

Mental health apps have expanded rapidly in number and regulation is
playing catch-up. There are many useful apps that can support clinicians
in the assessment and management of patients. There is also a burgeoning
market of personal health apps that are reshaping the health economy. A
sustained and multifaceted response from individual clinicians, health
services and policy drivers is needed to adapt to this new health
economy.

We thank Lab Tests Online-UK for their permission to include app
screenshots in our article, Professor Rainer Goebel for permission to
use the Brain Tutor HD screenshot and Dr Omer Moghraby for helpful
discussions around the subject matter.

.. [1]
   **Dr Justin Marley** MBBS, BSc, MRCPsych is consultant older adult
   psychiatrist, North Essex Partnership University Foundation Trust,
   and **Dr Saeed Farooq** PhD, MCPS(Psych), FCPS(Psych) is consultant
   psychiatrist, Black Country Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, and
   Visiting Professor at the University of Chester.
