=============================================================
Are psychiatrists only fools and horses to be open all hours?
=============================================================



Gary Wannan
M. E. Jan Wise

:Correspondence: Gary Wannan (gary.wannan@nhs.net)  [1]_

:date: 2015-12

:Abstract:
   The UK government's proposal for 24-hour healthcare means effectively
   asking doctors to work more unsociable hours for relatively little
   financial gain. In our opinion, psychiatry is particularly vulnerable
   to deterioration owing to negotiations of the terms of the current
   Consultant Contract that ensures fewer antisocial hours, whereas
   without parallel appropriate internal team and intra-agency working,
   provisions for which are not included in the government's proposals
   to extend care, patient care is vulnerable. Clarification and a
   narrower redefinition of what constitutes a psychiatric emergency is
   called for.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Psychiatry is no stranger to major shifts in the way it thinks or is
delivered. The pre-pharmacological treatments of the 1950s shifted into
the Brave New World of Largactil, and reacted with the therapy-rich and
anti-establishment fad made famous by Laing and the railing against
biological facets exemplified by Szasz. With its diversity of
self-reflection, psychiatrists have a legacy to assist in changing
practice.

Methods or modes of delivery of care have also been criticised.
Deinstitutionalisation was followed by the crisis of care in the
community, amid a spate of high-profile homicides. Risk management, best
represented by the Confidential Enquiry into Suicides and
Homicides\ :sup:`1` and at worst an ill-thought-out bureaucratic bungle,
added to the administrative burden without clear evidence that the
public and patients are now safer.

Recent assaults on the financial health of medical staff working in the
National Health Service (NHS) have included 6 years of pay cuts and
raids on future pensions. More general cuts in the organisation they
work in have led to low morale and allegations that rather than this
being viewed as a new paternalism, that somehow ‘nanny [the State] knows
best’, it is a neglecting and neglectful state.\ :sup:`2` After several
years of the ‘Nicholson challenge’,\ :sup:`3` with further cuts in
funding to mental health services, resources are at a dangerously low
level\ :sup:`4` and the Cinderella of the NHS faces unprecedented
challenges, singled out for selective cuts with resources not following
morbidity.

In this environment, the government is proposing a ‘24/7 service’. On
the face of it, running a psychiatric service is a 24-h activity anyway.
In-patients require constant access to appropriate medical and nursing
help; relapses and remissions of community patients do not always
coincide with their care coordinator's availability. So it seems
self-evident that psychiatric services run 24 hours a day, 365 days a
year. To many it seems that a disingenuous impression is being created
that consultants do not provide a 24-h service when in fact they do so
across specialties in the NHS.\ :sup:`5` The government appears to have
used this sleight to demand that there be contractual changes to remove
any obligation to pay consultants an appropriate premium for
out-of-hours work.

However, if the government's drive is for the same level of service all
the time, that is a separate matter. Examples of this would include
routine out-patient clinics on a Sunday afternoon and late evening
consultant-led ward rounds. Nearly all disciplines, especially
psychiatry, deliver care in a team manner, so without expansion of
numbers across professions, how are the same levels of interactivity to
be maintained outside Monday to Friday, 9-to-5 opening hours? If Donne's
metaphor is apt, psychiatry is not an island, so where will children and
families' Social Services be, and the police, occupational therapy,
clinical psychology and investigative services, when required? Although
the government has acknowledged this problem,\ :sup:`6` it is evident
that an initiative from the Department of Health will not be prioritised
in the same way by other departments.

The financial and human resource implications appear to be largely not
considered. Although there is evidence of better outcomes for patients
seen during the week in non-psychiatric specialties, there is no clear
costing of the changes required to raise weekend services to the same
level as those provided during the week. Many NHS staff have premium
rates for unsocial hours: fewer staff will be spread more thinly across
weekends and evenings, so without additional recruitment, daytime
services will shrink and likely worsen outcomes Monday to Friday.
Whereas there are theoretical savings in physical medicine with extended
use of surgical theatres or radiological facilities, such potential is
not so easy to find in mental health services. For those drawn to
community work in particular, reducing family time, a reason many choose
the specialty in the first place, will affect recruitment and retention.
Surveys of consultants show that the average time spent on NHS activity
is already well in excess of contractual requirements, at 5.8 hours
extra unpaid labour a week,\ :sup:`7` thereby further increasing the
challenge of doing more with less.

We are aware that that several NHS trusts are attempting to alter
Standard Operating Procedure to specify what consultants will do while
on call, including mandating non-emergency tasks out-of-hours.
Consultants, in particular, have the reasonable expectation that on-call
work will be for tasks that require their level of experience and skill,
rather than for bureaucratic reasons.

The 2003 Consultant Contract\ :sup:`8` contains an important provision
at Schedule 3, Paragraph 6: “‘Non-emergency work after 7 pm and before 7
am during weekdays or at weekends will only be scheduled by mutual
agreement between the consultant and his or her clinical manager.
Consultants will have the right to refuse non-emergency work at such
times. Should they do so there will be no detriment in relation to pay
progression or any other matter.’” To the government, this is a major
impediment to an imposition of 24/7 working in the absence of agreement.
To negotiators, it is an important safeguard against excessive and
antisocial hours with the compromise of patient safety. For either side,
its meaning could become totemic.

There may be much discussion over what an emergency is. We suggest a
framework where the most important categories are akin to those used in
time management::sup:`9` emergencyurgentimportantnot urgent not
important.

Emergency is defined as ‘a serious, unexpected, and often dangerous
situation requiring immediate action’. So, a non-emergency is anything
that is not an ‘emergency’. An urgent problem may later become an
emergency, but that is a separate issue.

The Cassandras among us may worry about litigation where an action is
delayed. However, it is the commissioned service's responsibility to
ensure that there are appropriate care arrangements in place, not the
individual consultant's. Of course, the General Medical Council provides
help on this matter when stating that: “‘If patients are at risk because
of inadequate premises, equipment or other resources, policies or
systems, you should put the matter right if that is possible. You must
raise your concern in line with our guidance and your workplace
policy.’\ :sup:`10:para.25`” Many will agree that acute suicidal
ideation, an acute dystonic reaction and attempted self-harm are all
emergencies. Likewise, while administrative procedures that allow leave
while detained, or medication to be administered lawfully, are very
important, they are not ‘emergency’ situations. Military training
includes the mantra that ‘A failure to plan on your part does not
constitute an emergency on mine’, something we would do well to
remember.

So where do practitioners sit on the urgent category? There will be some
that lie outside our comfort zone, for humanitarian or other reasons,
such as advice to a trainee about medication for psychotic phenomena
where few would not readily offer advice even when not deemed an
emergency. However, where is the boundary with the Human Rights Act?
Many NHS trusts have a seclusion review policy where after 24 h in
seclusion a review in person by a consultant must occur. Now this may be
good practice according to the Mental Health Act Code of Practice, but
an infringement of best practice is not an emergency.

It may well be that the solutions of other countries may help.
Greenland, part of the Kingdom of Denmark, runs practically all of its
psychiatric services over videoconferencing facilities.\ :sup:`11` In
Los Angeles, time constraints and skills shortages have led to a
parallel approach (R. Mendoza, personal communication, 2015). The
British ‘special hospitals’ have used the same technology to reduce loss
of clinical time to travel to disparate sites or courts.

The discussion about what is an emergency should rage, and it should
rage hard. It is a point around which consensus would allow us to
protect that which we cherish – a service delivered in a considered and
coordinated manner, where there is a fair exchange of time and labour
for salary and security. In a politically driven, evidence-poor
initiative, psychiatrists should stand firm on whether the proposed
changes hold merit. If they do, at what cost should we accept them?

.. [1]
   **Gary Wannan** is consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist,
   Parkside Clinic, Central and North West London (CNWL) NHS Foundation
   Trust, and **M. E. Jan Wise** is consultant psychiatrist with CNWL
   NHS Foundation Trust and honorary senior lecturer at Imperial College
   London.
