======================================================================================================
A memory clinic *v.* traditional community mental health team service: comparison of costs and quality
======================================================================================================



Judy Sasha Rubinsztein
Marelna Janse van Rensburg
Zerak Al-Salihy
Deborah Girling
Louise Lafortune
Muralikrishnan Radhakrishnan
Carol BrayneCorrespondence to Judy Rubinsztein
(judy.rubinsztein@nsft.nhs.uk)  [1]_
:Date: 2015-2

:Abstract:
   **Aims and method** To compare the cost and quality of a
   memory-clinic-based service (MCS) with a traditional community mental
   health team (CMHT) service. Using a retrospective case-note review,
   we studied two groups, each with 33 participants. Consecutive
   referrals for diagnostic ‘memory’ assessments over 4 months were
   evaluated. Participants were evaluated for up to 6 months.

   **Results** The MCS was less costly than the CMHT service but the
   difference was not statistically significant (mean cost for MCS was
   £742, mean cost for CMHT service was £807). The MCS offered more
   multidisciplinary and comprehensive care, including: pre- and
   post-diagnostic counselling, more systematic screening of blood for
   reversible causes of dementia, more use of structured assessment
   instruments in patients/carers, signposting to the third sector as
   well as more consistent copying of letters to patients/carers.

   **Clinical implications** An MCS service offered more comprehensive
   and multidisciplinary service at no extra cost to secondary care.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In the UK, the national dementia strategy\ :sup:`1` strongly supports
the concept of timely diagnosis and intervention in dementia. The
cost-effectiveness of such services has been demonstrated.\ :sup:`2–6`
Studies show that memory services may improve quality of life for
patients and carers.\ :sup:`7–9` The recognition of dementia enables the
provision of safer care by considering, for example, accommodation and
care needs and encouraging advanced decision-making. Reaching a
diagnosis can help patients and carers to tolerate their symptoms better
and suitable treatments can be considered.

Advocates of dedicated ‘memory clinic services’ (MCSs) point to the
benefits of a less stigmatising setting, with a focus on psychosocial
interventions, education and the promotion of research and clinical
governance.\ :sup:`5,7,10–14` Opponents are concerned with resources
being diverted from community mental health teams (CMHTs) and point to
higher costs of MCS services.\ :sup:`15,16`

In this study, Trust A has a dedicated memory clinic service (henceforth
called MCS group) as well as a CMHT. In Trust B there is a ‘traditional’
CMHT-based service (henceforth called CMHT group) where referrals of all
types are seen. We compared the costs with those of secondary care and
the quality of the service offered to similar types of patients referred
for a non-urgent diagnostic memory assessment in these two service
models in neighbouring trusts. Patients were evaluated retrospectively
using case-note review in terms of the cost and quality of care they
received in secondary care for up to 6 months in similar rural/suburban
areas.

.. _S1:

Method
======

.. _S2:

Study design
------------

This study was a health service evaluation and used retrospective data
collected routinely as part of the usual services provided in both
trusts, so local research ethics committee permission was not needed.

.. _S3:

Demographic matching
--------------------

Two rural and suburban eastern areas of England were matched using data
from the Eastern Region Public Health Observatory (ERPHO). The number of
people over the age of 65 years, based on general practice (GP) records
in these areas, was recorded: 20 289 people in the MCS group and 21 112
people in the CMHT group. Data from the British primary care Quality and
Outcomes Framework (QOF),\ :sup:`17` which requires the recording of
dementia and other chronic conditions, showed that the prevalence of
dementia and strokes, and the recording of cholesterol and blood
pressure, were similar in both groups. The Indices of Multiple
Deprivation (IMD)\ :sup:`18` show that the GP practices in the CMHT
service (Trust B) experienced less deprivation. The range of the IMD was
11.5–17.7 for the MCS and 5.7–8.96 for the CMHT service.

.. _S4:

Patient identification
----------------------

We examined all referrals received over the time frame of the study (4
months) from specific, predetermined GP practices in these two
rural/suburban areas. All patients included in the study had to fulfil
Department of Health memory clinic referral criteria.\ :sup:`19` These
criteria state that memory services will see all patients with
subjective memory problems or change in everyday function, or a carer’s
report of change in a patient over a period of more than 6 months.
Patients referred should have no previous or definitive diagnosis of
dementia. The Department of Health stipulates that memory services will
not see patients where urgent treatment is needed, for example those
with more complex behavioural and psychological problems, patients with
suicidal ideation, psychotic behaviour or a crisis situation from the
carer’s perspective. Patients with early-onset dementia (age under 64
years) were also excluded because the two areas have different referral
pathways for such patients. The MCS service received two referrals of
early-onset dementia, which were excluded from this study; there were no
such referrals in the CMHT service. All referrals had to have been
received between August and November 2011 in both services.

For the MCS group, a computerised search of all memory clinic patients
referred by GP practices in the designated area of the trust was
performed for the specified time period. Thirty-four consecutive
patients were identified and all fulfilled the Department of Health
memory clinic criteria.\ :sup:`19` One patient refused the diagnostic
interview after pre-diagnostic counselling and that patient was
excluded. Occasionally, patients may be passed on to the crisis team or
CMHT, but none on our list had been dealt with in this way.

For the CMHT group, a member of the research team (M.J.V.R.) manually
searched all consecutive referrals to the service from particular GP
practices from a central written database. Thirty-three referrals were
included in the CMHT group (by coincidence, the same number of patients
as the MCS group). These 33 patients all fulfilled Department of Health
memory clinic criteria\ :sup:`19` and were identified by consecutively
recruiting from the original list. Patients were excluded only if they
did not fulfil memory clinic criteria.\ :sup:`19` A second member of the
research team (J.S.R.) ensured that all referrals met these criteria for
inclusion or exclusion. There was uncertainty as to whether to include
one patient and a senior nurse’s opinion from the MCS team was sought to
arbitrate.

.. _S5:

Questionnaires
--------------

.. _S6:

Quality of service
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A data extraction sheet to assess the quality of the service was
developed for this study. It was used for case-note analysis and
captured information routinely collected by clinicians for assessment
purposes (`Box 1 <#box1>`__). The quality criteria were chosen based on
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance
for dementia services,\ :sup:`20` the Memory Services National
Accreditation Programme (MSNAP) criteria where they could be applied to
both services,\ :sup:`21` and literature evidence.\ :sup:`10,11,22` We
pragmatically assessed whether the data could be extracted
retrospectively from the services. This information was obtained from
computerised and handwritten notes from the initial contact with the
patient and for the following 6 months of contact with the mental health
service. The psychiatrists involved in the data collection conferred
about any uncertainties with recording of data. M.J.V.R. and Z.A.-S.
each initially screened at least four sets of case records together with
J.S.R. to ensure interrater reliability in recording of data. All
entries were scrutinised by J.S.R. to ensure data entry was consistent.
Any missing information was noted. It is the view of clinicians in both
trusts that GPs are best suited to conduct physical examinations and
these are stated in the requirements for referral to the service by the
MCS trust. However, individual psychiatrists often choose to conduct
some aspects of the physical examination themselves and the extent to
which clinicians were doing this was noted.

.. _S7:

Cost of service
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

| The Client Service Receipt Inventory (CSRI)\ :sup:`23` was adapted for
  this study (available from the authors on request). This includes all
  the mental health service costs for each individual patient from the
  initial point of contact and then all subsequent contacts with the
  mental health service over the following 6 months. Costing stopped at
  the point the patient was discharged back to the GP. However, patients
  found to need more extensive follow-up for more severe or complex
  behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) were
  referred to the CMHT service in Trust A (one patient) and Trust B
  (three patients). Costs were excluded from that point. Costing was
  calculated from the perspective of National Health Service
  care\ :sup:`24` (secondary care only evaluated in this study) rather
  than from a wider medical or societal perspective. Costs for hourly
  contact with professionals were mainly derived from the unit costs for
  health and Social Services compendium and included ‘on costs’, for
  example for a consultant psychiatrist this includes salary, national
  insurance and superannuation, qualifications, overheads, ongoing
  training and capital overheads.\ :sup:`25` From this
  document,\ :sup:`25` the cost per hour for consultant time is £162
  (including on costs such as administrative support and buildings) and
  the cost per hour for a non-medical clinician (e.g. CMHT nurse) is
  £44. The costs of drugs prescribed by secondary care were derived from
  the *British National Formulary*.\ :sup:`26` The costs of scans were
  derived on the basis of the Department of Health’s Dementia
  Commissioning Pack.\ :sup:`27` Costs incurred as a result of time
  spent on discussion and meetings were based on the size of individual
  teams, allowing for an average of 6 min discussion per patient (team
  sizes and calculations available from the author). The average time
  taken for domiciliary Table 1Demographic data and results of
  assessment in memory clinic service (MCS) group and community mental
  health team (CMHT) groupMCS group (*n* = 33)\ `a <#TFN2>`__\ CMHT
  group (*n* = 33)\ `a <#TFN2>`__\ *P*\ CommentsMean age,
  years80840.03Significantly older in Trust BMean age when leaving
  school, years1515/>0.05Not recorded in 4 patients in MCS and in
| 20 patients in CMHTFemale, *n* (%)19 (58)22 (67)/>0.05MMSE,
  median23.5250.2\ *n* = 32 in both groupsACE-R, median (range)67
  (76)CMHT group not analysed as only 9 patients
| had ACE-R done, *n* = 31 in MCS groupAccommodation – independent/
| sheltered, *n* (%)32 (97)30 (94)/>0.05Seen with relative/friend/carer,
  *n* (%)33 (100)24 (73)<0.001Clinicians in CMHT group may have
| contacted relative by telephone after interviewMean days to be seen
  (s.e.), *n* (%)25 (3)20 (3)0.23Mean months since symptom
  onset23240.7712 not known in CMHT groupReceived pre-diagnostic
  counselling, *n* (%)32 (94)2 (6)<0.0001Dementia blood screen examined,
  *n* (%)33 (100)24 (73)0.001Physical exam done by GP/psychiatrist, *n*
  (%)16 (48)14 (42)n/sFunctioning examined formally, *n* (%)24 (73)1
  (3)<0.0001e.g. Bristol Activities of Daily
  Living\ :sup:`30`\ Behaviour examined formally, *n* (%)22 (67)1
  (3)<0.0001e.g. Cambridge Behavioural Inventory\ :sup:`31`\ Global
  assessment formal, *n* (%)33 (100)14 (42)<0.0001e.g. HoNOS,\ :sup:`32`
  EQ-5D-5L\ :sup:`33`\ Depression examined formally, *n* (%)2 (6)1
  (3)>0.05e.g. Geriatric Depression Scale\ :sup:`34`\ Risk assessment,
  *n* (%)31 (94)22 (67)0.02Patient/carer sent copy of GP letter, *n*
  (%)29 (88)14 (42)<0.0001 [2]_ [3]_ visit and/or administrative time
  costs were calculated on the basis of discussions with representatives
  from professional groups in each of the teams or on data recorded by
  team members (average times for appointment available from the author
  on request). The mileage travelled by clinicians was calculated using
  the Automobile Association Website
  (`www.theaa.com <www.theaa.com>`__). Travel and transport costs are
  part of general overheads in the unit costs of health and social
  care,\ :sup:`25` but as this was anticipated to be an area of
  difference between the two models, this was calculated separately for
  each patient seen at the rate of 54p/mile up to 3500 miles as
  suggested in this unit cost document.

**Box 1** Measures extracted regarding the quality of the memory service

Background characteristics (age, gender, marital status, employment,
school-leaving age, accommodation)Waiting time to be seenSymptom time
prior to referralPresence of a carer, relative, friendPre-diagnostic
counsellingDementia blood screen: ordered, examinedInformal assessment
of functioning, behaviour, depression, global assessmentStructured
questionnaires to assess functioning, behaviour, global assessmentBrain
imagingPhysical examination (record from GP/psychiatrist)MMSE, ACE-R or
other cognitive tools utilisedRecord of a diagnosisRecord of risk
assessmentRecord of post-diagnostic advice to patient/carerRecord of
discussion about drivingCopying of letters to patients/carers

ACE-R, Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-Revised; GP, general
practitioner; MMSE, mini-Mental State Examination.

.. _S8:

Analysis
~~~~~~~~

Data were analysed using Excel 2007 and Stata Version 12.1 for Windows
(χ\ :sup:`2`, Fisher’s exact tests if less than 5 in a cell, Wilcoxon
rank sum test). Parametric and non-parametric tests were applied, as
appropriate, to evaluate costs and quality of care provided. To be
conservative and because non-parametric distributions were predicted,
the cost data were analysed using the Wilcoxon rank sum test.

.. _S9:

Results
=======

.. _S10:

Quality data
------------

A similar range of diagnoses were seen in both areas (Alzheimer’s or
mixed dementia: 17 in MCS group, 15 in CMHT group; vascular dementia: 9
in MCS and 8 in CMHT; Lewy body dementia: 0 in MCS group, 2 in CMHT
group; mild cognitive impairment: 6 in both groups; depression: 0 in MCS
and 1 in CMHT; other diagnoses: 1 chronic subdural in MCS group and 1
multiple sclerosis-related cognitive impairment in CMHT group).
Demographic data and the analysis of data collected during patient
assessments are shown in `Table 1 <#T1>`__.

Diagnostic assessments included a clinical assessment of behaviour,
functioning and a global assessment of severity in nearly all patients,
with no significant differences between groups on these variables. Some
structured questionnaires (e.g. EQ-5D,\ :sup:`33` Cambridge Behavioural
Inventory\ :sup:`31`) were sent to patients and carers before the actual
appointment in the MCS group. Others were administered by clinicians
during the clinic appointment. However, structured assessments in
patients and carers using symptom rating scales in these domains were
not routinely done in the CMHT group. A Mini-Mental State Examination
(MMSE)\ :sup:`28` was performed in all patients except one in each
group. In the MCS group, the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-Revised
(ACE-R) test\ :sup:`29` was performed routinely, with a median score of
67, but it was not performed routinely in the CMHT group. Computed
tomography head scans were ordered as part of the assessment to a
similar extent in both groups (19 in MCS and 17 in CMHT), whereas scans
that had been done previously and considered by the clinician to be
recent enough to be helpful amounted to a further 6 in the MCS and 5 in
the CMHT group. So, only 8 MCS (24%) and 11 CMHT (33%) patients did not
have scans available for diagnostic purposes. Scanning is widely
available in both trusts and it was patient preference and some
clinician guidance that determined whether a patient had a scan or not.
Diagnoses were recorded by clinicians in 100% of letters sent to GPs. A
psychologist saw two patients in the MCS group (one for
neuropsychological testing and one for cognitive stimulation therapy)
and two patients in the CMHT group had further neuropsychological
testing.

The post-diagnostic advice given by clinicians to patients and/or carers
from the MCS *v*. CMHT group in percentage terms was signposting: to the
third sector (70% *v*. 24%; *P* = 0.0002); for welfare benefits (55%
*v*. 36%; *P*>0.05); to Social Services (67% *v*. 48%; *P*>0.05);
advanced Table 2Mean costs in memory clinic service (MCS) group and
community mental health team (CMHT) group\ `a <#TFN4>`__\ CostsMCS group
£ (mean per person ±s.d.)CMHT group £ (mean per person ±s.d.)Total
Costs742 (250)807 (375)Direct costs271 (82)252 (124)Office costs182
(81)224 (130)\ **Travel time**\ `b <#TFN5>`__\ **76 (59)186
(106)**\ Mileage costs28 (21)32 (31)Multidisciplinary team costs44
(15)30 (41)Scan costs74 (67)69 (72)Drug costs67 (103)12
(31) [4]_ [5]_ [6]_ planning discussions (55% *v*. 45%; *P*>0.05).
Interviewers were better at documenting whether patients were drivers in
the MCS group (information not recorded in three patients in the MCS
group and nine patients in the CMHT group). Anti-dementia drugs were
prescribed in 65% of patients eligible for prescriptions (if patients
had Alzheimer’s disease, mixed dementias or Lewy body dementia and MMSE
scores greater than 10). Payment methods differed between groups, with
the CMHT passing on prescribing to GPs after 1–2 months compared with
the MCS group, where clinicians continued to prescribe for 3–4 months.

.. _S11:

Patient pathways
----------------

The major significant difference was that just under half of patients in
the CMHT group (*n* = 15, 45%) were seen only by a doctor at their usual
place of residence and then discharged, whereas in the MCS group 97%
were seen by both a doctor and a non-medical clinician (once or twice).
In the CMHT group, 55% of patients were seen by non-medical clinicians
several times (range 2–11). Although some patients received no follow-up
in the CMHT group, others received extensive follow-up within the
6-month period, incurring increased travel time, mileage and
face-to-face costs. Most medical input was from the clinic base for the
MCS group, but 85% of patients also received a domiciliary visit by a
non-medical clinician either pre- or post-diagnosis (or both).

.. _S12:

Costs of service
----------------

The total costs per person to secondary care between the MCS and the
CMHT groups over 6 months were not significantly different in the
non-adjusted analysis or the analysis adjusted for age and MMSE score.
The mean total cost of care in the MCS group was £742 (median £722) and
in the CMHT group it was £807 (median £833). Travel costs were
significantly higher in the CMHT group where all patients were seen at
their usual place of residence (*Z* = –5.14, *P*\ <0.0001, effect size
–0.63). Consultants travelling to see patients would often add a cost of
£162/hour to each assessment in the CMHT group. This expense was not
needed for clinic-based assessments by consultants in the MCS group. The
costs for non-medical staff to travel to see patients more frequently
than in the MCS group also added to this overall travel cost figure.
Other costs between groups were not significantly different using
non-parametric analysis (`Table 2 <#T2>`__).

.. _S13:

Discussion
==========

This paper highlights the cost and quality differences between two
service models for patients referred with concerns about their memory.
The total costs to secondary care were less with the MCS-based service
than the CMHT-based service (median cost of £722 *v*. £833 per patient),
but this difference was not statistically significant. The MCS offered
significantly more multidisciplinary care to a greater number of
patients than the CMHT service. Both services offered a high-quality
diagnostic service but we argue that the MCS service was able to offer
more systematic and comprehensive care, including pre-diagnostic
counselling, more systematic screening of blood tests for reversible
causes of dementia/comorbidity, more extended cognitive examination and
structured assessment tools, better evidence of signposting to the third
sector as well as copying of letters to patients and carers. It has been
demonstrated that there is greater satisfaction with multidisciplinary
assessment\ :sup:`35,36` where diagnostic and management options are
explained to both patient and caregiver.

It is possible that patients in the CMHT group were not typical for an
MCS or that a selection bias was introduced, with only 33 patients in
the CMHT group. However, we feel this is unlikely as the Department of
Health memory clinic criteria were applied to all referrals accepted
into the study in a systematic way.

We acknowledge that the numbers included in the study were small and the
findings can only be regarded as preliminary. However, we cannot exclude
the possibility that a CMHT service may be more economical for all types
of patients as it was beyond the scope of this study to examine the
costs for all patients entering CMHT services in both areas. The study
was also not a full economic evaluation where costs and outcome data
(such as delays to institutional care) are combined to reach
conclusions. The CSRI\ :sup:`23` as adapted for this study only examines
costs to secondary mental healthcare and not primary care, social care
or carer time costs. Using the CSRI, we detailed the patient’s
involvement with doctors and other clinicians as accurately and
comprehensively as possible. In real life, clinicians do not return to
base between patient visits so costs may have been inflated in both
services for travel time. We were aware that there seemed to be
differences between groups in the rate whereby prescribing was handed
over to GPs.

This was a retrospective service evaluation and we encountered many of
the pitfalls of examining data that were not specifically collected for
research purposes. However, the pragmatic design of this study also
means it is more reflective of actual practice and therefore less
subject to a Hawthorne effect.

Stakeholder views had been sought in both trusts and satisfaction was
high with both services in the year of the study, but this was not
evaluated specifically in this research and satisfaction cannot be
inferred from these data.

There will, of course, be differences among clinicians about what
determines the quality of a memory service and we acknowledge our own
subjectivity. However, we took a pragmatic view on which variables to
include, based on the literature and the information we were likely to
be able to obtain from retrospective data in these two services. Other
quality indicators for a memory service may be helpful to consider in
future studies, for example the rate of reversible causes found, the
rate of ‘no diagnosis’ made, the range of diagnoses or the rate at which
drugs were accepted by eligible patients. However, this sample was too
small to find significant between-group differences on these indicators.

The IMD in the MCS group was lower than in the CMHT group. This could
possibly influence referral patterns but we acknowledge that this is a
complex issue, involving the attitudes of patients, families and their
referring GPs. Ethnicity was not specifically matched for in this study
and this is acknowledged as a study limitation. We acknowledge that both
groups had higher than expected rates of patients not receiving
anti-dementia drugs. Clinicians did not always offer the drug, because
they were concerned patients would not comply with taking the
medication. However, some patients refused the drugs because of possible
side-effects or other factors.

Another emerging care model in the UK utilises the services of ‘allied
mental health professionals’ in making diagnoses and offering
interventions with medical input not provided face to face for most
patients.\ :sup:`5,37,38` It may be argued that some of the diagnostic
quality provided by a ‘medical’ view on diagnosis may be compromised in
such services and this needs further evaluation.

We thank all the clinicians who provided information for this project,
and Christine Hill (CLAHRC administrator), Sam Norton (statistician for
CLAHRC in Public Health Department), David Rubinsztein (statistical
support) and Dr John Battersby (ERPHO) for providing help with
demographic and QOF data. J.S.R. thanks her colleagues in psychiatry at
the West Suffolk Hospital, who provided support for the project and
backfill for sessions during the CLAHRC year of training. J.S.R. also
thanks all those in the CLAHRC, Cambridge and Peterborough scheme for
their generous support of her fellowship.

.. [1]
   **Judy Sasha Rubinsztein**, Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust,
   consultant and fellow in NIHR CLAHRC [National Institute for Health
   Research Collaborations for Leadership in Applied Health research and
   Care] for Cambridge and Peterborough; **Marelna Janse van Rensburg**,
   ST6 in Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust; **Zerak
   Al-Salihy**, ST5 in Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust;
   **Deborah Girling**, consultant, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
   Foundation Trust; **Louise Lafortune**, senior research associate,
   NIHR CLAHRC for Cambridgeshire and Peterborough, Cambridge Institute
   of Public Health, University of Cambridge; **Muralikrishnan
   Radhakrishnan**, senior health economist, Centre for the Economics of
   Mental and Physical Health, Institute of Psychiatry at King’s College
   London; **Carol Brayne**, Director of the Cambridge Institute of
   Public Health, Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
   University of Cambridge.

.. [2]
   ACE-R, Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination–Revised; GP, general
   practitioner; HoNOS, Health of the Nation Outcome Scales; MMSE,
   mini-Mental State Examination; n/s, non-significant.

.. [3]
   Unless otherwise stated.

.. [4]
   Bold denotes significance.

.. [5]
   Small differences in the total means can be accounted for by rounding
   off.

.. [6]
   The only significant difference between the groups was in the travel
   time costs *P* < 0.0001; *z* = –5.14 (Wilcoxon rank sum test). The
   drug, scan and multidisciplinary team costs were not formally
   analysed as their distributions were not suitable for parametric
   testing and there were too many ties for the Wilcoxon rank sum test.
