===========================================================================================================
Anti-*N*-methyl-d-aspartate receptor encephalitis: review of clinical presentation, diagnosis and treatment
===========================================================================================================



Helen Barry
Susan Byrne
Elizabeth Barrett
Kieran C. Murphy
David R. Cotter

:Correspondence: Helen Barry (helenbarry@rcsi.ie)  [1]_

:date: 2015-2

:Abstract:
   Anti-*N*-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor encephalitis is a form of
   encephalitis occurring primarily in women and associated with
   antibodies against NR1 or NR2 subunits of the NMDA receptor. As a
   potentially treatable differential for symptoms and signs seen in
   neurology and psychiatric clinics, clinicians practising across the
   lifespan should be aware of this form of encephalitis. Common
   clinical features include auditory and visual hallucinations,
   delusions, behavioural change (frequently with agitation), impaired
   consciousness, motor disturbance (ranging from dyskinesia to
   catatonia), seizures, and autonomic dysfunction. We present a review
   of the literature on the disorder, including its clinical
   presentation, differential diagnosis, epidemiology, treatment and
   prognosis.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Anti-*N*-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor encephalitis was first
described in 2007 by Dalmau and colleagues, :sup:`1` who identified 12
patients presenting with prominent neuropsychiatric symptoms. All were
confirmed to have serum or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) antibodies to the
NMDA receptor. :sup:`1` In a subsequent case series of 100 patients, 77
initially presented to psychiatric services. :sup:`2` Although patients
with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis exhibit high rates of psychiatric
disorder, psychiatrists may not be fully aware of the diverse
presentation of this disorder. Given the high mortality rate (up to
25%), the likelihood of presentation across the age range and the
potential for treatment, a high index of suspicion is warranted by
clinicians.

.. _S1:

Epidemiology
============

Epidemiological studies suggest that anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis may
be the most common cause of autoimmune encephalitis after acute
demyelinating encephalitis. :sup:`3` While to date there are no
estimates as to prevalence rates, more than 500 cases have been
reported. :sup:`4–6` Between September 2007 and February 2011, the
California Encephalitis Project examined referrals of 761 patients
presenting with encephalitis. :sup:`7` Of the cases of identified
aetiology, anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis was the leading entity (32 of
79 cases) within the cohort and was identified four times as frequently
as herpes simplex – type 1, West Nile virus or varicella zoster virus.
:sup:`7` In another study, Steiner and colleagues examined 121
individuals with schizophrenia for diverse NMDA receptor antibodies.
Approximately 10% (*n* = 15) were found to be positive for anti-NMDA
receptor antibodies, two of whom had the specific immunoglobulin G (IgG)
NR1a antibodies of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. :sup:`8` Zandi *et
al* :sup:`9` observed NMDA receptor serum antibodies in approximately 6%
(3 of 46) of patients with first-onset schizophrenia. The true rate of
anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis in the population generally and among
individuals with psychosis is thus not yet fully clarified.

.. _S2:

Pathophysiology
===============

Encephalitis and psychosis have a long association, with a viral
aetiology of psychosis hypothesised as early as the 19th century. The
influenza epidemic in the early 20th century led Karl Menninger to
conclude that ‘dementia praecox is at least in most instances a
somatopsychosis, the psychic manifestations of an Encephalitis’.
:sup:`10` While the dopaminergic model of schizophrenia has been the
leading neurochemical hypothesis of psychosis for many decades,
hypofunction of the NMDA-type glutamate receptors provides an
alternative model to understanding the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. It
is well described that antagonists of NMDA receptors (e.g. phencyclidine
(PCP)) produce a clinical syndrome that closely resembles negative
symptoms of schizophrenia and induce neuropsychological and sensory
processing deficits that are very similar to those observed in
schizophrenia. :sup:`11`

The prominent psychotic symptoms, catatonia and indicators of
dopaminergic involvement (orofacial dyskinesias) are all consistent with
the effects of PCP, :sup:`11` which is well recognised to also replicate
many aspects of the presentation of schizophrenia. NMDA receptor
antagonists are believed to function by blocking the NMDA receptor in
the presynaptic gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic neurons of the
thalamus and frontal cortex, leading to a disinhibition of postsynaptic
glutamatergic neurons and subsequent glutamatergic and dopaminergic
dysregulation in the frontal cortex.

It has been observed that nitroprusside completely abolishes the
behavioural effects of PCP in animal models. :sup:`12` Hallak and
colleagues :sup:`13` administered a sodium nitroprusside infusion to 20
patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia, with a resultant rapid
improvement in symptoms. They hypothesise that in addition to generating
nitric oxide in the brain and increasing cAMP production, nitroprusside
may also modulate NMDA receptor activity. In addition, reductions in
plasma and brain glycine, D-serine and glutathione levels provide
additional mechanisms underlying NMDA dysfunction. :sup:`14`

The neuropsychiatric presentation of these cases of anti-NMDA receptor
encephalitis thus provides important support for the NMDA receptor
hypofunction hypothesis for psychosis. :sup:`15,16` Explanations for the
proposed NMDA receptor hypofunction in schizophrenia are varied and may
involve altered recycling of NMDA receptors. :sup:`17` However, the
possibility that autoantibodies to the NMDA receptor subunits may be
causal in psychotic presentations is novel.

Acute psychosis in anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis is associated with
serum and CSF IgG antibody titres against the NR1a subunit of the
receptor. However, antibodies against different antigens (e.g. the NR2a
and NR2b subunits) have been described in cases of limbic encephalitis
and systematic lupus erthymatosus, :sup:`18,19` and psychiatric symptoms
may not be exclusive to the NR1a subunit. Steiner *et al* :sup:`8`
examined the serum of 459 patients admitted with schizophrenia (*n* =
121), major depression (*n* = 70) and borderline personality disorder
(*n* = 38) for a variety of antibody subtypes in order to determine
whether antibody subtypes overlap with or are distinct from those in
anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. They identified NMDA antibodies in 9.9%
of patients with schizophrenia. Diverse NMDA receptor antibodies,
including those specifically found in anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis,
were found primarily in those with an initial diagnosis of
schizophrenia; two patients initially diagnosed with a disorganised or
catatonic schizophrenia were subsequently diagnosed with, and treated
for, anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. :sup:`8`

Potential causes for the behaviour, learning and memory difficulties in
anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis have been postulated by Iizuka and
colleagues, :sup:`20` who noted reversible predominant frontotemporal
atrophy, an area in which NMDA receptors are present in high density,
therefore suggestive of an immunological cause to the atrophy.

Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis is associated in some cases with ovarian
pathology, in particular teratomas. It is considered that the antibodies
to the NR1–NR2 subunits of the NMDA subtype of glutamate receptors
develop in response to this abnormal tissue.

.. _S3:

Clinical presentation
=====================

Presentations can be variable, thus posing a challenge to clinicians in
neurology and psychiatry settings. With symptoms and signs ranging from
psychosis to mania to catatonia, clinicians may be prompted to consider
primary mental health aetiology. Dalmau *et al* :sup:`6` have proposed a
staged presentation. Maneta *et al* :sup:`5` summarise these into early,
middle and late symptoms, initially involving a prodrome, followed by
more overt psychiatric manifestations and later physical symptoms.

Clinicians should be aware that the presentation of anti-NMDA receptor
encephalitis includes several characteristic features.

A non-specific prodrome: in one series of 100 individuals with
encephalitis, 86% had headache, low-grade fever or a viral-like illness
(headaches, respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms) in the weeks prior
to acute presentation. :sup:`2` In our series of five cases, we
identified a prodrome in four, with symptoms including poor
concentration, anorexia, insomnia and slurred speech. :sup:`6`
Psychiatric symptoms are prominent: agitation, bizarre and disinhibited
behaviour, delusions and auditory and visual hallucinations. :sup:`2` In
our series, the psychotic phenomena observed were markedly fragmented in
comparison with those typically found in functional psychoses, with
delusions being poorly formed and non-systematised. :sup:`6` Cognitive
dysfunction: short-term memory loss can also be a presenting feature, as
can concentration difficulties. Formal neuropsychological testing in the
presence of psychosis and/or behavioural disturbance may present
difficulties in clinical practice. Motor dysfunction: in addition to
typical epileptic seizures, patients often develop dyskinetic movements,
including orofacial dyskinesias (grimacing or lip smacking), which may
be mistaken for seizures. These abnormal movements, especially orofacial
dyskinesia, may present from an early stage and are often a clue to the
diagnosis. Autonomic instability: autonomic instability and
hypoventilation can also occur (41 of Dalmau’s series :sup:`2` had one
or both of these features), as can cardiac dysrhythmias often
necessitating intensive care unit management. :sup:`2` Dissociative
responses to stimuli during have been noted, including resistance to eye
opening while displaying no response to painful stimuli, a combination
that may lead to diagnostic confusion. :sup:`20,21` Association with
known pathology: an association with ovarian pathology has also been
identified. Dalmau and colleagues reported that in 59% of cases, the
diagnosis was associated with ovarian tumours, primarily ovarian
teratomas. :sup:`2` However, Irani and colleagues identified tumours in
only 26% (9 of 34) of cases. :sup:`22` Children under the age of 18 are
unlikely to have an associated tumour.

.. _S4:

Diagnosis
=========

Confirmation of the clinical diagnosis of anti-NMDA receptor
encephalitis requires a positive serum or CSF sample screening for
antibodies to the NMDA receptor subunit. There is ongoing controversy as
to whether serum or CSF is best tested. Dalmau recommends testing of
both, :sup:`6` whereas Irani & Vincent, :sup:`23` by contrast, report
that serum levels of anti-NMDA receptor antibodies were similar or
higher to those of CSF. The clinical symptoms of this disorder correlate
well with antibody titre. :sup:`2` The test for anti-NMDA receptor
encephalitis, although currently somewhat slow, is relatively cheap, and
therefore should be considered in any patient presenting with an acute
onset of psychiatric symptoms with atypical features or unusual
movements.

CSF abnormalities have been described in approximately 80% of cases and
include a mild lymphocyctic pleocytosis, normally or mildly increased
protein concentration, and CSF-specific oligoclonal bands. :sup:`2,24`

Brain magnetic resonance imaging scans have been reported as normal in
70% of cases. :sup:`4` In the remainder, hyperintensities in a variety
of regions may be evident (implicated areas include the hippocampi,
cerebellar and cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, brainstem, frontobasal
and insular regions). :sup:`25`

Typically, electroencephalograms (EEGs) may show non-specific slowing or
slow continuous rhythmic activity during the catatonic phase of illness.
:sup:`26` An EEG is very helpful if one is trying to distinguish between
encephalitis and a primary psychiatric disorder, as the majority of
patients (90%) with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis have evidence of
non-specific slowing at some stage during the illness. :sup:`4`

While not at present likely to support clinical practice, other
investigations have been reviewed. Positron emission tomography has
shown variable findings, with some evidence of cortical hypometabolism.
:sup:`27` This contrasts with findings from other investigators,
suggesting subcortical hypermetabolism. :sup:`28`

.. _S5:

Differential diagnosis
----------------------

The condition may present in the domain of either the neurologist or the
psychiatrist, depending on whether psychiatric symptoms precede the
neurological features, as is often the case.

.. _S6:

Neurological
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Neurological differential diagnosis tends to include viral encephalitis,
cerebral vasculitis or other forms of autoimmune encephalitis and
encephalitis lethargica. :sup:`29` Dyskinetic movements may be mistaken
for seizure activity or tardive dyskinesia. Patients can also have
bizarre stereotypies. Repetitive stereotypies and orofacial dyskinesia
can be mistaken for seizures. :sup:`30` The seizure-like dyskinetic
movements may also be misdiagnosed as status epilepticus, a diagnosis
that is reported in 6% of cases. :sup:`30` Dericioglu and colleagues
:sup:`30` report two cases where status epilepticus was suspected but
video EEG was indicative of encephalopathy, thus avoiding aggressive
treatment with intravenous anaesthetics. Caution therefore is advised in
interpreting these movements, unless clarified by video EEG, when status
epilepticus is suspected. :sup:`30`

.. _S7:

Psychiatric
~~~~~~~~~~~

Psychiatric differential diagnoses are usually the primary differential
in the initial phase of illness. New-onset psychosis is typically
recorded in the literature as the most common initial diagnosis because
of the presence of delusions, hallucinations and catatonic features.
Recent studies explore the possibility that this disorder, or indeed
other similar autoimmune conditions, may present with a more typical
schizophrenia picture and be responsible for as much as 5–10% of
first-onset psychosis. :sup:`8,9` Zandi and colleagues :sup:`9` screened
a 46-patient cohort of first-episode psychosis patients in a prospective
study for NMDA receptor antibodies and only 2 tested positive. The
authors state that there were no clinical features to differentiate
these individuals from other individuals with psychosis in the cohort.

Cases of ‘postnatal psychosis’ in association with ovarian pathology
that bear remarkable similarity to anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis have
also been described. :sup:`31`

The presence of rigidity and altered consciousness, which are common in
anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis, may also lead to consideration of a
diagnosis of neuroleptic malignant syndrome, particularly when
antipsychotic medications are prescribed. This may present both a
diagnostic dilemma and a management challenge in clinical practice, as
these diagnoses are clearly not mutually exclusive.

.. _S8:

Treatment options
=================

It is important to note that treatment must target both the cause and
the clinical consequences of the encephalitis (the behavioural and
psychotic symptoms). With respect to the former, first-line treatment is
immunotherapy, typically corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulins or
plasma exchange, in addition to the removal of any identified teratomas.
Titres are effectively reduced by immunomodulatory treatments, including
high-dose steroids, intravenous gamma globulin and plasmaphoresis.

Behavioural disturbance can be a marked obstacle to initiation of
treatment, often requiring patients to be sedated for administration of
plasma exchange.

Second-line immunosuppression may be necessary using rituximab or
cyclophosphamide.

These are often required in individuals who receive a delayed diagnosis
or those without a tumour. :sup:`26` Liba *et al* :sup:`32` report use
of alemtuzumab in an 8-year-old child with a positive outcome.

Treatment is generally thought to be more effective in patients who have
an underlying tumour removed. Cases of ovarian teratomas discovered
years after initial onset of symptoms have been described, particularly
in patients who experienced a slow recovery. :sup:`20` Peery and
colleagues describe a case where oophorectomy was performed despite
negative scan results and on postoperative biopsy an occult teratoma was
revealed, with subsequent improvement in clinical symptoms. :sup:`33`

With respect to the immediate management of behavioural and psychotic
symptoms, both typical and atypical, antipsychotics have been utilised.
It must be noted that use of antipsychotics can complicate the picture,
particularly prior to definite antibody diagnosis. The development of
autonomic instability and rigidity may be mistaken for neuroleptic
malignant syndrome. In addition, use of corticosteroids may result in
confusion with a steroid-induced psychosis. Clonidine, trazadone and
benzodiazepines have been used successfully for reversal of sleep
disturbance. :sup:`34`

Catatonic symptoms are typically treated with benzodiazepine medication.
Doses of up to 20–30 mg of lorazepam daily have been used to manage
symptoms in catatonia, although little has been published on its
efficacy in anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. :sup:`35` Electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT), though the gold standard for treatment of catatonia in
the absence of a response to benzodiazepines, is little studied in the
area of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. Case reports of catatonic
symptom response in anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis have been described.
:sup:`36` Interestingly, in animal models of ECT action, an elevation of
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) of the NMDA subunits NR2A and NR2B has
been demonstrated, leading to an up-regulation of the NMDA receptor.
:sup:`37`

.. _S9:

Prognosis
=========

According to Dalmau’s original case series, approximately 75% of
patients with NMDA receptor antibodies recover or have mild sequelae;
the other 25% have severe deficits or die. :sup:`2` Subsequent studies
have identified a 12–24% risk of relapse. :sup:`9,34,35` Mortality of 7%
at 24 months has been noted. :sup:`4` Other studies have noted that
approximately 25% of patients at diagnosis give a history of one or more
similar symptom episodes in the months preceding diagnosis, indicating a
more relapsing and remitting course of illness than initially described.
:sup:`26`

Titulaer *et al* :sup:`4` in a cohort study of 577 patients noted that
first-line immunotherapy resulted in an improvement in 53% of patients
in the first 4 weeks of treatment, 97% of whom showed a good outcome at
24 months. In the 47% of patients who did not respond to first-line
treatment, those who received second-line immunotherapy (i.e. rituximab,
cyclophosphamide or both) had better outcomes than those who continued
first-line treatment or received no further immunotherapy. :sup:`4`

Several prognostic factors are implicated. With respect to duration of
illness and treatment outcome, Finke and colleagues :sup:`38`
demonstrated a better cognitive outcome in a small cohort of adult
patients with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis who were treated with
immunomodulatory therapy within 3 months of disease’s onset compared
with those who were treated at a later stage or not at all. The authors
proposed that a delay in treatment may lead to permanent hippocampal
damage, :sup:`38` yet the optimal time frame from onset of symptoms to
treatment has yet to be determined.

Other identified predictors of outcome include: lower severity of
symptoms, not requiring ICU admission, prompt initiation of
immunotherapy and tumour removal where present. :sup:`4,39`

.. _S10:

Summary and implications to clinical practice
=============================================

Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis is a relatively newly identified and
potentially treatable cause of psychiatric symptoms in both adults and
children. Several hundred cases have been reported since its
identification in 2007; however, clinicians may be unaware of
developments in this field. It is vital for psychiatrists working across
the age spectrum to be aware of this condition and to engage in timely
liaison with our neurology colleagues, thus facilitating early screening
and diagnosis.

There are a wide range of presenting symptoms and signs. Patients may
present with prodromal features, followed by psychiatric and perhaps
later physical manifestations. As outlined, anti-NMDA receptor
encephalitis is easily diagnosed using a blood or CSF test. This
presents the opportunity for early treatment, and a low index of
suspicion should be considered for any patient presenting with a
constellation of symptoms.

To date, the recommendation for screening has advised testing of those
patients, particularly females, with an atypical new-onset presentation
of psychosis with motor features. However, recent studies have
questioned how readily this disorder is distinguishable from those where
patients receive a purely psychiatric psychotic diagnosis.

It is clear that early identification and treatment may have serious
prognostic implications. Delay to treatment with immunosuppressive
therapy probably results in worsened outcomes, with evidence for
permanent hippocampal damage. :sup:`38` Management may prove clinically
challenging, from the perspective of treating both the cause and the
symptoms. Initiation of antipsychotic treatment is not without risk in
these patients and behavioural management may prove challenging.

Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis is a potentially treatable form of
psychiatric illness that is illuminating our understanding of the
neuropathophysiology involved in some individuals who present with
symptoms of psychosis.

.. [1]
   **Helen Barry** is Consultant Psychiatrist, Department of Psychiatry,
   Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, RCSI Education and Research
   Centre, Smurfit Building, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland; **Susan
   Byrne** is Specialist Registrar in Neurology, Department of
   Neurology, Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Dublin;
   **Elizabeth Barrett** is Consultant Child and Adolescent
   Psychiatrist, Department of Child and Adolescent Liaison Psychiatry,
   Temple Street Children’s University Hospital, Dublin; **Kieran C.
   Murphy** is Professor of Psychiatry and **David R. Cotter** is
   Professor of Psychiatry, both at Department of Psychiatry, Royal
   College of Surgeons in Ireland.
