=============================================================================
Heads in the sand may leave old age psychiatry looking foolish and vulnerable
=============================================================================
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: Commentary on . . . A memory clinic *v.* traditional community mental health team service
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



David Jolley

:Correspondence: David Jolley
(David.jolley@manchester.ac.uk)  [1]_

:date: 2015-2

:Abstract:
   Dementia has been recognised as a major challenge to health, social
   care and economies. Research by Rubinsztein and colleagues, in this
   issue, has compared the services provided by memory clinics with
   those of traditional community mental health team services. They
   conclude that memory clinics offer a more comprehensive and
   multidisciplinary service at no extra cost. Here I will question some
   of their findings and highlight the importance of better continuity
   of care between primary and secondary services.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

These are heady times for the dementia lobby. London’s G8 Conference on
dementia was the latest in a series of national and international
‘think-ins’ that has seen the condition emerge from the shadows of
denial and neglect to be recognised as the single most significant
challenge to health and social care, economies and personal philosophy
now and for the predictable future.\ :sup:`1`

*The Guardian*\ ’s letters page and a thoughtful article from Richard
Ashcroft laid bare the realities of our situation.\ :sup:`2,3` Awareness
of dementia has been improved, but are services being made available to
help people affected by it and are the research initiatives producing
better lives and reducing stress associated with the condition? Richard
Ashcroft’s mother-in-law received a diagnosis and was discharged after
two contacts by ‘old age psychiatry’, leaving her, her family and
general practitioner to feel left adrift in a sea made no-less
frightening by having acquired a label.

.. _S1:

Rubinsztein *et al*\ ’s research
================================

Judy Rubinsztein and her colleagues\ :sup:`4` provide an interesting and
important description and analysis of what happens when someone with a
memory problem is referred by primary care for specialist assessment and
advice. They compare the experiences and costs associated with a memory
clinic, the model that has become the Holy Grail of assessment through
the National Dementia Strategy,\ :sup:`5` and assessment with less
formality by a community mental health team (CMHT). Referral rates were
similar: 5 per 1000 of the over 64-year-old population per annum. The
CMHT patients were older, they were less impaired and were seen more
quickly after referral. The diagnostic spectra were similar. Neither
service was bedevilled by a long waiting list such as is described by
many floundering services.\ :sup:`6` Stakeholders were happy with both
systems but measures that equate quality with assessment by more than
one profession, and make use of formalised paper protocols and
checklists, prefer the memory clinic model: memory clinic patients were
twice as likely to receive a copy of the letter summarising the findings
and plans for their future care.

The increased ‘quality’ attributed to the memory clinic is said to be
achieved at no greater, actually lesser, cost. Yet, we might wonder how
useful all those paper scaled measures are and many will question the
costings: digging deeper we find that half of patients referred to the
CMHT service were seen only once, and by a consultant in their own
homes. The paper judges this to be poor practice, yet this is not
reflected in stakeholder views. It might alternatively be viewed as an
elegant and efficient approach that reserves multidisciplinary
assessments at the clinic, which are time-consuming, less convenient and
more costly for patients and carers, for people with more complex
presentations. The memory clinic model might be construed as:
‘one-size-fits-all’ with everyone attending the clinic, 22/33 having two
to six contacts. This is the sort of consideration that makes people
question the advantages of clinic-based services. The differential that
deems the CMHT model more expensive relates exclusively to travel costs,
where the high salary of consultants who are travelling and one outlier
who was visited eleven times, load the CMHT pricing. This is a brave and
important attempt to capture costs and relate these to activities and
effectiveness. It leaves us to reflect how difficult a task this is.

The paper opens a fascinating window on what actually happens in this
world of dementia care. A total of 35% per cent of people ‘eligible’ for
cholinesterase inhibitors did not receive them. This is the reality and
gives a degree of balance to criticism of the UK for its relatively low
rate of prescribing these substances::sup:`7` even when assessed, not
every patient will accept such treatment, others will encounter
side-effects or become disabused. One wonders what is happening in those
countries that report prescriptions to near 100% of the predicted
prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease.

Three CMHT patients (10%) were retained for further care, but only 1 of
33 in the memory clinic was directed to their CMHT. One patient (out of
66) received cognitive stimulation therapy and three saw a
neuropsychologist. The memory clinic is applauded for ‘signposting’ more
patients to other services: third sector, social services or benefits.
Overall, Richard Ashcroft might be forgiven for feeling that not much of
substance is evident after the initial flurry.

.. _S2:

Identifying weakness in existing services
=========================================

The arguments in favour of including specialist memory services within
the spectrum offered by old age psychiatry and other disciplines are
strong, cogent and widely accepted.\ :sup:`8` With great respect,
however, both models described here are failing. Their referral rates
are such that they cannot close the gap that still exists between
predicted prevalence and diagnosed prevalence.\ :sup:`9` There is no
increase in referrals associated with the memory clinic arrangement, nor
are the patients seen by that clinic earlier in the course of their
dementia (as measured using the Mini-Mental State Examination).
Tellingly, neither makes a tangible contribution to the continuity of
care that patients, families and colleagues in other agencies respect
and expect.

Variations that simply replace doctors with cheaper nurses, rate per
hour\ :sup:`10` may not be more cost-effective. They are more likely to
rely on standardised protocols with inclusion/exclusion criteria
designed to be risk-avoidant and limit workload rather than respond to
patient need.\ :sup:`11` Lessons from the 10/66 studies and initiatives
encourage the use of low-tech, clinically competent approaches with
training and support to local healthcare agents.\ :sup:`12,13`

In countries with established large populations of older people,
including the UK, the realisation is that we must bring specialist
skills into primary care so that people with dementia can be assessed,
treated and supported by a competent local team that knows them as whole
people with multiple strengths and multiple weaknesses associated with a
range of pathologies.\ :sup:`14–16` Models that do this achieve referral
rates more than twice those reported in East Anglia, sustain patients,
carers and primary care colleagues throughout the journey of dementia
and other frailties before death, and reduce expenditure on secondary
health care.\ :sup:`17`

Despite the rhetoric of ‘war on dementia’, and exposure of the myth of
the dependency ratio,\ :sup:`18` actual service support for older
people, including those with dementia, has been reduced by 30% in this
country.\ :sup:`19` Populist politicians are given column space to stir
up unjustifiable resentment against old people.\ :sup:`20`

Psychiatrists and their colleagues need to remain clear-headed, open and
honest as advocates and providers for people with dementia and their
families. We are learning what works and is affordable and this is what
matters.

.. _S3:

Conclusions
===========

Rubinsztein and her colleagues have done us good service in dissecting
and comparing the innards of clinic-based and community-based memory
services. They have answered some questions and opened others to be
pursued, which is all to the good; but we must lift our heads from the
sand of what we have been doing within the comfort and discomfort of
secondary care to work across the false border that is assumed between
primary care and secondary care. There is little to be gained from a
well-made diagnosis unless it is part of a meaningful, continuing
process of care for the patient and their caring family.

.. [1]
   **David Jolley** is a consultant psychiatrist and honorary reader at
   the PSSRU, The University of Manchester.
