=======================================================
Skydiving for Beginners: A Journey of Recovery and Hope
=======================================================

Femi Oyebode [1]_
:Date: 2015-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. figure:: 149f1
   :alt: 
   :name: F1

This book will surprise you, shock you, and intrigue you but ultimately
it will fill you with admiration and respect for the author. It is the
personal memoir of Jo McFarlane, a woman who was born into adversity but
who has triumphed, very much against the odds. She is that rare human
being: sensitive, thoughtful, positive, driven and without bitterness. A
living example of what resilience means in practice.

Her life started in ‘virtual squalor with dry rot and gaping holes in
the floor’. She goes on: ‘Ours was a dirty, freezing home infested with
vermin’. As if the utter material deprivation was not enough she
experienced sexual abuse at the hand of both her father and brother and
the circumstances were unspeakable: ‘The politics of my parents’ sex
life was played out openly among the children. We knew that he wanted it
all the time and that she hated it. This was an enduring source of
tension in their marriage and they often embroiled us in the drama [...]
One of her avoidance strategies was to have me sleep in their bed
between them. I soon became an outlet for his sexual frustration’. The
whole family were subjected to her father’s unpredictable moods which
‘like flames could blaze at the slightest provocation and burn for
hours; at other times they were extinguished in a breath [...] So
unpredictable were his rages that the atmosphere was like a bomb ticking
towards its inevitable climax’.

This deprived and abusive childhood formed the backdrop of her
psychiatric history in adulthood. Her account of her many admissions,
treatments, suicide attempts, and relationships with psychiatrists,
nurses and social workers is written with candour. It is an unsparing
honesty with which she describes her own behaviour with unswerving
clarity and objectivity. There is no sentimentality, self-pity or
excuses here. It is an analytic mind that is on display, one that is
eloquent and self-assured in how it handles language and ideas. She says
of one of her depressive spells: ‘A military metaphor is the most apt I
can think of to describe the war zone in my head. It was not a benign
melancholy but a splintering of faculties, a torture even to exist. The
rapid gunfire of destructive thoughts supplanted my will to survive’.
Again, ‘I was so paranoid I thought Kathryn had hidden cameras in my
flat, that they were all watching and laughing at my distress, that they
could hear what the voices were saying to me and were using them to
drive me to suicide. I felt I had to get away from the Royal Edinburgh
as far as possible and I boarded a night bus for London. The journey was
hell because of my mental state’.

The depiction of life on psychiatric wards, of good relationships with
psychiatrists, of the exemplary quality of the interactions with some
nurses, and of the kindness and generosity of many people underlines
what is admirable and exceptional in mental health services. But, sadly,
there are many examples of abuse, of disinterest, of perfunctory
interactions, of gross neglect and of errors of judgement. What is
impressive is that Jo McFarlane takes the good and the ugly in her
stride and she emerges as an astonishing human being.

This memoir stands alongside the great memoirs of Daniel Schreber, Janet
Frame, William Styron and Kay Redfield Jamison. It sheds light on the
intersections of disrupted attachment in early life, of traumatising
abuse and of biological vulnerability to psychosis. It reveals the
unheard but real voice of a fragile self that is masked by serious
illness. And McFarlane’s own ambition in writing this book is to be ‘an
invitation to others, through encouragement and example, to embrace
their talents with pride and joy’. I think she has succeeded
marvellously.

.. [1]
   **Femi Oyebode** is Professor of Psychiatry, University of
   Birmingham, National Centre for Mental Health, Birmingham, UK, email:
   femi_oyebode@msn.com
