============================================================================
Culturally adapted mental healthcare: evidence, problems and recommendations
============================================================================



Sokratis Dinos
:Correspondence: Dr Sokratis Dinos
(sokratisdinos@bpp.com)  [1]_

:date: 2015-8

:Abstract:
   Evidence suggests disparities in the prevalence of mental health
   problems and access to mental healthcare for a number of minority
   groups. The main response from mental health services falls into two
   related categories: (a) cultural adaptations of existing
   evidence-based interventions (EBIs) and/or (b) cultural competence of
   mental health professionals. This editorial looks at the evidence on
   culturally adapted EBIs and argues that although such interventions
   can be effective, they also carry the risk of alienating members of
   the groups they are aimed at. Recommendations focus on identifying
   issues that pertain to being from a racial minority and/or possessing
   other stigmatised identities that can have an impact on mental health
   problems, which may be overlooked by mental health services by
   assuming an overarching predominant cultural identity.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Evidence suggests that disparities exist in the prevalence of mental
health problems and access to mental healthcare for a number of
high-risk groups.\ :sup:`1` Many of these groups share similar
characteristics in terms of minority status (e.g. Black and minority
ethnic (BME) groups) or belong in subgroups that exist within a larger
racial/ethnic population (e.g. lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
(LGBT) people, older people, refugees, asylum seekers). Findings from
earlier and more recent reviews suggest that mental health services are
unattractive to these diverse cultural and subcultural minority groups,
who complain of stigmatisation, prejudice, unsuitable treatments and
adverse experiences and as a consequence, seek care less frequently and
drop out of contact more often than others.\ :sup:`2,3` Anxiety about
potential discrimination or inability of the services to understand the
diversity of needs can cause reluctance to access healthcare, resulting
in delayed treatment.

The main response from mental health services to deal with mental health
problems in minority populations falls into two related categories: (a)
cultural adaptations of existing evidence-based interventions (EBIs) to
clients' cultures and backgrounds and/or (b) cultural competence of
health professionals in terms of specialist knowledge relating to
particular lifestyles and needs. It can be argued that cultural
adaptations do not automatically translate into mental health
professionals' cultural competence and similarly, cultural competence of
health professionals does not translate to provision of suitable,
culturally adapted EBIs. Although culturally adapted EBIs seem to be the
right way forward, they can also be conceptually simplistic and narrow.
On the other hand, cultural competence can solve many of the conceptual
problems that cultural adaptations may pose but any subsequent
interventions need to be evidence based.

.. _S1:

Cultural adaptations: do they work?
===================================

Culture is a complex concept encompassing a number of elements,
including shared knowledge, language, behaviours, cognitive constructs
(e.g. thoughts, schemas, beliefs, norms). Health practices such as those
around food and exercise, health beliefs about aetiology, course and
outcome of illness as well as health behaviours are also heavily
influenced by culture.\ :sup:`4` Cultural adaptations of mental health
EBIs incorporate some or all of these elements with the aim of narrowing
inequalities in care and reducing the higher prevalence of mental health
problems in disadvantaged groups.

Meta-analyses of such interventions have produced mixed, inconclusive or
positive results.\ :sup:`5-8` In particular and when compared with
traditional EBIs, control groups and/or other care, effect sizes have
ranged from small to moderate (0.21-0.46). Interventions analysed have
included individual therapy or group therapy or a mixture of both.
Clinical characteristics included at-risk groups, clinical populations
already diagnosed with a mental illness, and community members without a
psychiatric diagnosis. There was no reference to whether services were
in-patient or out-patient. Results from the meta-analyses did not differ
by type of intervention, clinical characteristics, gender and ethnicity.
One of the meta-analyses has also produced effect sizes for a number of
different elements of culturally adapted EBIs.\ :sup:`7` For example,
cultural, ethnic and racial matching of individuals from BME groups with
service providers was more effective than when clients were not matched
with the provider or therapist (d = 0.58 *v.* d = 0.31). Furthermore,
non-English and/or ethnic-specific services were more effective than
non-ethnic-specific services (d = 0.49 *v.* d = 0.21).

.. _S2:

Culture *v.* subculture: does one size fit all?
===============================================

It can be argued that overall the evidence for culturally adapted EBIs
is encouraging. However, cultural adaptations may also carry the risk of
alienating members of those groups they are aimed at. One of the risks
is that mental health professionals and researchers often make the
assumption that individuals from specific subgroups possess certain
cultural characteristics\ :sup:`9,10` and fail to take into account that
within a larger group there are a number of subgroups with different
characteristics, which may be overlooked by attaching an overarching
cultural identity to them. These subgroups may also be those with the
highest risk of developing mental health problems. We can refer to them
as subcultural groups which exist within a larger racial population and
share similar life experiences and a mutual sense of belonging.

For subcultural groups racial identity may be secondary and the primary
identity may be either more in tandem with the mainstream culture where
they reside or related to a different group membership. Such group
membership may be related to another stigmatised identity such as ethnic
minority, LGBT groups, refugees, asylum seekers, older people.
Therefore, some minority groups may find themselves in membership of
multiple stigmatised identities in addition to ethnicity and mental
illness (e.g. sexuality, single motherhood, asylum seeker, offending,
poverty). In these situations mental health professionals would need to
question whether an existing culturally adapted intervention would be
beneficial. Therefore, subcultural differentiation is important when
both adapting EBIs and delivering a culturally competent mental
healthcare, as it provides specific information that goes beyond the
ethnic identity and can capture other characteristics and/or needs that
are not ethnic specific.

A further risk of cultural adaptations is the cultural contexts where
the original interventions were developed. In particular, the majority
of EBIs have been developed with participants from majority groups (e.g.
Western, White) and then have been culturally adapted and applied to
minority groups residing in the context where these were developed
originally. Since many cultural adaptations are developed from existing
EBIs, they very often overlook the factors related to being a minority,
such as racism, stigma, poverty, internalised oppression, and mainly
focus on culture and mental health. For example, coping with a
stigmatised identity has been found to be a crucial factor in recovering
from mental illness in a number of studies. In particular, in a
systematic review of published descriptions and models of personal
recovery, Leamy *et al*\ :sup:`11` found that recovery for ethnic
minority groups involved racial discrimination, stigma of mental illness
and stigma of ethnic minority identity. Therefore, recovery was not as
narrowly defined as recovering from mental illness.

A good example of incorporating these issues can be found in a
culturally adapted mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR)
intervention developed by Dutton *et al*.\ :sup:`12` The intervention
was adapted for African American women from low socioeconomic background
who were in abusive relationships and experienced post-traumatic stress
disorder. Interviews and focus groups revealed that the main concerns
were related to problems posed by living on a low income, lack of space
to practise MBSR exercises (e.g. breathing, yoga, meditation), exposure
to trauma, and also the structure of the intervention (e.g. time frames
and length of sessions) in relation to childcare demands. Therefore, the
adaptation involved, among other elements, shorter sessions and
availability of childcare as well as a special focus on dealing with the
everyday stressors of low-income existence and coping with trauma. The
specificity of race did not appear to be a theme that needed to be
included in the development of the intervention. However, the stigma of
mental illness and the stigma of using mental health services, which has
been found to be prevalent among African American
populations,\ :sup:`13` was also evident in the interviews and led to
adaptations that involved elements to cope with the stigma of mental
illness.

.. _S3:

Where next?
===========

Overall, it can be argued that mental health services are going in the
right direction in terms of culturally adapting EBIs to reach at-risk
groups and narrow the gap of mental health inequalities. However,
cultural adaptations can be beneficial if applied by health
professionals who are culturally competent and have the ability to
explore differing values and needs with their clients instead of
assuming cultural characteristics that may be either non-existent or not
predominant. Therefore, training of staff which focuses on removing
prejudice and promotes cultural competence and specialist knowledge
pertaining to particular lifestyles needs to go hand in hand with
cultural adaptations of EBIs. Cultural competence will help mental
health professionals to make an assessment focusing on each client's
experience before applying cultural adaptations. Such assessments need
to happen on a case by case basis and mental health professionals need
to identify a number of issues before making a decision. Such issues
pertain to: (a) exploring the predominant identity of the client (e.g.
cultural or other), (b) identifying issues that may be related to being
a racial minority (e.g. internalised racism and discrimination) and/or
having a mental illness (e.g. mental illness stigma in a particular
culture) and (c) exploring the client's membership in other groups that
may be stigmatised or have an impact on mental health (e.g. LGBT, low
socioeconomic status).

In relation to exploring a client's predominant identity, Rucker Sobczak
& West\ :sup:`14` suggest that the initial assessment needs to involve
an understanding of whether the client subscribes to a collectivistic
(e.g. seeing the self as part of a cultural group or others with
collective goals) or individualistic (e.g. seeing the self as a separate
entity to others with individual goals) self-identity as this can have
significant outcome implications. Such assessment can also add clarity
about whether there is a dominant identity and whether this is the
cultural one. Similarly, assessment measures that deal with issues
related to being in a minority group such as stigma and perceived racism
may reveal what type of interventions may be more beneficial for, or
applicable to, which individuals.\ :sup:`10`

Finally, it is important to stress that cultural adaptations and
cultural competence have to operate along other initiatives that aim to
reduce discrimination and tackle social exclusion, which have an impact
on further socioeconomic disadvantage and place someone at increased
risk of mental illness, and to promote outreach effort to recruit
underserved clients from high-risk groups and actively target
communities with higher concentration of socially excluded groups (e.g.
BME communities). Needless to say, culturally adapted EBIs and cultural
competence training as well as initiatives to reduce discrimination and
social exclusion must be evidence based and be subject to evaluations on
what works and for whom. Currently, most of the evaluation data on
culturally adapted EBIs come from US studies, so future interventions
and subsequent evaluations need to happen in a UK context.

.. [1]
   **Sokratis Dinos** is Head of Psychology and Senior Lecturer,
   Department of Psychology, BPP University, London, UK.
