=========================================================================================================================
The planning, implementation and publication of a complex intervention trial for chronic fatigue syndrome: the PACE trial
=========================================================================================================================



Peter D. White
Trudie Chalder
Michael Sharpe

:Correspondence: Peter D. White (p.d.white@qmul.ac.uk)
 [1]_

:date: 2015-2

:Abstract:
   The PACE trial was a four-arm trial of specialist medical care,
   compared with specialist medical care with a supplementary therapy:
   adaptive pacing therapy, cognitive–behavioural therapy or graded
   exercise therapy, for patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. The
   trial found that both cognitive–behavioural and graded exercise
   therapies were more effective than either of the other two treatments
   in reducing fatigue and improving physical disability. This paper
   describes the design, conduct and main results of the trial, along
   with a description of the challenges that had to be overcome in order
   to produce clear answers to the clinically important questions the
   trial posed.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) refers to a constellation of symptoms,
characterised by persistent and disabling fatigue that is typically made
worse by exertion. Some believe that myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) is
another name for the same condition; others regard it as different.
Whatever it is called, CFS or ME is an ‘orphan’ condition owned and
cared for by no particular discipline. ME is classified within the
*International Classification of Diseases* (ICD-10) as a neurological
condition (G93.3),\ :sup:`1` yet the majority of UK neurologists do not
regard it as such.\ :sup:`2` CFS may also be classified as neurasthenia
(F48), a diagnosis found in the ICD-10 chapter on mental and behavioural
disorders, or as a non-specific somatoform disorder.\ :sup:`1` However,
psychiatrists rarely see the illness as a condition that they should
treat and many do not regard it as a mental illness. Therefore, while
there is a consensus that CFS exists as a discrete syndrome, there is
little agreement about how it should be classified, who should treat
patients suffering from it, or how it should be treated.

.. _S1:

The PACE trial
==============

The PACE (Pacing, graded Activity and Cognitive behaviour therapy: a
randomised Evaluation) trial aimed to determine which of the non-drug
treatments advocated for CFS worked best and was safe. The first
research grant application to do a trial was submitted in 1998. At that
time, two trials of cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) and two trials
of graded exercise therapy (GET) had been published; these suggested
that both were promising treatments, but neither treatment had been
accepted by patient organisations. Therapeutic nihilism abounded and
rest was often advocated as the only useful treatment.\ :sup:`3`

This original grant application was unsuccessful and it took a further 5
years before we obtained funding for a trial. In those 5 years, the
trial design went through two more iterations. The first added a
specialist medical care (SMC) arm to allow comparison of the two new
therapies with the encouragement, education and support of a
knowledgeable doctor. The second iteration was developed in
collaboration with the patient organisation Action for ME, and added a
therapy called pacing, which surveys of their members had suggested was
the most helpful approach. The involvement of this patient charity,
which included the involvement of the charity’s CEO as an active member
of the trial management committee, was sought to ensure that the trial
addressed the right questions in the right way, and to maximise the
confidence of the patient community in its findings.

The concept of pacing had evolved from a strategy used in chronic pain.
It is essentially an approach to management of the illness in which the
patient is helped to better adapt to the symptoms by living within the
limits they impose. The patient is encouraged to ‘listen to their body’
and to adopt the right balance between doing too much or too little.
Pacing for CFS had never previously been tested in a trial, and the
precepts behind it allowed a comparison of two different models of the
illness: one adaptive (pacing), the other rehabilitative (CBT and GET).
A standardised pacing therapy was produced in collaboration with Action
for ME and Professor Diane Cox of Cumbria University, who agreed to be
the therapy lead, having had extensive experience in delivering an
occupational therapy approach to CFS that incorporated pacing. We called
it ‘adaptive pacing therapy’ (APT) so as to convey the main aim of the
therapy – to enable the patient to optimally adapt to the illness.

The PACE trial was finally funded in 2003.\ :sup:`4`

.. _S2:

Design issues
-------------

The PACE trial was designed to compare the efficacy and safety of SMC
alone against SMC with additional APT, CBT or GET for patients with CFS
recruited from six clinics in England and Scotland. We also sought to
determine cost-effectiveness, mediators and moderators of outcome, as
well as the patients’ long-term outcome. The trial raised a number of
design issues.

.. _S3:

Delivery of the therapies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A key design issue was how best to deliver the three therapies; should
the same individuals deliver all three or should each be given by
different people? We decided to have the most appropriate discipline
deliver each therapy: CBT-trained therapists (clinical psychologists or
nurse therapists) delivered CBT, physiotherapists (there was one
exercise physiologist) delivered GET and occupational therapists
delivered APT. This decision ensured optimal delivery of each therapy by
the therapists most likely to deliver these therapies in clinical
practice, but increased the risk that the relative effectiveness of the
therapies could be compounded by differences in the effectiveness of the
therapists themselves. Consequently, quality assurance of therapy
delivery was vital. We did this in a number of ways: manuals for both
therapists and patients were written and iteratively piloted, and
extensive training and regular supervision of the therapists was
provided.

Therapy quality was ensured by only allowing therapists to treat trial
patients once their competency had been established with non-trial
patients. Each therapy had a lead who delivered supervision: these were
Mary Burgess, an authority on CBT for CFS; Jessica Bavinton and Lucy
Clark for GET, a clinical specialist physiotherapist and a research
sports physiologist, respectively; and Diane Cox for APT. All therapy
sessions were audio-recorded to aid supervision and to allow ratings of
therapy quality and fidelity.\ :sup:`5` The treatment manuals we used in
the trial are available for free download at
`www.pacetrial.org/trialinfo <www.pacetrial.org/trialinfo>`__.

.. _S4:

Eligibility criteria and outcomes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We decided that only patients who met the Oxford definition of CFS would
be eligible to participate in the trial.\ :sup:`6` This definition was
widely used, broad and, unlike others, required fatigue to be the
patients’ main complaint. This helped to differentiate CFS from other
syndromes, such as fibromyalgia, in which fatigue is a common symptom.
We were also interested in knowing whether the trial findings applied to
the subgroups of patients who met alternative definitions of CFS and ME,
so we stratified treatment allocation by the international criteria for
CFS and also by the London criteria for ME.\ :sup:`7,8`

The primary outcome was hard to decide on: should it be fatigue or
disability? After much debate, we chose both as co-primary outcomes
because we considered them equally important aspects of the illness and
potentially different in their response to the different treatments.

In order to measure treatment safety, we chose to follow the stringent
European Union Clinical Trials Directive for pharmaceutical
interventions, a standard rarely applied to trials of
therapies.\ :sup:`9` The measures of safety included adverse events,
serious adverse events and reactions, withdrawal from treatments, a
global self-measure of worsening, and an *a priori* threshold for
deterioration in physical disability.

We also measured a number of secondary outcomes as well as potential
mediators and moderators. Outcomes were assessed at baseline,
mid-therapy, the end of the main treatment phase and 1-year follow-up,
as well as long-term follow-up 2.5 years after randomisation.

.. _S5:

The analysis
============

Having two primary outcomes complicated the analysis, although the size
of the trial gave sufficient power. Having three follow-up assessments
allowed us to use a linear regression model that minimised any effects
of the small amount of missing data, and also allowed us to adjust the
model by factors such as baseline measures. We originally planned to use
a composite outcome measure of the proportions of participants who met
either a 50% reduction in the outcome score or a set threshold score for
improvement. However, as we prepared our detailed statistical analysis
plan, we quickly realised that a composite measure would be hard to
interpret, and would not allow us to answer properly our primary
questions of efficacy (i.e. comparing treatment effectiveness at
reducing fatigue and disability). Before any examination of outcome data
was started, and after approval by our independent steering and data
monitoring committees, we decided to modify our method of analysis to
one that simply compared scores between treatments at follow-up,
adjusting the analysis by baseline scores. We also addressed the
potential clustering effects resulting from different numbers of
patients being treated by the different therapists.

.. _S6:

The main results
================

Overall, we recruited 640 patients.\ :sup:`10` Almost all participants
(98%) provided some outcome data, and 95% provided outcome data at 12
months, with no significant differences between arms in missing data.
These very high rates of follow-up were achieved as a result of the
commitment of the participants and the assiduous work by the research
staff. The strategies used by the latter included offering convenient
interview times (including early evenings), mailing most questionnaires
to allow sufficient time to answer them before interviews, paying travel
expenses, following up non-attenders expeditiously by mail and
telephone, offering to see the participants at their homes and, as a
last resort, recording the primary outcomes over the telephone. However,
if we were doing the trial again, we would seek ethical permission to
also offer follow-up by email, Skype and FaceTime.

Only 8% of participants dropped out of treatment, again with no
significant difference in dropouts between treatment arms. Between 82
and 88% of participants who received a therapy alongside SMC said that
they were satisfied with it, whereas only 50% reported being satisfied
with SMC alone.

Analysis of the primary outcomes revealed that both CBT and GET led to
significantly greater improvements in both fatigue and physical
disability than did either SMC or APT. The adjusted effect sizes ranged
from 0.5 to 0.8. To our surprise, there were no significant differences
between APT and SMC in either primary outcome.

The differences between treatments for the secondary outcomes were
broadly similar to the primary outcome comparisons. There were no
significant differences in any safety measures between treatment arms.
There was also a similar pattern of results in the two subgroups that
met the alternative criteria for CFS and ME.

The cost of one quality-adjusted life-year (QUALY) gained was found to
be £18 374 for CBT and £23 615 for GET.\ :sup:`11` Both CBT and GET were
three times more likely to lead to recovery from the present episode of
illness than SMC alone.\ :sup:`12`

We concluded that both CBT and GET were moderately effective,
cost-effective and safe treatments for CFS. These results were important
in confirming to patients, healthcare professionals and commissioners
that the promise of CBT and GET found in the earlier and small trials
was justified, and that these treatments were safe to receive, if
delivered as designed by the appropriate therapists.

.. _S7:

Implementation
==============

The results of the trial supported the current National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines’ recommendation that
‘cognitive behavioural therapy and/or graded exercise therapy should be
offered to people with mild or moderate CFS/ME [...] because currently
these are the interventions for which there is the clearest research
evidence of benefit.’\ :sup:`13` The trial results also suggested that
management by pacing, which was notably less effective than the other
therapies, should not be recommended.

Now the trial has been completed and the main findings published, there
is the challenging business of implementation within the National Health
Service (NHS) at a time of reducing budgets. Despite the NICE guidelines
suggesting that patients with long-standing CFS should be seen by
specialists,\ :sup:`13` many are now being sent to either Improving
Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) services or mental health
teams; these services are often neither confident nor competent in
delivering CFS-specific CBT and GET. The evidence suggests that outcomes
are better with specialist CFS services.\ :sup:`14,15` Alternative ways
of delivering therapies, such as through the internet and by telephone,
which are easier to access and potentially more cost-effective, may
provide ways to help patients in the future.\ :sup:`16,17`

.. _S8:

Challenges and solutions
========================

Delivering treatment in a trial like this required the time and
resources to recruit, employ, train and supervise numerous staff working
across a wide geographical area. We also had to address staff turnover
and the consequent extra training and supervision needed for new staff.
Occasionally, it was necessary to train an existing therapist in a
second therapy, which proved popular with those who did it. The morale
of therapists giving a specific therapy was maintained by encouraging
them to take ownership of their manualised therapy, by close
supervision, and by peer support between centres.\ :sup:`5`

PACE was affected by several external influences. First, some patient
organisations expressed opposition to the trial from the time that
funding was announced.\ :sup:`18` Our understanding is that this
opposition reflected the fact that the trial did not focus on a
biomedical approach to CFS. Meetings with those who objected did not
alter their concerns and divergent views about the illness and its
management continue to this day.\ :sup:`19` Strategies against the trial
have included a public petition to the prime minister and formal
complaints to our funders and publishers.\ :sup:`20` None of these
complaints have been upheld, but they did take considerable time to
address. A large number of Freedom of Information Act requests seeking
information on all aspects of the trial have been received since the
main results were published in 2011. Both declined requests that were
appealed all the way up to the Information Tribunal were rejected, one
being considered ‘vexatious’.\ :sup:`21` There was even a debate on the
trial in the House of Lords in 2013.\ :sup:`22` Our deliberate policy,
to help allay concerns about the trial, was to be as transparent as
possible regarding what we did, while protecting medical confidentiality
and our staff; this included publishing the protocol and the statistical
analysis plan,\ :sup:`4,23` and paying for open access to all
publications. On a more positive note, some patient organisations, such
as the Association for Young people with ME (AYME), have accepted the
findings, and are advising their members accordingly.\ :sup:`24`

Second was the challenge of delivering a complex trial in the NHS. One
particular threat was the ‘Agenda for Change’ which had implications for
the salary grades of therapists. As a result, some of the trial centres
interpreted the fact that the trial therapists had to use a manual to
mean that they were unskilled, and therefore should have their pay
reduced. We were successful in making the case that the trial therapists
were more rather than less skilled by taking on a research role. We also
supported therapists in their career progression, providing guaranteed
employment beyond the trial, when possible.

The third challenge was longevity. The trial was funded in 2003; the
first patient recruited in March 2005; the last patient followed up by
January 2010; the main paper published in February 2011. Eight years is
a long time to keep a team together and motivated. The co-principal
investigators (PIs) and treatment leaders had an important role in
setting the standards for trial conduct and ensuring therapy and
research team cohesion and direction. In turn, the external monitoring
and support of the Medical Research Council, trial steering committee
and data monitoring committees were essential in maintaining the morale
of the PIs. All staff met annually for a team meeting, which
incorporated fun as well as training and education, supplemented by
regular newsletters updating staff about progress
(`www.pacetrial.org/trialinfo <www.pacetrial.org/trialinfo>`__). It may
be that the external criticisms of the trial enhanced the internal
cohesion and determination shown by the 100 or so staff involved.

.. _S9:

Conclusion
==========

Delivering the PACE trial was an all-consuming, challenging, but
ultimately rewarding task that lasted many years. We hope that it has
provided useful information for patients, clinicians and commissioners
about the efficacy, adverse effects and cost-effectiveness of
rehabilitative interventions for CFS. We hope that we have also been
able to show that it is possible to deliver a large trial of complex
interventions in a challenging and sometimes hostile environment and to
obtain clear results from it.

We thank the following for their involvement in the trial: the PACE
Trial Management Group consisted of the authors of this paper plus (in
alphabetical order): Brian Angus, Hannah Baber, Jess Bavinton, Mary
Burgess, Lucy Clark, Diane Cox, Julia DeCesare, Eleanor Feldman,
Kimberley Goldsmith, Tony Johnson, Paul McCrone, Gabrielle Murphy,
Maurice Murphy, Hazel O’Dowd, Tim Peto, Laura Potts, Rebecca Walwyn,
David Wilks. The Trial Steering Committee independent members included
Janet Darbyshire (Chair), Jenny Butler, Patrick Doherty, Stella Law,
Meirion Llewellyn and Tom Sensky. The independent members of the Data
Monitoring and Ethics committees were Paul Dieppe (initial Chair),
Astrid Fletcher (final Chair) and Charlotte Feinmann. The funders of the
PACE trial were: the Medical Research Council, the Department of Health
(England), the Department for Work and Pensions, and the Chief Scientist
Office (NHS Scotland).

.. [1]
   **Peter D. White** is Professor of Psychological Medicine at the
   Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Barts and The London School
   of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, **Trudie
   Chalder** is Professor of Cognitive Behaviour Therapy at the Academic
   Department of Psychological Medicine, King’s College London, and
   **Michael Sharpe** is Professor of Psychological Medicine at the
   Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford.
