======================================================
*BJPsych International*: new name, new strategic focus
======================================================

:Date: 2015-2-01


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

With this issue of our journal we are beginning a new chapter in
facilitating communication between psychiatrists throughout the world.
*International Psychiatry* was established in 2003, as the *Bulletin of
the Board of International Affairs* of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists. It continues to be provided free of charge, both in paper
and online, thanks to the generosity of the members of the Royal College
of Psychiatrists. Our potential readership is enormous: over 15 000
members of the College receive the print edition regularly, and all
issues can be downloaded from the College website. We need to address
both the clinical interests and the needs of this diverse readership,
and in so doing we will be redirecting the focus of the journal over the
next few months and years. Publication of articles in the journal will
remain cost free to contributors and rigorous refereeing will be
sustained.

The time has come to review our strategic aims. Over the past decade,
there has been a gradual evolution in content. We have focused
increasingly on issues that have practical application in countries that
do not have the resources to be adequately supporting psychiatric
services.

First, we published accounts of the infrastructure of psychiatry
provided worldwide in ‘Country Profiles’, a series that began with our
first issue and emphasised diversity in mental health policies. We will
continue with this policy and we have added an important section on
international aspects of ‘Mental Health Law’, which is curated by George
Ikkos, Deputy Editor.

Second, since the very first issue, we have reviewed diverse ‘Themes’,
with a brief editorial and three papers that address the same topic from
different perspectives. We intend to continue to address themes that
have real practical relevance to supporting patients, with a particular,
but not exclusive, focus on the needs of low- and middle-income
countries as well as the mental health needs of the poor and socially
excluded in high-income countries. Contributors who can provide examples
of innovative practice, which could be emulated elsewhere at minimal
cost, are especially welcome, as are papers on public mental health.
Most articles in this thematic section are commissioned.

We receive a regular stream of uncommissioned articles, including some
that concern original research findings. In future, we will not be
publishing research articles of this type. The journal’s identity will
be focused on practical issues, rather than theory or scientific studies
that have no immediate relevance to the delivery of clinical services.
We will pass such submissions on to the *British Journal of
Psychiatry*\ ’s new online sister journal, *BJPsych Open*, for
consideration for publication there. We will continue to accept
uncommissioned ‘Special Papers’, on subject matter that does not
necessarily fit within a theme, but which is consonant with our aims.

There was a pressing need to address our limited online presence, and we
have done so principally in the form of a blog. As we will no longer be
publishing a Correspondence column, we will arrange for submitted
comments about published articles, and also other relevant material, to
be placed in the blogosphere, at
http://www.BJPsychInternationalblog.org. A new member of the Editorial
Board, David Jimenez, will be managing it, along with a social media
presence with the journal’s new Facebook page
(https://www.facebook.com/BJPsychInternational) as well as a Twitter
account (https://twitter.com/BJPsychInt;@BJPsychInt). We will also be
changing the face of ‘News and Notes’. In a journal that is published
quarterly, it was inevitable that most news was out of date by the time
it appeared in print. Accordingly, a change of focus was needed. Eleni
Palazidou will be managing the new commentary section of the journal,
‘Pandora’s Box’, which will take as its theme important developments in
psychiatric practice over the previous few months that have direct
clinical relevance to the non-specialist.

Finally, we have reviewed membership of the Editorial Board. We are keen
for Editors to be active ambassadors for the journal, and we have
consulted with members over the past few months about their roles. We
have assigned specific tasks to many members of the revised Board, who
will, we hope and anticipate, be actively eliciting contributions to the
journal from colleagues in their region of the world. An important
innovation is the appointment of new regional Associate Editors, who
will help ensure the increasing local importance of the journal to
psychiatrists worldwide. We have a new Associate Editor, Daniel Maughan,
with responsibility for ‘Psychiatry and Sustainability’, a subject that
is of increasing importance to all psychiatrists.

We trust the changes we have introduced, in the relaunched and renamed
*BJPsych International*, will be welcomed by our readership. We look
forward to hearing your comments.
