===================================================================================
41. RECONSIDERING THE EVIDENCE FOR CLOZAPINE FOR TREATMENT REFRACTORY SCHIZOPHRENIA
===================================================================================

James MacCabe
:Date: 2018-4

:Abstract:
   **Overall Abstract:** The superiority of clozapine for treatment
   refractory schizophrenia was, until very recently, seen as one of the
   few unshakeable truths in psychiatry. But the pre-eminence of
   clozapine has recently been called into question by meta-analyses.
   What are we to make of the fact that meta-analyses of clinical
   trials, supposedly the pinnacle of evidence based medicine, fail to
   show an effect which seems clearly evident to most clinicians, and on
   which many of our guidelines are based? Have we believed in a
   fairytale for the past three decades? Or do biases in RCTs and
   methodological limitations of meta-analyses explain the results?
   These questions will be discussed by Dan Siskind.

   Another way to address the question of efficacy is to examine the
   pharmaco-epidemiological evidence using population-based registers.
   Jari Tiihonen will present data from his seminal studies of mortality
   and readmission rates under clozapine treatment versus other
   antipsychotics, as well as other data. These data seem to show
   powerful positive effects of clozapine at the population level.
   Furthermore, more recent evidence suggests a role for clozapine in
   reducing rates of violent offending, with new data presented for the
   first time by Vishal Bhavsar.

   Finally, despite clinical guidelines recommending the use of
   clozapine, the actual rates of clozapine use are much lower than
   expected, with large regional and international variations. There is
   evidence that the burden of blood monitoring deters physicians from
   prescribing clozapine. Yvonne van der Zalm will present new data from
   a cluster randomised trial testing the efficacy and safety of an
   intervention to increase rates of clozapine prescribing by employing
   nurse practitioners trained in the initiation and monitoring of
   clozapine.

   John Kane, author of the first, seminal RCT of clozapine in 1988,
   will lead the discussion.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

