=======================================================================================================================
41.1 WHAT DO META-ANALYSES TELL US ABOUT CLOZAPINE’S EFFICACY AND EFFECTIVENESS FOR TREATMENT REFRACTORY SCHIZOPHRENIA?
=======================================================================================================================



Dan Siskind
Steve Kisely
Rachel Land
Lara McCartney
:Date: 2018-4

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background
      :name: s1

   Clozapine has long been considered the gold standard antipsychotic
   for treatment refractory schizophrenia (TRS). There have been a
   number of recent meta-analyses of efficacy of clozapine on psychotic
   symptoms and effectiveness in reducing hospitalisations that have
   sparked debate on the role of clozapine.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: s2

   Current literature regarding the efficacy of clozapine for TRS,
   including pair-wise and network meta-analyses of RCTs with reported
   outcomes of total psychotic symptoms, positive symptoms and negative
   symptoms were reviewed. We also examined the results of a
   meta-analysis of the effectiveness of clozapine on reducing
   hospitalisations based in RCTs and observational studies.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: s3

   Two recent meta-analyses: Samara et al (2016), a network
   meta-analysis in JAMA Psychiatry; and Siskind et al (2016) a pairwise
   meta-analysis in BJPsych, found similar equivocal results for total
   psychotic symptoms. However, Siskind et al (2016) found clozapine to
   be superior to other anti-psychotics for positive symptoms. Factors
   influencing the difference in results included pair-wise vs network
   methodology and sensitivity analyses of pharmaceutical industry
   support. Of note, only 40% of people with TRS responded to clozapine.
   Clozapine’s effectiveness for reducing hospitalisations was
   significant, with a relative risk of 0.74 (95%CI 0.69–0.80).

   .. rubric:: Discussion
      :name: s4

   There are a lack of recent non-industry funded randomised control
   trials of clozapine compared to SGAs, which hinders an equivocal
   statement about the superiority of clozapine for total psychotic
   symptoms. However, there is evidence to suggest that clozapine is
   superior to other antipsychotics, including SGAs, for positive
   symptoms. In terms of effectiveness, initiation of clozapine can
   reduce the proportion of people hospitalised and reduce bed days. Use
   of clozapine needs to be balanced against its adverse drug reaction
   profile. There remains a need for more effective treatments for TRS,
   and biomarkers to identify TRS.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

