========================================================================================================================================
40.4 LOW-DOSE RISPERIDONE TREATMENT IN ADOLESCENCE PREVENTS THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEUROINFLAMMATION IN THE MATERNAL IMMUNE ACTIVATION MODEL
========================================================================================================================================



Ina Weiner
Shani Pery
Jasbeer Dhawan
Anat Biegon
Yael Piontkewitz

:date: 2018-4

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background
      :name: s1

   Postnatal consequences of prenatal immune activation mimic a broad
   spectrum of neuro-psycho-pathological features phenotypic of
   schizophrenia (SCZ). We previously showed that SCZ-relevant
   behavioral and brain structural abnormalities emerging in adult
   offspring of moms exposed to the viral mimic polyI:C, are prevented
   by treatment with the atypical APD risperidone (RIS) in adolescence,
   prior to the emergence of structural and behavioral abnormalities.
   Given the increasing centrality of neuroinflammation in SCZ and its
   treatment and/or prevention, here we assessed whether adolescent RIS
   is able to prevent neuroinflammation in the polyI:C offspring.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: s2

   On gestation day 15, pregnant Wistar rats were injected IV with
   polyI:C (4 mg/kg/ml) or saline. Pups were weaned on postnatal day
   (PND) 21. Preventive treatment with RIS (Janssen, Belgium; 0.045
   mg/kg) was administered daily on PNDs 34–47. Offspring were
   sacrificed on PND48, prior to full spectrum of structural and
   behavioral abnormalities, or on PND90, after the emergence of
   structural and behavioral abnormalities. Microglial activation was
   assessed in ten regions (nucleus accumbens, striatum, substantia
   nigra, frontal, anterior cingulate and occipital cortices, dorsal
   hippocampus (sub-regions CA1, CA3 and dentate gyrus [DG]) and ventral
   hippocampus (vHPC), using quantitative [3H]PK11195 autoradiography.
   Another cohort of offspring underwent behavioral testing and imaging.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: s3

   ANOVAs of [3H]PK11195 binding in offspring sacrificed on PND48
   revealed no significant effects of prenatal polyI:C in any of the
   regions assessed. In adult male offspring, [3H]PK11195 binding was
   significantly increased in the CA1, CA3 and DG hippocampal subfields
   as well as in the frontal and occipital cortices, compared to
   controls. No such increases were observed in polyI:C offspring
   treated with RIS in adolescence (significant prenatal x preventive
   treatment interactions, and significant difference in [3H]PK11195
   binding between polyI:C-VEH and saline-VEH but not between
   polyI:C-RIS and saline-VEH offspring in post-hoc analyses, in each of
   the regions). In females, [3H]PK11195 binding was significantly
   increased only in the vHPC, occipital cortex, and nucleus accumbens.
   Such increases were not observed in polyI:C female offspring treated
   with RIS in adolescence. In a second cohort of offspring, prenatal
   poly-I:C led to structural abnormalities in the hippocampus,
   striatum, prefrontal cortex and lateral ventricles, as well to
   deficits in selective attention, executive function, working memory
   and social interaction, all of which were prevented by RIS.

   .. rubric:: Discussion
      :name: s4

   Increased [3H]PK11195 binding in the brains of adult poly-I:C
   offspring is consistent with increased uptake of [11C]PK11195 in
   patients with SCZ, measured in-vivo by PET. Microglial activation
   emerged in adulthood, with no such activation in young (PND48)
   offspring. Late emergence of microglial activation parallels the
   developmental course of behavioral and brain structural abnormalities
   in poly-I:C offspring (Piontkewitz et al, 2011a, 2012a; Piontkewitz
   et al, 2009), suggesting that these late-emerging abnormalities are
   linked. The latter is supported by the fact that RIS in adolescence
   prevented the emergence of behavioral and brain structural
   abnormalities as well as microgliosis in the adult offspring. These
   data suggest that prevention of adult microgliosis is one of the
   mechanisms underlying RIS capacity to prevent polyI:C-induced
   behavioral and neuroanatomical deficits, however, a causal
   relationship remains to be established.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

