================================================================================================
Street triage services in England: service models, national provision and the opinions of police
================================================================================================



Abirami Kirubarajan
Stephen Puntis
Devon Perfect
Marc Tarbit
Mary Buckman
Andrew Molodynski

:Correspondence: Stephen Puntis
(stephen.puntis@psych.ox.ac.uk)

:date: 2018-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Street triage services are increasingly common and part of standard
   responses to mental health crises in the community, but little is
   understood about them. We conducted a national survey of mental
   health trusts to gather detailed information regarding street triage
   services alongside a survey of Thames Valley police officers to
   ascertain their views and experiences.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Triage services are available in most areas of the country and are
   growing in scope. There is wide variation in levels of funding and
   modes of operation, including hours covered. Police officers from our
   survey overwhelmingly support such services and would like to see
   them expanded.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Mental health crises now form a core part of policing and there are
   compelling reasons for the support of specialist services. Recent
   changes to the law have heightened this need, with a requirement for
   specialist input before a Section 136 is enacted. Those who have
   experienced triage services report it as less stigmatising and
   traumatic than a traditional approach, but there remains little
   evidence on which to base decisions.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Law enforcement officers routinely come into contact with members of the
public who have mental health problems. In the UK, estimates of police
incidents linked to mental health crises have increased over recent
years.1 Within England and Wales, Section 136 of the Mental Health Act
2007 allows police officers to detain people who are experiencing a
mental health crisis and who are considered to pose a risk to themselves
or others.2 Although this measure may be unavoidable, it is often
distressing, expensive and labour-intensive.3 In addition, police
officers often feel that they lack the training to appropriately support
those in mental health crisis.4

In response to the increasing use of Section 136, the Department of
Health funded several regional pilots of street triage for mental
healthcare in 2013.5 Triage models typically involve mental health
professionals working in partnership with police officers, providing
expertise through a telephone service or an in-person mobile unit.

More services have now been commissioned at a local and regional level
by mental health trusts and police forces. The provision of triage
services nationally, however, remains unknown and there is a lack of
information regarding the operational models used. There is also no
systematic information regarding police officer opinions of such
services.

Recent changes to the Policing and Crime Act 2017 made it a legal
requirement to consult, where practical, with a mental health
professional before instigating a Section 136.6 Street triage schemes,
whose primary function is to introduce mental health expertise during
police incidents, may be ideally placed to do this. As mental health
police partnerships become more vital at the point of crisis,
information on service models will enable better planning of services to
meet the requirements of the legal changes.

Our study aimed to determine the prevalence of mental health street
triage services in England and to characterise their operational models.
We asked whether services were predominantly mobile- or control
room-based, how they were staffed, which vehicles and locations were
used, the hours of operation and the reasons cited for use.

Our second aim was to systematically collect the views and experiences
of police officers who have used services. We identified how regularly
officers had contact with individuals experiencing mental health crises,
whether they frequently used Section 136 and their confidence levels
when dealing with mental health crises. We also asked whether police
officers were aware of local street triage services, their preferences
regarding their model and whether they found them beneficial.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Survey design and samples
-------------------------

We conducted two surveys. Data were collected between June and October
of 2017, using an online survey tool
(`www.surveymonkey.com <www.surveymonkey.com>`__). The first was a
cross-sectional survey of all 55 National Health Service (NHS) mental
health trusts in England.

The second was a survey of operational police officers in the Thames
Valley police force. Thames Valley Police provide police services for
2.1 million people residing in Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and
Oxfordshire. Street triage services have been available in the region
since 2013 because of collaboration between Thames Valley Police and
Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust. The street triage service provides
telephone support and a co-response mobile unit (where a police officer
and mental health worker respond to incidents in a police vehicle)
between the hours of 18.00 h and 04.00 h.

Both surveys met Health Research Authority criteria for a service
evaluation and were approved by Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust.

.. _sec1-2:

Procedure
---------

For the NHS trust survey, letters were sent to every trust's Chief
Executive. Non-responders were followed up twice when necessary, at 4
and 8 weeks. For the police survey, surveys were emailed to all response
police constables and police sergeants employed by Thames Valley Police
in September 2017, with responses collected until October 2017. A single
reminder was sent out to all officers 2 weeks after the initial request.

.. _sec1-3:

Survey questionnaire
--------------------

The surveys were constructed to address the primary and secondary aims
of the project. The surveys took up to 30 min for participants to
complete, and were conducted solely online. We collected demographic
information and length of service for all respondents. The survey
questionnaires are available from the corresponding authors upon
request.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Identifying and characterising NHS street triage services
---------------------------------------------------------

.. _sec2-1-1:

Prevalence of street triage services
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A total of 40 out of 55 (73%) mental health trusts in England responded
to our survey. Of the 40 respondents, 28 (70%) offered street triage
services. Of those that had services, the mean length of provision was
2.9 years, with wide variability from 6 months to 5 years of operation.
Most areas reported that services had been available for 2–4 years.

Of those that did not provide a service, two (17%) had definite plans
for introduction. Seven trusts reported having more than one street
triage service, crossing different jurisdictions (police and/or social
services) in their geographical area, giving a total of 41 street triage
services represented in the survey.

.. _sec2-1-2:

Models of street triage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Eight out of 41 (20%) of the services described a telephone support only
street triage service, 19 (46%) reported a mobile unit and 12 (29%)
reported they had both means of response (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). Two
respondents (5%) did not specify. Fig. 1Reported frequencies of models
of triage.

.. _sec2-1-3:

Staffing
~~~~~~~~

A total of 28 out of 36 respondents (78%) reported their service was
staffed by police officers and mental health staff, and eight out of 36
(22%) reported it was staffed by mental health staff only (a model in
which mental health staff provide telephone support or attend police
incidents after a referral from the police at the incident).

Services were overwhelmingly led by health staff (27 out of 41; 82.5%),
although several services had police officers as lead (five out of 41;
12.5%) or a combined leadership model (six out of 41; 12.5%). One of the
services (5%) did not have a designated lead. Two respondents (5%) did
not specify. On average, there were 2.05 whole-time equivalent staff on
duty per shift.

.. _sec2-1-4:

Vehicle and location
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Of the 31 reported mobile services, ten (32%) used marked and 11 (36%)
used unmarked police vehicles. Four (13%) used personal vehicles or
ambulances and six (19%) respondents reported that they used a
combination.

A total of 38 services reported on their main location for street triage
services, with 28 (74%) services located at police stations and ten
(26%) located at mental health sites.

.. _sec2-1-5:

Hours and days of operation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was a wide range of reported hours and days of operation. Only
three of the 28 trusts (11%) offered 24/7 availability, with the
majority (79%) typically only providing night shifts (usually between
late afternoon or early evening and a few hours past midnight).

.. _sec2-1-6:

Methods of contact
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Street triage teams were contacted in a variety of ways, including 999
emergency operators (10%) and from the police control room (18%). The
most common method, however, was a combination of means (72%), including
999 calls, control room, individual police officers and other emergency
services.

.. _sec2-1-7:

Reasons cited for service use
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Service providers gave a number of reasons for street triage call-outs:
98% (39 out of 41) reported that call-outs had been made for cases of
self-harm and there were also high figures for other reasons, as shown
in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Table 1Reasons cited for use of street
triageReasons citedPercent of respondents\ `a <#tfn1_1>`__\ Deliberate
self-harm98%Previous mental health history80%Substance
misuse20%Psychosis50%No alternative support available10%Support Section
136 decision-making8% [1]_

.. _sec2-2:

The views and experiences of police officers regarding street triage services
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _sec2-2-1:

Demographic information
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The police survey was sent out to 579 officers, of whom 264 responded,
for a response rate of 45.6%. `Table 2 <#tab02>`__ presents service and
demographic results of respondents. Table 2Demographic and service
characteristics of police survey respondents
(*n* = 264)Characteristic\ *n*\ %GenderMale16161Female9436Other00Prefer
not to say73Did not specify gender20.8RankPolice
Constable746Sergeant4718Inspector150.8Police Community Support
Officer274Other52Did not answer question10.4DepartmentResponse
team1315Investigation team12050Neighbourhood policing teams1246Did not
specify department10.4Length of serviceServed <5 years10138Served 6–10
years6926Served 11–20 years7529Served >20 years187Did not specify length
of service10.4

.. _sec2-2-2:

Mental health training
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A total of 207 out of 256 (81%) of respondents reported they had
received formal mental health training in the past 3 years, often in
more than one form. Eight respondents did not respond. This training was
generally mandated (181 out of 221 respondents; 82%).

.. _sec2-2-3:

Contact with mental health crises
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A total of 87% (222 out of 255) of respondents reported regular
(approximately every shift) face-to-face contact with the public, with
79% (202 out of 255) reporting weekly or more frequent contact with
people in mental health crises; within this subset, 115 (45%) reported
daily or more frequent contact (`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__). Respondents
reported that on average, four out of their past ten incidents involved
mental health crises. Fig. 2Frequency of contact with members of the
public with mental health problems.

Officers' confidence regarding mental health incidence varied: 71% (178
out of 252) reported they were at least fairly confident, whereas 10%
(25 out of 252) described themselves as unconfident.

.. _sec2-2-4:

Awareness and use of street triage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Levels of awareness of the service were high at 97% (249 out of 256):
92% of respondents who answered this question had used street triage
(234 out of 257) and 92% of these respondents described the triage
service as helpful. Sixty per cent (145 out of 245) had used both mobile
units and telephone support.

Respondents were further asked for their experiences of and preferences
for the two systems. There was a clear preference for response in
person, with 47% (68 out of 145) reporting this as being more helpful
and only one respondent feeding back that telephone support was better.
The remainder (52%; 76 out of 145) reported that both were equally
helpful. A total of 98% of respondents (240 out of 245) overall felt
that the service has been beneficial in the Thames Valley area and 71%
(173 out of 245 respondents) felt that it should be available 24 hours a
day.

.. _sec2-2-5:

Use of Section 136 and interactions with street triage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

More than half of respondents had used Section 136 of the Mental Health
Act 2007 (58%; 146 out of 251) and only 52% of those using the powers
(76 out of 146) had involved the street triage service in the process.
The most common reason cited was the unavailability of the street triage
service because of hours of operation or other demands on it (83%; 58
out of 70).

.. _sec2-2-6:

Officers' free-text responses and feedback
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sixty respondents made comments in the free-text section, with 58 (98%)
commenting that the service was highly beneficial. Officers noted that
the service was ‘long overdue’ and ‘one of the best decisions made by
Thames Valley Police and NHS in recent years’. One officer directly
commented on its necessity: ‘[Mental health] is a specialist area and
police officers are not mental health specialists’. Additional reported
benefits included saving police time and reducing stigma.

Many stated that they wished that the service was available 24/7 or at
least extended hours. One officer wrote ‘the only downside is that it is
not already a 24-h service’. Additional comments referenced the lack of
availability of child mental health workers and social workers, as
‘[police officers] seem to come across a lot of younger people with
mental health issues too’.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

These surveys are the first attempt to characterise street triage
services nationally since the launch of the pilot projects in 2013, and
to get a detailed snapshot of police attitudes toward them. It is clear
that street triage services, although still a relatively new model of
care, are now widespread across England. They have continued to expand
in spread and scope since their introduction, understandably given the
increasing contact between police officers and those with mental
illness. This is also reflected in the changes to the Policing and Crime
Act, which will necessitate better police–mental health interagency
collaboration;6 street triage is best prepared to fill this gap in
service.

Our National NHS survey highlights significant variations in street
triage models. Hours of operation vary, although usually with an
emphasis on evenings, night-times and weekends, with little or no cover
during the daytime. Levels of investment vary substantially and are
reflected in staffing numbers and types of model; a mobile in-person
response is inevitably initially costlier than telephone support.
However, the former service is more valued by officers and may be more
effective at freeing up police time and allowing for appropriate
interventions, and as a result may be more cost-effective. We simply do
not know. Future research must concentrate on what the effective
elements of street triage are that improve patient experience, reduce
‘wasted’ police time and improve outcome in terms of health use,
functioning and criminal justice interactions.

Most services are located on police premises, but are led by NHS staff.
This may be appropriate in the short-term, but there needs to be
consideration of whether a merger of personnel would be more effective.
There is similar lack of clarity in many funding models, with the key
question being ‘who should pay for these services?’. We did not
specifically explore this in our study, but opinions seem to differ
between the three main agencies concerned (the police, health and social
care). A hybrid funding model involving the interested parties would
likely be most appropriate but this requires negotiation and thought; in
these austere times this will not be easy. Future work to determine how
to best navigate such financial and institutional barriers to
interagency cooperation between the police and health sector is needed.

Police officers from our survey are overwhelmingly supportive of street
triage. There was a clear preference for services to exist and to be
provided in-person. There was strong support for 24/7 services. There
was a high frequency of responding to mental health incidents described
by participants, supporting the view that mental health work is now
‘core police business’.7 This underpins the need for triage services,
heightened by recent changes to legislation that require officers to
seek qualified mental health advice before using Section 136, rather
than seeking guidance retrospectively.6 As mental health crises occur at
any time of the day, it was not surprising that the majority of officers
in our survey believed that street triage should be available 24/7.
Longer hours of operation, more integration and a higher profile may
help to improve the training and confidence of officers.8 We do not know
whether face-to-face triage is more effective than telephone triage.
Only one previous study has compared these models.9 Their analysis
suggested that a face-to-face model can reduce the overall use of
Section 136 and increase the proportion resulting in hospital admission,
while the telephone-only service did not.

.. _sec3-1:

Limitations
-----------

Both surveys may include some selection bias, in common with any survey
of this type. However, the respondents in our police survey were fairly
large in number, there was a reasonable response rate and they appear
representative. Our national NHS survey achieved an excellent response
rate of 73%, unusually high for such a survey and likely to be
protective against selection bias.

.. _sec3-2:

Implications
------------

In conclusion, street triage services are widespread across England and
increasingly seen as a permanent part of our response to mental health
crises. Despite this, models vary significantly and there is little or
no evidence on which to base good practice or commissioning decisions.
Outcome data is almost non-existent. Our surveys show a clear appetite
for services to exist and to be strengthened. Recent changes to the
Police and Crime Act will almost certainly stimulate this, with officers
being required to seek advice in real time. Public concerns regarding
civil liberties and the unacceptable cases of people being stranded in
police cells while arrangements are made also make the case that mental
health expertise during these crises is vital.

However, the increase in use of street triage will require greater
resources and further investment. Questions should be asked as to how
services can be organised most effectively and efficiently and how they
can most benefit those experiencing mental health crises. Evidence is
urgently needed regarding the effects of street triage services and,
crucially, what elements of the service are effective in reducing risk
and improving outcome. Future studies could also investigate mental
health staff or patients' perceptions regarding the quality of triage
care.

This research was funded by the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care
Oxford at Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust (grant number BZR00180).
The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.

**Abirami Kirubarajan** is a Medical Student at the University of
Toronto Faculty of Medicine, Canada. **Stephen Puntis** is a National
Institute for Health Research Post-Doctoral Fellow at University of
Oxford, Warneford Hospital, UK. **Devon Perfect** is an Assistant
Psychologist at Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, Warneford Hospital,
UK. **Marc Tarbit** is Chief Inspector of Thames Valley Police at St
Aldates Police Station, UK. **Mary Buckman** is Head of Social Care for
Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, Warneford Hospital, UK. **Andrew
Molodynski** is a Consultant Psychiatrist with Oxford Health NHS
Foundation Trust, Warneford Hospital, UK.

.. [1]
   Percentages do not add up to 100% because of multiple responses per
   question.
