---
abstract: |
  Night-time confinement, currently imposed as a blanket restriction on
  all patients on wards in UK high secure hospitals, constitutes an
  arbitrary restriction of liberty, not being based on any therapeutic
  purpose for those so restricted, nor serving a need for the protection
  of others. Its imposition constitutes a form of 'degrading' treatment
  as well as an unjustified restriction of 'residual' liberty. Persons
  who are vulnerable, especially those who are involuntarily detained as
  in this case, are particularly at risk of suffering human rights
  abuses. A compelling case can be made, based on ethics, law and
  accepted practice standards, for ruling out night-time confinement as
  an acceptable measure.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a1}

  None.
author:
- George SzmuklerCorrespondence to George Szmukler
  (<george.szmukler@kcl.ac.uk>)
date: 2019-2
institute:
- 1King\'s College London, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
title: Night-time confinement is an unacceptable hospital practice
---

Night-time confinement (NTC), currently imposed as a blanket restriction
on all patients on wards in UK high secure hospitals (see Silva &
Shepherd and Thomson this issue), represents an arbitrary restriction of
liberty, not being based on any therapeutic purpose for those so
restricted, nor serving a need for the protection of others. Its
imposition, I propose, constitutes a form of 'degrading' treatment as
well as an unjustified restriction of 'residual' liberty. This is
especially troubling when occurring in a hospital, not a prison.
Treating patients with respect for their dignity is a fundamental
principle of medical care. Persons who are vulnerable, especially those
who are detained as in this case, are particularly at risk of suffering
human rights abuses.

While there is a duty on those working in the healthcare system to
optimise the use of resources, there are 'red lines' limiting what
actions can be justified. Locking all patients in their rooms from 9:15
pm to 7:15 am in order to save money on nursing costs crosses such a
'red line'.

Treating patients in this manner cannot be seen as therapeutic or as
facilitating recovery; if anything, the reverse. It has been argued that
NTC is welcomed by some patients because they feel safer at night. My
reaction to this is one of disappointment that wards cannot be made safe
using other means. For example, NTC confinement of an individual patient
assessed as presenting a risk to others can be acceptable. Further, if
patients feel safer when locked in their rooms, they could be offered
this option on a consenting, voluntary basis. A valid consent would make
the action not a restriction of the person\'s liberty.

# Degrading treatment {#sec1}

A good case can be made that NTC constitutes a form of 'degrading
treatment'.

A definition of 'degrading treatment' can be difficult to establish.
Before considering legal aspects, it is helpful to examine, as
Waldron^1^ suggests, the ordinary meaning of 'degrading'. The word
'degrading' in everyday language connotes treatment of a person that
significantly diminishes their normally accepted rank or status. In this
sense, NTC can be seen as degrading the status of 'patient' when set
against all other patients (as opposed, say, to prisoners). A further
ethical argument is that in NTC patients are being instrumentalised,
used as 'means to an end', the 'end' being the saving of money (albeit
with the claimed aim of enhancing therapeutic possibilities during the
day).

Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)^2^ says that
'no one should be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment'. While the European court concedes there is a
threshold of severity to be met, the fact that a person is held in
control by state agents, for example in detention, will influence that
decision. As a rule, the threshold depends on a number of factors --
including the vulnerability of the person, as well as the duty of care
owed by the authorities towards persons held in their care.

The approach of the European court has been to assign the terms
'inhuman' or 'degrading' to an accumulation of particular kinds of
practice in particular settings.^1^ The meaning of the terms is then
read back from the list of particular practices ruled prohibited and
identified descriptively. Until a case of NTC, or one relevantly similar
to it, is considered, it is not clear whether the European court would
regard NTC as constituting 'degrading' treatment.

The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC)^3^ states that
'degrading treatment' means treatment that is extremely humiliating and
undignified. Whether treatment reaches a level for such an ascription
depends on a number of factors. These include the duration of the
treatment, its physical or mental effects, and the vulnerability and
health of the victim. In NTC the duration is long-term, perhaps lasting
years, and a health problem is the reason for the person being in a
hospital. Presumably, the hospital is intended to offer a therapeutic
environment for persons with a mental disorder, one that, for example,
enhances a sense of agency or self-worth. It is hard to see how NTC
encourages, rather than impedes, such progress.

The recognised defence of 'medical necessity'^4^ for what may on the
surface appear to be degrading treatment, it can be argued, cannot be
applicable in NTC: there simply is no medical purpose.

It is commonly stated that the right not to be treated in a degrading
way is 'absolute'. The EHRC notes that 'it must never be limited or
restricted ... For example, a public authority can never use lack of
resources as a defence against an accusation that it has treated someone
in an inhuman or degrading way.'^3^

Waldron poses the question whether treatment can be 'degrading' even if
the person subject to it is unconscious of it.^1^ He proposes that we
may judge the treatment as objectively degrading even if the victim
accedes to it. A decision in the High Court^5^ supports this contention:
"Treatment is capable of being 'degrading' within the meaning of article
3, whether or not there is awareness on the part of the victim. However
unconscious or unaware of ill-treatment a particular patient may be,
treatment which has the effect on those who witness it of degrading the
individual may come within article 3 \[ECHR\]. It is enough if judged by
the standard of right-thinking bystanders it would be viewed as
humiliating or debasing the victim, showing a lack of respect for, or
diminishing, his or her human dignity."

This view comports well with the results of a survey of patients and
staff concerning their 'agreement' or 'disagreement' with NTC.^6^ This
showed that while the majority of the small number of patients
(comprising fewer than 50% of eligible participants) were not in
disagreement with NTC, 100% of staff were.

# Deprivation of 'residual liberty' {#sec2}

Thus far, English law has not recognised the concept of 'residual
liberty'. However, the European court following the case of Munjaz *v*
UK^7^ now does. While the residual liberty of Munjaz was ruled not to
have been infringed, the validity of the concept was confirmed by the
Court -- there can be a further deprivation of one\'s liberty under
Article 5 of the ECHR, even if already detained. The Court held that
whether there was a further deprivation of liberty of someone already
detained depended on their concrete situation, for example, the type of
measure used, and its duration, effects and manner of implementation. In
fact, the Court stated, the criteria for a further deprivation 'must
apply with greater force' when the person is already detained.

The grounds given for the Court\'s negative decision in Munjaz offer
reasons why NTC, by contrast, might well be considered as a deprivation
of residual liberty. The court recognised that Mr Munjaz was secluded
when already in a high secure hospital where he was already subjected to
greater restrictions on his liberty than a normal mental health patient.
However, reasons for a rejection of his claim were: his seclusion was
'to contain severely disturbed behaviour likely to harm others'; the
length of the seclusion was 'foremost a matter of clinical judgment';
and great store was placed on 'the manner of implementing the seclusion
policy' -- the hospital\'s approach was 'to allow secluded patients the
most liberal regime that was compatible with their presentation', and
seclusion was being 'flexibly applied'. Behind each reason lay a
critical assumption: that the deprivation of liberty served the
fundamental purpose of protecting other patients from the harm that
might have been caused specifically by Mr Munjaz. The problem with NTC
is that its purpose is not therapeutic, nor an individually planned
response to the risk of harm to others by the person deprived of their
liberty. Furthermore, NTC is clearly not 'the most liberal regime
compatible' with the person\'s presentation, nor is its consistent
application for 10 h each night 'flexible'.

The case for a violation of the patient\'s ECHR Article 8 right to a
'private life' was also considered. Mr Munjaz argued that the
hospital\'s seclusion policy was not in accordance with the law as it
lacked the necessary foreseeability and procedural safeguards. The
European court affirmed the presumption that those deprived of their
liberty will continue to enjoy all of the other fundamental rights and
freedoms guaranteed by the Convention. It stated: 'the importance of the
notion of personal autonomy to Article 8 and the need for a practical
and effective interpretation of private life demands that when a
person\'s personal autonomy is already restricted, greater scrutiny be
given to measures which remove the little personal autonomy that is
left ... \[Mr Munjaz\'s periods of\] seclusion must be regarded as
additional interferences with the private life of the applicant, which
were distinct from the inevitable interference with his private life
that arose from his detention in high security conditions'.

NTC offers little evidence of the kind of additional 'greater scrutiny'
demanded by the court. Furthermore, the court stated that any potential
breach of Article 8 must be in accordance with the law requiring the
impugned measure both to have some basis in domestic law and to be
compatible with the rule of law consistent with the object and purpose
of Article 8. 'The law must thus be adequately accessible and
foreseeable, that is, formulated with sufficient precision to enable the
individual -- if need be with appropriate advice -- to regulate his
conduct'. In NTC, on the other hand, the patient\'s conduct is
irrelevant to the deprivation of liberty and thus represents 'arbitrary
interference'.

I suggest that NTC would be very unlikely to meet criteria for a lawful
restriction of persons\' residual liberty or interference with their
private life.

# Mental Health Act Code of Practice 2015 {#sec3}

NTC is furthermore inconsistent with 'guiding principles' expressed in
Chapter 1 of the Mental Health Act Code of Practice (MHA CoP) 2015^8^ --
'the least restrictive option and maximising independence'; 'respect and
dignity'; 'purpose and effectiveness ... clear therapeutic aims, promote
recovery ...'.

The MHA CoP (26.7) states that restrictive interventions, when required,
'should be planned, evidence based, lawful, in the patient\'s interests,
proportionate and dignified'.

And later: "26.20 **...** service providers should avoid blanket
restrictions that apply to all patients; interventions should always be
individualised, and subject to discussion and review by the whole
clinical team. The individual\'s consent to the intervention should
always be sought where the individual has capacity to consent or refuse
the intervention, even if a refusal may be overridden ..."

Under the section entitled 'Respecting human rights': "26.45 Any use of
restrictive interventions must be compliant with the Human Rights Act
1998 (HRA), which gives effect in the UK to certain rights and freedoms
guaranteed under the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).26.47 No
restrictive intervention should be used unless it is medically necessary
to do so in all the circumstances of the case. Action that is not
medically necessary may well breach a patient\'s rights under article 3,
which prohibits inhuman or degrading treatment.26.48 Article 8 of the
ECHR protects the right to respect for private and family life. A
restrictive intervention that does not meet the minimum level of
severity for article 3 may nevertheless breach a patient\'s article 8
rights if it has a sufficiently adverse effect on the patient\'s private
life, including their moral and physical integrity."

These statements are clearly relevant to the earlier discussion.

I note 26.105 '... Seclusion does not include locking people in their
rooms at night in accordance with the High Security Psychiatric Services
(Arrangements for Safety and Security) Directions 2013'. Locking
patients in their rooms at night is not seclusion; seclusion is
justified by clinical considerations of the risk of harm to the patient
or to others. Locking all patients on a ward in their rooms at night as
a money-saving measure involves no therapeutic purpose.

# Conclusion {#sec4}

A case, based on ethics, law and accepted practice standards, for ruling
out NTC as an acceptable measure is compelling. It should cease as soon
as possible.

I thank to fellow members of the Special Committee on Human Rights of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists for their helpful comments on the
manuscript.

George Szmukler is Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry and Society at the
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King\'s College
London, UK.
