======================================
Emanuel (Gus) Moran FRCP FRCPsych, DPM
======================================



Gerald Russell
:Date: 2018-8


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Formerly Consultant Psychiatrist, Claybury Hospital, Woodford Bridge,
and Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield, UK

.. image:: S2056469418000244_inline1.jpg

Emanuel Moran, known to many of his Maudsley colleagues (though not to
family and friends) as Gus, died on 18 August 2017, aged 89. He had
become the UK's foremost authority on the psychiatric and social aspects
of pathological gambling. His interest had developed during his time as
a psychiatric registrar at the Maudsley. He had seen patients who had
attempted suicide when they were in difficulties resulting from their
gambling dependence. Over the next few years, he accumulated a series of
50 such patients and published his findings in 1970 in the *British
Journal of Psychiatry*.1 He proposed a definition of pathological
gambling and put forward a tentative typology. He concluded that
gambling was due to a complex interaction between personal factors and
social pressures. Among the latter, he noted that the gambling urge
would be triggered by new opportunities, such as the opening of a
licensed betting office near the person's home or place of work.

It is striking that among the 50 subjects there were no women, a finding
probably due to the limited opportunities at that time for women to
indulge in serious gambling. They seldom frequented betting shops or
casinos and confined themselves to bingo halls, playing that sedate game
in the company of friendly neighbours. It was only in the late 1980s
that fruit machines were introduced into bingo halls and there was a
rapid increase in more active gambling among women. Even more pernicious
was the advent of online gambling, attracting young women in particular.

A similar increase in pathological gambling occurred when regulations on
gambling were relaxed. Warning signals were sounded following the 1960
Betting and Gambling Act, which had resulted in increased gambling
facilities. In more recent years, Emanuel campaigned tirelessly against
any further relaxation of restrictions on gambling. He was the first
chairman of the Society for the Study of Gambling and insisted that no
funding was received by the Society from the gambling trade.
Subsequently, he founded the National Council on Gambling.

The Gambling Act’, which was passed in 2005 and became effective in
2007, had as one of its stated objectives the protection of children and
other vulnerable persons from being harmed or exploited by gambling.
This laudable aim has been somewhat undermined by the acceptance of an
elastic definition of ‘responsible gambling’. From 1974 to 2010, Emanuel
was the specialist adviser on gambling to the Royal College of
Psychiatrists. Under his guidance, the College submitted crucial advice
on restricting the more harmful ‘remote gambling’ (including mobile
phones and the internet). He recognised that the regulation of online
companies was only possible when these were based in Britain, but, in
fact, most internet companies promoting gambling are now based abroad.
Towards the end of his life, Emanuel felt that his efforts to reduce the
dangers of gambling had been of no avail, a source of considerable
distress to him. Yet his efforts had been determined and valiant.

Emanuel was born in Charlottenberg, Berlin, in 1928. His parents
originally came from Kiev. His father, a Baptist minister, moved to
Berlin to run a Christian mission. Emanuel was evacuated to England on
his 10th birthday, where he was quite alone and knew no English, yet he
pursued his schooling with ease. His parents and two younger siblings
joined him in London a few months later. His further education took him
to Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge, and Guy's Hospital to study medicine.
After a period in neurology at the Whittington Hospital, he trained in
psychiatry at the Maudsley Hospital under the influence of the
formidable Professor Aubrey Lewis. From 1966 to 1980, he was a
psychiatrist for Gamblers Anonymous. Through his work, gambling came to
be recognised as an addictive disorder. His definition of gambling
disorder was adopted by the World Health Organization. Throughout the
1970s, he worked closely with the Home Office. He advised Parliament
through the Royal Commission chaired by Lord Rothschild, opposing the
deregulation of gambling laws.

Emanuel was an extremely kind and considerate colleague. As a junior
consultant, I had admitted a not-so-young lady who became depressed when
her engagement to marry was broken. She disappeared from the ward and,
justifiably, I feared the worst. The Thames River Police asked me to
identify the body. Witnessing my dismay, Emanuel offered to accompany me
to the mortuary, an offer I gladly accepted.

In 1965, he was appointed Consultant Psychiatrist to Claybury Hospital,
Woodford Bridge, and Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield, where he worked for
almost 30 years. He was clinically responsible for one of the busiest
general adult sectors in north London, a role which consumed a great
deal of his time and energy

In the early 1970s Emanuel began to suffer from severe ill-health, and
in 1974 his wife was told that he had only weeks to live because of a
bladder cancer. He survived for another 40 years, for which he felt
indebted to two urosurgeons, but his illness greatly affected his
subsequent quality of life. He took delight in his family. Jane was his
wife for 51 years. His elder son, Paul, became a psychiatrist, and his
younger son David was active in education. He leaves five grandchildren.
