=================================================================================================================
External validity and anchoring heuristics: application of DUNDRUM-1 to secure service gatekeeping in South Wales
=================================================================================================================



Daniel Lawrence
Tracey-Lee Davies
Ruth Bagshaw
Paul Hewlett
Pamela Taylor
Andrew Watt

:Correspondence: Dr Andrew Watt (awatt@cardiffmet.ac.uk)

:date: 2018-2

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Structured clinical judgement tools provide scope for the
   standardisation of forensic service gatekeeping and also allow
   identification of heuristics in this decision process. The DUNDRUM-1
   triage tool was completed retrospectively for 121 first-time
   referrals to forensic services in South Wales. Fifty were admitted to
   medium security, 49 to low security and 22 remained in open
   conditions.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a3

   DUNDRUM-1 total scores differed appropriately between different
   levels of security. However, regression revealed heuristic anchoring
   on the ‘legal process’ and ‘immediacy of risk due to mental disorder’
   items.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a4

   Patient placement was broadly aligned with DUNDRUM-1 recommendations.
   However, not all triage items informed gatekeeping decisions. It
   remains to be seen whether decisions anchored in this way are
   effective.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a5

   Dr Mark Freestone gave permission for AUC values from Freestone *et
   al*. (2015) to be presented here for comparison.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Secure mental health services in the United Kingdom are designed to
detain individuals who have severe mental ill health and are believed to
pose a significant risk of harm to others.1 Secure services in the UK
are configured around three tiers (low, medium and high) in order to
accommodate people in different levels of clinical security. The task of
allocating individual patients to different security tiers is
challenging. First, clinicians are expected to adhere to the principle
of the *least restrictive option*,2 and yet there are no clearly defined
eligibility criteria for different levels of security, and no clear
guidelines for their particular roles.3 Furthermore, consideration of a
patient's clinical presentation, psychiatric history, diagnosis,
comorbidity, developmental history, family history, employment history
and ethnic/cultural background,4 and the patchy information about
outcomes achieved by secure services, complicates and compromises
gatekeeping decisions further still. The challenge for forensic
gatekeepers in matching patients to appropriate security levels is
apparent in the reported heterogeneity of cases admitted by both
medium5\ :sup:`,`\ 6 and low7 secure services.

The process of deciding who should/should not be admitted to specific
levels of security requires consideration of a wide range of
characteristics.4 Unfortunately, knowledge about associations between
patient characteristics and relevant outcomes is currently restricted by
a dearth of rigorously controlled outcome studies8 and by a range of
confounding factors that include, but are not restricted to, diagnostic
uncertainty, individualistic risks, individual needs and treatment
responsivity. At present, decisions regarding patient allocation to
different levels of security must be extrapolated from an uncertain
knowledge base, with inevitable uncertainty regarding likely outcomes.
Apart from the weak knowledge base, it is important also to consider the
inherent complexity of this form of decision process.

Under complex and uncertain circumstances, human decision-making
typically depends upon heuristics. Heuristics describe the normal
tendency for people to employ a range of strategies in order to reduce
the burden on their finite cognitive resources.9 Heuristics are
especially prevalent when decision makers are required to accommodate
multiple or conflicting sources of information.10

Heuristic phenomena of particular relevance to forensic practice include
representativeness bias, availability heuristics and decision
anchoring.11 The anchoring heuristic, which will be the focus here,
describes decision processes that are biased toward initially received
(or attended to) information.12\ :sup:`,`\ 13 Anchoring describes a
process where initially considered features disproportionately influence
decisions, while later processed information is neglected and does not
influence decision-making.10

When anchoring is present, decisions that are supposed to be based on a
range of characteristics (i.e. should the patient be admitted to secure
services?) will instead be based on a limited set of characteristics.
Under these circumstances, the structure of assessments and/or the
emphasis placed on specific characteristics will be more important than
the bulk of the information that is intended to inform decisions. There
is a risk, therefore, that patients may be inappropriately placed
because of the neglect of information.

One of the objectives of structured clinical judgement tools is to
increase the transparency and consistency in decision-making and to make
sure that relevant factors consistently inform clinical decisions.
Despite the availability and widespread knowledge of structured clinical
judgement tools in forensic services, clinical opinion can still be more
influential than formally assessed risk status in decisions to detain
people in secure conditions.14

Clinical opinion has been criticised as error prone and too heavily
dependent on heuristics.15 Heuristics have predominantly been associated
with misdiagnosis, inappropriate treatment16 and (notably for forensic
services) high-impact failures of case management that have resulted in
fatalities.17 Heuristics are predominantly presented as a source of
error; there is a widespread assumption that cognitive short-cuts are
necessarily bad, but also a growing realisation that the efficacy of
heuristics is open to debate.18 A counter argument has therefore arisen
against the *a priori* assumption that heuristics are necessarily bad.
This counter argument is that heuristics may have many practical
benefits that counterintuitively can include accuracy, transparency and
efficiency.19 Furthermore, it has been argued that heuristics in
practice-based medicine drive the iterative refinement of
decision-making and allow clinicians to learn to focus on
outcome-relevant features through reflection on the consequences of
clinical decisions that they observe directly over time.20 The
possibility that heuristics may have some value is particularly
interesting to forensic practitioners who have become accustomed to the
notion that clinical opinion is less reliable than actuarial or
structured clinical judgement tools.21 The nature and extent of the use
of heuristics in forensic practice, however, remain largely unknown,
despite the substantial potential benefits and costs for these forms of
decision-making.

Until recently, gatekeeping decisions have relied on clinical experience
along with local definitions of security need. Structured clinical
judgement tools with robust psychometric properties are now beginning to
influence gatekeeping practice and may be preferred because they promise
increased transparency and uniformity in decision-making. Despite
widespread knowledge of the DUNDRUM quartet22 among secure service
personnel, the extent to which this tool has been adopted and
implemented in gatekeeping decision-making is unknown and has only
recently become a subject for evaluative investigation.23

Kennedy24 lists violence, immediacy of risk, specialist forensic need,
absconding behaviour and public confidence as the assessment guidelines
that should determine security placement of patients. The Dangerousness,
Understanding, Recovery and Urgency Manual22 was developed as an aid to
clinical decision-making, and includes a scale designed to assist
psychiatric triage (DUNDRUM-1). The DUNDRUM-1 is an 11-item risk
assessment tool that uses both scores on individual items and the
distribution of those scores (a case should score mostly in one
category) to inform judgement. The tool is reported to have excellent
predictive validity, high internal consistency and good interrater
reliability.25 The DUNDRUM-1, therefore, has potential for assisting
clinical decision-making regarding patient placement and for evaluating
the correspondence between patient characteristics and secure service
placement. The DUNDRUM-1 also has the potential to measure the influence
of heuristic bias in clinical decision-making.26\ :sup:`,`\ 27 The
DUNDRUM quartet is a third-generation risk assessment tool, with items
that are anchored in specific definitions of low, medium and high
security that do not take account of the contextual factors within
individual secure units (patient acuity, patient dynamics, workforce
skill, philosophies of care and so on). Nevertheless, the DUNDRUM allows
the initial quantification of the specific nature of anchoring that may
underpin clinical decision-making in relation to allocating people to
levels of security.

.. _sec1-1:

Aims and hypotheses
===================

First, the current study was designed to extend examination of the
external validity of the DUNDRUM-1 psychiatric triage tool to a sample
that was different from the original validation sample,22\ :sup:`,`\ 25
and also different from the first external demonstration23 of the
DUNDRUM-1 as a useful support for clinical decision-making. Significant
alignment between DUNDRUM-1 scores and patient placement would confirm
the external validity of the tool. The second objective of the current
study was to use the DUNDRUM-1 as a ‘best practice’ framework in which
to examine anchoring heuristics in secure service gatekeeping decisions.
Anchoring would be apparent if, following regression, one (or a narrow
set) of the DUNDRUM-1 items were able to explain a disproportionately
large fraction of variance in patient placement.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

.. _sec2-1:

Sampling
--------

The study was approved by the research ethics committee of Cardiff
Metropolitan University's School of Health Sciences, and as a service
evaluation by the relevant local National Health Service (NHS) Health
Board Research and Development department. All patient characteristics
were extracted from written narrative reports that had been triggered by
a referral requesting admission to secure services. In every instance,
permission was sought from the original report author; no requests were
declined.

Characteristics of the sample were extracted from the All Wales Secure
Services database of immediate post ‘referral-to-service’ (gatekeeping)
assessment reports between January 2010 and June 2013. This database is
used in the management of Welsh secure service patient placements. Cases
were selected if they had not previously been referred either for
treatment or assessment by secure services. First-time referral was used
as an inclusion criterion to control for possible confounding of
assessment recommendations by previous placement of patients. The
database was interrogated sequentially for cases where a psychiatric
report was available and the destination of the patient recorded. A
total of 121 assessment reports were present in the database for the
sampling period.

Of the 121 cases, 50 patients were admitted to medium security, 49 were
admitted to low security and 22 remained in open conditions. Reports
included comprehensive details of the index offence, forensic history,
Mental Health Act 1983 status, psychiatric history, diagnoses, previous
non-criminalised violence and/or self-harm, and the gatekeeping
recommendation for security level.

.. _sec2-2:

Design
------

The study used a between-subjects retrospective cohort design.28 All
cases involved first-time referrals for secure care to avoid biasing of
placement decisions by previous secure referrals. Neither of the raters
had any involvement in the referral process for any of the patients
included in the current study. Both were also blind to the referral
outcomes at the time of completing the assessments.

.. _sec2-3:

Materials
---------

The Dangerousness, Understanding, Recovery and Urgency Model22 was used
as the method for rating patient characteristics at the time of first
referral. DUNDRUM-1 is the triage component of the DUNDRUM Quartet and
consists of 11 items that rate patient triage features on a 0–4 scale,
where 0 is very low severity and 4 is high severity. Kennedy *et al*.22
suggest that people who mostly score 4 (across the range of the items on
the scale) will initially require conditions of high therapeutic
security (i.e. Special Hospital). A person who mostly scores 3 is likely
to need conditions of medium security, and a person who is mostly rated
2 will be best placed in conditions of psychiatric intensive care (acute
low security). A patient rated as 1 on most of the items should be
safely treated in an open setting, and a person mostly rated 0 may be
cared for in a community setting.

The DUNDRUM-1 was selected on the basis of its psychometric properties.
The DUNDRUM-1 has been reported to have acceptable validity and
reliability.25 For instance, the scale has been reported to have good
internal consistency (Cronbach's α: 0.95) and also good interrater
reliability; the kappa statistic could be rated for seven of the 11
items and was greater than 0.85 for each of these.

.. _sec2-4:

Procedure
---------

The DUNDRUM-1 was applied to each report by one of 2 raters (D.L. &
T.D.). Both raters had successfully completed reliability workshops for
the Historical Clinical Risk Management-20 (HCR-20), Sexual Violence
Risk-20 (SVR-20) and Psychopathy Checklist – revised (PCL-R); they had
achieved high interrater reliability with HCR-20 assessment (kappa for
both: 0.9) and were therefore assumed to be reliable in the application
of other similar structured clinical judgement tools (DUNDRUM-1). For
each case, each item of the DUNDRUM-1 was scored by either D.L. or T.D.
in accordance with item score definitions published for DUNDRUM-1.22

.. _sec2-5:

Methods of analysis
-------------------

All statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS version 22 (IBM). The
alpha criterion was set throughout at 0.05, and alpha was adjusted for
multiple comparisons using the Holm–Bonferroni method.29

The index of predictive validity reported here is the area under the
curve (AUC). In both the current study and the comparison data23 the AUC
was used to determine the ability of the individual DUNDRUM-1 item
scores (and total score) to discriminate between cases admitted to
security (low or medium secure) versus those who were not admitted to
security (open conditions). AUC values can range between 0 and 1
(0 = perfect negative prediction, 0.5 = no predictive validity and
1 = perfect positive prediction). Higher AUC values indicate increased
predictive validity, 0.5 acts a reference and 95% confidence intervals
are used to determine whether predictive validity is superior to chance;
where the lower bounds of the 95% CI were below 0.5, the null hypothesis
(predictive validity is no better than chance) was accepted. Similarly,
where confidence intervals overlapped, there were no significant
differences in predictive validity between DUNDRUM-1 items or samples.

The next set of analyses was designed to determine whether scores for
DUNDRUM-1 items differed between patients allocated to each of the three
tiers of security (open conditions, low security or medium security) in
the current sample. Total DUNDRUM-1 scores and individual DUNDRUM-1 item
scores for these three groups were compared using Kruskal–Wallis
analyses, *post hoc* contrasts between specific pairs of groups used
Mann–Whitney U, and alpha inflation was controlled using the
Holm–Bonferroni29 method.

The final set of analyses used multiple ordinal regression to explore
the extent to which DUNDRUM-1 items might individually, or in
combination, explain patient placement. Analysis used multiple ordinal
regression because of the ordinal nature of the independent (DUNDRUM-1)
and dependent (patient placement) variables. Models were designed using
the enter method in order to explore possible structures in decision
processes.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

For comparison, the results of the AUC analyses for the current sample
and for the Freestone *et al*.23 sample are presented in `Fig.
1 <#fig01>`__. Predictive validities of total DUNDRUM-1 scores for both
samples were superior to chance, and the AUC values and confidence
intervals were remarkably similar between the two samples. The picture
for individual DUNDRUM-1 items was more complex and not wholly
consistent between the two samples. The two samples yielded similar
significant AUC results for the following five items: immediacy of risk,
specialist forensic need, absconding and legal process. The two samples
were also consistent in finding that neither self-harm nor suicide
immediacy predicted secure admissions. The two samples yielded
inconsistent AUC results for violence seriousness, preventing access,
public/victim sensitivity, complex risk of violence and institutional
behaviour. Violence seriousness predicted secure placement in the East
London sample but not in the South Wales sample; the same pattern was
observed for preventing access, public/victim sensitivity and complex
risk of violence. The opposite pattern was apparent for the
institutional behaviour item; this item showed significant predictive
validity for the South Wales sample but not for the East London sample.
The preceding analysis served as a means of assessing the predictive
validity of the DUNDRUM-1 for discriminating between patients admitted
to secure services versus those not admitted to secure services. The
next series of analyses were concerned with whether either DUNDRUM-1
total scores or individual DUNDRUM-1 items differed significantly
between three groups of patients in South Wales. Fig. 1Comparison of AUC
for DUNDRUM-1 total and item scores between East London (Freestone *et
al*.23) and South Wales (current sample). AUCs reflect the validity of
DUNDRUM-1 items for discriminating individuals admitted to secure
services (low or medium secure) from those not admitted to secure
services. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. The hatched
reference line at AUC = 0.5 indicates the line of no information.

.. _sec3-1:

External validity, total DUNDRUM-1 scores
-----------------------------------------

`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__ presents the mean total DUNDRUM-1 scores separately
for the patients who stayed in open conditions and for those who were
admitted to either low or medium secure care. The mean scores suggest
appropriate alignment between DUNDRUM-1 criteria and clinical
gatekeeping decisions; mean scores increased as the levels of
therapeutic security increased. This impression of the total DUNDRUM-1
scores was confirmed by the association between patient placement and
total DUNDRUM-1 scores, *H* (*n* = 121, d.f. = 2) = 20.737, *P* < 0.000.
Furthermore, *post hoc* comparisons with Mann–Whitney and alpha
adjustment revealed that mean total DUNDRUM-1 scores for each of the
groups differed from the other two groups (open *v.* low, mean
difference = 3.86, *P* < 0.050; low *v.* medium, mean difference = 5.78,
*P* < 0.005; and open *v.* medium, mean difference = 9.64, *P* < 0.005).
Fig. 2Mean DUNDRUM-1 scores for the patients allocated to open
conditions, low and medium security. Error bars show the standard error
of the mean (\*\ *P* < 0.050; \**\*\ *P* < 0.001).

.. _sec3-2:

External validity, individual DUNDRUM-1 items
---------------------------------------------

`Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__ presents the mean scores for individual DUNDRUM-1
items for three groups of patients referred to the South Wales Forensic
Mental Health Service: those who subsequently remained in open
conditions, those admitted to low security and those admitted to medium
security. Between-group differences and successive increases in the mean
scores for individual items indicated that patient placement had been
consistent with DUNDRUM-1 criteria. Inspection of the data in `Fig.
3 <#fig03>`__ suggested that patient placement was not consistently
aligned with all of the DUNDRUM-1 items, for example, there was clear
separation in mean scores between the groups for the legal process item
but poor separation for the self-harm seriousness item. In order to
explore this impression of the association between items and patient
placement, a series of Kruskal–Wallis tests were conducted, one for each
of the 11 items of the DUNDRUM-1. Fig. 3Mean DUNDRUM-1 item scores for
patients who stayed in open conditions, and those who were admitted to
either low or medium security. Error bars show the standard error of the
mean.

The results of the multiple Kruskal–Wallis analyses are presented in
`Table 1 <#tab01>`__. The impression that some DUNDRUM-1 criteria fitted
service placement more accurately than others was confirmed. Only
seriousness of violence, immediacy of risk, specialist forensic need,
legal process and institutional behaviour were significantly associated
with patient placement. Placement was not associated with absconding
risk, complex violent need, victim sensitivity/public confidence,
preventing access, self-harm seriousness or immediacy of suicide risk.
It is worth noting, however, that several items (absconding risk,
complex violent need and victim sensitivity/public confidence), if
tested individually, would have been regarded as statistically
significant but were rejected here after alpha adjustment. Table
1Kruskal–Wallis analysis of individual DUNDRUM-1 itemsDUNDRUM-1
itemObserved *P*-valueAdjusted alphaSignificanceLegal
process<0.0000.005***Immediacy of risk<0.0000.005***Specialist forensic
need<0.0000.005***Seriousness of violence<0.0000.006***Institutional
behaviour<0.0010.007**Absconding risk<0.0500.008nsComplex violent
need<0.0500.010nsVictim sensitivity/public
confidence<0.0500.013nsPreventing access>0.0500.017nsSelf-harm
seriousness>0.0500.025nsImmediacy of suicide risk>0.0500.050ns [1]_

The above Kruskal–Wallis analysis was used to select predictor variables
for regression modelling of gatekeeper decision-making and identified
five significant potential predictor variables. The current sample of
121 cases with five predictor variables therefore exceeded the normal
power convention (30) in standard regression analyses (104 + number of
predictors = 109).

.. _sec3-3:

Analysis of heuristics
----------------------

With an ordinal dependent variable, an ordinal regression was chosen.
The distribution of the dependent variable was skewed towards the higher
security levels (see `Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__), so the complementary log-log
function was used.

The predictors for the model were those highlighted in `Table
1 <#tab01>`__ by the Kruskal–Wallis analysis (seriousness of violence,
immediacy of risk, specialist forensic needs, legal process and
institutional behaviour). The model was a significant predictor of level
of security assignment (χ\ :sup:`2` = 236.6, d.f. = 5, *P* < 0.001),
with estimates of variance accounted for ranging between 86% (Cox and
Snell) and 98% (Nagelkerke). The goodness of fit tests (Pearson and
deviance) were both non-significant (*P* = 1.000 for both). The test of
parallel lines was also non-significant (χ\ :sup:`2` = 0.0, d.f. = 5,
*P* = 1.000). Parameter estimates are shown in `Table 2 <#tab02>`__. The
two significant predictors in this initial model were legal process and
immediacy of risk. Table 2Parameter estimates of variables predicting
assigned level of security (whole
model)Estimates.e.Waldd.f.\ *P*-valuePredictorsSeriousness of
violence−0.060.190.111>0.050Immediacy of
risk0.360.174.701\ **<0.050**\ Specialist forensic
needs0.240.201.471>0.050Legal
process1.810.2842.221\ **<0.001**\ Institutional
behaviour0.220.150.021>0.050 [2]_

To examine the variance accounted for by different elements of the
model, the analysis was repeated with only legal process and immediacy
of risk (the elements that were significant in the initial model). Legal
processes and immediacy of risk were significantly associated (Kendall's
tau = 0.255, *P* < 0.010). The simpler model was a significant predictor
of security assignment (χ\ :sup:`2` = 166.4, d.f. = 2, *P* < 0.001); the
estimates of variance accounted for were lower than when all five
predictors were included in the model, between 75% (Cox and Snell) and
85% (Nagelkerke). The goodness of fit tests were both non-significant
(Pearson *P* = 0.940, deviance *P* = .530), see `Table 3 <#tab03>`__.
Table 3Parameter estimates of variables predicting assignment to level
of securityEstimates.e.Waldd.f.\ *P*-valuePredictorsImmediacy of
risk0.350.137.831\ **<0.005**\ Legal
process1.560.2540.731\ **<0.001**\  [3]_

The remaining three predictors (seriousness of violence, special
forensic needs and institutional behaviour) were then considered without
legal Process and immediacy of Risk, see `Table 4 <#tab04>`__. The
resulting model was a significant predictor of security assignment
(χ\ :sup:`2` = 34.9, d.f. = 3, *P* < 0.001); estimates of variance
accounted for ranged between 14% (McFadden) and 28% (Nagelkerke). The
goodness of fit tests were both non-significant (Pearson *P* = 0.200,
deviance *P* = 0.080). Specialist forensic need was correlated with both
institutional behaviour (Kendall's tau = 0.342, *P* < 0.001) and
seriousness of violence (Kendall's tau = 0.258, *P* < 0.005); however,
institutional behaviour scores were independent of seriousness of
violence (Kendall's tau = 0.025, *P* > 0.050). Table 4Parameter
estimates of variables predicting assigned level of security (initially
excluded predictors)Estimates.e.Waldd.f.\ *P*-valuePredictorsSeriousness
of violence0.370.165.011\ **<0.050**\ Specialist forensic
needs0.300.135.261\ **<0.050**\ Institutional
behaviour0.330.136.261\ **<0.050**\  [4]_

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec4-1:

External validity of the DUNDRUM-1 triage tool
----------------------------------------------

The weaknesses of unsupported clinical risk assessment have been the
subject of debate for more than 30 years, and a growing number of tools
have been designed with the intent of maximising consistency and
transparency; however, the application of violence risk assessment tools
has been extensively criticised.30 The DUNDRUM quartet22 has been
designed specifically as a support tool for clinical judgements at
important junctures in patient care (admission to hospital,
increasing/decreasing therapeutic security and discharge). One potential
weakness of the DUNDRUM quartet is that it was developed in a specific
service context, and its practical relevance depends heavily upon its
generality. Currently, the validity of this tool rests upon work
conducted predominantly by its authors; very little is known about how
well the contents of the DUNDRUM quartet generalise to decision-making
in other services.

Overall, the findings of the current study support the predictive and
external validity of the DUNDRUM-1 triage tool as a clinical decision
aid for first-time referrals to secure psychiatric services. Total
scores on the DUNDRUM-1 differed between all three of our groups of
patients (open conditions, low secure and medium secure), and scores
increased as levels of security allocation increased. The main measure
of predictive validity was the AUC, and our findings, along with those
of Freestone *et al*.,23 indicate acceptable discriminative power for
the DUNDRUM-1; total scores on the DUNDRUM-1 yielded AUC values between
0.75 and 0.8, with lower bounds for 95% CIs that were comfortably above
chance. It is notable, however, that these AUC values were lower than
that reported earlier (AUC = 0.984) when the DUNRUM-1 was used to
discriminate between court cases in which individuals were admitted or
not admitted to psychiatric care.25 By contrast, all of the individuals
in the samples reported by Freestone *et al*.23 and here were referred
to services, presumably because their offending and/or clinical
presentation caused sufficient concern to prompt forensic assessment. It
is therefore unsurprising that our AUC values were lower than those
reported earlier, because any sample referred to specialist services
will have been relatively homogenous compared with a ‘randomly’ selected
and clinically heterogeneous court sample. This finding shows that the
predictive validity of the DUNDRUM-1 depends to some extent upon the
context in which it is being applied, and its external validity may
therefore be constrained.

The pattern of findings for the predictive validity of individual
DUNDRUM-1 items was not simple. First, both the current study and
Freestone *et al*.23 found that self-harm and suicide risk were not
related to decisions following referral for possible admission to secure
conditions. This finding suggests that secure admissions in South Wales
and East London were not influenced by the severity of the risk that
individuals posed to themselves. It is plausible that differences in
service configuration (e.g. the degree of integration between secure and
general services) between the UK and Eire could explain the restricted
external validity of these two items. Alternatively, this could reflect
a difference in emphasis on public protection between services in the UK
and in Eire. Further research would have to be conducted in order to
determine the source of this important difference.

As well as the differences between the two UK samples and the original
validation sample for the DUNDRUM-1, there were also a number of
differences between the two UK samples that may indicate local
constraints on the validity of some of the tool's items. There was
agreement in AUC analysis between the South Wales and East London
samples for six of the 11 DUNDRUM-1 items (including non-significant
results for suicide and self-harm). AUC results therefore differed for
five items, including seriousness of violence, preventing access,
public/victim sensitivity, complex risk of violence and institutional
behaviour. Therefore, the influence of these factors on secure
admissions decision-making differed between South Wales and East London.

Overall, the above interpretation of the external validity of the
DUNDRUM-1 triage tool raises some difficult questions. Are generic
clinical judgement tools viable for applications across contexts, where
there appear to be so many differences in emphasis between services and
in the predictive accuracy of the tool? Might locally defined clinical
judgement tools provide an alternative approach that would be more
contextually relevant, especially in light of increasing devolution of
health service configuration and governance between regions of the UK?

.. _sec4-2:

Anchoring heuristics in clinical decision-making
------------------------------------------------

The emphasis in the forensic literature has been on the possible
contribution of heuristic decision-making to preventable fatalities;
however, only a minority of such events are in fact predictable, even
when heuristics could have been minimised by the application of risk
assessment tools.31 The current work makes a novel contribution, because
it focused instead on characterising the nature of heuristics applied by
gatekeepers when patients were allocated to different levels of
therapeutic security at the point of first referral to secure services.

The information for rating all of the items of the DUNDRUM-1 was readily
available in all of the patient referral reports that were analysed in
the current study. The gatekeeping clinicians were therefore clearly
collating and reporting patient characteristics relevant to all 11 of
this tool's items, even though the gatekeepers were not using the
DUNDRUM-1 in their decision-making. The DUNDRUM triage tool, therefore,
showed excellent face validity with respect to the information gathering
practices in secure triage assessment. In the following, we consider
whether all of this information actually informed clinical triage
decisions to the same extent, or whether gatekeeping decisions instead
reflected the operation of heuristic bias.

The second objective of the current study was to use regression analyses
of individual DUNDRUM-1 items and gatekeeping decisions to examine the
nature of heuristics in the decisions made by clinicians in South Wales.
Our analyses revealed the presence of anchoring12 that was biased in
favour of a subset of DUNDRUM-1 items. Two of the 11 (legal process and
immediacy of risk due to mental disorder) explained a disproportionately
large fraction (between 86% and 98%) of the variance in patient
placement. When these two potent predictors were removed from the model,
three further variables (seriousness of violence, specialist forensic
need and institutional behaviour) were shown to predict security level
but explained a more modest proportion (between 14% and 28%) of variance
in decision-making. Taken together, the two regression analyses suggest
a two-tiered, hierarchical heuristic (see `Fig. 4 <#fig04>`__) that was
primarily anchored by two items, legal process (which reflected the
least restrictive option acceptable to all parties) and immediacy of
risk due to mental disorder; the secondary tier included consideration
of seriousness of violence, specialist forensic need and institutional
behaviour. Fig. 4Legal process and immediacy of risk served as heuristic
anchors that may have acted as a heuristic frame for secondary
consideration of seriousness of violence, specialist forensic need and
institutional behaviour.

Our heuristic analysis rested on the assumption that each of the items
of the DUNDRUM-1 tool should influence decision-making to the same
extent. This is a common assumption in the construction of risk
assessment tools (PCL-R; HCR-20), but it often does not reflect the
subjective weighting given to these characteristics by clinicians during
assessments. Further application of regression methods with the
DUNDRUM-1 and other assessment tools could further elaborate the extent
and nature of anchoring heuristics in many aspects of clinical
decision-making regarding people with mental illness.

.. _sec4-3:

Limitations
-----------

Anchoring and framing heuristics are closely interrelated,11 and it is
plausible that consideration of two or more of the patient
characteristics may have interacted: consideration of some items may
have acted as frames for subsequently considered items. Unfortunately,
the design of the current study did not allow more detailed exploration
of such interactive cognitive processes; the contribution of framing
heuristics here must remain unknown.

Examination of the referral reports yielded information on a great many
factors that did not form part of the items included in the DUNDRUM-1.
Gatekeepers were therefore routinely collecting and assessing
information beyond the scope of the DUNDRUM-1. Our analysis depended on
applying the DUNDRUM-1 as a best practice framework, and it could not
capture the possible contribution of these other factors to triage
assessment decisions. We conclude that the heuristic in triage decisions
was anchored on only two factors. It is possible that selection of the
DUNDRUM-1 as the best practice framework for the current analysis may
have artificially constrained the resulting heuristic and clinicians may
have been basing their decisions on a wider set of factors.

The current study does not inform about any relationships between triage
decisions and either health or forensic outcomes. Individual progress
monitoring and aggregated data on outcomes for patients placed in secure
mental health care (cf. Centre for Mental Health, 2011) remains
underdeveloped in the UK.

**Daniel Lawrence** is a Forensic Psychologist, working at various
locations in Wales for the Priory Group, UK. **Tracey-Lee Davies** is
currently acting Head of Nursing for Child and Adolescent Mental Health
Services (CAMHS) in Bridgend, UK. **Dr Ruth Bagshaw** is the Lead
Consultant Clinical and Forensic Psychologist in Specialist Services for
ABMU Health Board, Wales. **Dr Paul Hewlett** is Senior Lecturer in
Applied Psychology, Cardiff Metropolitan University, UK. Professor
Pamela Taylor holds the Chair in Psychiatry at the Division of
Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff University,
UK. **Dr Andrew Watt** is a Reader in Applied Psychology at the
Department of Applied Psychology, Cardiff Metropolitan University, UK.

.. [1]
   Alpha was adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Holm–Bonferroni
   method. DUNDRUM-1 items were sorted on the basis of observed
   *P*-value (reading down, lowest to highest). \**\*\ \ *P* < 0.000;
   \*\*\ \ *P* < 0.001; ns, not significant.

.. [2]
   Significant *P* values are highlighted in bold.

.. [3]
   Significant *P*-values are highlighted in bold.

.. [4]
   Significant *P*-values are highlighted in bold.
