============================================================================================================================
The effect of a youth mental health service model on access to secondary mental healthcare for young people aged 14–25 years
============================================================================================================================

Sarah Maxwell
Obianuju Ugochukwu
Tim Clarke
Brioney Gee
Emmet Clarke
Hope Westgate
Jonathan Wilson
Belinda R Lennox
Ian M GoodyerCorrespondence to Dr Sarah Maxwell
(sarah.maxwell1@nsft.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2019-2

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The Norfolk Youth Service was created in 2012 in response to calls to
   redesign mental health services to better meet the needs of young
   people. The new service model transcends traditional boundaries by
   creating a single, ‘youth friendly’ service for young people aged
   14–25 years. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of
   the transition to this new model on patterns of referral, acceptance
   and service use. We analysed routinely collected data on young people
   aged 14–25 years referred for secondary mental healthcare in Norfolk
   before and after implementation of the youth mental health service.
   The number of referrals, their age and gender, proportion of
   referrals accepted and average number of service contacts per
   referral by age pre- and post-implementation were compared.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Referrals increased by 68% following implementation of the new
   service model, but the proportion of referrals accepted fell by 27
   percentage points. Before implementation of the youth service, there
   was a clear discrepancy between the peak age of referral and the age
   of those seen by services. Following implementation, service contacts
   were more equitable across ages, with no marked discontinuity at age
   18 years.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Our findings suggest that the transformation of services may have
   succeeded in reducing the ‘cliff edge’ in access to mental health
   services at the transition to adulthood. However, the sharp rise in
   referrals and reduction in the proportion of referrals accepted
   highlights the importance of considering possible unintended
   consequences of new service models.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interests
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Adolescence is a high-risk period for the emergence of mental health
problems(n.d.a) but mental health service provision for this age group
is often inadequate.(n.d.b)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.c) Traditional mental health
service models bisect the adolescent period, with young people under 18
(or in some cases 16) years seen by child and adolescent mental health
services (CAMHS) and those aged 18 years and over by adult mental health
services (AMHS). Consequently, there is often a gap in service provision
for young people transitioning to adulthood, meaning that young people
are unable to access timely and developmentally appropriate
support.(n.d.d)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.e) In response to these problems, a
number of innovative services have emerged that traverse the traditional
CAMHS–AMHS divide in an effort to meet the specific needs of young
people and reduce the need for disruptive transitions between
services.(n.d.e)

Norfolk and Suffolk National Health Service Foundation Trust (NSFT)
established the Norfolk Youth Service as a pilot in 2012. The pilot
service provided mental healthcare for young people aged 14–25 years
with severe and complex non-psychotic mental health problems. Following
the success of the pilot, the service was expanded to provide staged
intervention for all young people aged 14–25 years living in Norfolk and
Waveney, replacing the existing traditional CAMHS–AMHS service model. In
2015, Norfolk and Waveney was home to 271 698 children and young people
aged under 25 years.(n.d.f) The county is predominantly rural and 86% of
residents identify as White British; it has higher rates of looked after
children, children in need because of abuse, neglect or family
dysfunction, and pupils with behavioural, emotional and social support
needs than the average for England.(n.d.f)

The new service model was intended to be youth-oriented,
non-stigmatising and recovery-focused to maximise access and engagement.
The new service kept the same referral criteria, continuing to accept
referrals for young people with mental health problems requiring
specialist or secondary care interventions. However, young people no
longer had to be referred from a CAMHS service into an AMHS service when
they reached 18 years old, increasing the continuity of care. The
national and local context for this service transformation, and the
design of the new service have been described in detail
elsewhere.(n.d.g)

The empirical evidence of the effect of redesigning mental health
services to bridge the CAMHS–AMHS age range on young people's access to
mental health services is limited. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effect of implementing a youth mental health service
model for young people aged 14–25 years, based on patterns of referral,
acceptance and service use. The study involved retrospective analysis of
service data collected before and after the implementation of the
Norfolk Youth Service.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Design
------

The study used a historical control design. The investigation focused on
two 12-month periods, one before and one after the implementation of a
specialist youth mental health service for young people aged 14–25 years
in Norfolk, UK. The first time period, September 2010 to August 2011,
fell immediately before the development of the youth mental health
service pilot. The second time period, April 2014 to March 2015, was the
second year of operation of the substantive Norfolk Youth Service,
chosen to coincide with the completion of the transition to the new
service model and embedding of new clinical teams. The service models in
operation during these two time periods are outlined in simplified form
in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__. Pre-existing data on young people referred to
secondary mental health services in Norfolk during these two time
periods was obtained and analysed. Fig. 1Service models in operation
before and after creation of the Norfolk Youth Service as part of
Norfolk and Suffolk National Health Service Foundation Trust's redesign
of services for children, families and young people. AMHS, Adult Mental
Health Services; CAMHS, Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services.

.. _sec1-2:

Data collection
---------------

Data on all referrals to NSFT are routinely collected and processed by
the Trust's Informatics Department for the purpose of business delivery
and development. To meet the aims of our study, the research team
requested data held by the Informatics Department on all referrals to
secondary mental health services in Norfolk of young people aged 14–25
years during the above 12-month periods. All data was anonymised before
being transferred to the research team; the researchers accessed no
personally identifiable data. The study was approved by NSFT as a
service evaluation and did not require ethical approval.

The data requested included the demographic characteristics of those
referred, the outcome of the referral (i.e. whether the young person was
accepted into mental health services) and the number of recorded service
contacts (i.e. the number of appointments, including both face-to-face
and telephone appointments), which served as an indicator of service
use.

.. _sec1-3:

Analysis plan
-------------

The number of referrals received, proportion of referrals accepted, and
the age and gender of those referred and accepted were examined for each
of the two time periods under consideration. The average number of
service contacts per referral by age was also calculated for each time
period. These descriptive statistics were used to make comparisons
across the two time periods studied, with the aid of tables and figures.
The use of inferential statistics to make comparisons between the two
time periods was not considered appropriate given that the dataset
included all recorded referrals made during the pre-specified time
periods of interest, not a sample of such referrals.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Referral and acceptance rates
-----------------------------

During a 12-month period before the implementation of the youth service
model, from 1 September 2010 to 31 August 2011 inclusive, NSFT received
7476 referrals for young people aged 14–25 years living in Norfolk. Of
these referrals, 27.7% were for young people under 18 years of age.
Across services, 90.8% of referrals received were accepted. The
acceptance rate was higher for AMHS than for CAMHS (95.5 *v.* 78.5%).
During a 12-month period post-implementation of the new service model,
from 1 April 2014 to 31 March 2015 inclusive, NSFT received 12 559
referrals for individuals aged 14–25 years living in Norfolk. Of these
referrals, 45.8% were for young people under 18 years of age. During
this period, the Norfolk Youth Service accepted 68.2% of referrals
received. The acceptance rate for adults referred to the service was
higher than for young people aged under 18 years (75.8 *v.* 59.2%). The
referral and acceptance data for both time periods are summarised in
`Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Table 1Referrals received and accepted pre- and
post-implementation of the youth mental health service model for young
people aged 14–17 years and aged 18–25
yearsPre-implementationPost-implementation14–17 years18–25
yearsTotal14–17 years18–25
yearsTotalReferred2070540674965746681212 559Accepted162451626786340051638563Percentage
accepted78.595.590.859.275.868.2 [1]_

The majority of those referred during both time periods were female
(58.8% pre-implementation and 59.5% post-implementation). For both pre-
and post-implementation of the youth service model, the gender disparity
in the referrals received was most marked among younger referrals under
18 years of age, with a more even gender split in referrals of those
aged over 18 years.

.. _sec2-2:

Service contacts
----------------

During the 12-month period before the implementation of the new service
model, the total number of contacts with young people aged 14–25 years
in Norfolk was 56 759. The average number of contacts per referral was
markedly higher for young people aged 15–17 years than for young people
aged 18–20 years, with a clear disparity between the rate of contacts
per referral for those younger than 18 years and those aged 18 years or
over. On average, a young person referred at 17 years of age went on to
have 11.3 service contacts, whereas a young person referred at 18 years
of age went on to have just 5.3 service contacts.

In the 12-month period following implementation of the youth service
model, the total number of service contacts with young people aged 14–25
years in Norfolk was 79 659. Although overall the average number of
contacts per referral was lower than before implementation of the new
model, the average number of contacts received was more equitable across
age groups. On average, a young person referred at 17 years of age went
on to have eight service contacts, whereas a young person referred at 18
years of age went on to have an average of seven service contacts. The
average number of contacts with services during the periods before and
after implementation of youth service model by age of referral are
presented in `Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__. Fig. 2Average number of service
contacts per referral for young people aged 14–25 years
pre-implementation (Time 1) and post-implementation (Time 2) of the
youth mental health service model.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The purpose of this study was to explore whether a change in service
structure from a traditional CAMHS–AMHS model with transition at 18
years of age to a youth mental health service model for young people
aged 14–25 years was associated with altered patterns of referral,
acceptance or service-use.

A number of interesting changes post-implementation were identified. The
number of referrals to mental health services for young people aged
14–25 years living in Norfolk increased by 68% following implementation
of the new service model: from 7476 before the implementation of the
youth service to 12 559 after its implementation. The number of
referrals increased most for young people aged 14–17 years: there was a
2.8-fold increase in the number of individuals aged 14–17 years referred
but only a 1.3-fold increase in referrals for individuals aged 18–25
years.

The reason for this increase in referrals is unclear. One possibility is
that the increase reflects increased local awareness of the support
available for young people with mental health problems as a result of
the publicity surrounding the new service model. New referral routes
(including the option for young people to self-refer) may also have led
to an increased volume of direct referrals to secondary mental health
services. Previously, these young people might have been referred to
primary care or third-sector agencies in the first instance, with only
more severe or complex cases being referred on to secondary care. It is
also possible that the increase in referrals reflects a wider increase
in demand for mental health support for young people, not directly
associated with the change in service model. There is some evidence that
rates of internalising problems in children and young people have been
increasing in recent years,(n.d.h) and a substantial rise in the demand
for children and young people's mental health service has been reported
nationally.(n.d.i)

Both before and after the implementation of the youth service model,
more females were referred than males, with the gender disparity being
more marked among younger referrals. The reluctance of young men to seek
care for mental health problems is well
documented.(n.d.j)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.k) The small number of males referred
relative to females, both before and after the implementation of the new
service model, suggests there is more work to do to encourage young men
to access support. NSFT have recently launched a Men's Wellbeing Project
that aims to encourage men and boys to talk more openly about their
mental health and increase access to mental health services.(n.d.l)

Although the raw number of referrals accepted by the service increased
substantially following implementation of the youth service model, the
proportion of referrals accepted fell: from 91% pre-implementation of
the model to 68% post-implementation. This decrease might be at least
partially explained by the increased number of referrals coming into
conflict with limited service capacity. As previously reported,(n.d.g) a
consequence of improving access to services when resources remain
limited has been increased wait-lists and sometimes overwhelming
case-loads. Although acceptance criteria were unchanged following
implementation of the new service model, it is possible that pressures
on service capacity might have led to an upward shift in the threshold
for secondary care. However, it is also possible that the fall in the
proportion of referrals accepted can be explained by an increase in the
number of inappropriate referrals due to the introduction of new
referral routes. These referrals are then signposted on to more suitable
agencies. The service is in the process of investigating this with a
view to developing strategies to further improve access for young people
across all agencies, to reduce the number of referrals ending up in the
wrong place and subsequently being passed around services.

The number of recorded service contacts was used as a proxy for service
use. The overall average number of contacts per referral for those aged
14–25 years decreased following the introduction of the youth service
model. Although the service offered by Norfolk Youth Service is not
time-limited, there is an emphasis on offering appropriately staged
intervention and not retaining individuals within the service for longer
than needed.(n.d.g) The reduction in overall average service contacts
for young people in this age group might, therefore, reflect this change
in service philosophy, toward encouraging flexible re-referral if
needed.

Before implementation of the Norfolk Youth Service, young people aged 18
years or over were referred to services in high numbers but received
substantially fewer contacts with services relative to those aged under
18 years. This ‘cliff edge’ in mental health service use at the
transition to adulthood has also been reported in the USA,(n.d.m)
suggesting this problem is not specific to the local context. Following
the implementation of the youth service model, the average number of
contacts per referral was more equitable across ages, with the cliff
edge in service contacts no longer evident. Pre-implementation, the
average number of contacts per referral at 18 years of age was less than
half that at 17 years of age. Post-implementation, the average number of
contacts per referral was just one fewer for 18-year-olds than for
17-year-olds.

It is possible that the new service model simply moved the transition
down from 18 years to 14 years. Data for 13-year-olds demonstrated that
this was not the case: 574 referrals for 13-year-olds were accepted by
the service and they received 5103 contacts. This gave them an average
of 8.9 contacts per referral, which is broadly similar to 14-year-olds.
This does not support the idea that the previous disparity in contacts
per referral has been moved to a transition at 14 years instead of 18
years.

Overall, this study suggests that implementation of the youth service
model might have been successful in reducing the disparity between
demand for, and access to, service during young adulthood.

.. _sec3-1:

Limitations
-----------

As the study had a historical control design, it is not possible to know
whether the changes in referral, acceptance and service-use patterns
observed following implementation of the youth service model were the
result of the change in service model. It remains possible that the
changes observed resulted from wider factors influencing demand for
and/or engagement with mental health services. Further, because the data
used were routinely collected service data, it is possible that there
were variations in the quality of data collection over time that may
have affected the study's findings.

Although moving from separate CAMHS and AMHS to an integrated service
for 14- to 25-year-olds removes the service boundary at age 17/18 years,
it also creates new boundaries at age 13/14 years and 25/26 years.
Arguably, these new service boundaries fit more closely with
developmental transitions and coincide less closely with peaks in the
incidence of mental health problems. Nonetheless, it will be important
for future research to investigate the effect of these new service
boundaries on those who fall outside the 14–25 year age range.

We would like to acknowledge the valuable input of Valerie Gage, Kevin
Brown (NSFT Informatics Department) and Dr Dickon Bevington.

Findings reported in this paper have been presented as a number of
conferences and seminars, including: Making it Happen Across Kent,
Surrey and Sussex, Gatwick, 17 April 2012; The Second International
Conference on Youth Mental Health, Brighton, September 30 to 2 October
2013; Royal College of Psychiatrists Congress, Edinburgh, 2–5 July 2013;
The Third International Conference on Youth Mental Health, Montreal,
8–10 October 2015 and Improving Mental Health Services for Young People:
Supporting the transition to adulthood, London, 21 June 2016.

**Sarah Maxwell** is a consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist with
Children, Families and Young Peoples Services (CFYP), Norfolk and
Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Obianuju Ugochukwu** is a consultant
general adult psychiatrist with Children, Families and Young Peoples
Services (CFYP), Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Tim
Clarke** is a research clinical psychologist with Children, Families and
Young Peoples Services (CFYP), Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust
and Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, UK. **Brioney
Gee** is a research psychologist with Children, Families and Young
Peoples Services (CFYP), Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust and
Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, UK. **Emmet Clarke**
is an assistant psychologist with Children, Families and Young Peoples
Services (CFYP), Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Hope
Westgate** is an assistant psychologist with Children, Families and
Young Peoples Services (CFYP), Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust,
UK. **Jonathan Wilson** is a research director at Children, Families and
Young Peoples Services (CFYP), Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust
and Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, UK. **Belinda R
Lennox** is an associate professor and clinical senior lecturer in the
Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford Health NHS
Foundation Trust, UK. **Ian M Goodyer** is a professor emeritus in the
Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge and Peterborough NHS
Foundation Trust, UK.

The research was supported by the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) through Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research
and Care, East of England fellowships awarded to S.M. and O.U. The views
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily of the NIHR or
Collaborations for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care, East
of England.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.m.

.. [1]
   Pre-implementation refers to the 12-month period from 1 September
   2010 to 31 August 2011. Post-implementation refers to the 12-month
   period from 1 April 2014 to 31 March 2015 inclusive.
