---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  We aimed to evaluate clinical note documentation of valproate
  prescribing and establish the level of knowledge among women of
  child-bearing potential regarding valproate-associated adverse
  effects, including teratogenesis, in a regional Irish mental health
  service.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  Of the 42 women prescribed sodium valproate, 21.4% (*n* = 9) had some
  documentation in relation to associated risks and 33.3% (*n* = 14)
  described an awareness of these risks from consultation with their
  treating mental health team. On clinical interview, 9.5% (*n* = 4) of
  individuals with clear documentation of the risks of teratogenesis
  described no such awareness. Augmentation with lithium was associated
  with greater awareness of the teratogenic risks of valproate (*P* =
  0.011).

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  A clear description of the teratogenic risks of valproate and
  potential management strategies, including advice regarding
  contraception and supplementation with folic acid, should be clearly
  documented and provided repeatedly and in context to all women of
  child-bearing age who are prescribed valproate.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a4}

  None.
author:
- Deirdre Mulryan
- Anna McIntyre
- Colm McDonald
- Sabina Feeney
- Brian HallahanCorrespondence to Dr Brian Hallahan
  (<brian.hallahan@nuigalway.ie>)
date: 2018-12
institute:
- 1Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital Galway, Ireland
- 2Department of Psychiatry, Roscommon County Hospital, Ireland
- 3School of Medicine, College of Medicine Nursing and Health Sciences,
  National University of Ireland, Ireland
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
title: Awareness and documentation of the teratogenic effects of
  valproate among women of child-bearing potential
---

Valproate is a broad-spectrum anticonvulsant with well-established
efficacy for the management of partial and generalised seizures,^1^
acute (hypo)mania and prophylaxis of (hypo)manic episodes both as a
monotherapy or in combination with other psychotropic agents.^2^ In
addition, valproate can be utilised for the prophylaxis of depressive
episodes in bipolar disorder,^2^ although this reported therapeutic
effect is of lesser magnitude.^3^

# Risk of teratogenesis {#sec6-1}

However, valproate use in women of child-bearing potential is associated
with a wide range of neurodevelopmental deficits,^4^ with an approximate
risk of teratogenesis of 7%^5^ and 70% of teratogenesis malformations
consisting of neural tube defects (NTDs),^6^ which is a 20-fold increase
compared with the general population.^7^ NTDs occur when the embryonic
neural tube fails to completely close during development, and include
spina bifida and anencephaly.^8^ In addition to NTDs, valproate use in
pregnancy is also associated with an increased incidence of cleft lip
and palate, cardiovascular abnormalities, genitourinary defects,
endocrine disorders, cognitive impairment, developmental delay and
autism spectrum disorders in the foetus.^9^ A 'foetal valproate
syndrome' has also been described and includes a constellation of
physical traits consistently observed in foetuses exposed *in utero* to
valproate such as a flat nasal bridge, epicanthal folds, small upper
lids and a downward-turned mouth.^10^^,^^11^ Potential contributory
factors to the teratogenicity of valproate have been reported and
include the number of co-administered medications, higher dosages of
valproate, differences in maternal and/or foetal metabolism, gestational
age of the foetus at exposure to valproate and hereditary
susceptibility.^12^^,^^13^

The teratogenic risk associated with valproate has resulted in
significant caution with its use, with the summary of product
characteristics for sodium valproate and the related compound
semi-sodium valproate and the National Institute of Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) guidelines of 2014 stating that valproate should not
be initiated in women of child-bearing potential without specialist
advice or unless other treatments are not tolerated or are ineffective
([https:\\\www.gov.uk/government/publications/toolkit-on-the-risks-of-valproate-medicines-in-female-patients](https:\\www.gov.uk/government/publications/toolkit-on-the-risks-of-valproate-medicines-in-female-patients)).

# Awareness of teratogenic risk {#sec6-2}

Given the risks associated with valproate use during pregnancy,
awareness of these risks and a consideration of what precautions are
required in relation to the use of valproate in women of child-bearing
potential is important. However, previous research has demonstrated low
rates of documentation in clinical notes of advice from mental health
staff regarding both the teratogenic risks of valproate and the
importance of both contraception and folic acid use.^14^^--^^17^

# Aims {#sec6-3}

Consequently, in this study we wanted to establish if women of
child-bearing potential attending a mental health service in Ireland
were prescribed valproate and ascertain the indications for this
treatment. In addition, we wanted to assess the rate of documentation of
advice relating to the teratogenic risks of valproate and importance of
the use of contraception and folic acid. We wanted to establish the
awareness of women of child-bearing potential who are prescribed
valproate regarding the teratogenic risks of this agent, and the
potential benefits of contraception and folic acid. We also wanted to
enquire establish how those with such awareness attained this
information.

# Method {#sec1}

## Participants {#sec1-1}

This study was undertaken in an Irish mental health service region with
an approximate population of 250 000 people. All female adult patients
attending this mental health service in January 2016 were screened
(*n* = 1620) to ascertain if they were being treated with valproate.
Community mental health team staff members, including consultant
psychiatrists, non-consultant psychiatry hospital doctors, community
mental health nurses, allied health professionals and administrators,
were contacted to ascertain potential participants. Inclusion criteria
included women aged 18--49 years who had been in receipt of care from
the mental health service for \>1 year and had been treated with
valproate.

Exclusion criteria included individuals \<18 years of age, the presence
of an intellectual disability (IQ\<70), a diagnosis of dementia and the
presence of acute psychosis. None of the 42 individuals identified as
receiving treatment with valproate fulfilled these exclusion criteria.
Clinical diagnoses were attained utilising ICD-10 diagnostic criteria
after consultation with the relevant treating consultant psychiatrist
and a full clinical chart review.^18^

Ethical approval was attained from the Galway University Hospitals
Research Ethics Committee (C.A. 841) and the study was conducted in
accordance with the Helsinki declaration on research ethics. Written
informed consent was attained from each participant for clinical note
review, clinician contact and semi-structured interview. On completion
of the semi-structured interview, psychotherapeutic support was offered
to each participant.

## Chart review {#sec1-2}

A retrospective chart review was undertaken of the lifetime clinical
notes of included individuals. Clinical notes were examined in depth (by
D.M., A.M. and S.F.) and included all handwritten, typed and
electronically generated entries pertaining to in-patient admissions to
one of three acute psychiatric in-patient units; attendance at the
different day hospitals, day centres and out-patient clinics in the
region; correspondence to and from general practitioners and specialists
(including neurologists) and all prescription records.

Demographic data collected included gender, age and socioeconomic,
employment, marital and domiciliary status. Clinical data included
diagnosis, prescription of valproate, time duration and dose of
valproate prescribed and prescription of any concomitant psychotropic
medication (mood stabilisers, anticonvulsants, antidepressants,
antipsychotics, anxiolytics, hypnotics and anticholinergic agents). We
also ascertained if children were conceived to patients when prescribed
valproate, and if any foetal abnormalities were recorded. Data
pertaining to the documentation of the risk of teratogenicity or
congenital malformations secondary to valproate, and precautions
including adequate contraception and use of folic acid were recorded.

## Semi-structured interview {#sec1-3}

All 42 identified participants participated in a semi-structured
interview. Information gathered included awareness of the teratogenic
risk of valproate; how, when and by whom participants were first
informed of this risk (if informed); advice regarding use of
contraception; wishes regarding pregnancy before or during treatment
with valproate; undertaking a pregnancy test before commencement of
valproate and advice regarding, or prescription of folic acid. We also
enquired if participants became pregnant or conceived when treated with
valproate and ascertained what advice regarding treatment with valproate
was attained from their treating clinician during their pregnancy (see
Appendix 1, *Semi-Structured Interview Topic Guidelines*).

## Data analyses {#sec1-4}

Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS 22.0 for Windows (SPSS
Inc., New York, USA). We utilised the Student\'s *t*-test for parametric
data and the *χ*^2^-test for non-parametric categorical data, where
appropriate. Linear regression was conducted to ascertain the effect of
age, dose of valproate and duration of treatment in relation to clinical
documentation or awareness of the teratogenic risks of valproate.

# Results {#sec2}

## Demographic and clinical data {#sec2-1}

Demographic and clinical data are described in [Table
1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}. Of note, the most common diagnosis was
bipolar disorder (33.3%, *n* = 14) and the most common comorbid
psychotropic medications prescribed were antipsychotic agents (71%). In
addition, 16.7% of individuals (*n* = 7) were treated with valproate for
prophylaxis of epilepsy due to treatment with high dosages of clozapine.
Table 1Demographic and clinical characteristicsVariable*n* (%) or mean
(s.d.) \[range\]Employment statusIn third-level
education[^a^](#tfn1_1){ref-type="table-fn"}3 (7.1)Employed10
(23.8)Unemployed26 (69.0)Relationship statusSingle27 (64.3)In a
relationship4 (9.5)Married10 (23.8)Divorced/separated1 (2.4)Living
arrangementAlone2 (4.8)With parents or siblings12 (28.6)With partner or
spouse14 (33.3)In supported accommodation14 (33.3)Socioeconomic
class[^b^](#tfn1_2){ref-type="table-fn"}I or II10 (23.8)III0 (0.0)IV30
(71.4)V2 (4.8)Mental disorder (ICD-10)Bipolar disorder14 (33.3)Recurrent
depressive disorder12
(28.6)Schizophrenia[^c^](#tfn1_3){ref-type="table-fn"}7
(16.7)Schizoaffective disorder6 (14.3)Emotionally unstable personality
disorder3 (7.1)Other psychotropic agentsAntipsychotics30
(71.4)Antidepressants20 (47.6)Lithium6 (14.3)Anti-epileptics5
(11.9)Benzodiazepines8 (19.0)Hypnotics5 (11.9)Anticholinergics3 (7.1)Age
at interview41.5 (6.7) \[24--49\]Sodium valproate dose, mg/day923 (434)
\[300--2000\]Duration of treatment, years7.59 (3.92)
\[1--14\][^1][^2][^3]

## Clinical documentation {#sec2-2}

Documentation of risks associated with valproate in pregnancy were
present in 21.4% (*n* = 9) of the clinical files and included advice on
contraception (16.7%, *n* = 7), the specific teratogenic risks of
valproate (9.5%, *n* = 4) and use of folic acid (2.4%, *n* = 1). No
individuals had a documented pregnancy test before initiation of
valproate.

A range of sociodemographic factors, including maternal age at interview
(*B* = −0.101, *P* = 0.54), or clinical variables, including dose of
valproate (*B* = 0.205, *P* = 0.21) and treatment duration (*B* = 0.127,
*P* = 0.45), were not associated with clinical documentation of the
teratogenic risks of valproate. All nine individuals with a comorbid
diagnosis of epilepsy had no clinical documentation of the risks of
valproate, although this was not statistically significant when compared
with those treated with valproate for a mental health disorder
(*P* = 0.17, Fisher\'s exact test). Valproate augmentation with
psychotropic medication was present in 95.2% (*n* = 40) of individuals.
Three of the six individuals treated with lithium had written
documentation of the risks of valproate.

## Structured interview {#sec2-3}

On interview, 33.3% (*n* = 14) of participants demonstrated some
awareness of the risk of valproate, with 19.0% (*n* = 8) aware of
specific teratogenic risks, requirement for contraceptive use and need
for a pregnancy test before valproate initiation, and 16.7% (*n* = 8)
aware of the need for folic acid use when taking valproate. All but one
of these participants stated that they had acquired this information
from their treating consultant psychiatrist. Nine (64.3%) individuals
who stated that they were informed of the risks of valproate as acquired
from their treating clinician had no documented information detailing
this advice/information in their clinical files. Overall, 18 (42.9%)
individuals had either documented data in their clinical notes or stated
that their mental health team had advised them on at least some of the
risks of valproate for women of child-bearing potential. Four
individuals (9.5%) had documented advice in their clinical notes but had
no awareness of same (on clinical interview).

Regression analysis showed that younger age (*B* =−0.315, *P* = 0.042)
was associated with a greater awareness of the teratogenic risks of
valproate. Additionally, individuals augmented with lithium were more
likely to be aware of the teratogenic risks of valproate (83 *v.* 25%,
*P* = 0.011).

## Pregnancies on valproate {#sec2-4}

Four participants had pregnancies (all uncomplicated) when treated with
valproate. Three continued on the same treatment and dosage, with
documentation that they should continue because of the risk of relapse
of their seizure disorder. There was no documentation in these clinical
files in relation to the risks of valproate in pregnancy or advice
regarding contraception or folic acid use. The fourth participant had a
diagnosis of bipolar disorder and had documentation to discontinue
valproate (at 4 weeks\' gestation), but there was no documented advice
to commence folic acid. On structured interviews, in addition to the
individual who discontinued valproate treatment, two of the other three
participants stated that their consultant psychiatrist advised them to
commence folic acid, but there was no documentation in the clinical
files in relation to this.

# Discussion {#sec3}

This is the first study to date, to our knowledge, to review both
clinical documentation and undertake semi-structured interviews with
women of child-bearing potential who were prescribed valproate. Either
clear documentation of the risks of valproate or an awareness of these
risks after discussion with their treating clinical team was present for
43% of individuals.

Our findings of poor clinical documentation of specific risks of
valproate are consistent with previous research, with rates of 16--29%
noted for documentation of risks of teratogenesis or the provision of
advice in relation to contraception for women of child-bearing potential
who are prescribed valproate.^14^^,^^16^ Similarly, documented advice in
clinical notes relating to the use of folic acid has previously also
been noted to be particularly low (4%).^16^ Our findings in relation to
patient awareness of teratogenic risks of valproate are also consistent
with previous studies (17--28%);^12^^,^^17^ however, awareness of the
need for contraceptive use was lower in our patient cohort compared with
a number of previous studies (55--67%).^15^^,^^17^

It is probable that the majority of patients examined in this study were
provided with verbal advice regarding the risks of valproate. Two-thirds
of patients who said they had been advised of the risks of valproate had
no clinical documentation relating to this advice. Some participants,
despite clinical documentation stating they had been informed of the
risks of valproate, stated at the time of interview that they had no
awareness of such a discussion (which may potentially be related to
recall bias). This highlights the need for information (including in a
written format) relating to the teratogenic risks of valproate to be
provided repeatedly and in context to patients to ensure awareness of
these risks. This may be particularly important for this cohort of
patients who are being treated for bipolar disorder or schizoaffective
disorder, where impulsive behaviour including risky sexual behaviour may
occur during a (hypo)manic episode.^14^ The lack of documentation in
mental health clinical notes of advice to individuals treated for
epilepsy with valproate may be secondary to the fact that mental health
staff had not initiated this treatment, with evidence suggesting that
clinicians are less likely to inform patients of medications adverse
events if they have not initiated the particular medication
themselves.^17^ However, three individuals diagnosed with epilepsy
described being advised of the risks of valproate by their mental health
team, and it is probable that some participants additionally attained
advice from other clinicians (i.e. neurologists, general practitioner)
relating to the teratogenic risks of valproate. The provision of written
information, and advice on appropriate resources that gives accurate
advice in relation to the risks and benefits of valproate and
precautions required with its use is suggested. Information recently
produced by the National Clinical Programme for Medicine Management is
one potential option in this regard.^19^

This study highlights the low rates of documentation of contraceptive
use or advice regarding folic acid. Consultations with mental health
staff (preconception consultations) in relation to the risks and
benefits of continuation or discontinuation of medications, including
for women diagnosed with bipolar disorder, have previously been
demonstrated to influence both choices regarding conception and
treatment.^20^ This study suggests that such consultations, focusing on
issues of conception and pharmacotherapeutic treatment, should be
considered for all women of child-bearing potential (even if not in a
significant relationship) who are prescribed valproate. NICE
guidelines^21^ state that valproate should not be offered to women of
child-bearing potential for either the management of acute mood episodes
or the long-term management of bipolar disorder, and if already
prescribed, should gradually be discontinued because of the teratogenic
risks of valproate. Additionally, folic acid should always be prescribed
to women of child-bearing potential who are prescribed valproate,^22^
with levels to be undertaken both before commencement of valproate and
on a 6-monthly basis.

# Limitations {#sec4}

This study includes a number of limitations, including that females of
child-bearing age who were under 18 years old were not included.
Findings were attained from one region in Ireland and may not be
representative of other regions or other jurisdictions; however, many of
the findings are consistent with those noted in other jurisdictions and
thus may indeed be generalisable. Clinical notes from other
practitioners, including neurologists and general practitioners
(excluding correspondence from them as detailed in the mental health
clinical notes), were not examined or available. Finally, the
semi-structured interviews conducted were retrospective in nature, and
thus potentially liable to recall bias. Recall bias may partly explain
the discrepancy we found, where documentation detailing the teratogenic
risk of valproate was noted but not recollected by participants. It is
probable that other non-mental health service clinicians may have
disseminated information relating to the risks of valproate; however,
this was not evident on clinical interview and this study principally
investigated documentation in mental health clinical records.

# Semi-Structured Interview Topic Guidelines {#sec5-1}

1.Are you aware of any risks associated with the use of sodium
valproate? Please list these risksPlease identify how you became aware
of these risks2.Are you specifically aware of any problems this
medication has in relation to pregnancy and foetal development? What
have you been told?Who told you?When were you told?3.Was your wish or
likelihood of becoming pregnant ascertained before commencing
therapy?4.Was contraceptive advice offered?5.Was use of contraception
confirmed before commencing treatment?6.Was a pregnancy test done before
commencing sodium valproate?7.Were you advised regarding the use of
folic acid supplementation?

**Deirdre Mulryan** Senior Registrar, University Hospital Galway, Galway
Roscommon Mental Health Services, Ireland; **Anna McIntyre**, Registrar
in Psychiatry, University Hospital Galway, Ireland; **Colm McDonald,**
Professor of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, College of Medicine Nursing
and Health Sciences, National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland and
Consultant Psychiatrist, University Hospital Galway, Galway Roscommon
Mental Health Services, Ireland; **Sabina Feeney**, Consultant
Psychiatrist, Roscommon County Hospital, Ireland; **Brian Hallahan**,
Senior Lecturer, School of Medicine, College of Medicine Nursing and
Health Sciences, National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland and
Consultant Psychiatrist, University Hospital Galway, Galway Roscommon
Mental Health Services, Ireland

[^1]: In this study, undertaking a university course.

[^2]: Socioeconomic class was scored based on NRS grading: I =
    upper-middle class/higher managerial, administrative or
    professional; II = intermediate managerial, administrative or
    professional; III = supervisory or junior managerial or skilled
    manual workers; IV = semi-skilled or unskilled manual workers, V =
    unemployed, on social welfare, minimum-wage workers.

[^3]: Used as a prophylactic treatment for seizure control due to
    treatment of schizophrenia with clozapine.
