====================================================================================================================================================
Against the stream: Antidepressants are not antidepressants – an alternative approach to drug action and implications for the use of antidepressants
====================================================================================================================================================

Joanna MoncrieffCorrespondence to Joanna Moncrieff
(j.moncrieff@ucl.ac.uk)
:Date: 2018-2

:Abstract:
   Although antidepressants are regarded as effective and specific
   treatments, they are barely superior to placebo in randomised trials,
   and differences are unlikely to be clinically relevant. The
   conventional disease-centred understanding of drug action regards
   antidepressants as targeting an underlying brain process, but an
   alternative ‘drug-centred’ view suggests they are psychoactive
   substances that modify normal mental states and behaviour. These
   alterations, such as numbing of emotions, may reduce feelings of
   depression, and also create amplified placebo effects in randomised
   trials. Patients should be informed that there is no evidence that
   antidepressants work by correcting a chemical imbalance, that
   antidepressants have mind-altering effects, and that evidence
   suggests they produce no noticeable benefit compared with placebo.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   The author is co-chairperson of the Critical Psychiatry Network.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Antidepressants are by far the most commonly prescribed class of drug
for mental disorders, and their use continues to rise.(n.d.a) Huge
marketing campaigns have persuaded the general public that depression is
a ‘chemical imbalance’ that antidepressants can help reverse.
Professional organisations claim that antidepressants are an effective
and specific treatment for depression, and that they are considerably
more effective than placebo. The Royal College of Psychiatrists' current
information leaflet suggests that 50–65% of people who are given an
antidepressant will show ‘much improvement’ within 3 months, compared
with only 25–30% on placebo.(n.d.b)

.. _sec1:

The evidence base
=================

Overall, randomised controlled trials show that depression ratings
decrease slightly more with antidepressants than placebo. Studies are
inconsistent, however, and differences are small, especially when
unpublished trials are included. Reviews of the literature on tricyclic
and older antidepressants concluded that ‘in well-designed studies, the
differences between antidepressants and placebo are not
impressive’.(n.d.c) Meta-analyses of trials of selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and other modern antidepressants that
include unpublished trials have found mean differences between
antidepressants and placebo ranging from 1.80 to 2.55 points on the
widely used Hamilton Rating Scale for
Depression.(n.d.d)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.e)

The clinical significance of such small differences is doubtful. The
Hamilton scale has a total score of 54 points. A recent analysis
comparing scores on the Hamilton scale with scores on the observer-rated
Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scale suggests that a difference of
three points on the Hamilton scale is equivalent to a rating of ‘no
difference’ on the CGI scale, while a difference of eight points is
required to obtain CGI scale ratings of ‘mild
improvement’.(n.d.f)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.g) Antidepressant/placebo
differences therefore appear to fall well below levels required to make
a noticeable difference in someone's condition.

.. _sec2:

Antidepressant effects and severity
===================================

It is often suggested that antidepressants are more effective, or
perhaps only effective, in severe depression, and that this can explain
their poor performance relative to placebo in trials with mixed
populations. Some meta-analyses have found a gradient between the size
of the antidepressant/placebo difference and the severity of initial
depression across trials,(n.d.h)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.i) although differences
in people with the most severe depression still fall well below those
equating to ‘mild improvement’ on the CGI. Other meta-analyses have not
identified a severity gradient.(n.d.j)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.k)

Older evidence suggests that antidepressants are not particularly
helpful for inpatients with depression. A Medical Research Council
trial, for example, found little difference between imipramine,
phenelzine and placebo.(n.d.l) Trials of antidepressants for the
treatment of depression in people with bipolar disorder have also found
no differences between antidepressants and placebo.(n.d.m)

.. _sec3:

Antidepressant effects and the drug-centred model of drug action
================================================================

The accepted view of drug action in psychiatry is that psychiatric drugs
work by targeting a putative underlying brain abnormality. I have called
this the ‘disease-centred’ model of drug action. An alternative
explanation is the ‘drug-centred’ model, which suggests that psychiatric
drugs influence symptoms of mental disorder and distress through their
psychoactive effects. ‘Psychoactive’ drugs, sometimes referred to as
‘mind-altering drugs’, include recreational drugs, drugs prescribed for
mental health problems and some other medical drugs (e.g. steroids,
anticholinergics). They modify normal thoughts, emotions and behaviours
in characteristic ways. According to the drug-centred model of drug
action, for example, antipsychotics reduce the symptoms of psychosis
through their ability to produce a state of mental slowing and emotional
restriction, a state they produce in animals and humans, regardless of
the presence of psychiatric or behavioural problems. Anxiolytics reduce
symptoms of anxiety through their well-known sedative and relaxant
effects, which occur independently of any psychiatric disorder.

Elsewhere, I have outlined the lack of evidence for the disease-centred
view of drug action for any class of psychiatric medication.(n.d.n) The
serotonin and noradrenaline theories of depression, which appear to
explain the action of antidepressants in a disease-centred manner, are
not supported by evidence or expert opinion.(n.d.o)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.p)
Moreover, numerous randomised trials have shown that drugs that are not
considered as antidepressants, and have actions on other
neurotransmitter systems, including benzodiazepines, opiates, stimulants
and antipsychotics, are as effective as recognised antidepressants in
people with depression.(n.d.o)

The drug-centred model suggests that the mental and physical alterations
produced by antidepressants account for the differences between
antidepressants and placebo in randomised trials. The psychoactive
effects of individual antidepressants vary in strength and character,
depending on chemical class and composition. Tricyclic drugs are
strongly sedating and impair psychological test performance.(n.d.q)
SSRIs have weaker and more subtle effects, but can induce a state of
emotional numbing or restriction, lethargy, reduced libido and sexual
impairment. They also occasionally produce a state of agitation and
tension, especially in young people.(n.d.r) Antidepressant-induced
emotional numbness may directly reduce the intensity of people's
feelings, but mental and physical alterations may also produce an
amplified placebo effect, by revealing to people participating in
randomised trials that they are taking an active drug. The fact that
drug/placebo differences are so small, however, suggests that
antidepressant-induced alterations are not clinically useful, whether
they act through pharmacological or psychological means.

.. _sec4:

Adverse effects
===============

By emphasising that psychiatric drugs change the normal state of the
brain and body, the drug-centred model highlights the likelihood of
adverse effects. Although modern antidepressants are usually
well-tolerated, there is mounting evidence of less common but serious
effects, including increased suicidal thoughts,(n.d.s) fetal
malformations,(n.d.t) bleeding, a prolonged and severe withdrawal
syndrome,(n.d.u) and persistent sexual dysfunction after
discontinuation.(n.d.v) The widespread use of antidepressants may also
produce nocebo effects by undermining people's sense of self-efficacy,
potentially setting them up for a lifetime of chronicity and dependence
on services.

.. _sec5:

Conclusions
===========

The public have been led to believe that depression is caused by a
chemical imbalance that antidepressants help to rectify; however, there
is no current evidence that any sort of drug specifically targets an
underlying biological abnormality, and whether there is an underlying
brain state or states specific to the experience of depression has not
been demonstrated. Amplified placebo effects and the subtle emotional
alterations produced by antidepressants may account for the small
differences between antidepressants and placebo found in some randomised
controlled trials, but these small differences are unlikely to translate
into a clinically meaningful effect. Doctors need to share this evidence
with patients who are considering taking an antidepressant. Doctors
should also help people to consider the pros and cons of using a
mind-altering drug, such as an antidepressant, in relation to each
individual's particular situation. This should include discussion of
alternative ways of achieving desired outcomes, using strategies that do
not carry the inherent risks of drug treatment.

Although the discovery of a specific antidepressant agent in the future
cannot be ruled out, it is possible that we misunderstand the nature of
depression, and that regarding it as a discrete and universal disorder
may have raised false hopes about the chance of a generally applicable
‘cure’ or treatment. The alternative view of depression as part of the
spectrum of meaningful human responses to the world suggests that drugs
will only dull the experience. In the end, the situation that provoked
the negative emotion needs to be addressed. Depression is a signal that
change is needed in some aspect of life.

**Joanna Moncrieff** is a Reader in Critical and Social Psychiatry at
University College London, and an honorary Consultant Psychiatrist at
North East London Foundation Trust. She is also a founder and co-chair
person of the Critical Psychiatry Network.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.
