---
author:
- Jennie Parker
date: 2018-8
institute:
- "Service User Researcher and Knowledge and Understanding Framework
  (KUF) Trainer, London, UK; email: <jennie.parker@btinternet.com>"
---

According to Dr Lee personality disorder is 'not your fault' and is a
treatable 'disorder' for individuals that are both able and willing to
become involved with available therapeutic programmes. This book
immediately highlights the importance of responsibility, not only on the
part of clinical staff, but also for the person engaging with services,
and as someone who has lived with the diagnosis of borderline
personality disorder for many years, I was pleased to find that a key
theme was one of empowerment.

The format and content allows a wide reach in terms of audience, being
accessible to both clinicians and those with lived experience, their
families and others with whom they may come into contact. The author
utilises well the fictional character Nina to portray real-life
examples, while not apportioning blame, nor attributing her difficulties
to one particular aspect of her life. Although the focus is mainly on
borderline personality disorder, the use of case examples in a chapter
dedicated to other personality disorders gives an excellent insight into
how these may present. Indeed, within this, is also the notion of the
enduring and pervasive nature of personality disorder, how it affects
lives, and the ability to question whether a label is indeed always
helpful or necessary.

Lee uses the term 'personality configurations' to describe individual
differences and how carers may adapt to a role which enables the
individual. The label of personality disorder is often perceived as
stigmatising and, therefore, reframing how this is presented to others
can be significant in accepting both the diagnosis and how to manage it.
Overall, he attempts to reduce stigma and the feeling of being
stigmatised, while retaining an honest approach to how negative
perceptions can influence relationships of all levels. This notion of
relationships is also addressed, being key to personality disorder and
to therapeutic alliance.

The information on the differences between borderline personality
disorder and other psychiatric diagnoses may help to dispel some myths.
For example, Lee suggests that clinical depression and depressive
symptoms of borderline personality disorder are not the same. Although
this comes across as a medicalised view, it fits well with my personal
experience where unnecessary pharmacological treatment pathways were the
only option given, rather than an effective therapeutic management of
negative emotion.

The chapter on treatments provides a comprehensive overview of
evidence-based therapies for borderline personality disorder and
indirectly highlights the paucity of evidence-based options for other
personality disorder classifications. From the range of treatment
options available, albeit limited, the information given is easy to
digest, providing key concepts and a tabulated summary of areas such as
goals and the all-important patient-therapist relationship.

At one point Lee outlines the role of choice in finding a treatment
programme and therapist. In an ideal world, the choice of therapist can
be an essential aspect of engagement in services but in reality this is
not always the case -- this is perhaps an area towards which health care
services can move their focus.

I would have welcomed discussion around the role of gender in
personality disorder, in relation to both diagnosis and treatment
outcomes, as well as a more explicit and detailed examination around the
role of emotion (and how this underlies relationships and day-to-day or
even minute-to-minute interactions). Although this idea is present in
the examples used, further elaboration may be helpful.

For me, the book summarises a positive approach to understanding and
helping individuals with personality disorder without leaving the reader
feeling helpless; this is achieved not by changing who we are but, as
the author suggests, by building on the positive qualities we already
have. I liked the idea that the final chapters provide an ending, not
just for Nina but for the reader.

Taking a collaborative approach to treatment goals and enabling
individuals to have a sense of agency in their passage to self-discovery
is an essential aspect of the book -- and a way of working that I found
to be imperative to discovering a way through what for me was a
confusing, frustrating and distressing journey.
