=====================================================================
Michael Graham Gelder MA, DM Oxon, FRCP, FRCPsych (Hon), FMedSci, DPM
=====================================================================

Philip J. Cowen
:Date: 2018-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Formerly Foundation Professor of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, UK

.. image:: S2056469418000360_inline1.jpg

As a young clinical researcher at the Institute of Psychiatry in London
in the 1960s, Michael Gelder was only too aware of the need for better
treatments of the ‘neuroses’. Management of these conditions was limited
to dependence-producing anxiolytic medications and lengthy
psychoanalytic psychotherapies, neither of which were particularly
effective. Around this time, psychologists had begun to apply learning
theory to clinical anxiety disorders, which were conceived as a
manifestation of faulty learning or, more specifically, the failure to
‘extinguish’ anxiety that was contextually inappropriate. However, it
was not until Gelder's work that these ideas influenced mainstream
psychiatry. Gelder, with his characteristic intellect and scientific
rigour, developed effective clinical methods to lessen anxiety by
‘desensitisation’, in which gradual exposure to the feared stimulus was
coupled with physical relaxation. This resulted in his seminal 1966
publication with Isaac Marks, which described the first controlled trial
of this form of therapy in patients with severe agoraphobia.(n.d.a)

A few years later, Gelder's growing reputation as someone able to carry
out original and clinically important research across disciplinary
boundaries led him to be recruited to the Foundation Chair in Psychiatry
at the University of Oxford. Arriving at the Warneford Hospital in 1969,
Gelder's task was to establish from scratch, and with limited resources,
a world-class psychiatric research department, as well as organising and
conducting undergraduate and postgraduate teaching and sharing in the
clinical work of the hospital.

These goals were formidable, but Oxford had chosen well. Rather
unusually for a brilliant researcher and clinician, Gelder also
possessed remarkable organisational abilities and committee skills,
which he used tirelessly and selflessly to build a thriving Department
of Psychiatry, one recognised as a world-leading centre for the
development and clinical application of psychological treatments.(n.d.b)
Early work on agoraphobia used home-based methods to enhance the
effectiveness of the behavioural therapy he had developed at the
Institute of Psychiatry. Although this was a major advance, Gelder was
quick to realise the limitations of a purely behavioural approach and
encouraged exploration of the value of adding cognitive strategies,
focusing on modifying thoughts, attention and memory. The Oxford Centre
that he led was distinguished by an unusually close interplay among
psychological theories, experimental studies and clinical innovation – a
particularly productive approach. New and highly effective forms of
cognitive–behavioural therapy were developed for panic disorder,
generalised anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder,
obsessive–compulsive disorder, hypochondriasis, post-traumatic stress
disorder, chronic fatigue syndrome and bulimia nervosa. These
cognitive–behavioural treatments have been widely adopted in clinical
practice, are recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence and provide better long-term outcomes than alternative
approaches such as antidepressant medication. They have benefited
enormous numbers of people worldwide.

In addition to his personal interest in psychological treatments,
together with David Grahame-Smith, Nuffield Professor of Clinical
Pharmacology, Gelder developed a research unit for the equally new field
of psychopharmacology. At the time, this was an almost unique example of
cross-departmental collaboration in the Oxford Medical School. The
unit's work on the mechanisms by which treatments such as
electroconvulsive therapy, anxiolytics and antidepressants actually work
has fundamentally shaped our understanding of the biology underlying
psychiatric disorders.

Michael Gelder was born in 1929 in Ilkley, the only child of Philip
Gelder, a wool merchant, and Alice Gelder, the daughter of a general
practitioner. The family soon moved to Bradford, where Gelder attended
the local grammar school. Gelder had a longstanding desire to study
medicine, but his parents discouraged this ambition, arguing that he
should join his father in the family business. However, Gelder
persisted, taking science A-levels at evening classes and then winning a
scholarship to Queen's College, Oxford, where he took first class
honours in physiology. A further scholarship to University College
Hospital allowed him to complete his medical training, which was
followed by National Service as a Medical Officer at the British Army of
the Rhine Headquarters from 1956 to 1958. Through his medical training
and early clinical work, Gelder became intrigued by the pervasive role
of psychological factors in medical practice. This led him to embark on
his training in psychiatry at the Maudsley Hospital, during which he won
the prestigious Gaskell Gold Medal of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists. Strongly encouraged by Professor Aubrey Lewis, he then
worked as a Medical Research Council Research Fellow at the Institute of
Psychiatry.

Gelder led the Oxford Department of Psychiatry until his retirement in
1996. He was notable for ‘leading from the front’, attending all
departmental academic meetings, as well as carrying a significant
clinical and teaching load. His unparalleled lucidity of thought and
encyclopaedic knowledge made him an inspirational teacher; this was
captured particularly in the Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, which he
co-authored with Dennis Gath and Richard Mayou. Translated into six
languages, this became the standard textbook for psychiatric trainees.
One of his most important priorities was to foster the talented young
clinicians and scientists who joined his department. Many went on to be
leaders in the psychiatric and research communities.

Although Gelder served on major research committees of the Medical
Research Council and Wellcome Trust, he had no interest in the personal
accumulation of power, and was self-deprecating and modest. Invariably
dressed in a grey suit and tie – even when walking his Alsatian dogs –
he had a formality of manner, which, coupled with his intense drive for
clinical and scientific excellence and his formidable intellect, could
make him a somewhat forbidding figure. However, patients spoke of his
approachability and kindness, while trainees would comment on how his
acute clinical perception and genuine concern for them helped them cope
with and learn from the most difficult of situations.

This side of Gelder's nature was, of course, well-known to his family.
His daughter Fiona remarked that, as a father, ‘he was kind, fair and
unfailingly supportive of us all – in school life, marriage and work
decisions’. She is a general practitioner, Colin is a chest physician
and Nicola runs her own business. Gelder met his wife, Mandy, when he
was a medical student at University College Hospital and she was a
nurse. Gelder regarded persuading her to marry him as his greatest
achievement, and he was devoted to her throughout their nearly 64 years
of marriage, showering her with flowers on anniversaries and Valentine's
Days.

In retirement, Gelder was able to find more time to indulge his love of
travel. He had a wide circle of fond and loyal friends who would have
been astonished to learn of the trepidation he had sometimes engendered
in junior colleagues. When he gained an Italian son-in-law, he joined
Italian classes and at the wedding gave a speech in both English and
fluent Italian. Until arthritis supervened, he continued to play real
tennis at Merton College, where he was a Fellow. He was an affectionate
and attentive grandfather to his eight grandchildren, one of whom, to
his delight, recently qualified in medicine.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.
