====================================================
Known but unpredictable – an argument for complexity
====================================================



Martin Plöderl
Clemens Fartacek

:date: 2018-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Since the seminal paper of Pokorny in 1983,1 the prediction of suicides
has not improved, as Large *et al* have pointed out in their current
paper2 and in previous meta-analyses.3\ :sup:`–`\ 7 In opposition to
most current recommendations in suicide prevention, which still require
clinicians to formulate levels of suicide risk,8 Large *et al*\ 2
suggest that clinicians should give up risk formulation and instead
focus directly on the individual needs of patients to deliver optimal
care. They argue that uncertainty in the prediction of suicide is
largely aleatory (dependent on random processes) and also epistemic
(lacking knowledge). We think that one important explanation is missing:
complexity.

Complexity refers to behaviours produced by nonlinear dynamic systems,
which cannot be predicted in the long term, even if the generating
system operates completely deterministically and is known in detail. The
most prominent type of complex dynamics is deterministic chaos, which
became familiar as the ‘butterfly effect’. During chaotic dynamics, even
the smallest differences in initial conditions lead to a massive
divergence of trajectories over time. Owing to complex behaviours such
as chaos, from a nonlinear dynamical perspective, the failure of
long-term predictions of suicidal behaviour could be a consequence not
only of incomplete epistemic knowledge (e.g. unspecific or unknown risk
factors) or aleatory processes (random noise), but also of the inherent
complexity of the underlying system.

Are there any alternatives for predicting suicidal behaviour from a
nonlinear dynamical perspective? Natural sciences (e.g. geophysics) have
developed methods for the short-term prediction of extreme events (e.g.
tsunamis), based on continuous monitoring of appropriate signals and
identification of nonlinear dynamical precursors.9\ :sup:`,`\ 10 This
might be a promising approach for suicide research as well. Given the
recent improvements of scientific methods, an empirical application of
complexity theory in suicide research seems realistic.11\ :sup:`,`\ 12
However, it still has to be demonstrated that such novel approaches are
feasible in clinical practice and that they can in fact improve the
prediction of suicides.

We believe that suicidology needs to take complexity theory into
consideration. If not, much time, effort and money will continue to go
into approaches that, from the viewpoint of complexity theory, lead to a
dead end. This includes the search for novel risk factors or
combinations of risk factors (e.g. by applying machine learning) without
acknowledging the underlying complex processes.
