============
A lost cause
============



Anuradha Menon
:Date: 2018-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

On reading Dr Moorey's earnest response to Dr Gipps’ views, I was struck
by his description of the ‘depressive mode’.1 This marvel of
development, 100 years on from Freud's classic paper,2 is – in Dr
Moorey's view – a ‘complex neural network, including multiple relevant
brain regions that are activated or deactivated during depression’.
This, he argues, is the target of therapeutic practice in
cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT), where unconscious schemas are
automatic, not repressed. It seems to the reader that in this
dehumanised framework, grief and loss are merely ‘problems’ that face
humankind, which need to be put on the CBT table to be sorted out openly
between therapist and patient. The tools? Good old-fashioned common
sense, an indefatigably optimistic therapist and well-positioned
intelligence. As for the measures: specially designed scales that
measure the very structure which they helped create.

I am writing this piece to explore how both Dr Moorey and Dr Gipps
warily circle around a point which is never highlighted in its own
right.

Freud's theory of melancholia2 posits an unconscious basis for the
depressed patient's dilemma. This theory holds true: the proof is in the
analytic setting, and all contemporary psychoanalytic approaches which
describe the transference find their roots in this classic paper.3 Freud
writes about an identification of the ego with the abandoned object,
saying ‘thus the shadow of the object fell upon the ego’. This is still
pre-object relations. American psychoanalysis, which was evolving at the
time, is well known to have been profoundly influenced by Freud.

In the 1950s, psychoanalysts around the world were working on extending
early theories, and the Americans actively participated in this
worldwide development. So, with respect, Dr Moorey's point about Beck's
‘perfectly acceptable masochism hypothesis’ is a bit like Lamarck
chasing after amputated tails while Darwin was thinking about evolution!

The crux of the matter is that Beck moved into what is essentially the
conscious realm when he developed his theory. Today, anyone who manages
patients with depression will know that the latter is the easier and,
dare we say, cheaper option. It's all backed up by robust evidence, and
supported by what is essentially an Orwellian4 environment. I hardly
need wonder why patients are rarely asked what they prefer: an analyst
who is interested in undiscovered aspects of their loss and is willing
to explore themselves in the process, or one bent on pinning down the
patient's experience in prosaic terms.

This is why I take exception to the statement in Dr Moorey's final
paragraph, which is unreferenced and states that CBT ‘has given
psychoanalysts methodologies they now use to evaluate their own
theories’. This is outrageous, as no self-respecting psychoanalyst would
turn to a two-dimensional construct to tell them whether they are tuned
into their patient's inner world. I think this is another example of the
kind of empiricism that undermines a patient's personal struggle with
loss, ignores the depth in a poorly understood psychoanalytic theory and
exposes a flawed theoretical argument. Why would psychoanalysis have any
real use for a methodology that doesn't even address its basic
theoretical stance? Dr Moorey's thesis is, unfortunately, a lost cause.
So, to quote from the excellent choice of title for this debate:

‘I give you the mausoleum of all hope and desire […] I give it to you
not that you may remember time, but that you might forget it now and
then for a moment and not spend all of your breath trying to conquer it.
Because no battle is ever won he said. They are not even fought. The
field only reveals to man his own folly and despair, and victory is an
illusion of philosophers and fools’. (William Faulkner, *The Sound and
the Fury*\ 5)
