==============================================================================================
‘To know before hand is to freeze and kill’ Commentary on… Should psychiatrists write fiction?
==============================================================================================



Daniel RaceyCorrespondence to Daniel Racey (daniel.racey@nhs.net)
:Date: 2018-4

:Abstract:
   In this article I argue that fictional accounts of mental illness
   should be unethically unobliged. I suggest that art is not generated
   with conscious ethical intent and provide evidence that art
   proceeding from an ethical agenda is more likely to be poor art. I
   also consider ways in which a writer-doctor might need to compromise
   what they articulate to maintain a professional ethical integrity.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

“For only after, can one nail down, examine, explain. To try to know
beforehand is to freeze and kill. Self-consciousness is the enemy of all
art, be it acting, writing, painting, or living itself, which is the
greatest art of all.Ray Bradbury1”

Beveridge2 argued that fiction supports psychiatrists to imaginatively
enter other lives to become more ethical and empathetic. The previous
article3 changes the slant: psychiatrist/writers should enter the life
of readers to encourage them to become more ethical and empathetic
regarding mental health. Oyebode, a poet/psychiatrist, sees literature
as lacking conscious ethical intent, but argues that a secondary outcome
of fictional investigations of psychiatry is to influence how society
sees mental disorder and how politicians will tackle this area.4

Will Self has written many pieces of fiction with a recurring
psychiatrist character, Zack Busner, who sometimes resembles Ronnie
Laing, sometimes Oliver Sachs. For Self, psychiatry has become central
to his writing, because: “*… psychiatrists stand – whether they
acknowledge it themselves […] at the threshold between happiness and
sadness and between sanity and madness […] I'm thinking […] in terms of
priests who manage the transition from the phenomenal to the
numinal.*\ 5”

In a secular age dominated by scientism, psychiatrists function as
meaning-makers. Given this status, shouldn't psychiatrists who write
show an ethical loyalty to the project of psychiatry?

The way in which creativity proceeds and how art and psychiatry interact
with each other can be approached using the framework of one of
psychiatry's foundational figures – Karl Jaspers. Jaspers identified two
modes of knowing, which should weave together in the work of a
psychiatrist: Verstehen and Erklären.6 Erklären tries to make
explanatory sense of phenomena by finding the laws that govern them. The
psychiatrist who engages in Verstehen tries to make empathetic sense of
phenomena by looking for the perspective from which the phenomenon
appears to be meaningful. Jaspers is describing the art and science of
medicine, insisting that scientific explanations are necessary but not
sufficient accounts of our patients.

Fiction attempts to subjectively understand the human condition – it is
Verstehen. At the same time, fiction is not just a right-brained tapping
of the unconscious. A writer gains by having authority over the subject
matter: to be coherent, to be up-to-date, to teach us, to please us with
erudition. We know the difference between well-researched and poorly
researched novels. However, writing that is overly occupied by Erklären
will fall dead from the womb.7 A Pulitzer Prize winner writes: “*‘What's
erroneous is the assumption that the thoughtful analysis and willful
insertion of that in the work is the creative process […] it's the
antithesis of the process […] If you start perverting that with other
motives to write, your ability to become an artist is severely hampered,
if not destroyed.’* 8”

In the accompanying piece, the authors simplify and rationalise the
writing process, which they depict as ‘\ *Firstly, the writer gathers
information through research. Secondly, a story framework, however loose
or rigid that may be, is devised. Thirdly, a coherent narrative is
constructed through putting the words onto paper.*\ ’9 This strikes me
as true when I write professionally or academically. I would suggest
that the process of writing fiction is fundamentally different, that the
authors misunderstand the writing process by assuming the ego's fingers
have a firm grip of the pen. Numerous writers have described the
creative process as passive,8\ :sup:`,`\ 9 for example, Paul Bowles
states: “If I am writing fiction, I am being invented. I cannot retain
any awareness of identity. The two states of being are antithetical. The
author is not at a steering wheel […]9”

The creating artist may be caught in an unconscious dream, but Margaret
Atwood does not allow so easy an abdication of moral responsibility:
“Why do authors wish to pretend they don't exist? It's a way of skinning
out, of avoiding truth and consequences.10”

Ray Bradbury states: ‘\ *For only after, can one nail down, examine,
explain*.’1 This feels true to the writing experience: that creation is
often unconscious, but the subsequent shaping of the material is
conscious and where ethics become relevant. The poet Selima Hill
describes the moral editorial step which occurs late in her creative
process. She uses the following rubric to guide her: “*[…] the morals of
the thing. Is it libellous? Is anyone's reputation going to suffer? […]
Am I exploiting someone else's work, or life? Or might it, on the other
hand, have a positive (morally ‘good’) effect?*\ 11”

The power dynamic in psychiatry is so asymmetric and the potential
consequences of breaching confidentiality are so severe that when
psychiatrists write about psychiatry, our policing needs to be rigorous.
How we achieve this is another topic in itself.

Selima Hill concludes that the function of art is not that of Erklären
but the subversion of Erklären. “*It is not the place of art to draw
conclusions or even to understand. On the contrary, isn't the whole
point that it is non-judgemental? That it undermines the making of value
judgements? It is modest, helpless, useless, but at the same time
determined, and just. I think of Heaney's phrase ‘to set the darkness
echoing’ – where darkness is what it is, and we can neither flinch nor
sink.*\ 11”

Hill is arguing that art should be ambiguous, should avoid conclusions.
Psychiatry is used to shades of grey in its epistemology, nosology and
ethics. More than other branches of medicine, we require negative
capability – the skill of sitting with uncertainty without irritably
reaching after a simplistic explanation.12 This is Verstehen – a
different kind of understanding, one that does not make value
judgements. To achieve such an end, the artist/psychiatrist will put
aside Erklären and ethics. An activity that is ‘\ *modest, helpless,
useless but just and determined […] where […] we […] neither flinch nor
sink*\ ’ sounds like what most psychiatrists do, the kind of modest
psychiatry we can believe in, the psychiatry that we actually practise
in shabby clinics and battered wards ‘\ *where we set the darkness
echoing’*.

**Dr Daniel Racey**, ST4 Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, The Terraces,
Mount Gould Hospital, Livewell Southwest, Plymouth, PL4 7QD, UK.
