=====================================================================================================================
The banality of counterterrorism “after, after 9/11”? Perspectives on the Prevent duty from the UK health care sector
=====================================================================================================================



Charlotte Heath-Kelly
Erzsébet StrauszCONTACT Charlotte Heath-Kelly
c.heath-kelly@warwick.ac.uk\  [1]_

:date: 2019

:Abstract:
   Since 2015, the UK healthcare sector sector has (along with education
   and social care) been responsibilised for noticing signs of
   radicalisation and reporting patients to the Prevent programme. The
   Prevent Duty frames the integration of healthcare professionals into
   the UK’s counterterrorism effort as the banal extension of
   safeguarding. But safeguarding has previously been framed as the
   protection of children, and adults with care and support needs, from
   abuse. This article explores the legitimacy of situating Prevent
   within safeguarding through interviews with safeguarding experts in
   six National Health Service (NHS) Trusts and Clinical Commissioning
   Groups. It also describes the factors which NHS staff identified as
   indicators of radicalisation – data which was obtained from an online
   questionnaire completed by 329 health care professionals. The article
   argues that the “after, after 9/11” era is not radically distinct
   from earlier periods of counterterrorism but does contain novel
   features, such as the performance of anticipatory counterterrorism
   under the rubric of welfare and care.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _S0001:

Introduction
============

The question “is there an after, after 9/11?” forces us to address
whether there has been any return from the exceptionalised, emergency
frame which dominated international politics in the aftermath of 9/11.
At face value, the direction of travel in Europe and North America is
unchanged. The immediate legislative responses to international
terrorism of the twenty-first century – the Contest Strategy (UK) and
the Patriot Act (USA) – have not been repealed, and the technological
advance of counterterrorism surveillance continues unabated.

However, this article argues that Countering Violent Extremism (CVE)
policies do represent a distinctive development in the post-9/11
counterterrorism repertoire. CVE frameworks are now employed across the
globe by actors such as the United Nations, the European Union as well
as individual nation states (Kundnani and Hayes `2018 <#CIT0017>`__).
Their unique selling point is the prevention of terrorism through
interventions in “radicalisation processes”, before criminal conspiracy
occurs (in the so-called “pre-criminal space”). Here, the resources
usually associated with social welfare policies (like mentoring, housing
and education) are reframed as terrorism prevention assets (Home Office
`2017 <#CIT0014>`__, `2018 <#CIT0015>`__). In contradistinction to the
emergency criminal justice measures of the immediate 9/11 era, this
article focuses on the banality of the Prevent Duty in the UK where
social care, education and health care workers are now engaged in the
prevention of terrorism (Ragazzi `2017 <#CIT0024>`__).

The Counter-Terrorism and Security Act of 2015 placed a statutory duty
on specified authorities within the UK’s public sector to have “due
regard to the need to prevent people from being drawn into terrorism”
(Home Office `2015 <#CIT0013>`__: 2). In practice, this has meant that
schools, colleges, universities, prisons, social services, National
Health Service (NHS) trusts, NHS Clinical Commissioning Groups [2]_
(CCGs) and private health care providers on the NHS standard contract
now perform counterterrorism – under the rubric of safeguarding. These
providers deliver Prevent-related training to their staff, promote the
importance of the Prevent Duty to their staff, and process Prevent
referrals made about colleagues, students, patients and clients.

The use of health and education sectors to support counterterrorism is
unique to England, Wales and Scotland. The Prevent Strategy has not even
been rolled out to the entire UK (given the specific provisions of Good
Friday Agreement, the Prevent Strategy does not apply in Northern
Ireland). While some European nations utilise community policing and
prison services to identify and deter potential radicals, it is much
rarer for the non-judicial sectors to be involved in
counter-radicalisation. The Netherlands is an exception and has begun
encouraging youth workers and educators to promote
counter-radicalisation [3]_ agendas. But Britain is alone in making its
educational, health and social care sectors legally responsible for
counter-radicalisation.

In this unique context of policy implementation, this article explores
how counter-radicalisation has been integrated into the health care
sector. The authors conducted a 12-month pilot study, funded by the
Wellcome Trust, which evaluated the performance of Prevent Duty
safeguarding by NHS trusts and CCGs in the Midlands region of
England. [4]_ Using expert interviews with NHS safeguarding
professionals, discourse analysis of the Workshop to Raise Awareness of
Prevent (WRAP) training DVD and a survey of staff attitudes (*N* = 329)
towards the Prevent Duty, we explored how Prevent is performed within
the NHS’ safeguarding remit.

Our study showed that NHS staff are, on the whole, accepting of their
new responsibilities under the Prevent Duty and comfortable with the
training provided. However, our survey also revealed that staff
knowledge of specific “radicalisation indicators” is drawn not from
official training but from popular culture representations of ISIS and
radicalism. WRAP training encourages staff to intuit the presence of
radicalisation in staff and patients, rather than providing details of
explicit “signs” to be reported. We found that this has led NHS staff to
rely on the media for their understandings of terrorism and
radicalisation. Furthermore, despite the popular acceptance of the
Prevent Duty as a form of safeguarding, our expert interviewees
unanimously commented on the imperfect fit between the Prevent Duty and
other forms of safeguarding expected of the NHS.

Unlike broader safeguarding protocols, Prevent safeguarding is not
restricted to adults with “care and support needs”. NHS England
therefore defines all citizens as potentially vulnerable to radicalisers
and opens the possibility for care practitioners to intervene upon their
lives. This extension of interventions across the entire population
(rather than limiting them to those persons with care and support needs)
creates a tension with the liberal foundations of British political
life. A distinctive feature of counterterrorism “after, after 9/11” is,
then, that care can be positioned as an anti-terrorism measure – and
counterterrorism as a care intervention; such is the normalisation of
the counterterrorism within society “after, after 9/11”.

.. _S0002:

Prevent in the NHS: academic studies
====================================

The majority of academic literature on Prevent in UK public services
addresses the performance of the duty in the particular contexts of
education (Choudhury `2017 <#CIT0004>`__; Miah `2013 <#CIT0022>`__;
Thomas `2016 <#CIT0028>`__), youth work (Lynch `2013 <#CIT0018>`__;
McDonald `2011 <#CIT0020>`__) and social work (McKendrick and Finch
`2017 <#CIT0021>`__). Studies exploring the role of the health care
sector in Prevent are beginning to emerge, but at a slower pace.
Research access to the NHS can be a lengthy and complicated procedure
involving a primary application to the Health Research Authority,
unfamiliar terminologies (social scientific research is often not
recognised as “research” but as a “service evaluation”) and secondary
research access applications to each local NHS Trust's Research and
Innovation (R&I) department. These difficulties render studies of
Prevent in the NHS slower to develop. To date, literature on the Prevent
Duty in health care can be divided into two streams: debates in forensic
psychiatry about the scientific reliability of extremism risk scoring
tools and social scientific research into the NHS as a
counter-radicalisation actor. This literature review focuses only on the
latter.

In the field of Psychiatry, David Goldberg, Jadhav, and Younis
(`2017 <#CIT0010>`__) have recently problematised the use of the term
“pre-criminal space” in NHS England Prevent Training and Competencies
documentation. To foster acceptance in the health care sector, the term
situates the positioning of Prevent as a safeguarding and protection
measure. Intervening to protect people in the “pre-criminal” space
emphasises the separation of Prevent safeguarding from judicial
measures. As Goldberg et al. rightly point out, the obscure term
“pre-criminal space” does not appear in Home Office Prevent policies nor
in any other NHS safeguarding policy: in policy terms, it is unique to
NHS England’s Prevent Guidance. They explore the etymology and usage of
“pre-criminal space”, arguing that it operates as both metaphor and
analogy – smoothing and bridging the discourses of the health and
criminal justice sectors, and persuading NHS professionals to comply
with the duty (Goldberg, Jadhav, and Younis `2017 <#CIT0010>`__).

Other academic research into the Prevent Duty focuses on the mass
responsibilisation of health care workers for counterterrorism detection
and prevention. Heath-Kelly (`2017a <#CIT0011>`__, `2017b <#CIT0012>`__)
has explored how the Prevent Duty expands the application of
preventative counterterrorism to the entire population, rather than
deploying it upon smaller suspect communities. The training of the 1.3
million NHS workers to report radicalisation demonstrates a transition
of security apparatus away from security professionals (such as
counterterrorism officers) who possess formal training, towards a far
looser type of counterterrorism “expertise”. In the NHS, a 1- or 2-hour
training session in front of the “WRAP” DVD qualifies a staff member to
detect and report radicalisation. The minimal training for such a
sensitive task shows that central government have prioritised
large-scale reporting of radicalisation suspicions across the
population, rather than targeted and precise counterterrorism measures
(Heath-Kelly `2017a <#CIT0011>`__, `2017b <#CIT0012>`__). Indeed, upon
the release of the 2013 Prevent Guidance document “Building
Partnerships, Staying Safe”, Director of Nursing Hilary Garratt wrote to
all CCG commissioning leads and emphasised that the size of the NHS
(which makes 1 million patient contacts every 36 hours), rather than any
specific expertise, qualified it as a key partner within the Prevent
Strategy (Garratt `2013 <#CIT0009>`__). Size matters, it seems, in the
new Prevent Duty.

Outside these formal studies, various health care professionals have
also taken to the pages of academic and professional journals to voice
concern, and occasionally support, for the Prevent Duty in the NHS.
Derek Summerfield, a consultant at South London and Maudsley NHS Trust,
wrote in *BJPsych Bulletin* that compelling medical staff to attend
Prevent training is as follows: “a corrosion of the ethics of the
doctor-patient relationship, and is to prime us for an activity which is
a duplicitous deviation from the medical assessment, advice and
treatment that has brought the patient to us. (Summerfield
`2016 <#CIT0027>`__)”

Dr Rosemary Rizq has similar concerns about the conflation of health
care and protection with the reporting of terrorist deviance. She argues
that surveillance and control insidiously invade the consulting room
through the Prevent Duty, turning the patient requiring health care into
an already-securitised risk, and forbidding the free play of speech so
essential for therapy (Rizq `2017 <#CIT0025>`__).

.. _S0003:

Prevent as safeguarding?
========================

This perceived clash between medical ethics and reporting radicalisation
suspicions is complicated by the positioning of the Prevent Duty as a
safeguarding measure. Central government policy has explicitly presented
the Prevent Duty as an additional patient safeguarding measure which
entails no extra responsibilities on behalf of clinical and non-clinical
staff (Department of Health `2011 <#CIT0006>`__: 3). Accordingly, NHS
England places responsibility for Prevent training and the processing of
Prevent referrals with Trust and CCG safeguarding teams. These
safeguarding experts provide WRAP training to staff with the Home Office
DVD and script, process Prevent queries (filtering out inappropriate
referrals), and determine which queries are referred to Local
Authorities and the police. Safeguarding discursively and operationally
situates Prevent in the NHS.

While safeguarding is more loosely defined as a “protective
intervention” in the educational and social care sectors, safeguarding
processes in the NHS are tightly defined. Health care safeguarding is
designed *to protect those with care and support needs* (like learning
disabilities, severe mental health conditions, dementia, drug and
alcohol addiction) from abuse, where they cannot protect themselves.
They are a necessary societal protection for those with reduced
individual capacity or agency. The Care Act was passed in 2014 to
legally enforce the safeguarding of vulnerable people, and it states
that local authorities must intervene to support adults in cases: “where
a local authority has reasonable cause to suspect that an adult in its
area (whether or not ordinarily resident there) – (a) *has needs for
care and support* (whether or not the authority is meeting any of those
needs), (b) *is experiencing, or is at risk of, abuse or neglect, and*
(c) as a result of those needs is unable to protect himself or herself
against the abuse or neglect or the risk of it. (2) The local authority
must make (or cause to be made) whatever enquiries it thinks necessary
to enable it to decide whether any action should be taken in the adult’s
case. (Care Act `2014 <#CIT0003>`__, c.23, section 42, emphasis added)”

If an adult has care and support needs, faces the risk of abuse *and*
cannot protect themselves, then the individual’s agency ceases to be a
paramount principle. Rightly, the Local Authority becomes duty bound to
intervene in these situations.

In the NHS, safeguarding teams take reports about vulnerable patients
who are at risk of abuse (physical, sexual, financial) and liaise with
the Local Authority, and that patient, to put a care package in place.
But under the Prevent Duty, safeguarding protocols are activated in
cases where no care and support need exists. In Prevent protocols, the
explicit provision regarding “care and support needs” in the Care Act is
watered down to a suggestion of “vulnerabilities” – creating concerns
that the presumption of adult agency has been side-lined.

Home Office and NHS England policy guidance presents radicalisation as a
process of abusive exploitation performed upon “vulnerable” persons. But
vulnerability, under the Prevent Duty guidance protocols, is no longer a
formal state of reduced capacity (like care and support needs); rather,
“vulnerability” is extended to potentially cover the entire population.
Anyone, with or without care needs, can be the subject of a Prevent
safeguarding inquiry. How is this interference in a person’s agency
justified, before the criminal threshold is reached? One’s vulnerability
(and the need for safeguarding intervention) is constituted through a
circular argument: simply by being associated with a radicalisation
referral, a person *must already have been vulnerable* to extremist
influence. The assumption plays out that no person with full capacity,
or in control of their life, would support political extremism or
terrorism – thus any presumed sympathy denotes reduced capacity or
“vulnerability”.

While any person can be subject to a Prevent safeguarding referral,
regardless of their formal capacity level, the Department of Health does
provide some guidance on “factors which put people at risk of
exploitation by radicalisers”. Worryingly, these racialise
“vulnerability” to extremism. The factors emphasise the migration status
of an individual as a point of vulnerability to extremism, their
“traditional” family life (in a context where “traditional” acts as a
synonym for people of colour), and their “religious/cultural heritage”.
For example, the first factor highlighted by the Department of Health as
indicating radicalisation vulnerability is “identity crisis”, but this
is characterised as follows: “Adolescents/vulnerable adults who are
exploring issues of identity can feel both distant from their
parents/family and cultural and religious heritage, and uncomfortable
with their place in society around them. (Department of Health
`2011 <#CIT0006>`__: 10)”

Identity crisis seems to be associated here with second- or
third-generation immigrants, positioned between cultures. Apparently
“identity crisis” is not a potential experience that anyone could
experience, only specific and racialized groups.

The second factor in the Department of Health’s list of radicalisation
vulnerability factors is “personal crisis” (characterised as the
“isolation of the vulnerable individual from the *traditional*
certainties of family life” [emphasis added]). Following on from the
first racialised indicator, this invocation of “traditional family life”
reads like a synonym for racialised groups in society. The third factor
in vulnerability relates to an individual’s “personal circumstances”. We
all have “personal circumstances”, but these are characterised by the
Department of Health in terms of cultural, religious and raced
identities leading towards radicalisation vulnerability: “Personal
Circumstances: The experience of migration, local tensions or events
affecting families in countries of origin may contribute to alienation
from UK values and a decision to cause harm to symbols of the community
or state. (Department of Health `2011 <#CIT0006>`__: 10)”

Finally, unemployment/underemployment and criminality are listed
(without racialised undertones) as factors which may make a person
vulnerable to radicalisation (Department of Health `2011 <#CIT0006>`__:
10).

Without a clinical evidence base or NICE guidance, these factors replace
the formal care and support needs which are central to other forms of
NHS safeguarding. These “factors” fudge the centrality of care and
support needs to safeguarding (Care Act `2014 <#CIT0003>`__, c.23,
section 42) by repeatedly invoking the “vulnerability” of a person
experiencing disenfranchisement or ennui, but provide no other basis for
the interruption of their agency by a safeguarding action.

Without care and support needs, an adult should be entitled to live
uninterrupted by the state unless they request support and assistance.
Indeed, NHS safeguarding policy enshrines the principle of agency, in
all cases apart from where “coercion and undue influence” might apply:
“Adults have a legal right to make their own decisions, even if they are
unwise, as long as they have capacity to make that decision and are free
from coercion or undue influence. (NHS England `2015 <#CIT0023>`__: 16)”

Given the usual presumption of agency for adults without care and
support needs, Prevent in the NHS stretches normal safeguarding customs
and protocols to their limit. The “coercion and undue influence” usually
understood to constitute impaired agency are severe situational
constraints. For example, people experiencing domestic violence or human
trafficking can receive safeguarding assistance despite not necessarily
possessing “care and support needs” – because they are experiencing
significant coercion and abuse from which they cannot reasonably be
expected to protect themselves.

But is it legitimate for Prevent to equate the coercion experienced by
human trafficking and domestic violence victims, trapped within
appalling situations and experiencing dramatic constraints upon their
agency, to those engaging with extreme political opinions and those who
voice them? Given the potentially dramatic contrast, it would be far
more appropriate to presume that individuals retain agency and can
engage with political ideas freely. While the intention of safeguarding
practitioners is to keep people safe from travelling to war zones or
becoming involved in terrorism, the Prevent Duty involves a significant
departure from the presumption of adult agency in cases where there is
often no cognitive or coercive impediment.

In the next section, we highlight the testimonies of safeguarding leads
within NHS trusts and CCG’s on the imperfect fit between Prevent and
Safeguarding. These safeguarding experts experienced significant
dissonance between their desire to protect potential victims of
radicalisers, and their knowledge that safeguarding interventions
explicitly require the recipient to have “care and support needs” to
justify the intervention upon agency.

.. _S0004:

NHS safeguarding experts on the prevent strategy
================================================

Our interviews with safeguarding experts shed light on some of the key
features of Prevent’s uneasy situation within existing safeguarding
infrastructure. Most of the safeguarding experts we interviewed held
conflicting views and beliefs with regards to the place, function and
broader implications of Prevent referrals made by NHS staff, even if
they had come to accept, endorse or re-appropriate the Prevent Duty.
These dissonances in how safeguarding experts see their role reveal
important tensions and concerns that arise when a counterterrorism
reporting structure is embedded within an otherwise evidence-based
medical culture.

Normal safeguarding referrals utilise a transparent process which is
subject to audit and clinical governance. They follow an approach of
person-centred care that presupposes the person’s consent and in line
with general professional guidelines in the NHS, foregrounds patient
choice. However, the tension between Prevent and the medical duty to
provide care was immediately noted by some of our expert interviewees.
One General Practitioner (GP) we spoke to noted that with Prevent the
very object and objective of protection changes: “When you do
safeguarding, the person sat in front of you is your main concern
because you’re trying to protect that person. Whereas with this, you’re
protecting the state from that person” (Consultant Psychiatrist B and GP
2, 2017). This underlying shift makes Prevent a controversial subject
within the NHS, but also demonstrates an imperfect fit with existing
safeguarding structures which necessitates a constant negotiation of the
Prevent Duty by health care professionals.

Upon the introduction of Prevent to the NHS, a CCG Prevent Lead
(responsible for giving the Prevent training) recalled that the policy
“didn’t originally sit very well with [them] or a lot of [their] team”
(CCG Prevent Lead B, 2017). These concerns reflect the problematic
situation of Prevent within NHS safeguarding. Prevent aims to
orchestrate a new way of “seeing” and performing safeguarding by
cultivating an “awareness” for vulnerable people being at risk of
radicalisation. Prevent sits in tension with the approaches, principles
and definitions of safeguarding under the Care Act. These tensions
become apparent when one attempts to understand the type of “abuse” upon
which Prevent intervenes. Normal safeguarding processes exist to protect
vulnerable people from financial, physical and sexual abuse, where they
cannot protect themselves. For Prevent interventions, the closest fit
would be protection from psychological abuse, qua domestic violence
safeguarding. But even this fit is imperfect. One expert practitioner of
Prevent safeguarding understood radicalisation as a “type of grooming”
evident when “people are being harassed, they’re being groomed, they may
not have any control over what they’re being drawn into […].
Particularly if they’re very vulnerable and they don’t recognise it”
(Safeguarding Expert P, 2017).

Yet a different Prevent trainer pointed out to us that the notion of
“vulnerability” is used and talked about very differently between the
safeguarding and Prevent contexts. Instead of a focus on “care and
support needs”, what is emphasised is a “complex set of grievances”
related to ideology, exclusion and identity. For example, “Prevent, to
me, is about finding people who are at the cusp in their lives of not
having anything else other than somebody saying, “why don’t you do
this?” […] And for a young Muslim child growing up, I suppose, who has a
strong family bond and then suddenly is an isolated teenager, racially
abused perhaps, can’t find work, you’re going to start connecting with
things that perhaps, you know, you see and hear and read, and to deal
with your own feelings of anger: “oh, why haven’t I got a job? Why am I
in this position?” And that’s who Prevent is meant to protect, but the
fact that it sits under Safeguarding, I don’t think it sits comfortably
with Safeguarding. (CCG Safeguarding Expert C, 2017)”

Here, the type of abuse that NHS staff are duty-bound to protect against
seems to be exclusion, rather than the existing typologies of abuse
within safeguarding regimes.

The introduction of the Prevent Duty as a form of safeguarding
protection has led to professional dissonance. During our interviews
with safeguarding experts, it was common for them to first make the case
that Prevent fits well within safeguarding – on the basis that the
professional intuition already developed within safeguarding practice is
an appropriate tool for detecting radicalisation. In this regard, the
Prevent Duty requirements made sense to staff. Safeguarding
professionals were described as having a particular nose for detecting
the unfamiliar, understood as a “gut instinct that there’s something,
but I don’t know what” (Safeguarding Experts F and J, 2017). But
interviewees would then draw out some differences in how this intuition
is utilised within Prevent. The safeguarding remit, they acknowledged,
is now extended beyond people with care and support needs. Furthermore,
in normal safeguarding, the emphasis is on “making the person
immediately safe,” which is not the case in Prevent (Ibid).

However, the ways in which Prevent stretches beyond the scope of
safeguarding was (despite these inconsistencies) often seen in a
positive light. The point was made that in actual practice, normal
safeguarding *also* extends beyond the strict definitions of the Care
Act. Safeguarding experts F and J framed this work as a banal type of
intervention upon society: “like any one of us […] have been a victim of
something, but haven’t got care and support needs, but still need some
signposting” (Ibid). In this sense, they argue that “although it’s
different, I suppose, [Prevent] is not that different, because some of
what we do sits in and out of safeguarding as it sits under the Care
Act” (Ibid). Here, Prevent was framed as “early help,” before something
“reaches a critical point”. These safeguarding experts saw the Prevent
Duty as complementary to the Care Act as “we’re not always working
completely in line with the Care Act, because there’s more to it, and we
will try and prevent things before they get to that point” (Ibid).

Other safeguarding experts also made similar rhetorical moves which
positioned Prevent within the safeguarding regime and existing practice.
It is “almost parental care” for an individual rather than being
‘explicit and saying, actually, this is an act … this is dangerous, this
is potentially dangerous (CCG Safeguarding Expert C, 2017). This is
interesting, because it shows how the provisions of the Care Act and the
Prevent Duty have been appropriated and renegotiated by health care
professionals. Prevent’s vagueness on “vulnerability” has been
re-appropriated to redirect attention to the needs of, and rectifying
the exclusion of, the person. One interviewee used it as a “pathway” –
something like a personal care-centred corrective to the Care Act – in
order to secure resources for clients who would otherwise have fallen
through the safety net of social care (Ibid).

Yet, this negotiation of ambiguities is also practised by Central
Government, who have manufactured an overlap between NHS safeguarding
and the anticipatory surveillance of potential radicals. Unlike normal
safeguarding, Prevent referrals from the NHS are fed directly to the
police as a matter of routine. In regular clinical practice,
collaboration with the police follows established procedures: in cases
where clear threats to personal safety are voiced, the police are called
first and concerns about health come second. But Prevent operates before
this threshold of explicit threat and involves the police as a matter of
course. If a health care professional makes a Prevent referral, it is
first screened by the safeguarding team before those cases deemed
Prevent-worthy progress to the stage of police disambiguation (Home
Office `2017 <#CIT0014>`__: 5–6). The health care professional as well
as the safeguarding team screen for signs of “radicalisation” that stop
short of threats to personal safety, before involving the police. But
what kind of expertise informs this professional judgement?

Trainers and safeguarding teams are not experts in counterterrorism:
they receive the same WRAP training as those they train, while also
receiving occasional briefings from the Regional Prevent Coordinator.
Interviewees confirmed that there is an “inclination” within the NHS to
share information with the police and make a referral in order to avoid
risks. However, they also acknowledged that Prevent is an essentially
“grey area” in that “what we now get involved with is ‘if there’s
potential’ – and this is where it’s really grey with Prevent” (CCG
Prevent Lead B, 2017). This is particularly worrying as doubt is
actively discouraged in the process: as a CCG safeguarding expert noted,
what is looked for under Prevent is “a little bit of concern” about
someone’s behaviour, which will be triaged by the safeguarding team – so
the one who makes the referral doesn’t have to “own” it (CCG
Safeguarding Expert C, 2017). As another CCG Prevent Lead admitted, “I’m
not sure that [a referral] will help some people. I think it runs
contrary to safeguarding under the Care Act in terms of how that works”
(CCG Prevent Lead B, 2017).

Concerns about the potential inaccuracy and stigmatisation involved in
this haphazard reporting structure are assuaged through policy
discussion of the “pre-criminal space”. Prevent documentation, as well
as interviewee statements, repeatedly emphasised that referees could
come to little harm from the referral process – given that they would
not obtain a criminal record or penalty. We also discovered that people
referred to Prevent are often unaware that such a referral has been
made. Their consent only needs to be obtained if the process reaches the
stage where the Local Authority consider involving Channel. While policy
documents encourage social care sectors to obtain consent when making
Prevent referrals, they are not obliged to do so (NHS England
`2017 <#CIT0008>`__: 15–16). And, given the controversial and sensitive
nature of a Prevent-referral conversation, our interviewees consistently
left us with the impression that consent is usually sidelined (unlike in
normal safeguarding procedures) or is fudged as a vague reference to
“concerns” and obtaining unspecified “support” for the patient (CCG
Safeguarding Expert C, 2017).

One particular Prevent trainer was particularly explicit about the
contradiction they saw between the Prevent brief and normal safeguarding
procedures of obtaining consent: “You’re supposed to ask their
permission […] I don’t know whether anybody does. But you’re supposed to
ask for their consent. 'I think you're being radicalised, I think you
want to blow us up, would you mind if I referred you?' ” (Safeguarding
Expert A, 2017).

But, regardless of not receiving a criminal record or even not knowing
one has been referred, being put through a referral process could be
highly stigmatising for individuals and breaks the trust established
between health care and local communities. Several expert practitioners
noted that “I think it’s very difficult to come back from a Prevent
referral” (Safeguarding Expert A, 2017), and “that person’s life can be
blighted [by a Prevent referral] in all sorts of ways. Professionally,
personally, if you’re a child at school and nowadays, everyone knows
you’ve been referred […] That label will stay with you, well after the
investigation and possible trial” (Consultant Psychiatrist B and GP 2,
2017). The referral process was also thought to have broader negative
effects upon the relationship between health care professionals and
their local communities: “If that leaks out that you did an
inappropriate Prevent referral, you break down your relationship with
that community, your patients, that patient’s family. They’ll talk to
other patients. She did the referral to Prevent. She thought I was a
terrorist or whatever. It would be a total disaster, where you’ve worked
so hard to create a safe space for these people to come and talk about
some really sensitive issues. You have to think before you do that.
(Consultant Psychiatrist B and GP 2, 2017)”

In essence, safeguarding experts are aware of the imperfect fit between
the Prevent Duty and safeguarding protocols. However, they mitigated
those discrepancies by emphasising how their everyday (non-Prevent)
safeguarding practice also sometimes exceeds the bounds of the Care Act,
and by renegotiating aspects of the Duty. During our interviews, it
became clear that some safeguarding experts assuaged their concerns
about being implicated in predictive detection, by reframing the Prevent
Duty as a way to reallocate resources to those deprived by the economic
context of austerity. We now turn away from expert testimony to explore
the everyday experiences of NHS staff with Prevent – specifically the
training provided to NHS staff on Prevent and their interpretations of
it.

.. _S0005:

Description of the content of WRAP training
===========================================

One of the many tasks of NHS safeguarding teams is to deliver WRAP
training to Trust/CCG staff. The “WRAP” training lasts 1‒2 hours and
involves the screening of clips from the Home Office provided DVD. Since
2016, WRAP trainers need not attend a “train the trainer” workshop; they
are qualified by simply having previously attended a WRAP session and by
achieving their line manager’s approval for taking on the role. In an
NHS England National Prevent Update, cascaded to all safeguarding teams
and prevent leads in the NHS in August 2016, staff were informed that
10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-UF0001

(NHS England `2016 <#CIT0007>`__: 2–3)

No specific expertise is required to deliver Prevent training, because
the role involves reading from the Home Office approve script for the
session and interspersing the monologue with clips from the DVD. But in
the course of our interviews with Prevent leads across the Midlands, it
became clear that no one found it possible or effective to stick to the
script. Some trainers reported that they use jokes about the training to
lighten the atmosphere, whereas others integrated discussion of current
events into the session.

The “Facilitators Workbook” provided by the Home Office suggests that
trainers tailor their session to the level required to “achieve buy-in”
from the audience. For management audiences, the Home Office recommend
that this might only involve playing the “what is Prevent” clip
alongside one of the case studies contained on the DVD. However, the
workbook then states that there is a minimum content threshold for the
session to be considered a WRAP. The relationship between full WRAP, and
the recommended session for management audiences, remains
unclear:10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-UF0002

(`Home Office undated <#CIT0016>`__: 2)

After the introduction of Prevent, the Workbook then instructs the
trainer to proceed by choosing one of the case studies included on the
DVD: either “Al Qaeda”-related radicalisation, or “Far Right”. Emphasis
is placed on choosing the clip which “best suits your audience”, and
ensuring that the second clip used later reflects a different
ideological standpoint. Interestingly, the Facilitator’s Workbook then
explicitly scripts the trainer in a fake “trust-building admission”,
designed to win over their audience. The trainer is advised to reveal
that they once found it hard to accept Prevent as a form of
safeguarding, and how they overcame that perspective by “recognising
that their conception of terrorism was too narrow”. This, the Workbook
advises, will build trust that can later be exploited by “educating the
audience” with the iceberg metaphor of terrorism and enable you to
“assert your authority for the rest of the
session”:10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-UF0003

(`Home Office undated <#CIT0016>`__: 4).

The Facilitator’s Workbook clearly shows that the training package aims
to deflect criticism that Prevent does not fit within NHS safeguarding
protocols. The aim of the training is not to engage open discussion but
to embed the duty to report radicalisation concerns to one’s line
manager or safeguarding team.

Similarly, the internal narrative of the Facilitator’s Workbook
instructs trainers to control the discussion of case studies from the
DVD. Rather than allowing flippant suggestions of vulnerability
indicators, or “shouting out”, the trainer is repeatedly instructed to
focus the discussion on emotional states that might lead to
radicalisation:10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-UF0004

(`Home Office undated <#CIT0016>`__: 6)

Through the policing of discussion possibilities, and the threat of
being put on the spot by the trainer, the audience are drilled to accept
vague emotional and social states (family upheaval; low self-esteem;
social exclusion) as precipitating factors in radicalisation. NHS staff
are never trained in specific behavioural signs that indicate
radicalisation, but rather instructed to adopt an attitude of suspicion
towards emotional states.

Given the multiple contexts in which family upheaval, low self-esteem
and social exclusion are manifest, the indicators of radicalisation are
presented in very broad terms within WRAP. So what scenarios do NHS
professionals think they are supposed to report? The second stage of our
study involved testing NHS staff attitudes towards the Prevent Training
through a questionnaire, and asking what scenarios they consider to be
reportable as a Prevent query.

.. _S0006:

Everyday NHS staff attitudes to the prevent duty and WRAP training
==================================================================

Our questionnaire was developed to capture data around each
participant’s pay grade, the NHS Trust/CCG for whom they work, their
confidence in the WRAP training, the behaviours which they would
consider reporting as a Prevent query and their perceptions of the
social functions of the Prevent Duty (safeguarding or surveillance). The
questionnaire was hosted on a University of Warwick server, gained
ethical clearance from the University’s Biomedical Sciences Research
Ethics Committee, and was distributed to the workforces of each trust
and CCG participating in the study by their Head of Safeguarding. In
total, 329 NHS staff completed the questionnaire.

The uptake between participating Trusts and CCGs was imbalanced: 76% of
responses were drawn from a mental health trust in a non-priority
Prevent area of the Midlands; 15% came from an Acute Trust in a
non-priority area; 3% came from CCG staff in a non-priority area and the
remaining respondents either did not specify their employer or were
employed in various other trusts across the UK. These “others”
discovered the survey through publicisation by the MEND network (Muslim
Engagement and Development). We did attempt to obtain research access to
Trusts and CCGs in Prevent priority areas but we were not successful.

After obtaining contextual details about the participant’s pay grade (to
establish the degree of seniority they possess) and previous
safeguarding training received, we asked respondents to grade how well
WRAP (or other forms of Prevent training) explained the signs of
radicalisation. We were interested to know how NHS staff felt about the
training, given that our content analysis of WRAP demonstrated
significant vagueness around the communication of radicalisation signs.
Interestingly, 71% of respondents graded the training positively
(marking it as, or above, “7 out of 10”) in this regard (`Figure
1 <#F0001>`__). 10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-F0001Figure 1.Grade how
well prevent training explained the signs of radicalisation.

We interpret this positive reaction to the training’s communication of
radicalisation indicators as also being an endorsement of radicalisation
as the interruptible process which leads to terrorism. If a respondent
was unconvinced by the radicalisation narrative put forth by government
and media, then we argue that they would have marked the training as
“bad” or “extremely bad” on this scale. Similarly, positive results were
obtained when we asked participants to reflect on their comfort or
discomfort with the material presented during their Prevent training.
About 72% of respondents graded themselves as “comfortable” or
“extremely comfortable” with the training materials (`Figure
2 <#F0002>`__).10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-F0002Figure 2.Grade how
comfortable you were with the material presented during prevent
training.

At first glance, these findings tend to support the conclusions of a
study which explores the roll-out of Prevent in education –
specifically, that the majority of public sector respondents accept the
core government narrative that Prevent should be understood as part of
their safeguarding duties (Busher et al. `2017 <#CIT0002>`__). However,
when we directly asked health care professionals whether they understood
the Prevent Duty to be a form of safeguarding, our results became far
more ambiguous. Only 47% reported agreement with the statement that
“Prevent is just safeguarding. It is the same as safeguarding people
from domestic abuse, financial abuse and sexual abuse”. Slightly over
30% of people “didn’t know” whether Prevent fits the profile of
safeguarding, whereas 22% disagreed with the statement (`Figure
3 <#F0003>`__). 10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-F0003Figure 3.Prevent is
just safeguarding. It is the same as safeguarding people from domestic
abuse, financial abuse and sexual abuse.

This move towards ambiguity when directly questioned about Prevent’s
status as safeguarding is very interesting. When compared to similar
research in the education sector (Busher et al. `2017 <#CIT0002>`__), it
suggests that the context of safeguarding in health affects respondents'
attitudes towards the Duty. In health care, unlike education,
safeguarding is associated with protective intervention upon adults with
“care and support needs”. Our results show that the majority of health
care professionals (in our study) are accepting the Prevent Duty’s place
in health and are comfortable with its requirements; however, this
acceptance does not signify a similar acceptance that Prevent is
safeguarding. Results for that question were significantly split, with
less than 50% of respondents agreeing with the Department of Health’s
framing of Prevent as safeguarding.

Our survey continued by exploring health care professionals’ attitudes
towards various scenarios and whether they would constitute grounds for
making a Prevent query. We developed these questions to probe deeper
into the pedagogical effects of WRAP training. WRAP is quite vague on
specific indicators of radicalisation and instead emphasises the
wide-ranging emotional states which “make a person vulnerable” to
extremism, like family upheaval, low self-esteem and social exclusion
(Home Office undated: 6).

One of the most significant findings was that health care professionals’
confidence in their ability to spot radicalisation fell away when we
introduced mildly complex scenarios. For example, we asked respondents
to grade their confidence in distinguishing radicalisation from
someone’s interest in Middle Eastern politics and wars. Only one in
three respondents reported having any degree of confidence that they
could make the distinction; 56% of participants stated that they “didn’t
know” if they could distinguish interest in Middle Eastern politics and
wars from radicalisation and 11% were explicitly unconfident to tell the
difference (`Figure 4 <#F0004>`__).
10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-F0004Figure 4.Grade how confident you feel
to tell the difference between someone experiencing radicalisation and
someone with an interest in middle eastern politics and wars.

This represents significant ambiguity about the character of
radicalisation and its relationship to someone’s general interest in
current and/or political affairs. This finding was also apparent when we
asked health care professionals’ to consider whether someone’s
possession of radical philosophy necessitated making a Prevent Duty
query. We deliberately did not qualify what we meant by “radical
Islamic/anarchist philosophy” in the survey, to see if respondents
queried the definition. It is notoriously difficult to classify
philosophy as radical or non-radical. However, health care professionals
felt extremely confident to understand the difference, without specific
training on the matter. Only one respondent (from a sample of 329) left
comments on the survey about potential difficulties in distinguishing
radical from non-radical philosophy.

Leaving aside the unspecified nature of radical philosophy, 70% of
respondents were “somewhat likely” or “very likely” to make a Prevent
referral about someone on the basis of radical philosophy possession.
Only 22% were “unlikely” or “extremely unlikely” to make such a
referral. 8% said that they “didn’t know” if they would make such a
referral (`Figure
5 <#F0005>`__).10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-F0005Figure 5.If a patient
or staff member possessed books about radical Islamic philosophers or
radical anarchism, how likely is it that you would make a safeguarding
query?.

We conclude from this that health care professionals feel
inappropriately confident to judge whether philosophical books are
radical, and that they are worryingly inclined to suspect radicalisation
solely from the possession of radical philosophy. Academic research
suggests that the philosophically and religiously literate are actually
less susceptible to radicalisation (Coolsaet `2015 <#CIT0005>`__; Roy
`2011 <#CIT0026>`__), and WRAP training makes no mention of philosophy
books as an indicator of concern, so we believe that respondents are
drawing their attitudes from popular culture rather than official
training or academic research.

Our suspicion that respondents are drawing their understanding of
radicalisation from popular culture is further confirmed by their
association of beheading videos with signs of concern. Beheading videos
are not mentioned in Prevent training, so the association of viewing
such videos with radicalisation comes from popular media. When asked if
they would make a Prevent query about someone who watched beheading
videos, 74% of respondents said “yes” (without any reference to the
“care and support needs” generally needed for a concern to become
relevant to safeguarding procedures); 21% “didn’t know”; and only 5%
said they wouldn’t make a Prevent referral on this basis (`Figure
6 <#F0006>`__). 10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-F0006Figure 6.If you saw a
patient or staff member watching video clips of beheadings, would you
make a safeguarding query?.

Other criteria which health care staff strongly associated with
radicalisation included hate speech about ethnicities, sexualities and
other minority groups. An enormous 82% of respondents reported that they
would be “very” or “somewhat” likely to make a Prevent query upon
hearing such hate speech. Only 15% were “not likely” or “very unlikely”
to make such a referral (`Figure 7 <#F0007>`__). While it is important
to challenge hate speech in the workplace, the Prevent training does not
specify that such illiberal opinion indicates radicalisation. However,
upon the launch of the Prevent Duty, Education Secretary Nicky Morgan
did identify vocal homophobia as a potential sign of radicalisation (BBC
News `2015 <#CIT0001>`__). [5]_10.1080/17539153.2018.1494123-F0007Figure
7.If a patient or staff member made hateful statements against an
ethnicity, sexuality, or another minority group, how likely is it that
you would make a safeguarding query?

However, interests in political events, possessing unpleasant opinions,
or reading religious philosophy are not necessarily indications of
radicalisation. NHS England has itself emphasised this in the most
recent policy guidance for implementing the Prevent Duty: “Professionals
should also have due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty and be
sensitive in their considerations. Outward expressions of faith or an
interest in global or political events, or opinions that may seem
unpleasant, in the absence of any other indicator of vulnerability or
risk are not reason to make a referral to Channel. (NHS England
`2017 <#CIT0008>`__: 14)”

And yet, our study indicates that NHS health care professionals in the
Midlands are inclined to draw such conclusions and to potentially make
Prevent referrals on these grounds.

.. _S0007:

Conclusion
==========

In the era of “after, after 9/11” in the UK, terrorism prevention has
come to be framed as the extension of safeguarding. This framing of
peer-to-peer counterterrorism surveillance as a banal measure of care
has ensured the successful rollout of the Prevent Duty throughout the
public sector. However, upon examination, there is an imperfect fit
between Prevent and safeguarding in the health care sector (where
Prevent is applied to people with formal care and support needs). We
have raised concerns that the Prevent Duty deemphasises the formal care
and support needs which legitimate protective intervention in an adult’s
life, replacing them with vague (and circular) notions of vulnerability
to extremist rhetoric. We also showed the various strategies health care
professionals deploy to negotiate the tensions of Prevent in the NHS,
including the highlighting of “grey areas” in normal safeguarding
practice and the reframing of Prevent pathways as a way to redistribute
care resources to those excluded by society.

Outside the realm of formal definitions and their interpretation by
safeguarding experts, we also discussed the everyday experience of NHS
staff with Prevent. After describing the content and pedagogy of the
WRAP training product, we analysed the attitudes of 329 NHS staff to the
Prevent Duty and their conceptions of radicalisation. Here, we found
that the majority of those surveyed approved of the Duty, but were
somewhat unconvinced of its status as genuine safeguarding. More
concerning were the prominent trends within survey data which showed how
staff associate radicalisation with philosophy possession and with hate
speech. Illiberal attitudes and beliefs are being associated with
radicalisation. Finally, we expressed grave concerns that only one in
three respondents considered themselves confident to tell the difference
between radicalisation and an interest in Middle Eastern wars and
politics. Our survey results raise concerns that WRAP training generates
a significant number of inappropriate referrals, some of which are
removed from the system by the local safeguarding team, whereas others
are deemed “misguided” by the Police Prevent Lead or Local Authority.

No figures exist for referrals which are deemed irrelevant or misguided
by safeguarding teams or police. These fail to reach the Prevent Case
Management system. But the figures for those referrals which do reach
the Prevent Case Management system demonstrate a remarkably high
attrition rate. Only 5% of formal Prevent referrals in 2016 and 2017
were allocated a deradicalisation mentor (Home Office
`2017 <#CIT0014>`__, `2018 <#CIT0015>`__). Instead, the figures for 2017
show that 36% of formal referrals were abandoned, [6]_ and 45% were
given support from housing, education or health services. The remaining
19% were discussed at Channel Panel, of which a minority (5% of all
formal referrals) received mentoring (Home Office `2018 <#CIT0015>`__).

Before the statutory duty was introduced in 2015, this figure for
mentoring (and thus the formal accuracy of Prevent referrals) was much
higher. About 20% of referrals went on to receive mentoring support from
Channel. But since the introduction of the Prevent Duty, the total
number of referrals has jumped from 500–1000 per year to 7631 in 2015/16
(Home Office `2017 <#CIT0014>`__). As Thomas Martin argues, this
enormous increase in referral numbers – and the drop to 5% receiving
Channel mentoring – reflects the responsibilisation of the public sector
for counter-radicalisation and the prospect of censure for
non-compliance (Martin `2018 <#CIT0019>`__). Legal obligation has
increased the numbers of referrals but not their quality.

This remarkably high failure rate of the Prevent Duty to identify
subjects who require deradicalisation mentoring also speaks to the
impact of the safeguarding framing and economic austerity. The provision
of normal safeguarding support (housing, mental health care, education)
to 45% of Prevent referrals distracts attention from the small number of
people deemed to actually require deradicalisation intervention. But why
could not these outcomes be obtained through normal social service
provision, rather than a counterterrorism pathway? The context of
economic austerity in the United Kingdom has diminished the capacities
of the public sector to respond to social needs, and we find that the
Prevent Strategy is gradually filling the gap – while simultaneously
enabling surveillance (Heath-Kelly `2017a <#CIT0011>`__).

Supplementary Material
======================

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: Supplemental Material

**Charlotte Heath-Kelly** is an Associate Professor of Politics and
International Studies at the University of Warwick. She has published
one monograph on war-on-terror memorialisation, 'Death and Security:
Memory and Mortality at the Bombsite' (Manchester University Press,
2016), and one monograph on ex-militant testimony and the post-conflict
politics of memory in Southern Europe, 'Politics of Violence: Militancy,
International Politics, Killing in the Name' (Routledge, 2013). Her
research interests include counter-radicalisation policies,
memorialisation and critical studies on terrorism.

**Erzsebet Strausz** is an Assistant Professor of Politics and
International Studies at the University of Warwick. Her monograph,
'Writing the Self and Transforming Knowledge in International Relations:
Towards a Politics of Liminality', was recently published by Routledge
(2018). Her research interests include continental philosophy,
aesthetics and critical pedagogy.

.. _S0008:

Disclosure statement
====================

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

.. _S0009:

Interviews
==========

Interview with CCG Prevent Lead B; 11 November 2017.

Interview with CCG Safeguarding Expert C; 1 October 2017.

Interview with Consultant Psychiatrist B and GP 2; 19 November 2017.

Interview with Safeguarding Expert A; 20 March 2017.

Interview with Safeguarding Expert P; 14 October 2017.

Interview with Safeguarding Experts F & J; 21 October 2017.

.. [1]
   The underlying research materials for this article can be accessed at
   `https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/pais/research/researchcentres/irs/counterterrorisminthenhs’ <https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/pais/research/researchcentres/irs/counterterrorisminthenhs’>`__

.. [2]
   Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs) are NHS organisations set up
   after the Health and Social Care Act of 2012 to organise the delivery
   of healthcare services. Each CCG includes all of the General
   Practitioner groups in its geographical area, so that GPs and
   clinicians can influence commissioning decisions for their region.

.. [3]
   The Netherlands’ “Integrated Approach to Combatting Jihadism”
   [Actieprogramma Integrale Aanpak Jihadisme Overzicht maatregelen en
   acties] policy of 2014 outlines the potential for youth workers and
   educators to prevent radicalisation:
   https://www.tweedekamer.nl/kamerstukken/detail?did=2014D2934&id=2014D29343
   (last accessed 3 November 2017).

.. [4]
   The Midlands has a population of over 10 million people and is
   constituted by the counties of Derbyshire, Herefordshire,
   Leicestershire, Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, Nottinghamshire,
   Rutland, Shropshire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire and Worcestershire.
   The biggest cities in the Midlands are Birmingham, Coventry,
   Leicester, Nottingham and Stoke-on-Trent.

.. [5]
   We are grateful to a reviewer for alerting us to this.

.. [6]
   No figures exist for informal referrals which are removed from the
   pipeline by safeguarding teams or the initial police check. The real
   attribution rate for Prevent referrals is thus much higher.
