================================================================================================
Follow-up study of 6.5 years of admissions to a UK female medium secure forensic psychiatry unit
================================================================================================



John Tully
Alessandra Cappai
John Lally
Maria FotiadouCorrespondence to John Tully (john.tully@kcl.ac.uk)
:Date: 2019-4

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   We aimed to examine clinical and risk outcomes at follow-up, and
   reoffending and readmission rates, for a sample of 50 admissions to a
   female medium secure unit (MSU). Demographic, clinical risk
   assessment (HCR-20 and HoNOS-Secure) and quality of life data were
   collected using validated measures for all admissions to a female MSU
   ward in London, UK, between April 2008 and November 2014.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   All clinical and risk assessment scale scores had improved at
   follow-up. Quality of life compared favourably to community samples
   and was good for physical, social and environmental factors and
   acceptable for psychological health. Twenty-six per cent had at least
   one readmission, while 17.5% reoffended in the period studied. A
   longer duration of admission and use of restrictions on discharge was
   associated with reduced reoffending, but not readmission.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Admission is associated with improvement on clinical risk assessment
   at follow-up. Longer hospital admissions and use of restrictions on
   discharge may be necessary to prevent reoffending in this group.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Forensic psychiatry services are low-volume, high-cost services which
seek to balance clinical treatment for public protection with caring for
vulnerable patient groups.1 In the UK, forensic psychiatric in-patient
care is organised into three levels: high, medium and low secure
facilities.2 Patients are admitted to a specified level of security
based on forensic history, level of risk to self or others, and
diagnosis of a mental disorder. On discharge from in-patient services,
many patients are subject to conditions under a Community Treatment
Order (CTO), or ‘restrictions’ under Section 41 of the Mental Health
(MHA) 1983, as amended in 2007 (for England and Wales), known as
‘conditional discharge’. After discharge, such patients may leave
hospital, but if they breach conditions or restrictions, they may be
recalled to hospital. Examples of conditions and restrictions include
being resident at a specified address, medication adherence, or
cooperating with supervision by mental health services. Prevention of
reoffending after discharge and reduction in readmission rates are key
roles of forensic services. It is therefore essential that services be
aware of factors involved in reoffending and readmission.

In the past decade, there has been a six-fold increase in the number of
women admitted to medium secure forensic psychiatry services (MSUs3).
Approximately 12–15% of medium secure beds in the UK are occupied by
women.2\ :sup:`,`\ 4\ :sup:`,`\ 5 Despite this, there remains a paucity
of demographic and clinical data on female MSU patients, particularly in
relation to progress after discharge. Using a longitudinal cohort
design, we assessed clinical risk assessment follow-up data and quality
of life, using validated measures, in a female MSU sample. We also
sought to identify clinical and demographic factors associated with
reoffending and readmission rates following hospital discharge.

.. _sec1:

Methods
=======

.. _sec1-1:

Sample and study setting
------------------------

This study comprised all patients admitted to Spring Ward, the female
ward of River House MSU in South London and Maudsley Foundation (SLaM)
Trust, between April 2008 and November 2014 (6.58 years). Spring Ward
contains 16% of the beds within the unit. The service covers a
population of 1 090 544 people in London, approximately 50% of whom are
female. Spring Ward opened in April 2008 and employs a multidisciplinary
biopsychosocial approach to support women in their pathway of recovery
and reintegration into the community. Ethical approval for this project
was sought and obtained from the SLaM Trust Research and Ethics
Committee.

.. _sec1-2:

Data collection
---------------

We examined the electronic clinical records of all patients.
Demographic, clinical and risk assessment data are collected routinely
at admission and throughout the course of admission. Standard risk
assessment during MSU admission in the UK includes the Historical
Clinical Risk Management-20 (HCR-206), Health of the Nation Outcome
Scale (HoNOS), and Health of the Nation Outcome Scales for Users of
Secure and Forensic Services (HoNOS-Secure7). The predictive validity
for violence of the HCR-20 has been established in female patients in
medium secure settings,8 and HoNOS has previously been used to identify
clinical improvements following admission to female MSUs.9 All patients
were assessed using these scales at the time of their admission, or
shortly after. All patients were reassessed using the HCR-20, HoNOS and
HoNOS-Secure scales between April and October 2015. Readmission and
reoffending rates following initial discharge were collated, based on
SLaM data. Quality of life was measured using the World Health
Organization Quality of Life Scale, brief version (WHOQOL-BREF10), which
has been validated in large international samples, including those with
mental illness.11 One assessment was obtained for each patient, close to
or soon after discharge.

.. _sec1-3:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

Comparisons between the groups were conducted using *χ*\ :sup:`2`-tests
for categorical variables and *t*-tests for continuous variables. All
statistical tests were two-sided, and the α level for statistical
significance was 0.05. All analyses were conducted in SPSS version 22.0.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

Within the study period, 50 female patients were admitted to Spring
Ward. The mean age was 37.5 years (s.d. 11.17). The sample comprised 20
(40%) White, 26 (52%) Black and four (8%) individuals of ‘other’
ethnicity. The most common primary diagnoses were schizophrenia spectrum
disorders (*n* = 38; 78% of sample) (International Classification of
Diseases (ICD-10) category F20–29) and personality disorders (category
F60–F69) (*n* = 36 patients, 18%). Nine patients (18%) with a
schizophrenia spectrum disorder had a secondary diagnosis of a
personality disorder. A diagnosis of a schizophrenia spectrum disorder
was associated with non-White ethnicity (*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 8.059,
d.f. = 1, *P* = 0.005), while a diagnosis of personality disorder was
associated with White ethnicity (*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 4.678, d.f. = 1,
*P* = 0.031).

A history of physical or sexual abuse or neglect was present in 26
(52%), and 22 (44%) had a history of self-harm. Twenty-three patients
(46%) had a history of alcohol and/or drug misuse, with those of White
ethnicity having increased alcohol misuse compared to those of non-White
ethnicity (alcohol: *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 6.63, d.f. = 2, *P* = 0.036; drugs:
*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 7.49, d.f. = 2, *P* = 0.024). Eighteen patients (36%)
had no index offence, 17 (34%) had a violent index offence (actual or
grievous bodily harm, manslaughter or murder), eight (16%) had committed
arson and seven (14%) had a non-violent index offence.

The median length of hospital admission was 503 days (1.39 years). As of
November 2014, 46 of the 50 patients were discharged at least once
following admission; four were still in hospital following their first
admission. Thirteen patients (26%) were readmitted once or more during
the study period. The median follow-up period was 1390 days (3.8 years)
for the 46 patients who were discharged. Of this group, five (10.8%)
were discharged to prison; 32 (69.5%) were subject to a CTO, probation,
or section MHA restriction order; and nine (19.5%) were not subject to
conditions or restrictions.

`Table 1 <#tab01>`__ shows outcome data on the HCR-20, HoNOS and
HoNOS-Secure scales. There were significant improvements on each of
these scales at follow-up. Quality of life outcomes on WHOQOL-BREF were
‘good’ (60–69) for physical (mean 66.2), social (mean 64.3) and
environmental domains (mean 67), which compared favourably with
international samples of individuals with mental illness.11 The mean
score for psychological health (mean 58.9) was ‘acceptable’ (50–59),
which was comparable to that of patients with psychotic disorders in
international samples.11 Table 1HCR-20, HoNOS and HoNOS-Secure scales:
mean differences between initial assessment and follow-up
assessmentInitial assessment mean scoreFollow-up assessment mean
scoreMean differences.d.95% CI\ *t*\ d.f.Sig. (2-tailed)HCR clinical
items6.323.342.973.441.78–4.155.10634<0.001HCR risk
items5.914.131.773.080.73–2.823.462350.001HoNOS
scale15.077.717.3516.302.07–12.642.818380.008HoNOS-Secure
scale15.154.3010.8420.874.07–17.613.244380.002

Of 41 discharges to a hospital or community setting, data on reoffending
were available for 40. In this group, seven patients (17.5%) reoffended
(four with violent offences). Those who reoffended had a significantly
shorter hospital stay (mean days 231.7, s.d. 226) compared with those
who did not reoffend (mean days 631.7, s.d. = 326; *t* = 3.701,
d.f. = 12.66, *P* = 0.005). The length of stay of those who were
readmitted did not significantly differ compared with those who were not
readmitted (*t* = 0.215, d.f. = 27.05, *P* = 0.831). Likewise, use of
conditions, restrictions or probation was not associated with
readmission (*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 4.66, d.f. = 2, *P* = 0.097), but was
associated with reduced reoffending (*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 43.14, d.f. = 6,
*P* < 0.001). Alcohol or drug use was not found to be associated with
readmission (*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 0.02, d.f. = 1, *P* = 0.887), but was
associated with increased reoffending (*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 4.49, d.f. = 1,
*P* = 0.034).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

We report clinical characteristics and follow-up outcomes on 50 female
MSU patients, a group that has been underrepresented by research to
date. Studies of this group have focused primarily on readmission and
reoffending only, and there have been few new published data in the past
decade. Our study provides an update in this important area of forensic
psychiatry, including clinical outcome measures. This is also the first
study in this group to include self-reported quality of life data.

A key finding of our study was that women discharged from hospital
maintained their improvement for the follow-up period and reported good
outcomes. Reduction in clinical and risk items on HCR-20 suggests both
clinical improvement for patients and reduction in risk of future
violent offending in the community. Overall quality of life measures
(WHOQOL-BREF) were grossly comparable to a population of individuals
with mental health problems.11 Quality of life is an important outcome
for patients and their family following discharge. Lower scores on
physical and psychological domains were a concern, although this is
perhaps to be expected given the complexity of our population.

As with previous studies, we found that a longer hospital stay was
associated with a lower rate of reoffending. While forensic services
have been criticised for longer periods of stay in hospital,12 it has
also been argued that this is necessary for patient recovery and public
protection.13 Our findings provide support for this hypothesis, and are
in keeping with results from a previous large-scale study showing that a
longer in-patient stay was protective against reoffending following
discharge.4 The use of restrictions in forensic services is also
controversial, but has also been shown to be associated with reduced
reoffending following discharge.4 This was also the case in our sample.
These results suggest that longer stays in hospital and judicious use of
restrictions on discharge are necessary to prevent reoffending in this
patient group.

In our sample, alcohol and drug use were also associated with increased
reoffending. The largest study of reoffending following discharge from
MSU settings did not identify this association, demonstrating only an
association between alcohol use and arson.4 However, this association
may also be due to distinct clinical characteristics of our sample and
warrants further exploration.

Our sample's demographic characteristics were similar to those of
previous studies which have examined female MSU
patients.4\ :sup:`,`\ 5\ :sup:`,`\ 9\ :sup:`,`\ 14 There were high rates
of abuse and neglect, alcohol and substance misuse and self-harm,
emphasising that this is a vulnerable group, and supporting the view
that there is a need for specialised MSU services for
women.2\ :sup:`,`\ 9 There were higher rates of psychotic disorders than
in previous samples, and lower rates of personality disorders.4 This may
be due to a tendency in some settings to diagnose personality disorder,
rather than psychosis, on the basis of the presence of self-harm,
impulsive behaviour and substance misuse, an issue that has been
identified as a concern in clinical guidelines.15 Our exclusively urban
sample may also contribute to the discrepancy.

There was a high representation of ethnic minorities within our female
forensic service. Black women admitted to MSUs have previously been
shown to be more likely to have diagnoses of psychotic disorder or drug
misuse, and to be less likely to be diagnosed with depression, alcohol
misuse and borderline personality disorder than White women.14 In the
current study, ethnicity was also associated with different clinical
profiles in our patient group. Owing to our small sample size, we
limited our categorisation of ethnicity to White and non-White. In
keeping with previous research, non-White ethnicity was associated with
increased rates of schizophrenia spectrum disorders, while White
ethnicity was associated with increased rates of personality disorder.14
This tentatively supports the hypothesis that there is a deficit in
adequately providing appropriate non-forensic services to non-White
women with psychotic disorders, leading to escalation to offending and
admission to forensic services. Also in keeping with previous studies,14
White ethnicity was associated with increased alcohol misuse. However,
in contrast to previous findings, White ethnicity in our sample was also
associated with increased drug misuse. This suggests a potential shift
in clinical characteristics of White female patients being admitted to
medium secure settings. Inferences are limited, however, by our small
sample size and exclusively urban population.

The study was limited mainly by a relatively small sample size, although
this needs to be considered in relation to the relatively small female
MSU population, and the lack of relevant data on this group. The study
benefited from robust data collection – very few data were missing – and
from the use of standardised and objective measures of outcomes.

In conclusion, admission to female MSU is associated with improvement on
clinical risk assessment outcomes at follow-up. Longer hospital
admissions and the use of restrictions on discharge may be necessary to
prevent reoffending in this group. Further research on the role of
ethnicity in this group is warranted.

We would like to thank all staff on Spring Ward, River House MSU, for
assistance with data collation and acquisition.

**John Tully** is a Wellcome Clinical Research Training Fellow at the
Department of Forensic and Neurodevelopmental Services, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Kings College London, UK;
**Alessandra Cappai** is a specialist registrar in Forensic Psychiatry
at River House MSU, Bethlem Royal Hospital, South London and Maudsley
Foundation Trust, UK; **John Lally** is a clinical research worker at
the Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology
and Neuroscience, Kings College London and National Psychosis Service,
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK and Department of
Psychiatry, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Ireland; and **Maria
Fotiadou** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist at River House MSU,
Bethlem Royal Hospital, South London and Maudsley Foundation Trust, UK.
