---
abstract: |
  Poverty is strongly associated with mental illness. Access to state
  benefits can be a lifeline for people with mental health problems in
  times of hardship and can assist them on their journey of recovery.
  However, benefit application processes can discriminate against those
  with mental illness and can result in individuals unjustly missing out
  on support. Clinical evidence from mental health professionals can
  ameliorate these challenges and ensure that people get access to
  financial help.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a1}

  Dr Billy Boland is on the advisory board of the Money and Mental
  Health Policy Institute.
author:
- Alexander Galloway
- Billy Boland
- Gareth WilliamsCorrespondence to Dr Alexander Galloway
  (<alexander.galloway1@nhs.net>)
date: 2018-10
institute:
- 1Specialty Doctor, Hertfordshire Partnership University National
  Health Service Foundation Trust, UK
- 2Consultant Psychiatrist, Hertfordshire Partnership University
  National Health Service Foundation Trust, UK
- 3Benefits Adviser, Mental Health Project, Money Advice Unit,
  Hertfordshire County Council, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
title: Mental health problems, benefits and tackling discrimination
---

# The relationship between money and mental illness {#sec1-1}

There is a clear link between financial hardship and mental
disorder.^1^^--^^3^ In 2009 the global financial crisis was estimated to
be responsible for an additional 4884 suicides worldwide.^4^ In Britain,
people with severe mental illness are three times more likely to be in
debt than the general population.^5^ The aim of this article is to help
clinicians understand Employment Support Allowance (ESA) and Personal
Independence Payments (PIP) ([Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}), two
key state benefits in England and Wales, as well as provide further
advice on writing supporting clinical evidence for applications. Box
1'We can provide the best treatment in the world for our patients but if
they can\'t afford accommodation, heating or food this will be
ineffective. It\'s essential that clinicians know how to support their
patients in applying for the benefits they are entitled to.'Professor
Wendy Burn, President, Royal College of Psychiatrists (personal
communication, 2017)

The modern, post-war British welfare state was founded to eradicate what
*The Beveridge Report* of 1942 identified as the five 'giant evils' in
society: squalor, ignorance, want, idleness and disease.^6^ In 2011 the
World Health Organization reported mental illnesses to be the leading
cause of worldwide disability,^7^ with global costs estimated to exceed
\$6 trillion by 2030.^8^ It is therefore no surprise that people with
severe mental illnesses are the largest group (49%) claiming working age
sickness benefits in the UK.^9^

# Disadvantage and discrimination {#sec1-2}

However, in England and Wales the benefits system often does not work,
especially for people with mental disorders, leaving some claimants
'fearful, demoralised, and further away from achieving their
work-related goals'.^10^ In 2013 the Court of Appeal upheld a ruling
that people with mental disorders, along with those with intellectual
disabilities and autism, are specifically disadvantaged by the ESA
application process.^11^ Many benefits assessors do not have prior
training or experience in mental health.^12^ Award decisions are often
inaccurate; 67% of ESA and 68% of PIP decisions are later overturned by
appeal tribunals.^13^^,^^14^ In January 2018, the Government announced a
review of 1.6 million PIP claims following a High Court ruling in
December 2017 that described recent changes to the mobility component as
'blatantly discriminatory' against people with mental health
problems.^15^

The reliance on self-reported information in claims is a major obstacle,
particularly for those with impaired insight.^16^ Submission deadlines
are short and those who miss them (perhaps because they do not check
their post or were in hospital) may be penalised for the very problems
that led them to apply for benefits in the first place. Disturbingly,
there is evidence that the assessment for ESA, known as the Work
Capability Assessment (WCA; see below), is linked with harm as it is
independently associated with an increase in suicides, self-reported
mental health problems and prescribing of antidepressants.^17^ Clinical
and academic experts have long argued that clinicians should have a good
understanding of benefits to better care for patients.^18^ People using
community mental health services frequently under-claim and, for these
people, benefits advice can result in additional payment.^19^

# ESA and PIP claims {#sec2}

ESA and PIP claims share much in common; both require assessment by an
independent provider of the functional impact of a claimant\'s condition
based on a completed medical questionnaire, supporting clinical evidence
and, potentially, face-to-face assessment. Nevertheless, there are
notable differences: ESA provides a basic day-to-day income for a
claimant unable to work full time due to illness, whereas PIP provides a
supplement for the increased costs of living with disability. Claimants
may receive either benefit, or both, if eligible.

## ESA {#sec2-1}

ESA is awarded instead of Jobseeker\'s Allowance when a claimant is
determined by the Department for Work and Pensions' (DWP) WCA to have
limited capability for work due to illness or disability. 'Limited' does
not imply *no* capability and claimants are assessed in terms of whether
they can sustain full-time work (16 h per week or more).

ESA applications, once separate, are now being integrated into Universal
Credit claims as the programme rolls out nationwide. As the assessment
process remains the same, this article will use the term ESA to refer to
either route of application.

To establish limited capability for work, a claimant initially needs
only to provide a medical certificate from their doctor. At this point,
their claim is processed and provisional payment is issued (if
applicable). The claimant is then placed in the 'assessment phase',
which lasts for 13 weeks, or until the DWP completes the WCA, whichever
is longer. If this phase lasts longer than 13 weeks, successful claims
will have any additional payment due as a result of passing the
assessment backdated to the 13th week.

Following the WCA there are three possible outcomes: (1)The claimant is
found to be fit for work and is redirected to claim Jobseeker\'s
Allowance (or their Universal Credit claim is adjusted accordingly).(2,
3)The claimant is found to have limited capability for work and is
awarded ESA. Within this cohort are two subdivisions: •The 'limited
capability for work group', typically shortened to the 'work group'. In
this group, a claimant can be mandated to attend work-focused interviews
at their local Jobcentre (or by phone if necessary) and perform
'work-related activity', for example skills or CV training. Failure to
participate can result in financial sanctions, although a claimant in
the work group cannot be asked to apply for or take paid employment.•The
claimant is found to have 'limited capability for work-related
activity'. In this case, they are placed in the 'support group'
(technically the 'limited capability for work-related activity group'),
which has no attached requirements. Claimants may still choose to do
part-time or voluntary work, or other forms of work-related activity if
they wish.

## PIP {#sec2-2}

PIP has replaced the Disability Living Allowance for new claims for
16--64 year olds. Both are based on the presumption that functional
impairments incur additional living costs. Unlike ESA, PIP is not means
tested and eligibility is unaffected by savings, income, household or
work status. Award duration varies from 1 to 10 years (an 'ongoing
award') and successful claimants may still appeal the award length.^20^

The PIP assessment separates functional difficulties into two
components: daily living and mobility. Support for either or both
components may be awarded, with payments at a standard (requiring 8
points) or enhanced rate (12 points).

# The assessment process {#sec3}

For both ESA and PIP assessments, points are scored for key functional
tasks known as 'descriptors', according to the claimant\'s assessed
level of difficulty. For PIP there are ten daily living descriptors
(such as preparing food, dressing and budgeting) and two for mobility.
ESA assessments are split between ten descriptors for physical
disabilities and seven for mental, cognitive and intellectual function
(see [Box 2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"}). Scoring 15 points or more
anywhere in the ESA assessment qualifies a claimant for the work group.
There are also specific descriptors that, if awarded, will further
qualify a claimant for the support group. Box 2ESA and PIP assessment
criteriaESA descriptors concerning mental, cognitive and intellectual
impairment: •learning tasks•awareness of everyday hazards•initiating and
completing personal action•coping with change•getting about•coping with
social engagement•appropriateness of behaviour with other
people•conveying food or drink to the mouth/chewing or swallowing food
or drink (if due to severe disorder of mood or behaviour)Adapted from *A
Guide to Employment and Support Allowance -- The Work Capability
Assessment*.^21^PIP criteria: •Daily living activities: ○Activity 1 --
preparing food○Activity 2 -- taking nutrition○Activity 3 -- managing
therapy or monitoring a health condition○Activity 4 -- washing and
bathing○Activity 5 -- managing toilet needs or incontinence○Activity 6
-- dressing and undressing○Activity 7 -- communicating verbally○Activity
8 -- reading and understanding signs, symbols and words○Activity 9 --
engaging with other people face to face○Activity 10 -- making budgeting
decisions•Mobility activities: ○Activity 11 -- planning and following
journeys○Activity 12 -- moving aroundTaken from *PIP Assessment Guide
Part Two: The Assessment Criteria*.^22^

ESA contains 'substantial risk' rules that may allow claimants with
insufficient scores (including zero) to qualify for either the work or
support group if 'there would be a substantial risk to the mental or
physical health of any person if the claimant were found not to have
limited capability for work/work-related activity.'^23^ As well as
obvious risks, such as self-harm or hospital admission, substantial
risks may also include that of causing increased distress (e.g. if
forced to travel by public transport) or the possibility that medication
will need to be changed as a direct consequence.^23^ Reportedly up to
23% of ESA claims are awarded by this route.^24^

There is some degree of overlap in the descriptors for ESA and PIP, as
well as notable differences; the activities relevant to mental,
cognitive and intellectual functioning can be found in [Box
2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"}. For further information on specific
criteria and how they are judged, please see the Royal College of
Psychiatrist\'s guidance to clinicians on the ESA WCA^25^ (see [Box
3](#box3){ref-type="boxed-text"} for a summary). Similar College
guidance on the PIP assessment is in development. Box 3Advice on writing
supporting clinical evidenceThe general structure for supporting letters
advised by the Royal College of Psychiatrists^25^ is as follows:
(1)Basic clinical details: diagnosis, medication, side effects, length
of service contact, current contact, variability of condition (e.g.
diurnally, between episodes and during the most severe peaks of
illness), impact of stress and overall symptoms.(2)How this affects
level of functioning in regards to the specific descriptors. If unaware
whether a specific criteria applies, a clinician can still state they
believe it is likely it does on the balance of probabilities.Information
about difficulties a claimant may have travelling to an assessment
centre or completing paperwork should be clearly stated.

In addition to ensuring accurate award decisions, supporting clinical
evidence can also provide assistance and safeguards throughout the
application process itself. Given the disadvantages claimants with
mental health problems face,^11^ there are numerous areas where problems
can arise.

## Completing the questionnaire and initial review {#sec3-1}

Once a valid claim for ESA or PIP has been made, the case is referred to
an independent medical assessment provider. The claimant is sent a
Limited Capability for Work questionnaire (ESA50/UC50) or How Your
Disability Affects You form (PIP2), covering their condition and its
impact, and it is to be completed by them, or on their behalf. This is
submitted along with any supporting clinical evidence. Once received,
the assessor -- who may be an occupational therapist, nurse,
physiotherapist, paramedic or doctor -- conducts an 'initial review' of
the file. They may request a face-to-face interview or decide there is
sufficient evidence to make an immediate determination. Supporting
clinical evidence can therefore make the process far more
straightforward for the claimant.

Notably, supporting clinical evidence is not mandatory at any stage of
the process. An independent review of the WCA for the Government
concluded: 'it is essential that all relevant medical and allied
evidence about the claimant is available to the DWP Decision Maker at
the earliest possible stage in the assessment process.'^26^ Following a
more recent independent review of the PIP assessment,^27^ the Government
accepted the DWP should make clear that the responsibility to provide
further evidence 'lies primarily with the claimant and they should not
assume the Department will contact health care professionals.' The same
problems exist with ESA applications.^11^

### Questionnaire problems {#sec3-1-1}

Claimants can face numerous difficulties when completing the initial
questionnaire. In 2013 the High Court^11^ identified 11 reasons why
people with mental health problems may struggle with self-reporting at
this stage, including: failure due to lack of insight, inability due to
difficulties with social interaction or confusion and unwillingness
because of shame or fear of discrimination. Failure to return the
questionnaire may result in termination of the benefit. There are some
safeguards against this for ESA, as the WCA Handbook^28^ states: "'Where
a claimant has a mental function problem an assessment will be carried
out even if the \[medical questionnaire\] is not returned.'"

However for PIP claims, failure to return the questionnaire can be more
problematic. Regarding customers with additional support needs, the PIP
assessment guide^22^ states: "'1.12.2 Some may have an Appointee ... or
support from a family member, carer, Community Psychiatric Nurse or
other person who will usually ensure that the claimant is supported
throughout the process. In those circumstances, the claimant would not
be classified as requiring additional support from the DWP. These people
already have support.'"

This assumption effectively means less protection for PIP than ESA
applicants and makes early termination of claims more likely. In this
event, supporting clinicians can write to the DWP to provide evidence as
to how the claimant\'s condition has adversely affected their ability to
fulfil their requirements, ask for good cause to be accepted and for the
claim reinstated.

## Arranging the assessment {#sec3-2}

A determination is not usually made on initial review of paper evidence.
The assessor may attempt to contact professionals named in the
questionnaire for additional information or, more commonly, refer the
claimant for a face-to-face assessment (as with 72% of ESA assessments
in 2013).^29^ If a claimant cannot reasonably be expected to travel to
an assessment centre they can request a home visit, but this will almost
certainly require specific supporting clinical evidence.

### Assessment problems {#sec3-2-1}

If a face-to-face assessment for ESA or PIP is missed, the case file is
returned to the DWP to decide whether to accept good cause or to
terminate the claim. Both ESA and PIP legislation require that the
decision maker consider the claimant\'s state of health and the nature
of their disability in making this determination.^30^^,^^31^ As such,
these decisions can be challenged using clinical evidence to justify why
the claimant was unable to attend.

Assessment providers will typically refuse to conduct a home visit if
there is a history of violence or aggression, which may lead to an
impasse if the claimant cannot attend the assessment centre. In such
cases, it is advisable to write directly to the assessment providers,
explaining why the individual cannot travel and offering to provide
further evidence. This may allow a paper-only assessment to be
conducted.

## The face-to face assessment {#sec3-3}

The face-to-face assessment can be extremely stressful for claimants,
although they can be accompanied by a person of their choice who may
also provide evidence. The assessor should have read all available
information beforehand, although further clinical evidence can be
provided on the day. The claimant\'s overall presentation at the
interview can form a large part of the assessment, which may be
problematic for those who lack insight, have a fluctuating condition,
under-report or have become adept at masking their difficulties. This
further highlights the importance of supporting clinical evidence to
provide the full context.

Following the assessment, the health professional completes a report
including recommendations to the DWP, who make the final decision.

# Challenging decisions {#sec4}

The two initial stages of challenging an outcome are mandatory
reconsideration and formal appeal. To challenge a decision, claimants
must first request a mandatory reconsideration by the DWP, the legal
term being 'any grounds revision'. Mandatory Reconsideration requests
must be submitted within 1 month of the original decision, however this
can be extended by up to 13 months if there is good cause.^32^ This
1-month rule applies not only to final award decisions but to any
decisions made by the DWP, which carry right of appeal. For example,
claimants could challenge the termination of their claim for failing to
attend a face-to-face interview. In the real world, such situations are
likely and mental health services may only discover essential
information long after the designated 1-month limit. In these cases,
clinical evidence should support both the original challenge and also
why a late application for revision should be accepted. Even if
application for a late revision is denied, a recent Upper Tribunal
case^33^ ruled that a claimant still has a statutory right of appeal if
a late request is not considered.

If the Mandatory Reconsideration outcome is unfavourable, the claimant
can then submit (within a month) an appeal to the independent Courts and
Tribunals Service. Further clinical evidence can be provided. It is
important to ensure claimants are aware that reconsideration or appeal
of one aspect of a decision could lead to a potentially disadvantageous
revision of the whole decision. For example, challenging a decision
about PIP mobility could theoretically lead to an existing daily living
award being revoked. Appeals can be withdrawn at any point prior to the
hearing.

# Supporting clinical evidence {#sec5}

Reports can be sent directly to the assessment centre or, preferably,
given to the patient to submit with their completed questionnaire.
Additional evidence can be provided at any point, however early
submission ensures its use throughout all subsequent stages and may
allow for a quicker decision. Most supporting evidence will be requested
to establish whether a claimant meets the qualifying descriptors ([Box
2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"}), however it might also be necessary to
provide evidence in response to, or in anticipation of, specific
problems outlined above. For example, if a patient reports their ESA has
stopped, it may be due to insufficient points scored during their WCA or
because they failed to attend it at all. The clinical evidence should
address the issue in question.

It is important that supporting letters are objective, link functional
problems to health issues, expand on common clinical concepts (e.g.
negative symptoms of schizophrenia) and state obvious clinical
inferences explicitly (e.g. negative symptoms persist even during
periods of remission). It should be remembered that DWP decision makers
are not medical professionals and they may have a limited understanding
of terminology or mental health problems.

Care plans can be valuable evidence if they demonstrate that a claimant
cannot manage relevant domains of functioning, such as their own
self-care. However, there is a danger of care plans inadvertently giving
a positively skewed impression of functioning if they are too
simplistic. One example is preparing meals: PIP defines a 'simple meal'
as 'a cooked one-course meal for one using fresh ingredients'.
Therefore, a care plan that refers to independent cooking but does not
clarify that this extends only to the use of a microwave could adversely
affect the outcome.

The DWP\'s overall definition of capability is more narrow than it might
first appear and requires some measure of consistency; the claimant must
be able to perform the given tasks reliably (defined as 'safely,
repeatedly, to an acceptable standard and as often as is reasonable to
require'^28^) on a majority of days. In addition, judgments about
qualifying for a particular descriptor need not be unequivocal and may
be accepted on a balance of probabilities.

Finally, when providing clinical evidence, it is always worth bearing in
mind that you must demonstrate not only whether a claimant is affected
by their condition, but also whether they are affected in the specific
legal ways that qualify them for the benefit. The best evidence will
therefore directly address the descriptors and, as such, a working
knowledge of the criteria is vital in ensuring that claimants have the
best possible support throughout the process.^25^

# Conclusions {#sec6}

With some basic knowledge, mental health professionals can play a key
role in redressing the discrimination against people with mental health
problems and ensuring accurate award decisions by providing relevant,
well-written clinical evidence for benefits assessors. Clinicians should
be vigilant in demonstrating individuals\' needs eloquently, accurately
and in a timely way. Through an appreciation of the additional stresses
on patients applying for benefits, mental health services can provide
better support and signpost appropriately to agencies such as Citizens
Advice. Welfare expertise is outside the experience of many mental
health clinicians, but a patient\'s access to (eligible) benefits is an
important part of recovery. Clinicians should work towards forging
closer clinics with the benefits system and supporting services such as
benefits and welfare advice to enable better outcomes for patients.
Professionals need to understand the subtleties and potential for
discrimination in the system to best support people.

**Alexander Galloway** is a specialty doctor at Hertfordshire
Partnership University National Health Service Foundation Trust, UK;
**Billy Boland** is a consultant psychiatrist at Hertfordshire
Partnership University National Health Service Foundation Trust, UK;
**Gareth Williams** is a benefits adviser at the Mental Health Project,
Money Advice Unit, Hertfordshire County Council, UK.
