---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  To describe the functions of the Aneurin Bevan University Health Board
  Risk Reference Panel and characterise the typical referrals presented
  and outcomes from the panel. A structured thematic analysis was
  performed on verbatim transcripts of 48 panel sessions.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  The 79 codes identified were grouped into 16 subthemes. Four principal
  themes were identified: two characterising cases brought to the panel
  (childhood risk factors and current presenting difficulties) and two
  describing advice given (risk management and wider organisational
  issues). Quotations are given to illustrate cases presented and advice
  given by the panel.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  The panel provides a valuable source of special expertise in the
  management of complex and exceptional cases where risk of harm is
  significant and clinical teams have ongoing concerns. This paper
  describes a model of peer-working to support staff and may further
  reduce the risk of harm associated with mental illness.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a4}

  None.
author:
- Alec Thomas
- Ian Evans
- Gaynor JonesCorrespondence to Alec Thomas
  (<alecthomas@doctors.org.uk>)
date: 2019-4
institute:
- 1Caswell Clinic, Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University Health Board, Wales
- 2Gwent Forensic Psychiatry Service, Aneurin Bevan University Health
  Board, Wales
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
title: "The Risk Reference Panel: a thematic analysis of a
  multidisciplinary forum for complex cases"
---

# Background {#sec1-1}

The assessment and management of the risk that a patient poses to
themselves and others is a core duty for psychiatric services. There are
several ways in which this is achieved, depending on the complexity of
the case, the configuration of local services and resources available.
In many cases, issues around risk are managed effectively by individual
practitioners or teams on a day-to-day basis, using evidence-based
guidance from national bodies such as the Royal College of
Psychiatrists^1^ or the Department of Health,^2^ as well as locally
agreed policies and procedures and clinical supervision. However, in
some circumstances the risks posed may be exceptional or unclear, and
individuals can engage in high levels of self-harm or antisocial
behaviour. This can be analysed retrospectively by complex case reviews
to reduce risk of recurrence,^3^ but prospective prevention or
minimisation of harm is clearly preferable.

# The Risk Reference Panel {#sec1-2}

Multidisciplinary working is a key strategy for particularly risky
cases, which can take various forms. From 2008 the Aneurin Bevan
University Health Board Risk Reference Panel was developed by Dr Alan
Wright, Forensic Psychologist, and author I.E., Forensic Psychiatric
Nurse, as a local response to the public and professional anxiety
surrounding exceptionally risky cases. The panel is intended to provide
a pool of multidisciplinary expertise with representation from social
work, nursing, forensics, intellectual disability and general adult
psychiatry. To date, the panel has not included patient representation,
but this could be considered in future. This paper offers an analysis of
a way of addressing risk and management of complex cases by describing
the types of cases that have been presented and the outcomes of panel
meetings. A retrospective thematic analysis of the meetings was
conducted.

# Method {#sec2}

## Thematic analysis {#sec2-1}

Our aim was to describe the typical cases presented to the panel, the
discussions that took place and the advice given. To best produce this
narrative from the data available, we felt a qualitative approach was
appropriate. We required a method of qualitatively analysing transcribed
data, such as the meeting transcripts that formed our data-set, and
decided on thematic analysis. This provided a framework with which to
identify and organise the discrete ideas within the transcripts,
outlining patterns in the data but also indicating their relative
frequency within the meetings as a whole.

Although qualitative research uses many specific, prescribed techniques
to evaluate non-empirical data, there has historically been some
discrepancy as to what strictly constitutes thematic analysis and its
methodology. For our purposes, we have followed the model proposed by
Braun and Clarke,^4^ which describes six discrete stages of thematic
analysis.

The stages of the above method as applied to our analysis are described
in the Appendix.

Discrete ideas (referred to in the process as 'codes') and broader
groupings of these ideas into key patterns ('subthemes') were
identified. The subthemes can then be grouped together to identify the
main themes within the data.

## Data collection {#sec2-2}

The Risk Reference Panel meetings are attended by a secretary who
records what is said by typing verbatim as far as is possible; there is
no audio recording of the meetings. These transcripts are then used to
produce letters to the referring team, outlining what was discussed and
the recommendations of the panel.

A pilot analysis was conducted whereby authors A.T. and G.J.
independently applied the method described below to a sample of original
transcripts for 8 of the 48 cases that had been presented to the Risk
Reference Panel between May 2010 and April 2016. Ethical approval was
not required as our study is a retrospective service evaluation where no
change to the service was implemented and no service users were
interviewed. All reported data are anonymised. Anonymised samples of the
transcribed data, as well as examples of the codes generated from them
and how they were recorded, are given in [Boxes
1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"} and [2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"}.
Box 1Sample transcription and coding process*'...* *\[I\] can count on
one hand how often \[she\'s been\] seen, very difficult to engage^19^,
\[she\] abuses drink and drugs^36^, chaotic lifestyle, she has several
relationships with different men^35^...* *\[The house\] is a very
dangerous place to visit.*'^19^ Lack of engagement/difficult to engage  
^35^ Vulnerable adult  
^36^ Substance misuse issues*'...* *in the first instance, refer to
\[Learning Disability Consultant\]^70^ as it was recognised that \[he\]
needs to be embedded in LD services, \[but\] it was suggested that LD
services will not accept responsibility for his care* *... \[they\]
should be contacted regarding the interface between the relevant
services^78^.*'^70^ Refer to specialist  
^78^ Funding/responsibility issues*'...* *it sounds like it\'s taking
quite a toll on \[his\] CPN, what support is there for her^76^? In these
cases rotation of staff^77^ can be helpful in preventing burnout and
getting a fresh perspective on things.'*^76^ Extra support for staff
involved  
^77^ Suggest rotation of staff Box 2Box 2 Sample of code
databaseCodeG.J. frequencyA.T. frequencyTotal
frequencyThemeSubthemeHistory of being in care21311Aggressive as a
child12312History of sexual abuse561113History of neglect and witness of
violence and physical abuse951413

The pilot analysis generated an initial list of codes that were used as
the basis for coding the rest of the transcripts, as well as
demonstrating an acceptable consensus on what constituted individual
codes. The remaining 40 transcripts were then coded, 20 each by authors
A.T. and G.J., and the frequency of codes were recorded. The resultant
database allowed the rest of the thematic analysis to be completed. A
thematic map provided a diagrammatic representation of the various
themes, subthemes and relationships between them ([Fig.
1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}). Fig. 1Thematic map of Risk Reference Panel
meeting transcripts. CJS, criminal justice system.

A feedback form allowed participants to indicate, via a Likert scale,
the degree to which they agreed with a number of statements (outlined
under 'Feedback' within Results) and to provide free-text feedback.

# Results {#sec3}

Using this method, 16 subthemes were identified to group similar codes.
The subthemes were further grouped into four principal themes: childhood
risk factors, current presenting difficulties, assessment and management
of risk to self or others and team or wider organisational issues. The
first two themes encapsulate information presented to the panel during
presentations by referrers; the latter describe recommendations made or
issues identified by the panel.

The subthemes are organised by frequency of codes, referred to hereafter
as occurrences, with absolute frequencies (i.e. the number of times a
code occurred in the whole of the transcribed data, given as *n*) and
the proportion of occurrences within that theme (given as a percentage).
Percentages are rounded to the nearest 0.5%. There were a total of 522
occurrences of codes throughout the 48 transcripts analysed.

## Childhood risk factors {#sec3-1}

The first theme contains codes pertaining to the history of the case,
outlining risk factors pertinent to the current problem. There were four
individual codes that accounted for 31 of the 522 occurrences (i.e. 6%
of all occurrences). These were primarily adverse experiences that the
person had endured in childhood, but also included childhood traits that
are associated with subsequent antisocial behaviour.

The most common childhood adverse experience was being a victim of
physical abuse (*n* = 14, 45% within theme) or sexual abuse (*n* = 11,
35%), followed by having been in care (*n* = 3, 10%). A history of
aggressive behaviour as a child was also identified in a number of
individuals (*n* = 3, 10%).

## Current presenting difficulties {#sec3-2}

This theme accounted for the greatest proportion of individual codes,
with 245 occurrences (47%). Five subthemes were identified within
current presenting difficulties, namely nature of offences, problematic
behaviour, factors affecting current presentation, police/criminal
justice system involvement and established diagnoses.

The nature of offences subtheme explored the various types of offences
committed, if applicable (only some of the cases presented had criminal
convictions, hence their low frequencies). The offences captured in the
transcripts included arson (*n* = 3, 1%), non-assaultive sexual offences
(*n* = 3, 1% within theme), threats to kill (*n* = 1, 0.5%) and sexual
assault (1, 0.5%).

The most common problematic behaviour was suicide attempts/self-harm
(*n* = 32, 13%), which was often seen to be chaotic and instrumental.
However, there were several cases where severe self-harm without
suicidal behaviour was the primary problem. The next most frequent was a
lack of engagement with services (*n* = 19, 8%). The remaining codes
within the problematic behaviour subtheme were sexually inappropriate
behaviour (*n* = 7, 3%), antisocial behaviour (*n* = 7, 3%), disruptive
behaviour (*n* = 6, 2.5%), harassment of care-giving staff (*n* = 6,
2.5%), multiple contacts by phone (*n* = 6, 2.5%), absconding risk
(*n* = 6, 2.5%), complaints to health board/Welsh Assembly
Members/counsellors (*n* = 5, 2%), false allegations (*n* = 4, 1.5%) and
litigation (*n* = 1, 0.5%). Although the most prevalent individual code
was risk of self-harm or suicide, the combined frequency of codes
relating to risk to others was around 1.5-times as high.

Another subtheme was factors affecting current presentation, which
captured issues in the person\'s life at present that were affecting
their level of risk. Substance misuse was the most prominent among these
(*n* = 27, 11%). Other codes within this subtheme were chronic
pain/illness/physical issues (*n* = 7, 3%), social isolation (*n* = 7,
3%), multiple admissions to psychiatric hospital (*n* = 7, 3%),
homelessness/moving area frequently (*n* = 6, 2.5%), family history of
mental health issues (*n* = 5, 2%), admissions under the Mental Health
Act (*n* = 5, 2%) and lack of insight (*n* = 5, 2%).

Less commonly, people had problems with anger (*n* = 3, 1%), bereavement
(*n* = 3, 1%), sexuality (*n* = 3, 1%) and personality traits without a
diagnosis of personality disorder (*n* = 2, 1%). There was police
involvement in nine cases (3.5%) and the person was subject to the
criminal justice system in 15 cases (6%).

Most of the cases presented to the panel had an established diagnosis,
although within the 60 code occurrences in this theme,
'conflicting/unclear diagnosis' occurred 13 times (21.5%). These
subthemes grouped the diagnoses by psychopathology.

'Developmental disorders' were the most common presentation and included
autism spectrum disorder (*n* = 8, 13%), intellectual disability
(*n* = 5, 8%), attachment disorder (*n* = 5, 8%), 'Special needs'
(*n* = 3, 5%) and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (*n* = 3,
5%). Emotionally unstable personality disorder (EUPD) was the only
specified personality disorder diagnosis (*n* = 9, 15%) and the most
common individual pathology. This was followed by psychotic illnesses,
with 'treatment-resistant psychosis' accounting for seven cases (11.5%).
Schizophrenia was only given as a named diagnosis in one case (1.5%).
Lastly, affective/anxiety disorders included depression (*n* = 3, 5%),
eating disorders (*n* = 2, 3%) and post-traumatic stress disorder
(*n* = 1, 1.5%).

## Risk assessment and management {#sec3-3}

There were 31 occurrences of codes (6%) related to an assessment of the
level of risk posed to others by the individual. Three of these (9.5%
within theme) were an observation that there was a poor understanding of
the risks posed and that specific further information was required.

Much more of the output from panel meetings was regarding the management
of specific risks to the person or others, with 95 code occurrences.
Within this theme, four subthemes were identified: need for further
assessments, specialist care plans, capacity/placement factors and
responsibility of other services.

Most commonly, the panel advised that specific assessments would be
beneficial to manage risk. In disorders that modulated risk, such as
autism spectrum disorder, the panel would often suggest
'expert/specialist opinion required' (*n* = 17, 18%). If the risk was
more general, then suggestions of which avenues to pursue included a
need for HCR-20 (Historical Clinical Risk Management-20; an established
actuarial tool for assessment of violence risk) (*n* = 3, 3%); legal
advice (*n* = 4, 4%) and a need for more background information
(*n* = 11, 12%) or updated formal risk assessment (*n* = 8, 8%).

Issues regarding the assessment of capacity, or the established lack of
capacity, were also commonly cited. There were 14 occurrences (15%) of
recommendations that a Mental Health Act assessment had not been
considered and could be of use in containing the risks posed. Further to
this, there were 13 recommendations (13.5%) that the acute problems
should be managed as an in-patient.

Several of the cases indicated longer-term in-patient or other
compulsory interventions were necessary, such as the need for low secure
placement (*n* = 5, 5%) and management under guardianship (*n* = 2, 2%)
or Protection Of Vulnerable Adults scheme (*n* = 2, 2%).

Team issues within the context of risk management were need to improve
engagement (*n* = 1, 1%), need to take positive risks (*n* = 1, 1%) and
need for child protection training for team members (*n* = 1, 1%).

In eight cases (8%) the panel identified that responsibility for the
patient\'s actions did not lie with health services as they were
independent of mental health issues. These were divided into a
recommendation that their behaviour be dealt with under the criminal
justice system (*n* = 4, 4%), or an acknowledgement that although there
is no criminal element to pursue in some cases, all appropriate actions
to reduce risk have been considered and there is no more that the team
can realistically do (*n* = 4, 4%).

Occasionally, the panel recommended specific management plans to manage
particular disorders. Most frequently this was stated as a need for a
specialist care plan (*n* = 24, 77%), incorporating advice from
specialist assessments. The need for structure in the patient\'s life
was identified (*n* = 3, 10%), as was the need for family work/family
meeting (*n* = 1, 3%). More specifically, clozapine for
treatment-resistant psychosis (*n* = 2, 6%) and dialectic behaviour
therapy for EUPD (*n* = 3, 10%) were suggested.

## Team/wider organisational issues {#sec3-4}

The final theme generated by the analysis contained 29 occurrences
(0.5%) between five codes, and was subdivided into team working issues
(*n* = 8, 27.5%), funding issues (*n* = 7, 24%), need for special
staff/staff rotation (*n* = 6, 20.5%), need extra support for the staff
involved (*n* = 5, 17%) and trust management issues/needs escalation
(*n* = 3, 10%).

Team working issues captured differences within the team that may have
hindered progress in the management of particular behaviours. For
example, the panel acknowledged that because of splitting in the context
of EUPD, it was necessary to establish a clear and consistent boundary
narrative. However, outright disagreement within teams, over significant
issues such as primary diagnosis and level of risk posed, was identified
as an issue.

Funding issues identified that responsibility for funding was not always
clear and had delayed the provision of appropriate placement. This was
particularly relevant where the person had moved frequently between
areas or was of no fixed abode.

The panel stressed that the staff who were dealing with particularly
demanding individuals needed extra support themselves, which can often
be neglected, and suggested rotation of staff to prevent burnout. In a
small number of cases it was identified that the particular service or
treatment indicated for a person\'s condition, such as dialectic
behaviour therapy, was not available, and it was suggested that this was
escalated on a trust level on the basis that this would reduce risk of
harm.

## Feedback {#sec3-6}

Feedback was overwhelmingly positive, with 20 out of 22 respondents
(91%) indicating agreement or strong agreement with the following
statements: 'New ideas were generated in the session', 'The case feels
safer as a result', 'I learned a great deal during the session', 'The
questions I brought were answered' and 'I would recommend the process to
a colleague.'

# Discussion {#sec4}

The Royal College of Psychiatrists has highlighted a need for improved,
tiered risk assessment and interventions on both a local and national
level.^5^ A qualitative analysis of the content of Risk Reference Panel
meetings has illustrated how it provides a potential model for services
to address this need. The panel is an innovative service model that was
set up to provide a further level of support for teams who had been
looking for support in managing very complex individuals with high-risk
behaviour and has provided new direction and specialist advice in the
management of these cases.

Most cases described physical or sexual abuse, with many experiencing
multiple adverse childhood events (ACEs). These findings support the
existing body of work on the relationship between multiple ACEs and
subsequent morbidity and risk behaviours, such as that by Bellis *et
al*,^6^ which showed that individuals with four or more ACEs were
several times more likely to smoke, drink heavily, have low mental
well-being and chronic health conditions. This also correlates with
well-documented risk factors for self-harm,^7^ suicide^8^ and
interpersonal violence.^9^ These data have more general implications on
history-taking in risk assessment, with the inclusion of this background
information crucial to the working of the panel. The potential for
referrers to exaggerate the risk, both consciously and unconsciously, to
encourage acceptance by the panel should be acknowledged.

Although a person\'s risk of harm cannot be entirely removed,^5^
particularly in such complex cases, a thorough understanding of risks
posed and their severity is crucial. The panel often identified areas
where risk was not fully understood and suggested specific assessments
or specialist opinion that would be beneficial. Having said this, the
responsibility for risky behaviour, particularly in a capacitous
patient, does not lie entirely with mental health teams and it is
prudent to identify when all reasonable steps have been taken, or if
involvement of the criminal justice system is more appropriate. Taking
the case to such a panel allows an independent debate and makes this
decision more defensible.

For patients who remain in the community, it is particularly difficult
for teams to provide care and ameliorate risk if engagement is poor.
Surprisingly, the meetings often highlighted that capacity assessments
and use of the Mental Health Act beyond admission for brief assessment
had not been considered. This may reflect a lack of appropriate
placements available to community teams, particularly long-term
in-patient services when patients cannot be managed in the community.

This model provides a valuable multidisciplinary source of special
expertise in the management of complex and exceptional cases, where risk
of harm is significant and clinical teams have ongoing concerns. The
format may not be appropriate for every service and there is also a
place for improved training in formulation and management of patients
with complex personality difficulties, but model could certainly be
reproduced in other areas where clinical teams feel it would have a
beneficial role, particularly to inform Care Programme Approach unmet
needs, training needs within the staff workforce and service development
needs.

Lastly, it is pertinent to consider alternatives to such a panel. As the
heaviest burden appears to be personality pathology, these would
primarily consist of improving training in managing patients with
personality disorders. In some cases, it may be that this is the better
and more economical option, although it has been acknowledged that the
panel approach uses relatively few resources in terms of clinician
sessions while providing an additional tier of support for community
teams to reduce the risk of harm associated with mental illness.

## Limitations {#sec4-1}

This study is only able to describe the function and output of the panel
in question, rather than give a rigorous analysis of this model in
comparison with other models, and there were no available data on
matched people who were not referred. We were also unable to comment on
the make-up and training of the teams referring into the panel; it is
possible that the referrals represent professional anxiety that stems
from sources other than the patient in question, such as gaps in senior
management or reluctance to engage with complex individuals with
personality pathology, although the panel meetings analysed cover a
period of 6 years where it is likely that there would be some
fluctuation in team make-up.

All referrals to the panel are made via a written referral letter, which
details the history of the case, the assessments that have previously
been conducted, a risk assessment and concerns that the referrers wish
to address. As the panel will already be familiar with this information,
some of it may not have been verbalised at the meetings and thus not
captured by the transcription. However, it was noted that there was a
verbal presentation of each case and that the relevant history was
given.

We would like to thank Dr Alan Wright, Forensic Psychologist with the
Gwent Forensic Psychiatry Service, without whose work the Risk Reference
Panel would not have come to exist, for information on the formation and
workings of the Panel. We would also like to acknowledge the
contribution of Jen Strange, Team Secretary, toward setting up and
maintaining the Risk Reference Panel.

**Alec Thomas** is an ST4 in forensic psychiatry at Abertawe Bro
Morgannwg University Health Board, Wales, UK. **Ian Evans** is a
forensic community psychiatric nurse with Gwent Forensic Psychiatry
Service, Aneurin Bevan University Health Board, Wales, UK. **Gaynor
Jones** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist at Caswell Clinic,
Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University Health Board, Wales, UK.

1.*Familiarisation with the data-set*: All transcripts were read and
re-read by authors A.T. and G.J., considering the application of the
coding process to the data and noting initial observations.2.*Generating
initial codes*: Each transcript was read line by line and discrete ideas
within the data were identified and systematically coded. Eight cases
were coded by both A.T. and G.J. and the remainder were divided in half
between these two authors. Each occurrence of a code was recorded as a
simple tally. For example, the history of the patient in question would
be given and each feature would be assigned a different code, such as
'history of being in care', 'history of sexual abuse', 'diagnosis of
schizophrenia' or 'poor engagement with the CMHT.' Individual risks
identified and management suggestions offered by the panel would all
produce individual codes.3.*Searching for themes*: Codes were reviewed
and collated into potential themes. It was decided whether each code
represented, for example, a demographic feature, a specific risk to his
or her self or others, or a suggestion for managing a particular risk.
All data relevant to each theme were identified, as some ideas could be
given two distinct codes or fit into two or more themes.4.*Reviewing
themes*: Consideration was given to whether the identified themes
adequately captured and collated the data in relation to both the
individual coded transcripts (i.e. the narration of each Risk Reference
Panel meeting) and the entire data-set (i.e. the overarching patterns of
input and output for the Risk Reference Panel meetings as a whole). A
'thematic map' was generated.5.*Defining and naming themes*: After
satisfactory completion of stage four, each theme was analysed to refine
its specific categorisation and the overall 'story' that the analysis
has produced. Clear names and definitions were produced for each
theme.6.*Producing the report*: Writing the present report provided the
final opportunity for analysis of the insights gained from the process.
The analysis was used to address the initial research questions.
