==========================================
Adult safeguarding under the Care Act 2014
==========================================



Katherine Johnson
Billy Boland\ **Correspondence** to Katherine Johnson
(katherine.wilson3@nhs.net)
:Date: 2019-2

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Summary
      :name: sec_1

   Safeguarding adults is everybody's business, and it is now standard
   practice for clinicians to undertake safeguarding training as part of
   their mandatory training in the UK. Nevertheless, safeguarding work
   is complex and can involve significant dilemmas for professionals.
   The Care Act 2014 has introduced a number of differences in the way
   safeguarding is approached, emphasising the overall well-being and
   choice of the patient rather than merely focusing on their safety.
   This paper sets out to illustrate evolving safeguarding demand and
   practice, and aid clinicians in protecting people at risk by
   describing how they can approach challenging presentations.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Background
==========

Safeguarding adults in England and Wales is set out in the Care Act
2014.1 The new law came in to being in April 2015 and superseded earlier
documents that sought to protect vulnerable adults,2 or ‘adults at risk
of harm’,3 from abuse. The Care Act itself brought together a wide range
of social care concerns and activities, including personalisation,
social care assessment and Mental Health Act 117 aftercare, as well as
safeguarding, in a single statute.4 This aimed to create ‘\ *a legal
framework so key organizations and individuals with responsibilities for
adult safeguarding can agree on how they must work together and what
roles they must play to keep adults at risk safe’*.5

In Scotland, the Support and Protection Act 2007 ‘seeks to protect and
benefit adults at risk of being harmed’. The Act ‘requires councils and
a range of public bodies to work together to support and protect adults
who are unable to safeguard themselves, their property and their
rights'.6 In Northern Ireland, *Adult Safeguarding Prevention and
Protection in Partnership* was published in July 2015.7 It makes it
clear that ‘safeguarding is everyone's business and that as good
citizens we should all strive to prevent harm to adults from abuse,
exploitation or neglect’.

.. _sec2:

Definitions
===========

The term ‘vulnerable adult’ was a term used in *No Secrets* to describe
those adults who may need to be subject to safeguarding.2 However, in
2011, the Law commission recommended that this concept should no longer
be used, as the label of vulnerability was not appropriate and could be
‘stigmatising, dated, negative and disempowering’.3 The Care Act uses
the term ‘adult at risk’ and also, at times, ‘adult with care and
support needs’.

Most doctors will be used to definitions of abuse from statutory
training in child protection and adult safeguarding, which is now a
mandatory training requirement. Full details of forms of abuse under the
Care Act are included in the Care Act statutory guidance.8 It should be
noted that services now have responsibilities to ensure that carers are
also considered within the safeguarding context. Care Act statutory
guidance note 14.45 recognises the circumstances in which a carer could
be involved in a situation that may require a safeguarding response and
provide information on how to manage these.

A ‘concern’ is used technically in the Act as the point at which the
statutory authority is notified by someone that an adult at risk of harm
is suspected to be the subject of abuse.

‘Enquiries’ are the investigations that the statutory authority makes in
order to determine whether abuse has taken place, and whether the
individual would benefit from safeguarding.

.. _sec3:

Safeguarding activity
=====================

Statistics gathered in the first 6 months following the implementation
of the Care Act suggest that the number of adult safeguarding cases
doubled during this period.9 During the year following implementation of
the Act, the Local Government Association undertook a series of six Care
Act stocktakes to help them to understand the implications of the Act
for local authorities. These stocktakes suggested that the rise in
safeguarding referrals has continued, with 73% of councils involved in
stocktake 6 reporting an increase in the levels of activity, and 34%
stating that they had increased greatly.10 By contrast, figures gathered
by NHS Digital in their *Safeguarding Adults: Annual Report* for
2015–201611 indicate that 102 970 Section 42 *enquiries* were reported
for the period 2015–2016, compared with 103 445 *referrals* during the
period 2014–2015. It is difficult to directly compare statistics across
these two reports in light of changes in terms of reference used within
the safeguarding proceedings and therefore the reports. However, it
should be noted that a total of 184 860 safeguarding concerns and 8365
‘other enquiries’ were reported for the 2015–2016 period, suggesting
that the rate of overall referral was greater than the recorded number
of enquiries given above. When these are considered alongside the
‘referral’ rates from the previous year, it appears that the level of
safeguarding concerns being raised has indeed increased. Statistics for
2016–2017 support this trend, showing 109 145 individuals under a
safeguarding enquiry starting during the period measured, an increase of
6% from the previous year.12

.. _sec4:

Guiding principles
==================

As with all aspects of the Care Act, the concept of well-being underpins
safeguarding practice, with ‘protection from abuse and neglect’ cited as
one of the key elements of promoting individual well-being.8 Within
this, the Care Act guidance also outlines six fundamental principles for
safeguarding (`Box 1 <#box1>`__). Box 1Six Principles of
Safeguarding8EmpowermentPeople being supported and encouraged to make
their own decisions and informed consentPreventionIt is better to take
action before harm occursProportionalityThe least intrusive response
appropriate to the risk presentedProtectionSupport and representation
for those in greatest needPartnershipLocal solutions through services
working with their communities; communities have a part to play in
preventing, detecting and reporting neglect and
abuseAccountabilityAccountability and transparency in safeguarding
practice

In line with these principles, the Care Act focuses on early
identification and prevention of potential abuse and neglect, rather
than specifying thresholds for intervention. Any actions proposed should
take into account the needs, goals and wishes of the patient, ensuring
that their consent is gained before any action is taken. To support this
aim, Making Safeguarding Personal (MSP), a sector-led safeguarding
initiative, has also been introduced to help develop a more
outcome-focused response.13

The MSP ‘temperature check’ in 201614 recorded a number of positive
outcomes in places where MSP was being implemented. Patients reported
feeling more in control, with professional meetings declining but
smaller patient meetings becoming more common. Overall, the results
suggested that while MSP takes no longer than traditional approaches to
implement, there is evidence to suggest that it leads to better outcomes
and savings in time and resources.

.. _sec5:

Responsibilities
================

“*‘Effective safeguarding cannot be achieved without a large number of
organizations and individuals working closely together, and there being
an explicit recognition that safeguarding is everyone*'*s
concern.’*\ 15”

The local authority is required under Section 42 of the Care Act to take
a leading role in coordinating safeguarding enquiries, and may do this
either through making enquiries themselves or by ensuring that others do
so. Guidance for carrying out Section 42 enquiries is set out in
paragraphs 14.63–14.67 of the Care Act Statutory Guidance.8 Section 43
of the Care Act also requires local authorities to establish a
Safeguarding Adults Board for its area, with the objective of helping
and protecting adults that meet safeguarding eligibility criteria,
through coordinating and ensuring the effectiveness of each of its
members. A useful diagram showing the simplified responsibilities of key
parties can be found in the *Safeguarding Adults* paper produced by the
Care Quality Commission (CQC), the Association of Directors of Adult
Social Services, NHS England, the Local Government Association and the
Association of Chief Police Officers.16

Alongside local authorities and other partner agencies, individual
clinicians should seek to work with individuals at an early stage to
promote well-being and independence, with the aim of preventing abuse
and neglect from occurring.15 Further to this, the focus should be upon
identifying abuse or neglect early and raising a safeguarding concern.
Care Act guidance states: ‘\ *No professional should assume that someone
else will pass on information which they think may be critical to the
safety and wellbeing of the adult. If a professional has concerns about
the adult*'*s welfare and believes they are suffering or likely to
suffer abuse or neglect, then they should share the information with the
local authority and, or, the police if they believe or suspect that a
crime has been committed*\ ’.8 The safeguarding process can be time
consuming, and it is important that clinicians continue to offer
appropriate care and treatment to the patient. Where appropriate,
clinicians should also attend safeguarding meetings in order to provide
a more cohesive and robust plan of support.

Although not all concerns will be escalated to become Section 42
enquiries, this will be decided by the relevant safeguarding team, who
will have overall responsibility for the decision on whether an enquiry
is required. The team will consider the criteria as outlined in S.42(1)
Care Act (`Box 2 <#box2>`__). They will also consider issues such as
mental capacity17 and consent, which will be explored in more detail in
the case examples below. Box 2Care Act Safeguarding eligibility
criteria1 (1)This section applies where a local authority has reasonable
cause to suspect that an adult in its area (whether or not ordinarily
resident there):(2)has needs for care and support (whether or not the
authority is meeting any of those needs);(3)is experiencing, or is at
risk of, abuse or neglect; and(4)as a result of those needs is unable to
protect himself or herself against the abuse or neglect or the risk of
it.

Where clinicians have concerns that important factors are not being
acknowledged, these can be raised with the enquiry officer and through
initial strategy discussions and case conferences, which will be held
during the safeguarding enquiry process. All individuals involved in the
process will be included in determining whether allegations of abuse are
substantiated and in developing an appropriate plan with the patient.
Whereas under previous guidance, the emphasis was often on taking
professionally proscribed measures to ensure patient safety, statutory
Care Act guidance states that ‘professionals and staff should not be
advocating “safety” measures that do not take account of individual
well-being, as defined in Section 1 of the Care Act’.8 As in the
assessment of social care needs, practitioners should approach
safeguarding concerns in an inclusive, outcomes-focused, person-centred
manner, and the emphasis should be on ‘sensible risk appraisal, not risk
avoidance’.18 It should be made clear to the individual that they will
be included at all stages of the enquiry and that factors such as their
wishes, preferences, history and lifestyle will be taken into account
throughout the process. Outcomes should be primarily patient determined.
While there may be occasions when views of those involved in the process
differ, decisions are made in a multidisciplinary manner with the
patient's wishes at the forefront, with overall responsibility for
reaching consensus falling to the safeguarding manager.

.. _sec6:

Safeguarding dilemmas
=====================

The case studies below highlight some of the factors and considerations
which may be pertinent to safeguarding processes.

**Case Example 1: Cheryl – Consent, Coercion and Domestic Violence**
“Cheryl is a 30-year-old woman with a diagnosis of severe anxiety and
depression. She is living with her partner, Julian, and two children,
both of whom are under a Child Protection Plan. There have been a number
of concerns raised over recent months about Julian, who will often
present as verbally aggressive towards professionals. Julian will also
ensure that he is present at all of Cheryl's appointments.Cheryl comes
to her out-patient appointment with a black eye which Julian states is
due to walking into a door frame. Her psychiatrist manages to speak to
Cheryl alone and Cheryl tells her that in fact Julian has hit her the
evening before. Cheryl asks her psychiatrist not to tell anyone and says
that she does not want police involved or for any action to be taken.
Cheryl's psychiatrist feels that Cheryl has capacity to make this
decision, but is concerned about the risks to Cheryl and her
children.Cheryl's psychiatrist raises a Safeguarding Adults concern and
also contacts Children's services to ensure they are aware of the
incident.”

Unlike previous guidance, which emphasised the duty to report and act on
all allegations of abuse, the Care Act emphasises empowerment and the
patient's right to choice and control over how and with whom information
is shared. In this instance, Cheryl is refusing consent to contact
police or for a safeguarding investigation to take place. Since Cheryl
has capacity to refuse to report abuse to police or for a safeguarding
enquiry to be undertaken, a risk assessment will need to be made in
regards to whether others are at risk (public interest), a serious crime
is taking place (public interest) or Cheryl's life is in danger (vital
interest). In line with principles of protection and proportionality, if
there is an identified risk in either of these areas, the investigating
team may decide to overrule their consent and continue with the
safeguarding investigation, involving only professionals and not friends
or family members.

In light of Julian's behaviour, consideration should also be given to
whether Cheryl's decision is being made under the influence of coercion
and control, in which case Cheryl's consent may be overridden and a
safeguarding investigation commenced. This new offence of ‘coercive and
controlling behaviour in intimate and familial relationships’ was
introduced into the Serious Crime Act 2015 as a way of providing better
protection to victims experiencing continuous abuse.8 In cases such as
these, the individual may present as having capacity in relation to a
decision but in fact be unable to make this decision owing to coercion
or control. In these cases, the individual will not fall under the
auspice of the Mental Capacity Act. This kind of enquiry is often
complex and will require a range of professionals to work with the
person to identify appropriate safeguarding options. In serious cases,
the situation may ultimately require application to the inherent
jurisdiction of the High Court,15 who may legally be able to act against
the wishes of the individual to safeguard them from further harm.
Similarly, police now have the ability to use a Domestic Violence
Protection Order under Sections 24–33 of the Crime and Security Act 2010
to remove an alleged perpetrator from the family home for a period of up
to 28 days with or without consent from the person alleged to be
experiencing abuse.19

Should it be decided that safeguarding needs to proceed, with or without
Cheryl's consent and involvement, there is a need to undertake ‘safe
enquiry’, ensuring that any investigation does not increase risk to
Cheryl. The Local Government Association guide to adult safeguarding and
domestic abuse20 provides a useful and comprehensive guide to dealing
with these situations within the safeguarding context.

Finally, if Cheryl refuses consent and none of the above risk factors
are present, this decision should be respected and Cheryl should be
supported in considering other avenues outside the safeguarding agenda.
Information may still need to be shared with children's services if
there is a perceived risk to the children, which will need to be
addressed under child safeguarding procedures.

**Case Example 2: Layla – Unintentional Abuse, Carer Safeguarding and
Mental Capacity** “Layla is a 77-year-old woman with physical mobility
difficulties and early symptoms of Alzheimer's disease. She is currently
in a relationship with Giles, a 78-year-old man who also has physical
mobility issues.Layla and Giles both attend Layla's Care Programme
Approach meeting, during which Layla's psychiatrist notices that Layla's
hair and clothes are unclean and she has lost weight. He asks Layla
about this, who replies that Giles does not help her with her personal
hygiene or give her food regularly. Giles explains that he is doing his
best but is struggling to care for Layla at the moment owing to his
physical health, and that he did not want to contact anyone for help as
Layla does not want carers involved. He also discloses that he has found
caring for Layla more difficult recently, as on a number of occasions
she has lashed out at him and caused him minor injuries.Layla's
psychiatrist is concerned that Layla is being neglected and raises a
safeguarding concern.”

This case study, while on the face of it simple, in fact outlines
complex issues around unintentional abuse, carer safeguarding and mental
capacity.

In this case study, a safeguarding alert has been raised owing to what
appears to be unintentional neglect of Layla, which has arisen because
Giles is struggling to care for her. Unintentional abuse is a recognised
issue under the Care Act, and guidance is clear that the unintentional
nature of this does not change the fact that it is a form of abuse or
make the need for action any less important.

In this case example, professionals will need to consider Layla's
capacity in relation to a range of safeguarding-related decisions, for
example, whether she has capacity to decide whether to allow carers into
the home, and whether she can consent to information being shared as
part of a safeguarding enquiry.15 The Care Act works together with the
Mental Capacity Act 2005, and if Layla is found to lack capacity, an
Independent Mental Capacity Advocate (IMCA) must be made available to
her. Unlike most best-interests decision situations, an IMCA may be
required even if there is an appropriate friend or family member who
could support Layla.

If Layla is found to have capacity in these areas but also appears to
have substantial difficulty in engaging with safeguarding processes, it
may be appropriate for a Care Act Advocate to be involved. This is a new
role under the Care Act which is used where a person with capacity
demonstrates substantial difficulty in being involved in decision-making
and does not have an appropriate friend or family member to support
them. Where there is no appropriate individual, the local authority must
provide an independent advocate.21

Also pertinent in this case is that one of the major changes to
safeguarding processes introduced by the Care Act is the need to provide
safeguarding responses for carers who may be experiencing abuse due to
their caring role. Since it has been identified that Giles is
experiencing physical abuse from Layla in the course of his caring role,
this avenue will need to be considered as a framework for providing him
with appropriate support. Although the primary focus is likely to remain
on safeguarding Layla, consideration will also need to be given to
providing a more appropriate package for Giles as carer to help prevent
further abuse to both parties.8 In this instance, there is no indication
that Giles lacks capacity; however, it should be remembered that where
an alleged perpetrator lacks mental capacity, they are entitled to
support from an IMCA throughout the safeguarding proceedings.8

**Case Study 3: Alexis – Organisational Abuse** “Alexis is a 42-year-old
Black British man living in a residential placement owing to his
moderate learning disability and physical mobility issues. Alexis
attends a routine out-patient appointment, during which he discloses
that one of the staff members at the placement has left him sitting in
the bath for an extended period of time on a number of occasions. Alexis
also shares some racially derogatory names which he says the staff
member has been calling him when he asks for help. Alexis's psychiatrist
decides to raise a safeguarding concern.”

This case example allows us to consider issues round organisational
abuse, including neglect and poor practice within an institution or
specific care setting, and action which will need to be taken in these
instances, as set out in the Care Act statutory guidance.8

In situations such as this, the safeguarding investigation will need to
include Alexis's residential placement. The placement should be made
aware that, as instructed by Care Act guidance, where a complaint or
allegation has been made against a member of staff, they ‘should be made
aware of their rights under employment legislation and any internal
disciplinary procedures’.8

The local authority does not have the right to direct Alexis' care home
as to what actions to take against their staff; however, they should
report concerns to the CQC and continue to monitor the situation. Since
this is a care setting, the local authority must also advise other
placing authorities of the concerns so that appropriate measures can be
taken to safeguard all other residents as well as Alexis. Since Section
44 of the Mental Capacity Act makes wilful neglect or mistreatment of an
adult who lacks capacity a criminal offence, should Alexis be deemed to
lack capacity, police involvement may be required in the safeguarding
process.15

.. _sec7:

Conclusion: implications for patients and carers
================================================

The introduction of the Care Act 2014 has had a number of implications
for patients and carers requiring support under the safeguarding
framework. One of the positive developments in regards to individual
empowerment is that the Act places a greater emphasis on individual
self-determination and desired outcomes. Patients now have a more robust
framework protecting their rights to make decisions about their lives,
with new advocacy requirements ensuring that their voices are heard.
Prevention principles have removed some of the previous thresholds which
would have prevented those in the early stages of abuse or neglect from
being overlooked, and require services to be more proactive in
preventing the escalation of abuse.

However, it could be argued that the Care Act's emphasis on patient
outcomes and goals could come at the price of leaving some individuals
unsafeguarded who would previously have been supported under a less
flexible framework. Services may need to develop new ways of responding
to these concerns, ensuring that front-line staff across the
multidisciplinary team work together to ensure that needs are met and
risks are mitigated as far as possible. There are also questions over
where this leaves family members, friends and other members of social
networks who will continue to worry about the well-being of the
vulnerable person. There is scope under Care Act legislation for support
to be offered to carers under the safeguarding framework, and it may be
that support can be offered to carers in this situation. For example a
carer's assessment may be considered to discuss the effects of the
caring role, including worry caused by these concerns.

**Katherine Johnson** is a Think Ahead consultant social worker,
Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust, UK; **Billy
Boland** is a consultant psychiatrist in community psychiatry,
Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust and vice chair
(elected), Faculty of General Adult Psychiatry, Royal College of
Psychiatrists, UK
