===============================================================================================================================
A retrospective study comparing the length of admission of medium secure unit patients admitted in the three decades since 1985
===============================================================================================================================



Charles H. Earnshaw
Lucy Shaw
Deepu Thomas
Owen Haeney

:Correspondence: Dr Charles Earnshaw
(charles.earnshaw@cantab.net)

:date: 2019-8

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Admissions of patients to secure forensic hospitals are often
   lengthy. Previous research has examined factors associated with
   prolonged admission, but studies analysing admission data at a single
   medium secure unit (MSU) over a prolonged time period are lacking. We
   compared admission data for all patients admitted to a MSU in England
   during the years 1985, 1995, 2005 and 2012.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   The median length of admission increased from 167 days in 1985 to 580
   days in 2012, though not in the intervening cohorts. There have been
   changes in the discharge destination of patients, away from
   independent accommodation in the community towards further care or
   supported accommodation.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The results suggest a change in the delivery of care. Further studies
   should be performed to assess whether the same trends exist at other
   sites. If these trends are also found elsewhere, this should trigger
   a specialty-wide discussion about admission length and its effects on
   bed availability.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Forensic hospitals, including high, medium and low secure services, have
important roles in the treatment of psychiatric patients with a criminal
history. Patients are admitted to these specialised services when it is
felt they pose a risk to others, often due to a history of serious
violence or other offending behaviours. The care of these patients, now
more than ever, involves a multidisciplinary approach.1\ :sup:`,`\ 2

There is an expanding body of literature analysing the outcomes of
admission to medium secure units (MSUs). These studies suggest that
patients are at significant risk of readmission and, sadly, at
significantly increased risk of death compared with the general
population.3\ :sup:`–`\ 6 Admissions to MSUs are now often
lengthy,7\ :sup:`–`\ 9 findings that were echoed by a recent study
analysing length of stay data in high secure units across Europe.10
Factors identified as associated with a longer length of stay include a
diagnosis of a psychotic disorder, detention under a restriction order –
in particular, those under section 37/41 (Section 37 is a court-issued
order that means the patient will be sent to hospital rather than
prison, and Section 41 is a so-called ‘restriction order’ that is
designed to reduce the risk to the general public) of the Mental Health
Act 1983 (amended 2007) – poor treatment response and the seriousness of
the index offence.8 However, data from single sites over a prolonged
period of time are lacking.

The objective of our study was to observe trends in the diagnoses,
length of stay and discharge of patients admitted to a local MSU in the
years 1985, 1995, 2005 and 2012. We also considered what factors or
changes in service provision over the study period had affected the
length of admission and discharge locations of our medium secure
service.

.. _sec1:

Materials and method
====================

Ethical approval for this study was gained from the local clinical audit
department as a service evaluation and did not require approval from the
local Research Ethics Committee. Non-anonymised data required by the
study were gathered by one author (D.T.), and anonymised data were
subsequently analysed by the remaining authors.

All male and female patients admitted to the MSU during the years 1985,
1995, 2005 and 2012 were included in the study. The admission year of
2012 was chosen (rather than a later year) as it provided sufficient
time from admission to the date of data collection for treatment courses
and possible discharges to be assessed.

One hundred and seventy-nine patient records were included in this
study. The date of data collection was 4 April 2016. No patients were
excluded from the study. Electronic records were analysed for a variety
of criteria, including age on admission, date of admission, date of
discharge, diagnosis, source of admission, location of discharge and
convictions on admission. In the 2012 cohort, four patients had not yet
moved on from the MSU on the date of data collection. Their discharge
date was recorded as the date of data collection to give a minimum
median length of stay for the 2012 cohort. These patients were excluded
from the analysis of discharge destination.

Data compilation and analysis were performed in Microsoft Excel
(Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA). Statistical analysis
comparing length of admission of different cohorts was performed with
one-way ANOVA using an internet-based calculator
(http://www.statisticslectures.com/calculators).

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

There were 47, 65, 37 and 30 patients admitted to the MSU in 1985, 1995,
2005 and 2012, respectively. The majority of these patients were
diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia. The primary diagnoses of patients
included in the different cohorts are shown in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. The
average age of the patient population varied little over the time period
included in our study. Table 1Diagnoses of patients admitted to our
medium secure unit during 1985, 1995, 2005 and
2012Diagnosis1985199520052012Paranoid schizophrenia32 (67%)60 (92%)26
(70%)24 (80%)Schizoaffective disorder1 (2%)0 (0%)5 (14%)3 (10%)Mood
disorder, manic episode0 (0%)0 (0%)0 (0%)1 (3%)Bipolar disorder7 (15%)2
(3%)2 (5%)0 (0%)Depressive episode0 (0%)1 (2%)1 (3%)1 (3%)Recurrent
depressive disorder0 (0%)0 (0%)1 (3%)0 (0%)Affective mood disorder0
(0%)0 (0%)0 (0%)1 (3%)Antisocial personality disorder2 (4%)0 (0%)0 (0%)0
(0%)Emotionally unstable personality disorder0 (0%)0 (0%)1 (3%)0
(0%)Organic1 (2%)1 (2%)0 (0%)0 (0%)Undetermined5 (10%)1 (2%)1 (3%)0 (0%)

The median length of admission increased dramatically in our final
cohort, from 167 days in 1985 to 580 days in 2012 (`Table
2 <#tab02>`__). According to a one-way ANOVA test, the median durations
of the first and last cohorts, but not the intervening cohorts, differed
significantly from one another (*P* < 0.01). Table 2Median duration of
admission of patients in the medium secure unit in each of the years
included in the study. The minimum and maximum duration of stay are also
includedYear1985199520052012Median duration of admission,
days ± s.d.167 ± 299114 ± 425110 ± 566580 ± 453Minimum duration,
days1133Maximum duration,
days166219522297Unknown\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\  [1]_

The discharge location also showed changes over the study period (`Table
3 <#tab03>`__). Fewer patients were discharged directly to their home
(54% in the 1985 cohort and 13% in the 2012 cohort), and more patients
were discharged to other forms of psychiatric hospital, such as other
MSUs (0% in 1985, 3% in 1995 and 2005, 17% in 2012) or to low secure
units (10% in the 1985 cohort compared with 33% in the 2012 cohort).
Table 3Discharge location of patients discharged from our medium secure
unit (MSU) in the 1985, 1995, 2005 and 2012 admission cohortsDischarge
location1985199520052012Police custody0 (0%)0 (0%)0 (0%)1 (3%)Prison5
(10%)7 (11%)6 (16%)3 (10%)Low secure psychiatric hospital5 (10%)4 (6%)8
(22%)10 (33%)Other MSU0 (0%)2 (3%)1 (3%)5 (17%)High secure psychiatric
hospital4 (8%)5 (8%)1 (3%)1 (3%)Remained in our MSU0 (0%)0 (0%)0 (0%)4
(13%)Supported accommodation8 (17%)28 (43%)10 (27%)2 (7%)Home26 (54%)17
(26%)9 (24%)4 (13%)Died0 (0%)0 (0%)2 (5%)0 (0%)No information0 (0%)2
(3%)0 (0%)0 (0%)

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The main finding of this study is that the duration of admission has
increased significantly in the three decades since the initial cohort,
with patients now remaining for a median of close to two years in the
MSU. This correlates with a reduction in the number of new admissions
per year, down from a peak of 65 in 1995 to 30 in 2012. The duration of
admission appears to have been relatively stable in the decades prior to
the 2012 cohort; only in this cohort did the length of admission
increase significantly.

The four patients in the 2012 cohort still in the MSU on 1 April 2016
each had a length of stay of at least three years and three months.
Their final length of admission may be significantly longer, and we
cannot know by how much the median length of stay is an underestimate.

Recommendations regarding treatment of mentally disordered offenders
were made in the Glancy and Butler reports.11\ :sup:`,`\ 12 These
reports informed the development of the regional secure units (now known
as MSUs) to complement the existing special hospitals (now known as high
secure hospitals). An upper limit for length of stay of two years in the
regional secure units was suggested, but this is now regularly exceeded,
as this study shows. The increasing length of stay in MSU has been
criticised, being deemed ‘too long in very expensive and often
unsuitable provision’ in a report by the Schizophrenia Commission.13

Despite the aforementioned criticism of the increasing length of stay
and the undoubted expense of a medium secure bed, these services have
the potential to save society a significant financial burden. One report
suggests an average saving of over £600 000 per patient transferred from
prison to psychiatric units.

Information regarding the length of stay at a single site has been
investigated previously.14\ :sup:`–`\ 17 However, no studies have
investigated how the length of stay has changed over a prolonged period
of time. Therefore, we feel that the data provided by our study add to
the literature and provide a primary example of how length of admission
has changed across a significant period of time. When comparisons were
made with these early studies, the length of admission was comparable
with that of the earliest cohort of our study. For example, in one paper
published in 1981, the vast majority of patients were discharged in less
than one year, which fits with the length of stay of the 1985 cohort in
our study.14 It would be interesting to see modern studies in these
other hospitals, to identify whether they have witnessed similar
increases in length of stay.

One of the major changes since 1985 is in how patients are treated. In
the older cohorts, the principal role of the forensic mental health
service was to ensure that the symptoms of the patient's mental illness
had reduced or resolved; offending risk related to other factors such as
personality, substance misuse, social circumstances or life choices was
often not felt to be the domain of mental health services. This
underwent a significant change in the following decades. Mental health
services now provide far broader care to address these other aspects, as
evidenced by the essential roles of the multidisciplinary
team1\ :sup:`,`\ 2 and the adoption of recovery principles. These
important changes are time and labour intensive, and as such may be a
contributing factor to the increased length of stay.

In the analysis of the discharge locations and admission sources of
these patient cohorts, certain patterns emerged. Far fewer patients are
discharged directly to their home. Our patients are often discharged to
long-term MSUs, lower security psychiatric units or supported
accommodation. Notably, therefore, despite the increasing length of
stay, fewer patients are discharged directly into independent
accommodation in the community. Numerous studies have provided detailed
analysis of the follow-up of patients discharged from forensic
psychiatry units.3\ :sup:`–`\ 6 Given the risks inherent in these
patients returning to day-to-day life, further care in supported
environments may reduce risk to others at a population level. Responses
to serious untoward incidents have changed over time18\ :sup:`,`\ 19 and
may now be more likely to lead to greater restrictions for patients.
This in turn may contribute to the increasing lengths of stay described
above.

There are limitations to our study. As our cohort was from a single MSU,
the general applicability of our findings may be limited. It is
recommended that further research be undertaken to examine whether the
trends identified here are reproduced in other MSUs.

C.H.E. is funded by a National Institute for Health Research Academic
Clinical Fellowship.

**Charles H. Earnshaw** is an academic clinical fellow at Salford Royal
NHS Foundation Trust, UK; **Lucy Shaw** is a forensic psychiatry
registrar at Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust,
Prestwich, UK; **Deepu Thomas** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist at
Priory Healthcare, Kemple View Hospital, Blackburn, UK; and **Owen
Haeney** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist at the Forensic Mental
Health Service, James Nash House, Oakden and a clinical lecturer in the
Discipline of Psychiatry at the University of Adelaide, Australia.

.. [1]
   The maximum duration is unknown for this cohort owing to ongoing
   admission.
