==================================================================================================================================
Men in eating disorder units: a service evaluation survey regarding mixed gender accommodation rules in an eating disorder setting
==================================================================================================================================



Akira Fukutomi
Frances Connan
Anthony P. Winston
Pia Ghosh

:Correspondence: Dr Akira Fukutomi (fukutomiakira@gmail.com)

:date: 2018-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   This service evaluation was conducted to find out: (1) if mixed
   gender accommodation in eating disorder units is perceived to be
   helpful or unhelpful for recovery, and (2) if men were being
   discriminated against by the implementation of the 2010 Department of
   Health (DoH) guidelines on the elimination of mixed gender wards. All
   32 in-patient units accredited on the Quality Network for Eating
   Disorders were contacted via a survey.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   We received 38 responses from professionals from 26 units and 53
   responses from patients (46 female, 7 male) from 7 units. Four units
   had closed admissions to male patients due to DoH guidelines.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   We found that it is possible to provide admission for men with eating
   disorders, while respecting the single gender accommodation rules,
   and that doing so is likely to be helpful for both genders and
   prevents discrimination against men.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In 2010, the Department of Health (DoH) set guidelines for all hospitals
to eliminate mixed gender wards to preserve privacy and dignity for
patients.1 In specialist eating disorder services, all-male wards do not
exist due to the low prevalence of the disorder in males compared with
females. This leads to the paradoxical situation where men have
difficulty accessing an eating disorder bed under these DoH guidelines.
Some hospital trusts have modified their accommodation or procedures in
light of Care Quality Commission (CQC) guidelines set by the DoH to
accommodate men; however some have had to close admissions for male
patients as the trusts believed they would be fined for breaching single
gender accommodation rules.

Anecdotally, there has been positive feedback from having men in eating
disorder wards: they provide a less competitive atmosphere, a different
perspective in group treatments and reduce the institutional nature of
the environment. A survey performed by Mezey *et al*\ 2 in a medium
secure forensic setting found similar results, where most female
patients preferred to be among male patients. A small qualitative study
interviewed male in-patients with eating disorders and one participant
said that eating disorder is ‘gender-excluding as a disorder’ and
‘reasons why you get there are probably slightly different but in the
end all roads lead to Rome’,3 suggesting that the same treatment applies
to both genders. There has yet to be any evaluation of patient
perceptions on mixed versus single gender environments in an eating
disorder setting. We therefore collaborated with National Health Service
England to conduct a service evaluation survey, gathering information
from patients and professionals.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

All 32 in-patient units accredited on the Quality Network for Eating
Disorders (QED) in the UK were contacted via email, using an electronic
survey (Supplementary Appendix 1 available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2018.51). The individuals contacted were
those registered on the QED network and included consultant
psychiatrists, psychologists, senior nurses and occupational therapists.
The survey for the professionals asked for feedback on three themes:
(1)if they were a single or mixed gender unit and how they arranged the
ward to accommodate both genders;(2)if the trust, commissioners or the
CQC had ever commented on or stopped admission of male patients;(3)if
the professional had any views on recovery of patients in same or mixed
gender environments.

The third point was conducted by asking positively and negatively framed
questions with a five-point Likert scale and mean scores were then
calculated. The points ranged from 1 for strongly disagree to 5 for
strongly agree. A ‘free comment’ box was placed at the end for added
opinions.

In-patients were asked to provide feedback on their experience of single
or mixed gender environments and similar scores were then calculated
(Supplementary Appendix 2). Male patients had extra questions to
complete. Data were collected between October 2016 and August 2017.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Professionals
-------------

| A total of 38 eating disorder professionals registered on the QED
  network responded from 26 different units across the UK. Six of these
  units did not admit men: three of these units had stopped admitting
  men after a CQC inspection and one had been advised similarly by
  Health Improvement Scotland. `Figures 1 <#fig01>`__ and `2 <#fig02>`__
  show the responses to questions on perceptions of mixed gender wards.
  In general, professionals thought that mixed gender units carried more
  benefit than harm to patients. There was a general agreement that
  eating disorder units should be mixed gender wards (mean score 4.37
  out of 5) and that it was easy to ensure safety and dignity in mixed
  gender wards (4.11). Most did not think that mixed gender wards
  discriminated against women (1.63), nor did they think that having one
  male patient was detrimental to that man's care (1.71). There were
  mixed responses about whether it has been difficult to find a bed for
  male patients since the single gender rule was introduced (3.24).
  `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ highlights some comments that were provided in
  the free-text box. Fig. 1Survey for professionals: positively framed
  questions. Fig. 2Survey for professionals: negatively framed
  questions. Table 1Comments by professionals in the free-text
  boxThemesResponse from professionalsIs mixed gender accommodation
  helpful in eating disorder units?‘On the whole we have found having a
  male on the unit quite refreshing and beneficial to both client
  sexes…We have only had a small number of males admitted to the unit
  but on the whole our experience so far is positive.’
| ‘Mixed sex units for ED are a necessity. Both sexes benefit from
  having the other gender on the ward. ED units attempt to support
  individuals in recognising what is “normal” this includes being in an
  environment with members of the opposite sex.’
| ‘We tailor our groups to accommodate the needs of all patients, and
  dynamics that arise around gender, as with any other issue, would be
  explored through the group process and in community group settings
  where appropriate.’Are men being discriminated against due to single
  gender accommodation guidelines?‘The concern seems disproportionate
  and the impression is that the response from CQC varies dependent upon
  the individual assessor on the day.’
| ‘I believe it could be quite tricky to manage the issue of having
  different corridors for male and females especially if you are not a
  purpose built unit. The feedback from males during their stay is they
  prefer to be included in the group as it often makes them feel awkward
  and isolated from peers.’
| ‘There needs to be some work done to alleviate blanket rules around
  single sex wards. Some elements ought to be ward or unit specific.’

.. _sec2-2:

Patients
--------

A total of 53 patients (46 female, 7 male) from 7 eating disorder units
responded to the survey. Three of these surveys were partially
incomplete; however the scores and comments that were provided have been
included in the results. A total of 49 participants (92%) had
experienced admission on a mixed gender unit and 29 (56%) had
experienced both single and mixed gender environments. `Table
2 <#tab02>`__ shows the distribution of services from which the patients
responded, although many had experience of admission at a variety of
other centres. Table 2Sources of responsesEating disorder unitNumber of
responsesVincent Square Eating Disorder Service, London23The Haldon
Eating Disorder Service, Exeter15The Priory Hospital,
Chelmsford9Specialist Treatment for Eating Problems (STEPs),
Bristol3Kimmeridge Court, Dorset Healthcare Services, Dorset1The
Retreat, York1West Park Hospital, Northern Centre for Eating Disorders,
Durham1Total53

`Figures 3 <#fig03>`__ and `4 <#fig04>`__ shows the attitudes from
patients towards mixed gender accommodation. Most patients agreed that
men were being disadvantaged (75.5%). Nearly the entire patient group
(98%) answered positively or neutrally to whether having a mixed gender
accommodation was helpful for their recovery. A total of 45 participants
(85%) gave a similar (positive or neutral) response to ‘I've learnt
helpful things about myself by having male patients’. There were minimal
safety issues noted, most participants (75.5%) disagreed to being
‘intimidated by male patients on the ward’. Fig. 3Patients’ responses
scoring above 3 (neutral). Fig. 4Patients’ responses scoring below 3
(neutral).

`Figure 5 <#fig05>`__ shows the responses from the seven male patients.
Of these, six agreed to the statement ‘I don't mind if I'm the only male
patient on an eating disorder ward’ and five agreed to ‘As a man I feel
accepted on a mixed gender ward’. Six men said that they would not want
to be treated on an all-male ward if it were far from home. Fig.
5Perceptions from male patients.

| Of the 41 patients who wrote in the optional free-text box (see `Table
  3 <#tab03>`__), 36 (88.8%) were in favour of having a mixed gender
  unit. Many voiced that having a ‘mixed unit is reflective of the
  outside world’ and that mixed wards were ‘healthy for dynamics’ and
  ‘reduces competitiveness’. A male patient thought it was ‘crucial’ to
  his recovery that he was on a mixed gender ward and believes his
  presence ‘was a benefit to others on the ward’. Only three
  participants (8%) had negative feelings towards this (one male, two
  female); however both female patients with this opinion had not
  experienced a mixed gender eating disorder ward. The male patient
  voiced strong concerns about feeling ‘isolated and slightly
  intimidated’ as the only man because ‘many groups were geared towards
  females’. Table 3Comments by patients in the free-text
  boxThemesResponse from patientsIn favour of having mixed gender
  wards‘Mixed unit is reflective of the outside world.’
| ‘Having a male upon the ward allowed me to see from a different
  perspective during therapy groups which helped me to understand the
  illness from this kind of viewpoint and hence supported my treatment.’
| ‘All female wards can be stifling and very competitive.’
| ‘I feel sure that had I been forced to be on an all-male ward that I
  would have found it much harder. I also believe that my presence as a
  man was a benefit to the others on the ward.’
| ‘I think it's not a problem having male patients on the ward too. It's
  not fair to restrict their treatment options.’In favour of having
  single gender wards‘I see that there will be fewer wards for men which
  is unfair but also there is a percentage of women with eating
  disorders who have PTSD or have suffered from sexual abuse that need
  to be taken into account.’
| ‘Many groups were very geared toward females and I have often felt
  isolated and slightly intimidated in both units. I have often felt
  that my recovery, or lack thereof, has been in part not helped by
  being the only male in treatment at in-patient units, although I would
  still rather be the only male than have no treatment or community
  based treatment only which for me is ineffective.’

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The results show that the majority of both patients and staff believe
mixed gender units work just as well as, if not better than, single
gender units for patient recovery in both genders. Some of the original
thoughts behind segregating the genders, such as having to dress
differently or having separate lounges, were not deemed very important
by the patients. Unfortunately we confirmed that a handful of units have
closed to male admissions due to interpretation of DoH regulations.
Drawing parallels from the study by Mezey *et al*,2 it may be that due
to the long-stay nature of the ward and treatment duration, having a
sense of normality and the reduction in competitiveness by having a
mixed gender unit helps to provide a more therapeutic setting. This
survey suggests that both professionals and patients believe that eating
disorder wards should be open to males, and that patients will have a
better recovery journey as a result of the mixed gender environment. We
hope that research will now follow to better understand the risks and
values of a mixed gender treatment environment.

.. _sec4:

Recommendations
===============

With the support of QED, clarity was sought about how the DoH single
gender guidelines apply to settings such as eating disorder services.
The following guidance has been approved by the CQC as entirely
consistent with the DoH single gender accommodation guidance and should
make possible male admissions to every in-patient eating disorder
service: •A risk assessment has been carried out to ensure that the male
patient does not pose a specific risk to female patients.•There is an
agreement in place with National Health Service England commissioners on
the admission of male patients and the admission is consistent with this
agreement.•Appropriate arrangements have been put in place to ensure
that female patients do not feel unsafe or compromised in terms of
privacy.•Male patients are accommodated in single bedrooms with en-suite
bathroom and toilet facilities, if possible.•If this is not possible,
male patients occupy a single room with use of male-only bathroom and
toilet facilities.•Patients do not have to walk through a sleeping area
or a bathroom occupied by another gender. A sleeping area is a bedroom
or a bay of beds. Men can walk through a corridor, off of which there
are doors to female bedrooms and bathrooms, to access a male bathroom.•A
women-only day room is available.

**Akira Fukutomi** is in Core Training Year 3 at Vincent Square Eating
Disorder Service, Central and North West London National Health Service
Foundation Trust, UK. **Frances Connan** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at
Vincent Square Eating Disorder Service, Central and North West London
National Health Service Foundation Trust, UK. **Anthony P. Winston** is
a Consultant Psychiatrist in Eating Disorders at The Aspen Centre,
Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership National Health Service Trust,
Warwick, UK. **Pia Ghosh** is in Speciality Training Year 4 at Vincent
Square Eating Disorder Service, Central and North West London National
Health Service Foundation Trust, UK.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2018.51.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
