===================================================================================
The over-35s: early intervention in psychosis services entering uncharted territory
===================================================================================



Felix Clay
Sophie Allan
Serena Lai
Siona Laverty
Grace Jagger
Cate Treise
Jesus Perez
:Correspondence: Jesus Perez (jp440@cam.ac.uk) [1]_

:date: 2018-8

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Following the introduction of new standards for early intervention in
   psychosis (EIP) in England, EIP services are accepting referrals for
   people aged 35–65. The Cambridgeshire and Peterborough EIP service
   (CAMEO) aimed to explore the immediate implications for the service,
   especially with regards to referral numbers and sources. Data were
   collected from April 2016 to June 2017.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Referrals for over-35s represented 25.7% of all new referrals. Fifty
   per cent of referrals for over-35s were accepted onto caseload (40.2%
   for under-35s). The over-35s were more likely to be referred from
   acute and secondary mental health services (*P* < 0.01) and had
   longer durations of untreated psychosis than the under-35s (*P* =
   0.02).

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   CAMEO has received a significantly higher number of referrals as a
   result of age inclusivity, with an increased proportion of patients
   suffering from severe, acute psychotic presentations and existing
   mental health difficulties. This has implications for service
   planning.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In April 2016, a new Access and Waiting Time Standard for early
intervention in psychosis (EIP) services in England1 came in to force.
At least half of all referrals to EIP services should have access to and
commence a National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE)-concordant package of care for psychosis within 2 weeks of
referral. Although EIP services had promoted easy access and prompt
responses to new referrals since their inception, the new policy offered
detail on how to achieve and report the Standard. In addition, the
policy, in accordance with NICE recommendations,2 provided information
about the need to expand current care provision in order to treat those
individuals that might be at risk of developing psychosis, and to ensure
prompt access and treatment for people with a first-episode psychosis
regardless of their age. The effect of age inclusivity on the *modus
operandi* of previously youth-oriented services was unknown. In fact,
those EIP services that adhered to the new policy in full entered an
uncharted territory that, inevitably, would require cultural and
structural changes. However, the magnitude of these changes was unclear
and not fully informed by previous evidence. For instance, the paucity
of studies on the administrative incidence of first-episode psychosis in
people aged over 35 assessed in early intervention
settings3\ :sup:`–`\ 5 complicated new workload calculations and
commissioning decisions.

The CAMEO EIP service in the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
Foundation Trust (http://www.cameo.nhs.uk) decided to conduct a service
evaluation to determine the initial effects of this policy change and
assess how well it was achieving its intended aims with this population.
In the first instance, CAMEO managers and clinicians were particularly
keen to explore the immediate implications for the clinical service,
especially with regards to referral numbers and sources for individuals
aged over 35 with a suspected first-episode psychosis. This would help
generate meaningful information that could drive local decision-making.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Setting and data collection
---------------------------

CAMEO is an EIP service that offers management for people aged 14–65
years suffering from first-episode psychosis across Cambridgeshire and
Peterborough, UK. CAMEO serves a very diverse population of around
870 000, from the international scientific community in Cambridge city
and multicultural population of Peterborough to a large rural base in
the Fens.6 Referrals of suspected psychosis are accepted from multiple
sources, including general practitioners, other mental health services,
the third sector, school and college counsellors, relatives and
self-referrals.7\ :sup:`,`\ 8 CAMEO started accepting referrals of
people aged over 35 from 1 April 2016.

Data on referral numbers and sources for people aged over 35 were
collected over 15 months, from 1 April 2016 to 30 June 2017. Additional
personal information was de-identified and did not contain sensitive
details. It included data available from the Cambridgeshire and
Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust electronic clinical records, such as
demographic information (age, gender, ethnicity and marital status) for
all referrals, and duration of untreated psychosis (DUP) and working
diagnosis (usually based on the clinical judgement of two senior
clinicians, including a senior consultant psychiatrist, and discussions
at multidisciplinary team meetings) for those referrals accepted onto
the CAMEO case-load. For comparative purposes, we also collected some
information for under-35s referred to our service during the same
period. This included referral numbers and sources, age, gender and DUP
for those accepted to case-load.

Data analysis and publication followed the guidelines established by the
*Anonymisation Standard for Publishing Health and Social Care Data*.9
Raw data were not shared with any third party.

.. _sec1-2:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

All analyses were performed using version 20 of SPSS (SPSS, Inc.,
Chicago, Illinois). Comparisons were made using the χ\ :sup:`2` test for
categorical variables and *t*-test or Mann–Whitney U-test for continuous
variables. A *P*-value of less than 0.05 represented a significant
difference.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Referral numbers and characteristics
------------------------------------

One hundred and sixty-two referrals for individuals over 35 were
received during the 15-month evaluation period; 458 referrals were
recorded for people under 35. Thus, referrals for over 35s represented
25.7% of all referrals.

50% of referrals for patients over 35 were accepted onto the CAMEO
case-load (*n* = 81). Based on the population aged 35–65 in
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough,10 this represented an administrative
incidence of approximately 25 per 100 k per year for this group.
Notably, a lower proportion of the total number of referrals for
individuals aged under 35 were accepted onto case-load (40.2%) (`Fig.
1 <#fig01>`__). Fig. 1Flow chart for referrals received by CAMEO from
April 2016 to June 2017.

Of the referrals for over-35s, 21.7% (*n* = 35) were not assessed and
28.3% (*n* = 46) were assessed but not accepted onto case-load. Reasons
for those over 35 referred but not assessed or taken onto CAMEO were:
(a) absence of psychotic symptoms and/or diagnosis of non-psychotic
disorder, usually anxiety disorders, after assessment (*n* = 55); (b)
evidence of a first-episode psychosis in the past (*n* = 12); and (c)
psychotic symptoms in the context of neurodegenerative disorders, i.e.
dementia (*n* = 3). The rest were not taken onto case-load for a variety
of reasons, such as change of residence to outside CAMEO's catchment
area, disengagement during the assessment period or cancellation of
referral.

The mean age for all referrals for this group was 47.66 (s.d. = 8.44,
range = 36–66.5 years). Fifty-one per cent of referrals for over-35s
were female *v.* 38% for under-35s (χ\ :sup:`2` (4) = 420.55,
*P* < 0.01). Forty-four (54.3%) out of the 81 referrals for over-35s
finally accepted onto case-load were women.

Approximately one-third of over-35s referred to CAMEO were married or
cohabiting, 16.3% were divorced or separated, and 34.7% were single
(15.6% not known/recorded). The majority (60.5%) considered themselves
White British (the remainder were White other (11.1%), Asian British
(1.2%), Asian other (6.8%), African–Caribbean British (1.2%),
African–Caribbean other (2.5%), other (3.1%) and not known/recorded
(13.6%)).

.. _sec2-2:

Referral sources
----------------

A higher proportion of referrals for over-35s were received from acute
(acute psychiatric wards and crisis resolution home treatment teams) and
secondary (community mental health teams) mental health services in
comparison with under-35s, who were referred from primary care more
often. Differences in referral sources between the two groups were
statistically significant (χ\ :sup:`2` (5) = 27.84, *P* < 0.01). Also,
self-referrals from over-35s were less common (2 *v.* 39 individuals)
(`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__). Notably, 45.9% of all over-35s referred to our
service had a confirmed previous history of mental health problems. Fig.
2Percentage of referrals for over- and under-35s by referral source.

.. _sec2-3:

Duration of untreated psychosis
-------------------------------

DUP for over-35s accepted onto case-load ranged from 2 days to 20 years
(median 2.6 months, mean = 1.88 years; s.d. = 4.32; *n* = 68, 13 not
known). Five patients had a DUP of more than 10 years, and another six
of more than 3.5 years. Under-35s had a mean DUP of 8.5 months
(s.d. = 1.76 years, median = 1 month, range 1 day to 12 years;
*n* = 157, 27 not known). The difference in DUP between under- and
over-35s was statistically significant (*u* = 3129.5, *P* = 0.02).

DUP was longer than 3 years for 13.5% of patients over 35 accepted onto
case-load (*n* = 11), compared with 3.8% for patients aged under 35
(*n* = 7).

.. _sec2-4:

Working diagnosis
-----------------

Working diagnoses for the over-35s accepted onto case-load were as
follows: unspecified nonorganic psychosis (22.2%, *n* = 18), psychotic
depression (16.0%, *n* = 13), delusional disorder (14.8%, *n* = 12),
bipolar disorder (12.3%, *n* = 10), schizophrenia (11.1%, *n* = 9) and
acute and transient psychotic disorder (8.6%, *n* = 7), with a further
6.2% (*n* = 5) having other diagnoses, including schizoaffective
disorder and drug-induced psychosis, and 8.6% (*n* = 7) not
known/recorded. Differences in diagnoses by gender were statistically
significant (χ\ :sup:`2` (7) = 14.30, *P* = 0.05); women were more
likely to suffer from affective psychoses, such as psychotic depression.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

Our findings contribute to a sparse research landscape looking into the
administrative incidence of first-episode psychosis in people aged over
35 assessed in EIP settings. What little is so far known has been
gathered from services already offering a broader EIP service in
predominantly urban areas prior to 2016.3\ :sup:`–`\ 5 By collecting
data after the introduction of the new Access and Waiting Time
Standard,1 we were able to evaluate the effects of these changes in
existing EIP services, such as CAMEO, and anticipate further challenges
and opportunities.

Following the changes to our service, almost 26% of new referrals were
for patients over 35 years old. This confirms previous evaluations in
early-adopter services, which suggested that patients over the age of 35
would make up a significant proportion of referrals, ranging from 25 to
33%.3\ :sup:`–`\ 5 A higher proportion of patients over the age of 35
were referred from secondary and acute care in comparison with those
aged under 35; the over-35s were more likely to have existing mental
health issues.

Since referral processes may differ across EIP services, data from
early-adopter services are difficult to compare with ours; however, they
also suggested relatively few referrals from primary care for this older
group. This might reflect lack of awareness in the wider health system,
but, for some patients, it may well be related to psychosis developing
as a secondary feature of depression and other conditions for which they
had already received some support.11 Interestingly, 50% of referrals for
over-35s were taken on by our early intervention service, whereas only
40.2% of referrals for under-35s were accepted to case-load. This would
also support the idea of those aged over 35 suffering from a longer
history and higher burden of mental health issues.

Previous studies suggested a different distribution of diagnoses for
older *v.* younger patients, with an increased proportion of primarily
affective psychoses in over-35s.3\ :sup:`,`\ 4 Our results reaffirm
these findings, with 16% of over-35s suffering from psychotic
depression. The proportion of our patients aged over 35 with
non-affective psychosis, approximately 55–60%, is similar to that found
by previous evaluations and lower than would be expected in younger
patients, where non-affective psychosis is usually reported in
approximately 75% of cases.4 This is consistent with the natural course
of mood disorders, such as resistant depression, which becomes
progressively more prevalent in older patients, some of whom may have
suffered hypomanic episodes for which they did not seek treatment.
Non-affective psychotic disorders are less likely to present for the
first time over the age of 35.11 Also, the higher representation of
females in our over-35s sample and those of other studies may reflect a
bimodal pattern of psychotic disorders in women, with an first peak at
around the same age as in men (18–25 years) and a further peak, usually
of an affective nature, in the 40s.12 A willingness to treat these older
female patients would support age inclusivity across EIP services.

Selvendra *et al*\ 13 showed that older patients referred to their
mental health service in Italy had been unwell for significantly longer
than younger patients. Our results, from an EIP context, also found a
statistically significant difference in DUP between over- and under-35s.
This indicates the need to continue to enhance outreach approaches to
detect emerging psychotic symptoms earlier,8 or to consider different
approaches for a group of patients whose illness may have become more
chronic by the time they are assessed by EIP services.

Although only three referrals were not taken on by CAMEO owing to
comorbid dementia in our evaluation, other studies have shown a steady
increase in transition to organic pathology in older patients. In fact,
neurodegenerative diagnoses creep into the fold as the upper age limit
increases above 35.14 Accordingly, follow-up studies of over-35s treated
in EIP services under the new Standard1 will be required in order to
evaluate this potential clinical issue and the subsequent effects on
services that are not designed to treat such conditions.

In summary, our evaluation has begun to unfold the practical challenges
that the implementation of the new Access and Waiting Time Standard1
brings to established EIP services with regards to age inclusivity. The
CAMEO service received a significantly higher number of referrals as a
result of this, with an increased proportion of patients suffering from
severe, acute psychotic presentations and with existing mental health
issues for which they had already received treatment. These patients
were more likely to be referred from secondary mental health services
after an acute crisis, and to have longer DUP and psychotic symptoms in
the context of other conditions, such as mood disorders.

The main limitation of this evaluation pertains to the collection of
data from electronic records routinely employed in clinical practice;
some clinical information was missing and working diagnoses were not
confirmed with structured diagnostic questionnaires. However, data on
referral numbers and sources, which represented the main purpose of this
work, were complete and will aid future analyses on clinical and
functional outcomes after completion of the early intervention care
pathway. This should help to determine whether EIP services, as
currently implemented, achieve the required standards with a group of
patients whose characteristics clearly differ from those traditionally
treated in what used to be exclusively youth-oriented clinical services.

We thank all members of CAMEO services for their help and support with
this evaluation.

**Felix Clay** is Core Trainee in Psychiatry at CAMEO Early Intervention
Services, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust; **Sophie
Allan** is Assistant Psychologist at CAMEO Early Intervention Services,
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust; **Serena Lai** is
Consultant Psychiatrist at CAMEO Early Intervention Services,
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, **Siona Laverty**
is Foundation Year 2 Doctor at CAMEO Early Intervention Services,
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust; **Grace Jagger**
is Specialty Trainee in Psychiatry at CAMEO Early Intervention Services,
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust; **Cate Treise** is
Clinical Psychologist at CAMEO Early Intervention Services,
Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust; and **Jesus
Perez** is Lead Consultant Psychiatrist at CAMEO Early Intervention
Services, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust,
Associate Lecturer at the Department of Psychiatry, University of
Cambridge, Honorary Professor of Psychiatry at the University of East
Anglia and Lead Director of the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) Clinical Research Network in the East of England.

.. [1]
   These authors contributed equally to this work.
