---
author:
- Amar Shah
date: 2018-2
institute:
- "Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, East London NHS Foundation Trust,
  and Quality Improvement Lead, Royal College of Psychiatrists; email:
  <amarshah@nhs.net>"
references:
- id: ref1
title: Sharing quality and safety improvement work in the field of
  mental health
---

I welcome the findings of D\'Lima, Crawford, Darzi and Archer^1^ on the
relative scarcity of publications related to mental health quality and
safety improvement within reputable quality and safety journals.

I agree with the authors' proposition that there is increasing interest
in the application of improvement science within the mental health
field. A large number of providers of mental health services in the UK
and beyond are now starting to apply quality improvement methods at
scale. The Royal College of Psychiatrists has established a quality
improvement committee over the past year, and has recently appointed its
first quality improvement lead. There is also an organically growing
global mental health improvement network (#MHimprove), which meets twice
a year and has begun to present and share knowledge at large
international conferences.

As both the College quality improvement lead and the lead for quality at
East London NHS Foundation Trust (ELFT), with perhaps one of the largest
improvement programmes in the world within mental health services, my
experience agrees with the conclusion of the authors that publishing
mental health improvement work within reputable quality and safety
journals is a struggle. Our efforts to share real-world improvement work
have largely been unsuccessful in the high-quality journals within this
field. My theory, both as a submitting author and a reader of these
journals, is that the journals are still focusing more on the research
and evaluation end of the spectrum, as opposed to real-world, messy
improvement work in mental health services.

As an example, the use of Shewhart (control) charts to demonstrate
improvement over time, which is seen as best practice by improvers
across the globe, is still frowned upon by journals (both subject-matter
specialist journals and quality and safety journals), who prefer
enumerative statistics in the form of pre- and post-comparison of
averages. This jars with the real world of applied science, where there
is no pre- and post-state, but a gradual and iterative transition,
fuelled by multiple tests of change with increasing degree of belief and
reliability in the change package.

Despite these challenges, ELFT has published approximately 15
peer-reviewed articles over the past 4 years and has 3--4 articles
continuously in the process of submission. All published papers are made
available transparently to everyone through the ELFT quality improvement
website (<https://qi.elft.nhs.uk>), which has now had over half a
million hits in the past 3.5 years. Going even further, ELFT aims to
share learning from all completed projects on its website, in
acknowledgement of the fact that practising improvers and clinicians
will always struggle to find time to publish all completed improvement
work in peer-reviewed journals.

This brings me to the question: are journals still relevant in a world
of fast-paced knowledge-sharing and acquisition, and with increasingly
digital and connected networks? More than 500 leaders and clinicians
from more than 50 different provider organisations have now been to
visit ELFT to find out more first-hand about the quality improvement
work taking place. At ELFT, we are also using the web and social media
to share knowledge in real time and transparently with everyone, as we
recognise our responsibility in helping to grow the field of knowledge
within mental health improvement, and also to foster confidence in the
use of quality improvement.

So, while my personal experience leads me to agree with the authors that
publishing mental health improvement in journals remains challenging and
often puts people off from even submitting, I would also suggest that
there is much more active improvement work taking place and being shared
by mental health services globally than might be apparent from looking
at high-quality peer-reviewed journals alone.
