===============================================================================
Individuals seeking gender reassignment: marked increase in demand for services
===============================================================================



Josephine Fielding
Christopher BassCorrespondence to Josephine Fielding
(j.fielding2@nhs.net)
:Date: 2018-10

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To describe the pattern of referrals and characteristics of people
   aged over 18 seeking gender reassignment in Oxfordshire over a 6-year
   period (2011–2016).

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   A total of 153 individuals attended for assessment (of 162 referred);
   97 (63.4%) were natal males and 56 (36.6%) were natal females. Mean
   age at referral was markedly different between the two groups, with
   females being younger. The number of referral significantly increased
   over the time period, by an average of 18% per year (95% CI
   1.08–1.30). Eighty-seven patients sought transition from male to
   female, and 46 from female to male, while a smaller group (*n* = 13)
   had non-binary presentations. Twelve patients (7.8%) had autism
   spectrum disorder.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   There are various possible reasons for the increased demand for
   services for people with gender dysphoria, which we discuss here.
   When planning services in the UK, both the increase in overall
   referral rates and the apparent earlier age at referral should be
   taken into account.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Gender dysphoria is the personal experience of dissonance between
assigned and desired gender. It has always been considered to be a rare
disorder, but in recent years there has been an extraordinary increase
in the number of referrals to both adult and child and adolescent gender
clinics, with services becoming overwhelmed.1\ :sup:`–`\ 3 Five years
ago, our group published a service evaluation of referrals to the adult
(age 18 onwards) Oxford Gender Clinic between 2004 and 2009.4 In this
5-year period, there were 56 referrals. We found levels of psychiatric
morbidity to be lower than described in other samples, and there were
significantly more individuals seeking male-to-female transition (70%)
than female-to-male transition (30%). The natal females (those assigned
female at birth) were significantly younger than their natal male
counterparts at referral. However, since 2011, there has been an
increase in referrals to gender clinics, in particular to child and
adolescent services,2\ :sup:`,`\ 3 which has been noted in systematic
reviews of prevalence as well as being the subject of considerable
discussion in the media.5\ :sup:`,`\ 6 We wanted to determine whether a
similar pattern was occurring in services designed to cater for
individuals aged 18 and over.

All individuals who request treatment for gender dysphoria in
Oxfordshire are referred to a single clinician (C.B.) for psychiatric
assessment and subsequent referral to a specialist centre. We aimed to
review case notes for all referrals from 2011 until 2016 and to answer
the following questions. (1)Have referral patterns changed over
time?(2)If so, what are the main demographic and clinical
characteristics?We also discuss possible reasons for any changes in
referral patterns.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

Individuals referred to C.B. between January 2011 and December 2016 were
identified from a referral database kept by the Gender Clinic based in
the Emergency Department Psychiatric Service at the John Radcliffe
Hospital in Oxford. C.B. and J.F. reviewed case notes, and data were
extracted and entered into a spreadsheet. All patients who had attended
an appointment had had a full psychiatric assessment, as well as a
review of any available medical records, such as the general
practitioner (GP) summary. All patients were asked at assessment about
current or past hormone therapy (prescribed or non-prescribed).

Patients were excluded if they were seen for follow-up only (i.e. they
had been referred prior to the start of data collection) or if they had
been referred after having previously transitioned. Two patients were
also excluded owing to rare conditions: as this was a service
evaluation, specific consent was not required, and the small sample size
and unusual nature of the conditions meant that there would be concerns
about the individuals being potentially identifiable. Data on age at
referral were analysed with independent sample *t*-tests using IBM SPSS
Statistics version 24.0, and the relationship between year of referral
and numbers of referrals was examined using a negative binomial
regression model in Stata, version 12 (StataCorp).

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Demographic characteristics
---------------------------

From a total of 164 referrals received, 153 individuals attended for
assessment. The majority of patients were referred for initial
assessment, and the ‘did not attend’ rate was low at 5.6%.

The numbers of referrals, in 6-monthly intervals, between 2011 and 2016
are shown in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__. Fig. 1Referrals for gender dysphoria
from 2011 to 2016.

Analysis of the numbers of referrals over time from 2011 to 2016, with
data in 6-monthly intervals, was performed using a negative binomial
regression model. This showed that the relationship between the numbers
of referrals and year was significant at *P* < 0.001. The incidence rate
ratio was 1.18 (95% CI 1.08–1.30), meaning that, on average, each year
saw an average increase in the number of referrals of 18%. When the
analysis was repeated separately by natal sex, the number of referrals
of both natal males and females increased significantly over time, but
there was no significant difference between the natal sexes in the
relationship between number of referrals and time.

The increase appeared most marked in the second half of the time period:
the number of referrals nearly doubled over the 6 years, with 59
referrals from 2011 to 2013 and 103 from 2014 to 2016. Furthermore, mean
ages were significantly lower in the latter 3 years compared with the
first 3 years (a mean of 5.7 years younger, *t*\ (112) = 2.4,
*P* = 0.018) (`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__). Fig. 2Mean age at referral.

.. _sec2-2:

Gender characteristics
----------------------

Of the 153 individuals who attended for assessment, markedly more were
natal males (97, 63.4%) compared with the 56 (36.6%) who were natal
females (`Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__). The natal females were significantly
younger than their male counterparts at referral: there was a mean
difference of 10.5 years (*t*\ (160) = 5.5, *P* < 0.001), with a mean
age of 34.4 years for males and 24.3 years for females. This is
consistent with the findings of our previous study; see `Table
1 <#tab01>`__ in Saunders and Bass (2011). There was no significant
difference in the overall age of the sample compared with the previous
study (*t*\ (209) = 0.98, *P* = 0.33). Fig. 3Diagnoses. Table 1Mean ages
of all patients referred 2011–2013 and 2014–2016Referral
period\ *n*\ Mean
ages.d.s.e.m.2011–20135934.3714.9531.9472014–201610328.7013.6421.344

Eighty-seven individuals (56.9%) were seeking to transition from male to
female, and 46 (30.1%) from female to male, while 13 (8.5%) had
non-binary gender identities. All but one of these 13 individuals were
seen from 2014 to 2016. Overall, 146 patients (95.4% of those attending
the clinic) were assessed as having gender dysphoria.

The remainder (*n* = 7, 4.6%) had a number of problems or reasons for
referral that were not assessed as gender dysphoria (including body
dysmorphic disorder, homosexual identity, discomfort with certain
aspects of gender identity but not to the extent of gender dysphoria,
fetishistic transvestism, and ideas about gender related to psychotic
beliefs).

.. _sec2-3:

Hormone therapy
---------------

Twenty individuals (13.1%) reported taking hormone replacement therapy
at the time of assessment, with an additional five who had had hormones
at some time in the past, plus two who had been prescribed finasteride
for male pattern baldness. Of the 25, six were taking or had taken male
hormones (such as testosterone), and 19 were taking or had taken female
hormones (such as oestrogens).

.. _sec2-4:

Educational level
-----------------

Notably, perhaps partly because of the geographical location of the
study, a high proportion of our sample (39.2%) had either been educated
at BA degree level or higher (34, 22.2%, including those currently
undertaking postgraduate study) or were current undergraduate university
students (26, 17.0%).

.. _sec2-5:

Comorbidities
-------------

Of those who attended for assessment, 60 (39.2%) had a current
psychiatric comorbidity, and 81 (52.9%) had a past history of mental
illness. Twelve (7.8%) had a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder
(ASD). Depression was the most common mental disorder overall; 26 (17.0)
had a current episode of depression and 59 (38.6) had had at least one
previous episode. Seven patients (4.6%) also reported a current or past
history of self-harm. Other comorbidities are reported in `Table
2 <#tab02>`__. Table 2Comorbidities of those attending the clinic
(*N* = 153)ComorbidityCurrent, *n* (%)Past, *n* (%)Any60 (39.2)81
(52.9)Depression26 (17.0)59 (38.6)Bipolar affective disorder3 (2.0)0
(0.0)Substance misuse – alcohol2 (1.3)8 (5.2)Substance misuse – drug1
(0.65)8 (5.2)Psychotic illness2 (1.3)4 (2.6)Post-traumatic stress
disorder1 (0.65)2 (1.3)Generalised anxiety6 (3.9)7 (4.6)Social phobia9
(5.9)4 (2.6)Panic disorder3 (2.0)3 (2.0)Obsessive–compulsive disorder4
(2.6)0 (0.0)Other anxiety disorders1 (0.65)1 (0.65)Dissociative
episodes0 (0.0)1 (0.65)Eating disorder0 (0.0)4 (2.6)Body dysmorphic
disorder4 (2.6)0 (0.0)Autism spectrum disorder12 (7.8)0 (0.0)Attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder5 (3.3)1 (0.65)Personality disorder2
(1.3)4 (2.6)Chronic somatoform disorder1 (0.65)0 (0.0)Learning
disability2 (1.3)0 (0.0)

.. _sec2-6:

Outcomes
--------

The majority of patients (*n* = 135, 88.2%) were referred on to a
specialist referral centre for further assessment.

Of those not referred, 11 (7.2%) had gender dysphoria but were not ready
to pursue transition or onwards referral was considered inappropriate.
For example, some did not wish to disclose their transgender identity to
their spouses, or felt that transition would be unacceptable to their
social networks given their cultural backgrounds. Of the remaining seven
patients described above who were not thought to be transgender, six
(3.9%) were not referred but were offered alternative treatment or
discharged, and one (0.65%) was nevertheless referred on to a specialist
gender clinic for a second opinion.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec3-1:

Summary of findings
-------------------

In a study of 162 patients referred to the Oxford Gender Clinic between
2011 and 2016, we report a significant increase in the number of
referrals over the 6-year period, despite no changes in local policy or
funding of the clinic. In particular, there is no designated endocrine
clinic for patients to access in Oxford. The increase was marked in the
past 3 years, with 103 referrals from 2014 to 2016 compared with 59 from
2011 to 2013. Similar findings have been reported in child and
adolescent services.2 Our experience is also consistent with recent
findings from a paediatric endocrinology service:3 of 38 patients seen
over a 13-year period, 74% of referrals to the clinic occurred during
the past 3 years. In our detailed case note review of the 153 patients
who attended for assessment, we also found a high rate of psychiatric
comorbidity (in particular, depression and ASD), consistent with
existing literature.

.. _sec3-2:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

The strengths of our study were that there is a single point of access
in Oxfordshire for onward referral to specialist gender clinics, so our
case note review was able to capture all patients referred within a
certain time period in this geographical area. We were also able to
compare the results with those of our previous study in 2004–2009.

Limitations of our study were that the clinic's assessment does not
include a structured diagnostic interview, and although previous medical
records were available in some cases, this was variable. Patients who
had recently moved to the area, for example, might have had incomplete
information in their local records, which might have particularly
affected the large student population. Some information, such as on the
number of patients taking hormones, was largely gathered through
self-report, which may lead to underestimation.

.. _sec3-3:

Consideration of reasons for changes in referral patterns
---------------------------------------------------------

Examination of our referrals in more detail revealed that the patterns
of referrals changed during the 6-year period, with mean age at referral
decreasing. The prevalence of non-binary gender presentations also
increased during the 6-year period, echoing the phenomenon discussed by
Richards *et al*.7 This may reflect a change in how people's gender
identities are developing, possibly because of the increased
availability of information about non-binary genders from social media,
the internet and peers. An alternative explanation might be that
patients identified in this way previously, but perceived that if they
disclosed this at assessment they might be denied treatment. It is
conceivable that with greater awareness and less social stigma, these
individuals may be developing more confidence about explaining their
complex gender identities to professionals. The provision of
comprehensive and accessible information to patients about options for
gender identity and expression and possible medical interventions is
crucial.8

We found similar rates of comorbid psychiatric disorders to those
reported by others,9 with depression being the most common comorbidity.
Like de Vries *et al*,10 we found anecdotally that after patients had
declared their gender dysphoria to others, or ‘come out’, their mood
often improved and self-harming behaviour reduced in frequency or
ceased. Also, as in previously published literature,11 we found high
rates of patients referred with a diagnosis of comorbid ASD (in our
sample, about 8% of those attending for assessment). Although the
assessment in the clinic does not include a structured diagnostic
interview or a formal autism assessment, and hence our case note review
only included previously established autism diagnoses, even this
potential underestimate was still notably higher than the prevalence in
the general population (estimated at 62 per 10 000 in a worldwide
review12). This echoes the findings of de Vries *et al*,10 who
systematically assessed children and adolescents referred to a gender
identity clinic and found an incidence of ASD of 7.8%. They commented on
the diversity of their findings, with both males and females having
increased rates of ASD, and the variety of gender identity disorder
diagnoses found in those individuals in their study with ASD. They
speculated that in some individuals with ASD, feelings of gender
dysphoria might be related to an experience of being ‘different’
generally and having difficulty with identity development, or to more
rigid and concrete ideas about gender norms.

An unexpected finding was that only 20 (13.1%) of patients were taking
hormone treatment at the time of assessment, which is below the figure
of 23% reported by Mepham *et al.*\ 13 Our study methods did not allow
us to explain this discrepancy, although, like Mepham *et al*,
proportionately more of our patients were transwomen taking oestrogens.
Our findings do raise the possibility of underreporting, as hormone use
was assessed through self-report, but this cannot be confirmed without
more invasive methods such as blood tests, which were beyond the scope
of our study. Another possibility would be that our sample truly had a
lower rate of taking hormones, perhaps owing to an increased awareness
of the medical risks of non-prescribed hormone treatment.

How can these recent marked increases in referral rates be explained?
Our study does not provide any clues as to aetiology, but there are many
possible explanations. An increase in referral rates can be due to an
increase in the prevalence of the condition in the population, or to a
change in help-seeking behaviour. Although our study does not provide
evidence to differentiate between the two explanations, there have
certainly been some recent cultural shifts which could influence the
likelihood of patients with gender dysphoria seeking treatment. First,
the public profile of transgender issues has been raised of late, with a
recent increase in high-profile media figures such as Caitlyn Jenner and
Chaz Bono coming out as transgender, and the broadcasting of a variety
of documentaries about transgender people, including transgender
children.14 The internet also provides much greater access to
information about gender issues, so that individuals can research their
condition and treatment options, and connect with others for support and
advocacy. Many people, for example, document the story of their
transition on YouTube to provide others with encouragement and advice
from their personal experience. Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
(LGBT) support groups may also be more accessible because of the
internet, and these also provide a source of peer support and
information. Second, there have been campaigns to promote transgender
people's rights and reduce discrimination in the UK and elsewhere,
although significant stigma and discrimination do remain.15 All of this
may have helped individuals with gender dysphoria to overcome barriers
to seeking treatment, and potentially to presenting to healthcare
professionals at an earlier age. Third, when patients present in primary
care, or other contexts such as secondary mental healthcare, GPs and
other health professionals have acquired a greater awareness of gender
dysphoria and may be more likely to refer people for assessment.

However, decreased stigma and increasing access to information may not
wholly account for changes in referral patterns, and additional factors
may be needed to explain this. Advances in understanding the cause of
gender dysphoria could help account for changes in prevalence; however,
neurological studies investigating the possibility of structural or
functional changes in the brains of those with gender dysphoria have as
yet been inconsistent or inconclusive,16 and it is difficult to see how
they could account for rapid changes of the nature seen in this and
similar studies.

The implications of our findings support those of other recent studies,
and together suggest that commissioners and others need to take into
account the accelerating trend in referrals when planning services.
People with gender dysphoria are distressed by long waiting lists and
perceived health inequalities.17 In order to cope with increased demand,
services need to provide multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary teams
and networks that work and collaborate in the provision of services for
people with gender dysphoria, as recommended in the Royal College of
Psychiatrists’ guidelines.18 Given the recommendations in ICD-1119 that
gender dysphoria be removed from the mental health section and renamed
gender incongruence, a further question arises as to which medical
discipline is most appropriate to provide these services.

We thank Achim Wolf for his invaluable help and advice on statistical
analysis and comments on the manuscript, and Dr Kate Saunders for her
work on the previous study.

**Josephine Fielding**, MA, MRCPsych, is an Academic Clinical Fellow ST3
in Psychiatry at Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford, UK; **Christopher Bass**, MA, MD, FRCPsych, is at the
Gender Clinic, Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford, UK.
