==============================================================================
Against the Stream: Generalised anxiety disorder (GAD) – a redundant diagnosis
==============================================================================

Peter TyrerCorrespondence to Peter Tyrer (p.tyrer@imperial.ac.uk)
:Date: 2018-4

:Abstract:
   The diagnosis of generalised anxiety disorder is a distraction of no
   value. It is highly unreliable, co-occurring with many other
   disorders of firmer diagnostic status, and has intrinsic connections
   to personality dysfunction. It is argued that classification would be
   heartily relieved to rid itself of this unnecessary appendage and for
   the symptom of anxiety to remain as a descriptive term only.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Generalised anxiety disorder (GAD) describes an excessive and
disproportionate anxiety or worry about minor matters that would not
trouble most people. In addition to mental tension, consequent muscle
pain and inability to relax, people with GAD almost always have bodily
symptoms such as shaking, nausea, tingling sensations, a variety of
gastrointestinal symptoms covering the full extremity from mouth to
anus, sweating, palpitations, breathlessness and other respiratory
symptoms. It is a recurrent disorder and often lasts for many years.
This is an easily recognisable syndrome that is found to be one of the
most common in population epidemiological surveys.

So why do I suggest that the letters GAD would better stand for godawful
diagnosis? It is because all the characteristics that make a diagnosis
useful in psychiatry – clear and reliable presenting symptoms,
predictable outcome and treatment response – are lacking. Each of the
components of the diagnosis has been systematically stripped away,
leaving an ill-defined core of excessive worry only, which makes the
diagnosis so grossly comorbid as to be useless. Let us take each of
these elements in turn.

.. _sec1:

Excessive and disproportionate anxiety
======================================

If there is sudden and dramatic anxiety occurring without obvious
reason, particularly when accompanied by bodily symptoms such as
palpitations and shortness of breath, the condition is described as
panic disorder. There is no difference between the symptoms of panic
disorder and GAD; only their speed of onset separates them. Panic
disorder is like an overpowered car that can go from zero to 60 mph in
5 s, while GAD is like a reconditioned Morris Minor that takes at least
a minute to get to 60 mph and then groans with it and about it, for
years. The removal of panic makes GAD into worry only.

.. _sec2:

Bodily symptoms
===============

.. _sec2a:

Mid-gastrointestinal – irritable bowel syndrome
-----------------------------------------------

Irritable bowel syndrome is now so well known that even the general
public refer to it as IBS. Most people with IBS are anxious(n.d.a) and
often have other bodily symptoms of anxiety, but these are subjugated to
the gastrointestinal ones. There are now a number of specific and
effective treatments for IBS that either ignore the generalised anxiety
components or describe them in terms that are specific to the organ
system concerned.

.. _sec2b:

Muscular pain and tension – fibromyalgia
----------------------------------------

Fibromyalgia is a complex word, but pain and tension are the most
prominent symptoms. There are many who doubt the value of this
diagnosis, but few can deny that it has taken two important symptoms
away from GAD.

.. _sec2c:

Other bodily symptoms – somatic symptom and somatoform disorders
----------------------------------------------------------------

There are many other bodily symptoms that have been given formal titles
in general medicine – non-cardiac chest pain, respiratory distress
syndrome, functional dysphagia – but they all are selective in picking
out one of the symptoms of GAD and ignoring the others. Somatoform
disorders are ripe for justified criticism,(n.d.b) but they are
overshadowed by a proto-diagnosis that is not liked for its aetiological
nihilism, ‘medically unexplained symptoms’; it gets a great deal of
interest and attention, especially in primary care, again taking a chunk
away from the GAD superstructure.

.. _sec3:

Worry about health matters
==========================

People with the symptoms of GAD whose main symptom is worry about their
health are now diagnosed with illness anxiety (in the USA) or health
anxiety (outside the USA), but as these describe the same condition we
should not get too concerned. In health anxiety, minor worries about
health are amplified into a full anxiety syndrome that includes all the
symptoms of GAD. One of the core parts of treatment is for the patient
to learn to appreciate that these ‘minor matters’ should remain minor,
so chipping away at another GAD limb.(n.d.c)

.. _sec4:

Recurrent disorder that may be lifelong
=======================================

Anxiety is a personality trait as well as a symptom, and it has been
appreciated for many years that anxious or avoidant personality features
are very common in people with GAD. ‘I've always been a worrier’ and ‘I
come from an anxious family’ are very common spontaneous comments made
by patients at assessment. So, when patients with GAD construct a life
chart of their anxiety, it is easy to identify a range of outcomes from
one episode only to dozens of clear-cut episodes over time, with many
others that may not reach the threshold for GAD. The patient often does
not make much of this diagnostic distinction, as the handicap created by
the symptoms at different times is very similar. But it makes prognosis
extremely difficult to determine.

There is so much overlap between personality status and GAD that a
strong case can be made for a condition called the ‘general neurotic
syndrome’ (or the ‘general nervous syndrome’ for those who abhor the
word ‘neurotic’), in which certain personality features such as
obsessionality and dependence, as well as anxiousness, contribute to the
biaxial diagnosis.(n.d.d)

.. _sec5:

Mixed anxiety–depression (cothymia)
===================================

“‘The study of anxiety and depressionTeaches us one important
lessonThough their separate study often pleasesWe must remember they are
not diseasesLike wind and rain in stormy weatherThese symptoms always
come together’(n.d.e)”

This is the real cruncher that fells GAD completely. Nosologists have
tried desperately for years to keep anxiety and depression apart,
insisting that they are distant relatives, not siblings, but the family
bonds are too strong and the two always hover together threateningly at
diagnostic gatherings. The analogy is appropriate, as the genetic
evidence has shown repeatedly that anxiety and depression have a common
genetic structure(n.d.f) and so should be thought of together, despite
the obvious differences in symptomatology.

Despite the valiant efforts of David Goldberg(n.d.g) and several others,
there has been great reluctance to accept mixed anxiety–depression as a
full syndromal diagnosis in either the DSM or ICD classifications. If
this was agreed, and it is becoming increasingly likely this will
happen, the separate diagnosis of GAD would be weakened severely.

.. _sec6:

Unreliability of diagnosis
==========================

Some of these criticisms could be overcome if clinicians were pleased
with the criteria for the diagnosis and used them consistently. But they
do not. In the recent field trials of DSM-5, the interrater reliability
of GAD was 0.20,(n.d.h) which the authors regard as ‘questionable’, but
which most clinicians would regard as unacceptable.

.. _sec7:

Replacement of GAD
==================

If we abandoned GAD, what would replace it? There are three
possibilities here. The first is to elevate mixed anxiety–depression to
a more robust diagnosis instead of an apologetic afterthought. But of
course, some would argue correctly that generalised anxiety can occur in
the absence of depression. The second is to be really bold and join up
the common personality characteristics of anxiety, dependence and
obsessionality with the mood disturbance to constitute a ‘general
neurotic syndrome’. This is a condition, usually combined with
depression, that runs a chronic course and has a worse long-term outcome
than either anxiety or depressive disorder alone,(n.d.d) especially when
the personality disorder is more severe.(n.d.i) The third option is to
think of GAD as an adjustment disorder.

.. _sec8:

Adjustment disorder
===================

Many people receive a diagnosis of GAD when they are somewhat anxiety
prone and then experience a major life event, especially one that is
perceived as threatening. Although for many years adjustment disorder
had been thought of as a subsyndromal diagnosis, and as a consequence
largely ignored,(n.d.j) it is now being examined more seriously as an
important and measurable element of the trauma-focused disorders.(n.d.k)
The importance of this in clinical practice is that that these life
event-precipitated forms of GAD could be treated by relatively brief
psychological therapies and be less likely to lead to long-term
iatrogenic disease.

.. _sec9:

Conclusions
===========

The old concept of ‘anxiety neurosis’ has gone and been replaced by a
host of different labels. In the course of this process, the original
core of free-floating anxiety coming from out of the blue and
surrounding each patient with a mist of uncertainty and threat has
become redundant. It is persistently comorbid with other conditions and
has no central elements that deserve separate classification. It should
be quietly laid to rest and little mourned.

**Peter Tyrer** is Emeritus Professor of Community Psychiatry, Centre
for Psychiatry, Imperial College, London, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.
