=====================
Rethinking engagement
=====================



David Gilbert

:Correspondence: David Gilbert
(davidgilbert43@yahoo.co.uk)

:date: 2019-2

:Abstract:
   People affected by health conditions bring insights and wisdom to
   transform healthcare – ‘jewels from the caves of suffering'. Yet
   traditional patient and public engagement relies on (child–parent)
   feedback or (adolescent–parent) ‘representative' approaches that fail
   to value this expertise and buffers patients' influence. This
   editorial outlines the emergence of ‘patient leadership' and work in
   the Sussex Musculoskeletal Partnership, its patient director (the
   first such role in the National Health Service) and a group of
   patient/carer partners, who are becoming equal partners in
   decision-making helping to reframe problems, generate insight, shift
   dynamics and change practice within improvement and governance work.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   David Gilbert is Director of *In*\ Health Associates Ltd, a small
   consultancy organisation that supports patient and public engagement.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

“‘\ *Some important principles are becoming well established: these are
the antiseptic power of transparency, a commitment to both personal and
shared responsibility and a renewed engagement with patients and the
public.*\ ’ Rethinking Regulation. (p. 21)1” Calls for patient
engagement in mental healthcare seem ubiquitous. There appears to be a
consensus that people who use services must now work alongside staff to
identify solutions to current healthcare challenges. However, if we are
serious about this renewed engagement, we need to think carefully. The
task is fourfold. First, we need to learn to value what patients can
bring, which I call ‘seeing patients as partners’. Second, we need to
change how engagement is done, by rethinking the engagement process.
Third, we need to support people's capabilities to better work together.
This includes developing the right skills. Finally, we must develop new
opportunities for patients to influence decision-making by creating new
roles.

.. _sec1:

Valuing what patients can bring – patients as partners
======================================================

People who have been affected by life-changing illness, injury or
disability can help. We bring jewels of wisdom and insight from the
caves of suffering2 – we know intimately what it is like to feel
vulnerable and powerless, the effect of pain and suffering on lives, the
primacy of healing relationships in care and what good and poor services
look like. This combination of vision, humanity and integrity are
essential components of high-quality leadership.

About 20 years ago, I was sitting on a psychiatric ward with nothing to
do – the lunch had been awful, the occupational therapist had been
sacked (so no activities that afternoon) and the ward seemed full of
screaming folk. A doctor strolled onto our bay and gave a perfunctory
nod before gingerly pulling on the curtain rail beside my bed. Even in
my disturbed state, I could see his behaviour was odder than mine. I
asked him what he was doing. ‘Just checking to see if you could do
anything stupid’, he replied, before walking back down the corridor. I
was left contemplating the sudden and unintended addition to my range of
‘treatment’ options.

Fast forward 10 years: I was Head of Patients and the Public at the
Commission for Health Improvement, the health inspectorate at the time
(predecessor of the Healthcare Commission and Care Quality Commission).
I was reading the National Patient Safety Agency standards on mental
healthcare (though I don't recall which one, exactly). One of them was
to decrease in-patient psychiatric suicides to zero by…. removing all
non-collapsible curtain rails. I remembered that doctor who had checked
my curtain rail. At about that time, three fellow in-patient friends of
mine died. One had choked to death on her food while unsupervised, after
she had left the psychiatric unit and gone to a nursing home (she had
earlier been paralysed from the neck down through a failed suicide
attempt). One had gone to his caravan and hanged himself. And one had
drowned himself in the local reservoir.

All those deaths had occurred away from the in-patient environment, so
the unit would have passed its inspection by having removed ligature
points. It might also have been congratulated on its risk policies. This
was ‘hitting the target and missing the point’. The unit had responded
to the caravan and reservoir deaths by locking the doors at 20.00 h.
This deprived me of my one visitor, a local chaplain who I could only
get to see at 21.00 h. Nights became a pressure cooker of aggravated
emotions – the consequence of this lack of trust and forced containment
felt unsafe. I wonder whether dialogue between us in-patients and staff
about what makes for a safe environment might have saved my friends.

Later, as part of a Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health
Research and Care Fellowship (North-West London), I undertook
qualitative research that revealed seven benefits of high-quality
patient engagement in improvement work
(https://futurepatientblog.com/2015/03/22/seven-things-that-patients-bring-the-benefits-of-patients-as-partners-for-change/).3
I found several distinct benefits. Having patients as partners in the
room will reframe the problems to be tackled. Focusing on what matters
to patients leads to pathway redesign with better awareness of access
issues, information and explanations needed at each stage, more humanity
and better customer care. Patient engagement also promotes the finding
of potential solutions to problems. Patients have the passion, insight,
imagination and freedom from institutionally limited thinking to ask
‘What if…’? They also widen the array of options for improvement and
change.

This process necessarily leads to changed relationships. With patients
in the room, others are given permission to explore. Dynamics change,
trusted relationships develop, people work together and move beyond
us–them conversations to dialogue. Shared decision-making emerges. There
are also individual benefits. Patients feel more confident, develop new
skills and build on those skills buried during times of illness – and
come to feel better. Staff gain too. Morale is lifted as conversations
become about what can be done, they can feel that we are truly all in
this together. This sort of work rehumanises healthcare. It should be
noted that this approach may also help staff who suffer emotional
distress. In mental health (and perhaps beyond) there has never been a
better time for people with health problems to work with staff
(clinicians and support staff alike) to change and improve approaches to
well-being and to explore our common humanity, rethink professional role
boundaries (the ‘them and us’ mentality) and approaches to safety and
risk.

The result is better quality decisions. If people know why decisions
have been made and been part of that process, this generates trust,
confidence and it becomes easier to build consensus. This has deep
implications for transparency, governance and accountability. I have
seen and heard about dozens of changes in policy and practice as a
result of patients being partners in improvement work: making guidelines
more flexible, better ways to tackle access and equalities, tackling
attitudes and behaviours, different ways of meeting unmet need, the list
is endless. There are even benefits beyond the project. When people see
the advantages of patients as partners for improvement and change in one
area, they will help spread it to others. It is a virtuous cycle with
implications for scaling up improvement processes, spreading good
practice and sustainability.

.. _sec2:

Changing how engagement is done
===============================

The traditional approaches to involving or engaging patients do not
work, and so we fail to value the jewels offered or to change the
‘currency’ of healthcare toward what matters. Patient and public
engagement, as traditionally conceived, buffers power by distancing
patients from decision-making. Thus, it maintains the status quo by
preserving the institutional authority of professional system leaders.
Ironically, when engagement is seen to fail, as it often does, this can
be attributed to the lack of value that patients bring rather than to
faulty mechanisms. The engagement industry focuses largely on inputs,
activities and processes (the methods of gathering data, how to capture
views, etc.) over impact and outcomes.

The approaches and methods used rely on two main styles. The first is
that of feedback: patients are invited to fill in questionnaires, attend
focus groups or tell their stories (if they are lucky) at board meetings
or the like. The focus is what happened to them in the past, mostly
about their experience of services (rather than living with a condition,
or about their lives beyond the institutional scope of interest), and
the meaning of their data is left to professionals to assess through
their own lenses based on their own assumptions and often narrow
institutionalised thinking (often what is seen as feasible rather than
necessary). Patients are not permitted to eyeball the data or bring
their own interpretations to it, let alone be partners in decisions
about what to do. This feedback approach mirrors traditional medical
paternalistic models – you tell us the symptoms and we will provide the
diagnosis and treatment. It is stuck in child–parent mode.

The second style is scrutiny. Whenever there is a governance committee,
an advisory group or the like, the call goes out for a lay
representative. I know a patient and public involvement lead who likened
her role to that of ‘lay rep pimp’. Without clarity of role, support or
training, a representative is expected to bring the patient perspective
to the decision-making table. I was once asked ‘so David, what do
patients think?’. What, all of them? I thought. In search of credibility
and leaning on what we know, we tell our stories, and half the people in
the room applaud this ‘telling truth to power’ and the other half fall
asleep (‘another patient with an axe to grind’ or ‘personal agenda’ they
mutter later in the corridors). If we wise up and come to the table next
time wearing a suit and tie, brandishing data, those that were awake
last time fall asleep and accuse us of ‘going native’. I have written
about this representative trap in more detail elsewhere.4

The consequence of failed representational mechanisms is that committees
lapse into a default ‘us and them’ mode. Frustrated, marginalised and
unprepared representatives start finger-wagging or fall silent. This is
adolescent–parent style engagement. If we are serious about partnership,
then we need to overhaul the engagement industry.

.. _sec3:

Supporting people's capabilities – the emergence of Patient Leaders
===================================================================

The past few years have seen the rise of new forms of engagement such as
online dialogue, experience-based co-design, health champions, peer
support and the like. Mark Doughty and I founded the Centre for Patient
Leadership to support patients (those with life-changing illness injury
or disability, and/or with long-term conditions) to be influential
change agents. CPL trained over 1000 patients to develop the
capabilities to work with professionals as equal partners. Further
information on patient leadership is available online
(http://www.inhealthassociates.co.uk/patient-leadership-articles-and-reports/).

Patient Leaders are those who have been affected by life-changing
illness, injury or disability and want to work with others in
partnership to influence change. This can, of course, include carers.
They can have many roles. Some are entrepreneurs like Michael Seres, a
patient who had undergone a bowel transplant and then invented a
Bluetooth sensor-enabled colostomy bag that does not overflow. He has
also led the way on remote-access technology to allow people to
communicate with their clinicians, and is Chief Executive of his own
company, Health 11. Others are campaigners or activists, online dialogue
specialists, improvement advisors or help organisations as governors or
are part of inspection processes. They work at local, regional and
national levels. (I am writing a book entitled ‘\ *The Jewel
Merchants*\ ’, which will be published in 2019, that is based on the
stories of 15 such people, including Alison Cameron, Ceinwen Giles,
Dominic Makuvachuma-Walker, Patrick Ojeer and Sibylle Erdmann).

There needs to be wider investment in skills development; indeed, one
might question why tens of millions of pounds is spent investing in the
capabilities of managerial and clinical leadership, and none on this
emerging army of people who could – and I think will – regenerate
healthcare. There is still a widespread assumption that system leaders
are professionals, but for Patient Leaders to achieve their full
potential, they also need the learning and development that enables them
to be true leaders.

Finally, there has to be an equal emphasis on creating the right
opportunities, for example, in governance, research and audit, service
improvement and training and education. This could be at a local or
national level, but needs to be where professionals are willing and able
to work as partners too. Opportunities must also be created at a senior
level. In much the same way that it is not considered appropriate that a
service purporting to deliver ‘women-centred care’ is led entirely by
men, in a few years' time it will seem odd that we have ever had a
patient-centred National Health Service (NHS) run entirely by clinical
and managerial leaders. The Sussex Musculoskeletal (MSK) Partnership
(Central Sussex) receives referrals from general practitioners of people
who have joint, muscle or bone problems. The service stretches from
Brighton and Hove, through mid-Sussex and Horsham to Crawley. Clinicians
screen referrals, and many are offered an appointment at our specialist
clinics, with advanced MSK practitioners or physiotherapists (often
working alongside consultants and others, such as psychologists).The
Partnership is a lead accountable provider. It comprises the Sussex NHS
Community Trust, Sussex Partnership Trust, HERE (a social enterprise)
and The Horder Centre (a charity). In Autumn of 2015, three clinical
commissioning groups pooled a total of £50 m per year for 5 years to us,
so we could run a better system for people who use services. We want to
get it right first time, so that people do not have to go here, there
and everywhere for different diagnostic and treatment interventions. And
we, like the NHS rhetoric always says, want patients to be at the heart
of what we do.

.. _sec4:

New opportunities – the patient director and patient partners
=============================================================

The Sussex MSK Partnership (Central) made a brave decision to appoint
the first patient director – someone who has had experience of a
life-changing illness, injury or disability (in my case, mental health
problems) and can harness these experiences at senior decision-making
levels. This role ensures that patient leadership is embedded at a
senior level, within an executive team that includes a clinical director
and managing director. This models shared decision-making at corporate
level. The patient director's role is to help the Partnership focus on
what matters. This includes embedding patient-centred cultures, systems
and processes such that they become ‘hardwired’ and making sure we learn
from, and act on what patients’ think about services. The patient
director will also support patients to enable them to be influential and
valued partners in decision-making.

Being a patient director has enabled me to experiment with a different
approach to engagement. For example, we have eight patient and carer
partners. They bring professional and personal wisdom alongside their
experiences of using our services. Patient and carer partners are not
representatives or there to provide feedback, but are ‘critical friends’
who check assumptions, ask questions, provide insights into reframing
issues or identifying problems, change dynamics and model collaborative
leadership.

My role is to broker opportunities in improvement or governance and
support them to ensure they have the capacity and capability to be
effective. Patient and carer partners augment other involvement and
feedback work. This work has been developed during a period of intense
operational pressures. During the past 3 years, the Partnership has
transformed the way MSK services are delivered (through a lead
accountable provider model – see box) and patient partners have been
alongside as we have done so. We wanted them to be partners in every MDT
that oversees quality in each of our musculoskeletal pathways
(orthopaedics, rheumatology, pain management and physiotherapy).

The first step was for the patient director to identify opportunities
for meaningful engagement and ensure their presence in improvement and
redesign work. Then, to be clear that they were more than storytellers
or to feed back on their experiences (we had other data for that), they
stayed in the room, proving themselves well able to reframe problems,
generate new solutions, model collaborative leadership and shift
dynamics. Patient partners have been involved in seven major improvement
programmes: pain services redesign, fibromyalgia pathways, development
of patient reported outcome measures, plans for shared decision-making,
administrative systems, support for receptionists and call handlers and
integration of physical and mental health provisions.

An early experience helped us to demonstrate benefits. We were
discussing how to communicate with patients about booking appointments.
We were receiving lots of calls to cancel or change inconvenient
appointments that we had booked for people. A woman who had been through
our service, told us that our team phoned at inconvenient times to book
appointments. She suggested that, instead, we send opt-in appointment
letters and put her in the driving seat. Let her phone back when she had
her diary in front of her and she could plan out her week. We
experimented with the idea and it was successful, with patients and call
handlers alike delighted with how it worked. If this approach were
rolled out, we would save an estimated 3500 cancelled appointments per
year.

Slowly, they have become trusted equals. It has not been easy and is
dependent on clarity of role, shared understanding of purpose,
demonstrating benefits and the perennial time, money, space, trust… all
things the NHS has precious little of. We are ready for the next step –
for partners to move from an improvement role into a more steady-state
governance role. However, given inevitable resource constraints, we
realise that we cannot support two patient partners in each of our eight
MDTs. So patient partners have come up with a different approach: the
idea of a pilot special MDT. This might model the sort of reflective
dialogue they want to demonstrate and focus on issues of quality and
patient experience. We would evaluate the work and see whether it could
be a model for other pathways. Members of the hip and knee pathway MDT
seem keen on the idea, and next month we will be talking to them about
how it could work.

We will also discuss whether and how we can ensure that patients are a
part of regular MDTs. Several other clinical leads are watching this
experiment with interest, and it could pave the way for a different
model of reflective governance across the Partnership. It has taken 3
years for this work to take off – the role of patient director is still
novel, and this particular model of patient partnership is an
experiment. It has taken months of building relationships, doing the
ground work and making the case for a different model of engagement.

In the current frenzy surrounding NHS policy and practice, it is
worthwhile remembering that long-term improvements take time, space and
trust. There are no quick fixes. Our work in Sussex demonstrates one
novel approach to the challenges of rethinking engagement. It is
predicated on the four steps necessary to renew engagement – to value
what people bring, establish different mechanisms for dialogue, to
develop people's capabilities and provide new opportunities for the new
breed of patient (or carer) leaders. Looking back, I now wonder what
might have happened if a patient director had been around when I was on
the psychiatric unit. Might my three friends still be alive?

**David Gilbert** is Director of *In*\ Health Associates and Patient
Director at Sussex Musculoskeletal Partnership (Central Sussex), UK.
