---
author:
- Daniel Dunleavy
date: 2018-6
institute:
- "Florida State University College of Social Work; email:
  <djd09e@fsu.edu>"
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
title: Rational antidepressant use
---

In her contribution to the 'Against the Stream' series, Dr Moncrieff^1^
articulates the case for the drug-centred model of antidepressant
action. She notes that antidepressants do not typically outperform
placebo in well-designed studies (particularly in rare instances where
an active placebo is used as a control^2^), have little clinical effect
and can cause serious adverse effects. Having made the case that
antidepressants are not 'specific' antidepressant agents, she makes some
comments about their use in clinical practice. I would like to offer a
few remarks about these issues, including some musings about what
'rational antidepressant use' might look like.

Modern psychiatric practice has seen the rise and fall of several
promising antidepressant agents (the monoamine oxidase inhibitors, the
tricyclic antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs)). Recent efforts include testing the possible antidepressant
properties of ketamine. But are these efforts futile? Perhaps yes,
perhaps no. A truly specific antidepressant drug (if one is
ontologically possible) appears to be a pipedream, given current
diagnostic limitations. Our categorisation of major depressive disorder
is highly heterogeneous,^3^ creating a disjunctive category of
cognitive, behavioural and biological symptoms that do not reliably
cluster together. Even if any of our current drugs had specificity for
'depression', this would be extremely difficult to uncover in clinical
practice or research settings. As a result, drug development will be
prone to ideological, as opposed to scientific, revolutions.^4^

Should we therefore abandon antidepressants as a treatment modality? As
long as we are honest with our patients about our current state of
knowledge, I think not. Drug use has always been an integral part of
human life,^5^ helping to alleviate life\'s various physical, emotional
and existential pains. Antidepressants are no different in this respect.
While researchers continue the search for a discrete condition called
'depression', drugs such as the SSRIs can be exploited for particular
patient complaints. Antidepressants can cause emotional blunting,
sedation, activation and decreased libido, among other things. Some have
a proclivity towards one effect more than others. These effects can be
exploited to relieve particular problems (e.g. sedation to alleviate
insomnia, or emotional numbing to transcend an episode of intense
anxiety or distress), without pretence towards a yet-to-be discovered
condition. A rational provider would match a drug\'s effects to the
patient\'s complaints, irrespective of diagnosis (or drug class); and
would remain vigilant to the development of any adverse effects or
deterioration of condition, start at the lowest recommended dose, and
withdraw the patient from the drug as soon as possible. Psychosocial
interventions can remain an important part of treatment, in many cases
being the first treatment of choice. Antidepressants, like all drugs,
are neither angels nor demons. They should be used selectively and
thoughtfully, when used at all.
