=======================================================================================
Prevalence of vitamin D deficiency in adult patients admitted to a psychiatric hospital
=======================================================================================



Dipen Patel
Manjunath MinajagiCorrespondence to Dipen Patel (dpatel12@nhs.net)
:Date: 2018-6

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Vitamin D deficiency is increasing in the general population, and is
   linked with physical and mental illness. However, evidence on its
   prevalence in people with mental illness is limited. This study
   investigated vitamin D deficiency in 104 adult patients admitted to a
   psychiatric hospital in the UK.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Forty-nine per cent were vitamin D deficient (serum 25(OH)D <30
   nmol/L), and a further 42.3% were vitamin D insufficient (<50
   nmol/L). On admission, 8.7% of patients were vitamin D sufficient
   (>50 nmol/L). There were no statistically significant differences in
   mean serum vitamin D between different subgroups of mental illness.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Vitamin D deficiency is highly prevalent among individuals with
   severe mental illness admitted to hospital. Assessment and treatment
   of vitamin D deficiency should be considered in in-patients to
   protect musculoskeletal health. Further epidemiological and
   intervention studies are needed to investigate the role of vitamin D
   in the pathophysiology of mental disorders.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

It has been known for many years that severe vitamin D deficiency
increases the risk of metabolic bone disease, particularly rickets and
osteomalacia, and that moderate vitamin D deficiency leads to an
increased risk of osteoporosis and fractures.1 More recently,
observational studies have provided growing evidence of an association
between vitamin D deficiency and an increased risk for many chronic
diseases, including autoimmune diseases, some cancers, cardiovascular
disease, infectious disease and type 2 diabetes.2 The serum level of
25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) is the most accurate reflection of an
individual's vitamin D status. The National Osteoporosis Society's
guidelines define serum 25(OH)D levels <30 nmol/L as deficient,
30–50 nmol/L as inadequate in some people, and >50 nmol/L as sufficient
for almost the whole population.3 Vitamin D receptors are found in
nearly all tissues of the body, including both neuronal and glial cells
in the central nervous system and multiple areas of the human brain,
including the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, cingulate gyrus, thalamus,
hypothalamus and substantia nigra, many of which have been implicated in
the pathophysiology of mental illnesses such as depression and
psychosis.4 At a molecular level, vitamin D is known to have numerous
roles in nervous system health and disease. Animal models have increased
our knowledge and understanding of the mechanisms by which vitamin D
deficiency affects brain development and its subsequent influence on
adult psychiatric and neurological disease. There is evidence that
vitamin D has important roles in neurodevelopment, neuroprotection and
neuroplasticity, not only by exerting its biological function directly,
but also by influencing the expression of genes at a cellular level.5
Evidence on its prevalence in people with mental illness, in the UK, is
limited. This study investigated the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency
among adult patients being admitted to a psychiatric hospital in the UK,
to ascertain how widespread and severe it is among our patients, and to
further assess whether there are stronger associations with certain
subgroups of illness such as depressive or psychotic disorders.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

This was a cross-sectional study, designed as a pilot, to estimate the
prevalence of vitamin D deficiency in patients admitted to a psychiatric
hospital, and to ascertain any associations between severity of vitamin
D deficiency and severity and subclass of mental illness, in addition to
environmental and social demographic factors.

Ethical approval was gained from the National Health Service (NHS)
Health Research Authority via the Edgbaston Research Ethics Committee,
reference 15/WM/0434. Management permission was sought and gained from
the host research and development department at Leicestershire
Partnership NHS Trust.

A total of 153 patients were admitted to the general adult wards of the
unit, between 17 February 2016 and 23 April 2016, and were eligible for
inclusion in the study. One hundred and thirty seven individuals had
capacity to consent, of which 104 provided informed written consent.
Vitamin D levels were requested alongside standard admission blood tests
on serum samples collected by venepuncture. Plasma vitamin D levels of
serum samples were analysed in the local pathology laboratory, using
Siemens Centaur XP analysers with acridinium ester chemiluminescence
technology.

Vitamin D deficiency was defined as a serum 25(OH)D level of below
30 nmol/L, insufficiency was defined as a serum 25(OH)D level of
30 nmol/L or above but less than 50 nmol/L, and vitamin D sufficiency
was defined as a serum 25(OH)D level of 50 nmol/L or above.

Primary clinical diagnosis using ICD-10 criteria, ethnicity, gender, age
and length of stay were subsequently obtained from participants'
electronic in-patient medical records.

Data were initially input and analysed using Microsoft Excel, and
further descriptive analysis was conducted on IBM SPSS version 20. The
Mann–Whitney U test was used to compare means between different samples.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

A total of 104 participants were included in the study; 51% (*N* = 53)
were male and 49% (*N* = 51) were female. As shown in `Table
1 <#tab01>`__, the mean age of the cohort was 40.6 years, and the median
age was 39.5 with a range from 18 to 79. In terms of ethnicity, 76%
(*N* = 79) of participants were White British, 11.5% (*N* = 12) were
British Asian, 5.8% (*n* = 6) were Black British, 3.8% (*N* = 4) were of
any other White background and 2.9% (*N* = 3) were of other Asian
background. Table 1Demographic and clinical characteristics of the
population sampleDemographic and clinical characteristics of population
sample (*N* = 104)\ **Age,
years**\ Mean40.6Median39.5Range61Minimum18Maximum79\ **GenderFrequency%**\ Female5149Male5351Total104100\ **EthnicityFrequency%**\ White
British7976British Asian1211.5Black British65.8Any other White
Background43.8Other Asian Background32.9Total104100\ **Primary
diagnosisFrequency%**\ Depressive episode2927.9Bipolar affective
disorder1817.3Schizophrenia1817.3Personality disorder1413.5Acute or
unspecified psychotic disorder76.7Psychoactive substance-related
disorders76.7Schizoaffective disorder54.8Anxiety disorder32.9Delusional
disorder21.9Eating disorder11Total104100

In the sample studied, mean serum 25(OH)D was 31.9 nmol/L, and median
serum 25(OH)D was 32.0 nmol/L, with a range from <15 nmol/L to
81 nmol/L.

There were no statistically significant differences noted in mean serum
25(OH)D associated with gender, age or primary diagnosis. As shown in
`Table 2 <#tab02>`__, individuals with a primary diagnosis of
schizophrenia were noted to have the lowest mean serum 25(OH)D of
29.5 nmol/L, while those with bipolar affective disorder had the highest
mean serum 25(OH)D level of 33.8 nmol/L. Mean serum 25(OH)D was higher
in participants of White British ethnicity compared with those of other
ethnic backgrounds. Table 2Mean vitamin D in subgroupsSerum vitamin D,
nmol/L\ *N*\ s.d.\ **Whole
sample**\ Mean31.910413.5Median32Minimum15Maximum81\ **Gender**\ Female32.15114.1Male31.75313.2\ **Primary
diagnosis**\ Bipolar affective disorder33.81817.2Personality
disorder33.51415.8Depressive
episode31.4299.4Schizophrenia29.51810.3\ **Ethnicity**\ White
British33.27913.7British Asian28.51213.9Black British28.8614Any other
White background23.546.2Other Asian background28310.4

As shown in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__, 49% (*N* = 51) of participants were
vitamin D deficient (serum 25(OH)D <30 nmol/L), and a further 42%
(*N* = 44) were vitamin D insufficient (<50 nmol/L); 8.7% (*N* = 9) of
participants were vitamin D sufficient (>50 nmol/L). Fig. 1Percentage of
participants found to be vitamin D deficient, insufficient and
sufficient (*n* = 104).

Although not statistically significant, mean length of stay in
participants with vitamin D deficiency (<30 nmol/L) was 45.4 days, 8
days longer than those without deficiency (*P* = 0.23).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

To our knowledge, this is the first study to assess prevalence of
vitamin D deficiency in patients admitted to a general adult psychiatry
unit in the UK. We found a very high prevalence of vitamin D deficiency
in patients with mental illness being admitted to psychiatric hospital,
with a total of 49% being deficient and a further 42% being insufficient
in vitamin D.

The reported prevalence in our study was greater than that found in
psychiatric in-patient samples in Australia (58% less than 50 nmol/L),6
New Zealand (74% less than 50 nmol/L)7 and North America (52.3% less
than 50 nmol/L),8 and in an out-patient sample in Northern Europe (56%
less than 50 nmol/L).9

The prevalence of vitamin D deficiency in our study was higher, and the
mean serum vitamin D considerably lower, than in the general population
in the UK. Results from the National Diet and Nutrition Survey reported
a mean serum 25(OH)D of 34.8 nmol/L and a 39.3% rate of deficiency
(<25 nmol/L) in 19–64 year olds between the months of January and March,
while individuals 65 years and older had a mean serum 25(OH)D of
40.5 nmol/L and a 29.3% rate of deficiency.10

In this study, although the differences were not statistically
significant, of the four most common diagnostic groups, we found that
participants in our sample with a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia had
the lowest mean serum vitamin D of 29.5 nmol/L. This finding has been
replicated in other studies. A trend towards lower vitamin D levels in
individuals with schizophrenia has been reported in a study of
psychiatric out-patients,11 while a mini meta-analysis of seven studies
found that individuals with schizophrenia had a medium effect size for
lower vitamin D compared with healthy controls, and also a trend for
lower vitamin D levels in comparison with other psychoses.12

The UK has an insufficient intensity of ultraviolet sunlight to enable
cutaneous synthesis of vitamin D over the winter months, between October
and April, thus resulting in the vitamin D status of the UK population
peaking in September but then falling continually until the start of the
following summer in May, when levels begin to rise again.13
Historically, vitamin D deficiency has been linked to metabolic bone
disease, specifically serum concentrations of <20 nmol/L being
associated with clinical osteomalacia in adults and rickets in
children.14

It is unclear why the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency found in this
study was higher compared with the general population. In addition to
cutaneous synthesis during the summer months, vitamin D can be obtained
from the diet, but only a few foods such as fatty fish are good sources
of vitamin D.1 Although institutionalisation in this case would not be a
contributing factor, as the participants were newly admitted, it could
be hypothesised that people with mental illness are less likely to be
spending time outdoors in sunshine and thus produce less endogenous
vitamin D over the summer months.

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence and Department of
Health guidance identifies the need for vitamin D supplements to be
taken by certain at-risk groups, namely all pregnant and breastfeeding
women, particularly teenagers and young women; infants and children
under 5 years old and people over 65 years old; people who have low or
no exposure to the sun, i.e. housebound individuals; and people who have
darker skin, for example, people of African, African–Caribbean and South
Asian origin.

In a change to previous advice, Public Health England revised its
guidelines in 2016, based on a report by the Scientific Advisory
Committee on Nutrition. The report recognised the growing prevalence of
vitamin D deficiency and is now recommending a reference nutrient intake
for vitamin D of 10 μg/day (400 IU/day) throughout the year, for
everyone in the general UK population aged 4 years and above, to ensure
that the majority of the UK population has enough vitamin D to protect
musculoskeletal health year-round.15

Our study has some limitations in terms of its generalisability to the
wider population. A total of 104 participants were included,
representing a relatively small sample size. Of 153 potential
participants, informed consent was obtained from 104 individuals, which
could have affected results. As the study was cross-sectional in design,
no firm conclusions can be made regarding vitamin D deficiency, mental
illness and the direction of causality if present. Our study was also
limited to participants being admitted to a single unit. Finally, the
study was conducted during the winter months; thus, the reported
prevalence of vitamin D deficiency would be affected by sun exposure if
the study was conducted towards the end of summer.

Based on this study, in which almost half of the participants admitted
to psychiatric hospital were found to be deficient in vitamin D,
assessment and treatment of vitamin D deficiency by oral supplementation
should be considered to protect musculoskeletal health, alongside other
physical health interventions, in patients with mental illness admitted
to psychiatric wards.

The NHS Five Year Forward View for mental health has recognised the
importance of preventable physical health problems in people with severe
mental illness,16 and thus musculoskeletal health should be optimised
where possible.

At the current time, there is insufficient evidence to draw any firm
conclusions regarding an association between vitamin D deficiency and
non-musculoskeletal health outcomes, including mental illness. More
research in the form of larger epidemiological and intervention studies
are needed to investigate the association between vitamin D and mental
health outcomes; indeed, randomised controlled trials are planned that
will hopefully shed more light on this intriguing area in the future.

We would like to thank Dr David Clarke, Operational Lead (Research and
Development), Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust, for his invaluable
support and guidance.

**Dipen Patel** is a clinical fellow in Psychiatry and **Manjunath
Minajagi** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at Bradgate Mental Health Unit,
Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust, Leicester, UK.
