---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  A cognitive--behavioural therapy in-patient treatment model for adults
  with severe anorexia nervosa was developed and evaluated, and outcomes
  were compared with the previous treatment model and other published
  outcomes from similar settings.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  This study showed the Pathways to Recovery outcomes were positive in
  terms of improvements in body mass index and psychopathology.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  Adults with anorexia nervosa can achieve good outcomes despite longer
  illness duration and comorbidities.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a4}

  A.B., A.C. and L.H. work at The Retreat where the Pathways to Recovery
  were developed.
author:
- Andrea Brown
- Richard Jenkinson
- Julia Coakes
- Annette Cockfield
- Tish O\'Brien
- Louise HallCorrespondence to Andrea Brown
  (<abrown@theretreatyork.org.uk>)
date: 2018-6
institute:
- 1The Retreat, York, UK
- 2University of Sheffield, UK
- 3Insight Eating, Leeds, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
title: "Pathways to Recovery: development and evaluation of a
  cognitive--behavioural therapy in-patient treatment programme for
  adults with anorexia nervosa"
---

There is very limited guidance available regarding effective,
evidence-based, in-patient treatment for those people with severe
anorexia nervosa who cannot be managed safely due to high medical and/or
psychosocial risk and/or who have not responded to treatment in
out-patient services.^1^^,^^2^ Treasure *et al*^3^ have recently
proposed that severe and enduring anorexia nervosa (SE-AN) may be
defined by an illness duration of seven or more years and that
interventions should be matched to illness 'stage'. This proposed
'staging model' helpfully emphasises the importance of early
intervention for people with recent onset anorexia nervosa. However, the
suggestion of shifting focus away from recovery towards enhancing
quality of life and harm minimisation for those with more enduring
difficulties^4^^,^^5^ has the potential to fuel pessimism with regards
to outcomes for this group of patients and the clinicians who work with
them.

# Aims {#sec1-1}

This article aims to describe the development of a new treatment
programme called Pathways to Recovery: an innovative
cognitive--behavioural therapy (CBT)-based approach for the in-patient
treatment of people with eating disorders, including those with
significant chronicity and comorbidity.

The following questions are addressed: •What is the outcome for patients
treated by Pathways to Recovery?•How do the outcomes of patients treated
by Pathways to Recovery compare with the outcomes of patients treated by
the previous approach that used body mass index (BMI) guidelines (i.e.
treatment as usual (TAU))?•How do the outcomes of patients treated by
Pathways to Recovery compare with the outcomes in comparable in-patient
settings?

# Method {#sec2}

## Development of the Pathways to Recovery model {#sec2-1}

The model was developed in a regional specialist eating disorder
in-patient unit for women aged 18 and over with complex eating disorders
and comorbidities including personality disorders, substance misuse and
autistic spectrum disorders.

A CBT approach was adopted in response to evidence that CBT was the most
effective treatment for bulimia nervosa^6^ and it had the potential to
be effective trans-diagnostically with other types of eating
disorders^7^ and a wide range of comorbidities. The collaborative CBT
approach was not compatible with the pre-existing framework of using BMI
to inform treatment and evaluate progress (i.e. the BMI guidelines).^8^
The Pathways to Recovery model was developed as a solution by a
multidisciplinary group of clinicians with consultation with patients,
their families/carers and the wider staff team. Pathways to Recovery
incorporated key CBT principles and enabled the whole staff team to work
collaboratively and coherently in an integrated and holistic way with
each patient.

The Pathways to Recovery model was piloted and evaluated independently
using qualitative methodology. Overall, Pathways to Recovery was found
to be acceptable and a positive alternative to BMI guidelines.^9^

Pathways to Recovery broadly defines recovery as learning to live with
eating-disordered thoughts without using eating-disordered behaviours.
Emphasis is thus placed on behavioural change while developing a
repertoire of CBT skills to manage difficult thoughts and feelings. The
programme consists of seven parallel pathways: physical monitoring,
psychological, physical activity, meaningful living, meaningful eating,
self-catering and leave ([Fig. 1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}). Progression
up the pathways corresponds to the person\'s stage of recovery, moving
from medical stabilisation through to gaining skills and concluding with
the transferring skills stage. Progression is discussed collaboratively
at weekly multidisciplinary team meetings and regular care programme
approach reviews, which are run transparently with the patient present
throughout the meeting. CBT principles, methods and techniques are
central to each pathway; for example, the concepts of hierarchies,
graded exposure, behavioural experiments, problem solving and goal
setting are used. A guided discovery approach is encouraged for both
staff and patients. In addition to the poster which delineates the
pathways ([Fig. 1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}), each patient receives a
folder containing information about every step of each pathway. The
information includes the aims of each pathway and defines what the
person will be expected to work on at each stage. A complete set of
supporting documentation is also provided, which includes: planning and
evaluation forms for meals, self-catering, activity and leave. The
emphasis is on learning from experiences, enabling the patient to take
ownership of their recovery and to progress to higher levels of the
pathways. As the person progresses, the level of independence increases
and they receive less support from staff. This leads to increasing
periods of home leave where the person can practice the skills they have
learnt. The benefit of this is that patients and their families are able
to gain confidence that they will be able to continue using their skills
independently once they leave the programme. Fig. 1The Pathways to
Recovery poster.

## Participants and procedure {#sec2-2}

Clinical outcome data were reviewed from admission and discharge of 161
patients admitted consecutively from July 2008 (when routine data
collection was initiated) until April 2015 (when the data were
analysed). All patients provided written informed consent at the start
of their admission for their data to be used anonymously for research
and service evaluation purposes. This project did not require a research
ethics committee review as it was a service evaluation project using
outcome data routinely collected as a normal part of clinical practice
on the unit.

Although data were collected for all patients admitted during this time
frame, only data related to patients with a diagnosis of anorexia
nervosa at admission were included (*n* = 123). Patients with additional
comorbid diagnoses were included.

Further exclusion criteria were as follows: currently receiving
treatment in the unit (*n* = 13), previous admission already included in
the analysis (*n* = 15), present at the time the service model changed
and thus received treatment under both models (*n* = 11) and did not
have two or more sets of outcome data (*n* = 10). A total of 74
participants were therefore included. Of these participants, 25 were
treated using the former BMI-guidelines approach (hereafter designated
TAU) and 49 were treated using the Pathways to Recovery programme
(designated Pathways to Recovery). Treatment completion was not
routinely documented, so all patients were included in the data analysis
providing they had at least one data set in addition to admission data.

## Measures {#sec2-3}

The key areas targeted by in-patient admission were symptoms of eating
disorder, general psychological distress and weight restoration. To
evaluate change in these areas, the following outcome measures commonly
used in eating disorder research were selected for their clinical
utility:

Eating Disorder Examination -- Questionnaire (EDE-Q): A self-report
measure assessing eating disorder symptoms over the previous 28
days.^10^ This instrument has good reliability and validity.^11^ High
scores indicate greater eating disorder psychopathology.

Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation Outcome Measure (CORE-OM): A
widely used, generic, 34-item self-report measure of psychological
distress. This instrument has good reliability and validity.^12^ High
scores indicate greater psychological distress.

BMI: BMI (weight/height^2^) was recorded for each patient at admission
and at discharge.

## Statistical methods {#sec2-4}

Independent samples *t*-tests were used to compare the demographic and
clinical variables between the two groups at admission. To evaluate the
efficacy of Pathways to Recovery, comparisons between admission and
discharge scores were assessed in the Pathways to Recovery group using
paired sample *t*-tests. Cohen\'s *d* effect sizes are presented to
enable comparisons across outcomes. To put any detected changes into a
clinical context, outcomes were also compared to evidence-based
guidelines and cut-off points. Comparisons between the TAU and Pathways
to Recovery groups were assessed using a 2 (group: TAU and Pathways to
Recovery) × 2 (time: admission and discharge) mixed design ANOVA, with
repeated measures on the time factor. Data were explored to check
assumptions of multivariate analysis. All statistics were carried out
using SPSS version 22.0 for Windows. Missing data were dealt with using
pairwise deletion.

# Results {#sec3}

## Sample characteristics {#sec3-1}

The demographic characteristics and clinical features of the two groups
are shown in [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}. There were no
significant differences between the two groups in terms of these
variables. The mean age of the overall sample was 27 years (range 18--57
years). Of the participants, 67% had previously been admitted for at
least one specialist eating disorder in-patient treatment. The mean
duration of anorexia nervosa was more than 9 years (range 0--31 years).
More than half (51.9%) of the participants had an illness duration of 7
years or more, thus meeting the criterion proposed by Treasure *et
al*^3^ for SE-AN. On admission the participants were significantly
underweight: 86% had a BMI lower than 16 kg/m^2^ and nearly one third
(31%) had a BMI lower than 13 kg/m^2^. More than half (54%) of the
participants had at least one comorbid diagnosis including borderline
personality disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive
compulsive disorder, generalised anxiety disorder, alcohol and substance
misuse, autistic spectrum disorder, depression and gender dysphoria.
Table 1Demographic and clinical features of the sample by groupTAU
(*n* = 25)Pathways to Recovery (*n* = 49)Test*P*-valueAge at admission
(years)27.64 (8.12)26.65 (9.27)*t* (72) = 0.45*P* = 0.65Ethnicity*X*²
(1) = 1.05Fisher\'s *P* = 0.55White (British)25 (100%)47
(96%)Black/African/Caribbean/Black British0 (0%)2 (4%)Age at onset of
illness16.07 (4.23)17.44 (7.01)*t* (52) = −0.71*P* = 0.48Length of
illness at admission (years)11.97 (10.19)8.05 (6.91)*t*
(52) = 1.63Levene\'s *P* = 0.11Previous in-patient admissions1.25
(0.97)0.88 (0.95)*t* (59) = 1.42*p* = 0.16[^1]

## Question 1: What is the outcome for patients treated by Pathways to Recovery? {#sec3-2}

For participants who did not complete the programme, the last available
set of outcome data was used as discharge data ([Table
2](#tab02){ref-type="table"}). BMI data were available for all patients
as this was recorded weekly. However, patients who dropped out within
the first four weeks of their admission only completed one set of
self-report questionnaires and were therefore excluded from the
analysis. Table 2Clinical characteristics for Pathways to Recovery
groupAdmissionDischargeBMI14.14 (1.65) *n* = 4918.73 (2.3) *n* = 49
*P* \< 0.001CORE-OM22.85 (8.22) *n* = 4515.59 (8.30) *n* = 45
*P* \< 0.001EDE-Q3.97 (1.59) *n* = 432.49 (1.42) *n* =  43
*P* \< 0.001[^2]

There was a significant response to Pathways to Recovery in terms of
improvements in BMI, general psychological distress and symptoms of
eating disorder. At the point of discharge, the mean BMI had
significantly increased from 14.1 (s.d. 1.7) to 18.7 (s.d. 2.3; *t*
(48) = 13.32; *P* \< 0.001; *d* = 2.78) for patients in the Pathways to
Recovery group. A significant proportion of the group achieved a BMI
≥18.5 kg/m^2^ at discharge: 67% (33/49). The mean CORE-OM score
decreased by 7.2 (*t* (44) = 4.50, *P* \< 0.001, *d* = 0.88). On
average, CORE-OM scores remained above the clinical cut-off point (10)
at discharge; however, nearly one quarter of the patients (24.5%) were
discharged with scores below the clinical cut-off point. The mean global
EDE-Q score at discharge was also significantly lower compared to
admission (*t* (42) = 5.04, *P* \< 0.001, *d* = 0.93). The mean EDE-Q
score had reduced to \<1 s.d. above the community norm at discharge
(mean = 1.55, s.d. = 1.21)^10^ compared to 2 s.d. above the community
norm at admission. Almost one quarter of the patients (24.5%) had a
global EDE-Q score of within 1 s.d. of the community norm at discharge,
representing minimal eating disorder psychopathology.^13^

## Question 2: How do the outcomes of patients treated by Pathways to Recovery compare with the outcomes of patients treated by TAU? {#sec3-3}

There were no significant differences at admission between the two
groups on any of the three measures used ([Table
3](#tab03){ref-type="table"}). Table 3Clinical characteristics at
admission and discharge, by groupTAUPathways to
RecoveryBMIAdmission13.55 (1.89), *N* = 2514.14 (1.65),
*N* = 49Discharge16.94 (2.32), *N* = 2518.73
(2.3),[^a^](#tfn3_1){ref-type="fn"}^,^[^b^](#tfn3_2){ref-type="fn"}
*N* = 49CORE-OMAdmission20.87 (7.59), *N* = 2122.85 (8.22),
*N* = 45Discharge17.09 (9.78), *N* = 2115.59
(8.30),[^a^](#tfn3_1){ref-type="fn"} *N* = 45EDE-QAdmission3.60 (1.68),
*N* = 203.97 (1.59), *N* = 43Discharge2.50 (1.85), *N* = 202.49
(1.42),[^a^](#tfn3_1){ref-type="fn"} *N* = 43[^3][^4][^5]

A mixed ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of time (*F* (1,
72) = 221.67, *P* \< 0.001) and group (*F* (1, 72) = 7.87, *P* = 0.01)
on BMI. Both of these main effects were qualified by a significant
interaction (*F* (1, 72) = 5.01, *P* = 0.03), which indicated that the
change in BMI as a result of time was different between the two groups
([Fig. 2](#fig02){ref-type="fig"}). Fig. 2Effect of treatment on BMI.

The effect of treatment on BMI was thus greater in the Pathways to
Recovery group than in the TAU group. To further explore this,
simple-effect analyses were conducted. Independent *t*-tests revealed
that although there was not a significant difference in BMI between the
groups at admission (*t* (72) = −1.37, *P* = 0.17), the Pathways to
Recovery group had a significantly greater mean BMI than the TAU group
at discharge (*t* (72) = −3.16, *P* = 0.002).

A mixed ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of time (*F* (1,
64) = 16.89, *P* \< 0.001) on CORE-OM. The main effect of group on
CORE-OM was not significant (*F* (1, 64) = 0.02, *P* = 0.89), nor was
there a significant interaction between time and group (*F* (1,
64) = 1.68, *P* = 0.20).

A mixed ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of time (*F* (1,
61) = 25.67, *P* \< 0.001) on EDE-Q. The main effect of group on EDE-Q
was not significant (*F* (1, 61) = 0.28, *P* = 0.60), nor was there a
significant interaction between time and group (*F* (1, 61) = 0.57,
*P* = 0.46).

The mean length of admission was 27.4 (s.d. = 14.55) weeks for TAU and
33.2 (s.d. = 17.47) weeks for Pathways to Recovery.

## Question 3: How do the outcomes of patients treated by Pathways to Recovery compare with the outcomes in similar in-patient settings? {#sec3-4}

The outcomes for Pathways to Recovery were compared to those reported by
Dalle Grave *et al*,^13^ who describe findings from a CBT in-patient
service in Italy, and Goddard *et al*,^14^ who describe outcomes from 12
adult in-patient services in the UK ([Table
4](#tab04){ref-type="table"}). Table 4Pathways to Recovery outcomes
compared to other in-patient settingsGoddard *et al*^14^Dalle Grave *et
al*^13^Pathways to RecoveryMean length of admission (weeks)26.4 (17.9)Up
to 20 weeks33.2 (17.47)Discharge BMI (kg/m^2^)17.3 (2.1)18.9 (1.5)18.7
(2.3)Those achieving BMI 18.5
(%)22%[^a^](#tfn4_1){ref-type="fn"}86.1%[^b^](#tfn4_2){ref-type="fn"}67%
(49%[^a^](#tfn4_1){ref-type="fn"})Discharge EDE-Q3.3 (1.6)1.7
(1.0)[^b^](#tfn4_2){ref-type="fn"}^,^[^c^](#tfn4_3){ref-type="fn"}2.5
(1.4)Those achieving EDE-Q \<1 s.d. above community mean (i.e. 1.74)
(%)Not known51.4%[^b^](#tfn4_2){ref-type="fn"}24.5%[^6][^7][^8][^9]

### Pathways to Recovery in comparison to Dalle Grave *et al*^13^ {#sec3-4-1}

The mean discharge BMI in both settings was broadly similar. A greater
proportion of the Italian patients left with a BMI in the healthy range
(BMI 18.5--25 kg/m^2^) and met the criterion for minimal eating disorder
psychopathology.

### Pathways to Recovery in comparison to Goddard *et al*^14^ {#sec3-4-2}

The Pathways to Recovery outcomes appear to be substantially better than
the average outcomes reported by Goddard *et al*^14^ from 12 adult
in-patient services in the UK: 49% of the Pathways to Recovery sample
achieved a BMI greater than 19 kg/m^2^ at discharge compared to only 22%
of the Goddard *et al*^14^ sample. The EDE-Q on admission for both
groups was similar, and both achieved a statistically significant
decrease in scores. However, the improvement in the Pathways to Recovery
sample appears to be more clinically significant, achieving values
closer to the mean taken from the general female population.

# Discussion {#sec4}

In addition to briefly describing the development of Pathways to
Recovery, the aim of this paper was to evaluate the outcomes of this
CBT-based approach for the in-patient treatment of people with severe
and enduring anorexia nervosa. Although the programme is designed for
people with any eating disorder diagnosis, the focus of this service
evaluation was restricted to those with a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa.
The people treated were complex, with almost one-third starting
treatment with a BMI of less than 13 kg/m^2^ and more than half having
one or more comorbid diagnoses. More than half the participants met the
criterion of illness duration proposed by SE-AN.^3^ It is worth noting
that the term SE-AN implies both a severe level of symptoms, including
serious medical comorbidities as well a long duration of illness.
Although people with shorter durations of illness may also experience
physical comorbidities and other disabling features of anorexia nervosa,
these symptoms become progressively more likely as time goes on.

The first key finding was that introducing Pathways to Recovery
significantly enhanced weight restoration compared to TAU, with more
than two-thirds of participants gaining enough weight to enter the World
Health Organization\'s healthy BMI range. This is important since lower
BMI at discharge has been found to be a predictor of relapse.^15^
Pathways to Recovery also led to significant improvements in general
psychological distress and symptoms of eating disorder, with nearly
one-quarter having minimal eating disorder psychopathology at discharge;
however, these improvements were not significantly different from those
achieved by TAU.

The outcomes for patients treated by Pathways to Recovery were broadly
comparable to those produced by another CBT in-patient programme.^13^
The mean discharge BMI in both settings was similar. Although a greater
proportion of the Italian participants left with a BMI in the healthy
range (BMI 18.5--25 kg/m^2^) and met the criterion for minimal eating
disorder psychopathology, this only represented the outcomes for those
who had completed the programme; whereas the Pathways to Recovery data
set includes those who did not complete the programme (except those who
left within the first four weeks). Furthermore, the Dalle Grave *et
al*^13^ sample included adolescents (29% were younger than 18), thus the
mean age and median illness duration were less than the Pathways to
Recovery sample. The Dalle Grave *et al*^13^ sample recorded depression
(53.6%) and anxiety (20%) but did not report any other comorbidities.
Depression and anxiety are recognised complications of starvation and
may have been a feature of the anorexia nervosa rather than
comorbidities *per se*. This could indicate a less complex cohort than
the Pathways to Recovery sample. This indicates that Pathways to
Recovery is effective for not only patients with SE-AN but also for
those with other comorbidities. Such patient are often excluded from
specialist eating disorder in-patient services due to the complexity of
their presentations.

Another key finding was that Pathways to Recovery appears to produce
better than average short-term outcomes for in-patients with anorexia
nervosa when compared with similar adult in-patient settings in the
UK.^14^ The length of illness in both groups was virtually identical and
although the length of stay was longer for the Pathways to Recovery
group, the outcomes demonstrated that instead of being treatment
resistant, this group of patients can achieve positive outcomes in terms
of weight restoration and improvements in psychopathology. This may be
important for generating greater therapeutic optimism for clinicians
working with patients on the more severe and enduring end of the
spectrum, and thus give hope to these patients and their families.
Improvements in both of these outcome measures are likely to result in
sustained recovery post-discharge.

Treasure *et al*^3^ have suggested changing the focus of those with
SE-AN 'to improving quality of life and minimising discomfort rather
than achieving optimal weight'. This approach runs the risk of
clinicians and patients assuming that weight restoration is not possible
or even acceptable. Furthermore, chronic low weight has many long-term
health risks affecting all organ systems,^16^ many of which can
potentially reduce life expectancy.

However, Calugi *et al*^17^ caution: 'there are strong reasons to
indicate that pessimism regarding the recovery prospects of patients
with SE-AN may not be entirely justified and consequently steering away
from a recovery model may be premature at this stage'. They go on to
describe the 1 year follow-up treatment outcomes of their intensive
enhanced CBT programme that reveal no significant differences between
SE-AN and non-SE-AN patients in terms of BMI and EDE (global and brief
symptom inventory) scores at the 12 month follow-up. The mean length of
illness for their SE-AN group was 12 years.

Our experience is that offering hope in the form of a recovery-based
program to patients with eating disorders -- irrespective of length of
illness, severity or complexity -- is positively received. The uptake
following assessment is high, with some patients requesting to be
referred nationally.

As a service evaluation, this study inevitably has a number of
limitations. The programme was devised, used and evaluated at The
Retreat which could introduce potential bias. In addition, two of the
authors (L.H. and A.B.) currently work in the service. The outcomes
could be positively affected by the fact that the team was actively
involved in the development of the programme. On the other hand, the
adoption of this new way of working represented a significant cultural
shift for the team. Unsurprisingly, a number of changes to the
supporting materials and the processes were required, particularly over
the first year or so. Any changes were made in collaboration with the
participants and team. It is worth noting that no additional resources
were used and the staffing levels remained consistent before and
throughout the development and implementation of Pathways to Recovery.
The only cost incurred was the printing of the materials and the
graphics for the poster and folders.

In terms of the comparison between Pathways to Recovery and TAU (i.e.
the in-patient programme before introduction of the new model), the
patients were not randomised to the different treatment groups and thus
there may have been variations between the two groups that could explain
the differences in outcomes, despite there being no significant
differences in the key demographic and clinical characteristics
measured.

If patients had more than one admission, only their first admission was
included in the data set (15 sets of data from 14 patients were excluded
in total). It could be argued that using their most recent admission
would have been more representative for evaluating the effectiveness of
the programme in treating people with severe and enduring eating
disorders, assuming that difficulties may be even further entrenched by
the time people have had more than one admission. However, it may be the
case that those who have had a previous admission do better in a
subsequent admission as they are able to build on their experiences.

Furthermore, 10 patients were excluded due to having only one set of
data. These patients who dropped out in the very early stage of their
admission may represent a subset of even more complex cases, making the
final sample somewhat self-selecting.

Although patients were contacted at 3, 6 and 12 months post-discharge
and asked to complete self-report outcome measures, the uptake was poor
and has therefore not been reported in this paper. We are currently
investigating alternative methods to collect follow-up data including
the use of digital technology. One of the differences between Pathways
to Recovery and TAU is the emphasis on transference of skills and the
development of increasingly high levels of independence and
self-efficacy, which would predict that longer term outcomes are likely
to be encouraging.

Many thanks to The Naomi Unit patients, their family members and members
of the Naomi team -- present and past -- without whom the development of
Pathways to Recovery would not have been possible.

**Andrea Brown** is a consultant psychiatrist and psychotherapist at The
Retreat, York. **Richard Jenkinson** is an assistant psychologist at the
University of Sheffield. **Julia Coakes** is a consultant clinical
psychologist and **Annette Cockfield** is an advanced dietetic
practitioner at Insight Eating, Leeds. **Tish O\'Brien**, now retired,
was an occupational therapist and **Louise Hall** is a clinical
psychologist at The Retreat, York. All authors work or have worked in
the eating disorders service (The Naomi Unit) at The Retreat in York.

[^1]: Data are shown as mean (s.d.) unless otherwise indicated. TAU,
    treatment as usual.

[^2]: Data are shown as mean (s.d.) unless otherwise indicated. BMI,
    body mass index; CORE-OM, Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation
    Outcome Measure; EDE-Q, Eating Disorder Examination --
    Questionnaire.

[^3]: Data are shown as mean (s.d.) unless otherwise indicated. TAU,
    treatment as usual; BMI, body mass index; CORE-OM, Clinical Outcomes
    in Routine Evaluation Outcome Measure; EDE-Q, Eating Disorder
    Examination -- Questionnaire.

[^4]: *P* \< 0.001 *v.* admission.

[^5]: *P* \< 0.01 *v.* discharge TAU.

[^6]: BMI, body mass index; EDE-Q, Eating Disorder Examination --
    Questionnaire.

[^7]: Those achieving BMI \>19 (%).

[^8]: Only those who completed treatment rather than intent-to-treat
    sample.

[^9]: EDE interview version rather than self-report.
