=======================
Ideology over evidence?
=======================

Sameer Jauhar
Allan H. Young
:Date: 2018-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In her narrative, Dr Moncrieff makes assertions about depressive
illness, antidepressants, and psychotropic medications.(n.d.a) Her main
points are that these medications are not clinically effective when
using rating scales, and that the models proposed for antidepressant
action are erroneous. We would suggest that the narrative reflects
ideology, as opposed to evidence, and should be interpreted accordingly.

First, a 1969 narrative supplementary review is given as an example of
the lack of efficacy of tricyclic and older antidepressants. A more
recent (and comprehensive) review found significant benefits for
monoamine oxidase inhibitors over placebo, which were surpassed by
tricyclics.(n.d.b) The argument is then made that changes on the
Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HRSD) are minimal, in comparison
with placebo, and that differences are clinically insignificant when the
Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scale is used, citing among other
reviews the Kirsch meta-analysis (where the effect size was
0.31(n.d.c)). A similar effect size was seen in a recent analysis of
over 500 studies, which reported odds ratios of between 1.37 and 2.13
for response compared with placebo.(n.d.d)

In focusing the argument on change in total HRSD score, Dr Moncrieff
appears unaware that the scale was never intended to measure change. A
more robust way of analysing it was recently demonstrated, using the
rating of subjective mood (item 1 on the HRSD), which would be akin to
the CGI. This avoided the influence of antidepressant side-effects on
the scale, and found clear benefits for paroxetine and citalopram over
placebo.(n.d.e)

A study cited to indicate severity of depression did not predict
outcome, evaluated the short-term efficacy of antidepressants and was
not intended to test the hypothesis of severity, with the authors
reporting significant benefits of fluoxetine over placebo in adults
(improvement of approximately 35%).(n.d.f) The 1964 Medical Research
Council trial (which showed the efficacy of electroconvulsive therapy)
is given as evidence of lack of effect of severity on response; however,
the statement that antidepressants did not outperform placebo is not
surprising, given that the dose of imipramine was 50 mg and that of
phenelzine 15 mg. A more recent and influential publicly funded study
(cited over 3000 times in Google Scholar) showed the effectiveness of
imipramine (at a therapeutic dose of around 185 mg) in people with
severe depression, in comparison with psychological therapies
(cognitive–behavioural therapy and interpersonal therapy). These
therapies showed little benefit over placebo in this group.(n.d.g)

The rest of the narrative dwells on ‘disease-centred’ models of
psychiatric illness, as an alternative to the current ‘targeting a brain
abnormality’ approach. We are unaware of modern psychiatry relying on
the neurotransmitter models she discusses; the field has moved on
significantly, and most neuroscientists would point to more nuanced
models involving effects on neural networks and plasticity.(n.d.h) The
predominant references cited here are Dr Moncrieff's own hypotheses.

In summary, we would suggest that Dr Moncrieff's narrative is selective
at best, and on cursory examination there is little effort to appraise
the literature in a scientifically objective manner. One cannot help but
assume that this opinion piece represents ideology over evidence, and
therefore any interpretation should be cautious.

Declaration of Interests

Professor Young has the following disclosures: Employed by King’s
College London; Honorary Consultant SLaM (NHS UK); paid lectures and
advisory boards for the following companies with drugs used in affective
and related disorders: Astrazenaca, Eli Lilly, Lundbeck, Sunovion,
Servier, Livanova, Janssen; No share holdings in pharmaceutical
companies; lead Investigator for Embolden Study (AZ), BCI
Neuroplasticity study and Aripiprazole Mania Study; Investigator
initiated studies from AZ, Eli Lilly, Lundbeck, Wyeth, Janssen. Grant
funding (past and present): NIMH (USA); CIHR (Canada); NARSAD (USA);
Stanley Medical Research Institute (USA); MRC (UK); Wellcome Trust (UK);
Royal College of Physicians (Edin); BMA (UK); UBC-VGH Foundation
(Canada); WEDC (Canada); CCS Depression Research Fund (Canada); MSFHR
(Canada); NIHR (UK). Janssen (UK)

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.
