---
abstract: |
  The editor thanks the outgoing Correspondence Editor Greg Shields and
  welcomes Dr William Badenhorst as his successor. He reflects upon his
  own inadequacy as a letter writer in the hope it encourages others to
  be better.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a1}

  None.
author:
- Norman PooleCorrespondence to Dr Norman Poole (<pb@rcpsych.ac.uk>)
date: 2018-10
institute:
- 1South West London and St George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
title: Dear *BJPsych Bulletin*...
---

I must confess that I do not often write letters. As a child I had to be
cajoled and then threatened into composing thank you letters at
Christmas. I assumed (wrongly, it turned out) that a mumbled 'Thanks'
was quite sufficient. If only I\'d known Heidegger\'s arguments for the
supremacy of the spoken word at the age of eight, my life would have
been easier in so many ways. I\'m still no better at postcards, notes of
condolence, or work emails, and even texts feel just a little too much
effort. It should come as no surprise that as a medical student I did
not attempt to submit letters to the *BMJ* to gain an 'easy' first
publication. Nor do I Tweet.

All this avoidance of letter writing would not appear to be good
preparation for a career in psychiatry, however, and I am always
immensely impressed by those who do put pen to paper. Freud was of
course a prodigious writer of letters;^1^ these are worth a read for the
light they shed on the man\'s foibles as much as the development of his
ideas. His letter to the concerned mother of a young gay man,^2^ in
which he assures her that homosexuality is 'nothing to be ashamed of'
and its persecution 'a great injustice', exemplifies the qualities of a
good letter: crafted, lucid and brief, with a hint of wit. Not everyone
can aspire to such prose, but the correspondence section of a journal is
often its most lively and combative. Recent notable examples within
these pages include the exchange between Sameer Jauhar and Allan
Young^3^ and Joanna Moncrief,^4^ following her typically provocative
paper in our *Against the Stream* series. I was also struck by Martin
Plöderl and Clemens Fartacek\'s admirably brief account of complexity
theory in risk assessment in April\'s edition.^5^ A well-written
rebuttal can influence minds as much as any original paper, and quicker
too.

Notwithstanding some admiration for the scribblers' art, you can imagine
my state of mind when our correspondence editor Greg Shields handed in
his notice just a few weeks into my editorship. (A temporal relationship
need not imply causality!) Greg has worked on the section for 2 years,
but a first consultant post means he will now be frantically trying to
keep on top of his own correspondence. I\'d like to take this
opportunity to thank Greg for his sterling work over the past couple of
years and wish him all the best in all future endeavours. And I\'m able
to say this sincerely because in between his tendering his notice and
now, we have interviewed for a new correspondence editor and, from a
selection of three excellent candidates, appointed William Badenhorst as
Greg\'s successor. William is certified in both general adult psychiatry
and medical psychotherapy so is trained to efficiently process and
analyse the many letters sent to the *BJPsych Bulletin*. He promises a
fair but firm approach to the publication of eLetters online and in the
correspondence section of the journal. Sadly, not every submission
realises each of the qualities listed above, and some none at all.
Don\'t let this put you off writing your own letter to the editor,
however. Re-read this editorial and remind yourself, 'I could do better
than that', then get going. Just don\'t expect a reply.

Dr Norman Poole is Editor of the *BJPsych Bulletin* and Consultant
Neuropsychiatrist at St George\'s Hospital, South West London and St
George\'s Mental Health NHS Trust, UK.
