=====================================================================================
Making up symptoms: psychic indeterminacy and the construction of psychotic phenomena
=====================================================================================



Huw Green
:Correspondence: Dr Huw Green (huw.green@gmail.com)

:date: 2019-4

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Summary
      :name: sec_a1

   Psychotic phenomena include a far wider range of experiences than is
   captured by the brief descriptions offered in contemporary diagnostic
   guides. Given the richness of historical clinical phenomenology, what
   can account for the recent ascendancy of relatively impoverished
   descriptions of psychosis? One possible explanation is provided by
   Hacking's notion of dynamic nominalism, where human categories change
   over time in tandem with those who they classify. But although
   dynamic nominalism makes sense of changes in behaviour, it fails to
   account for change at the level of subjective experience. In this
   paper, psychotic symptoms are addressed in the light of the
   indeterminacy of subjective mental content. A naïve-introspectionist
   approach to mental symptoms assumes that, notwithstanding practical
   difficulties, such symptoms are reliably describable in principle.
   Contemporary philosophy of mind challenges this assumption. Lighting
   upon a verbal description for ineffable phenomena changes their
   nature, resolving them into new forms.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a2

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Introduction: historical moving targets
=======================================

The DSM-5 provides brief descriptions of the central positive psychotic
symptoms of delusions, hallucinations and disorganised thought. In this
schema, delusions are defined as ‘false beliefs’ and hallucinations are
defined as ‘perception-like experiences’. It is to this framework that
patients' experiences are matched to make a psychiatric diagnosis. The
dissemination of such definitions and criteria has pervaded society's
understanding of what psychosis is like. Their influence can now also be
seen in the push for the re-description of psychosis in terms not of
symptoms, but as ‘unusual beliefs’ or ‘hearing voices’.1 However, it is
not always clear that delusions are best characterised as
beliefs,2\ :sup:`,`\ 3 and auditory hallucinations can include
experiences that do not resemble ‘hearing’ and do not involve voices.4

Historically, delusions, to examine just one of these symptoms, were not
necessarily defined as beliefs. Tracing the conceptual history of this
particular symptom, German Berrios5 has argued for the falsity of what
he calls the ‘received view’ that delusions are beliefs, and detailed
its emergence. Berrios suggests that historical intellectual processes
shape delusions, although it is not clear whether he intends to suggest
that this shaping affects only the received clinical view or also the
symptom itself. Berrios argues that the received view was in place by
the end of the 19th century. However, a more complex picture of
delusions can be seen in the work of two prominent psychopathologists of
the early 20th century.

In his original description of the features of the group of
schizophrenias, Eugen Bleuler's6 overview of delusions includes no
explicit requirement that they be beliefs. At many points he seems to be
describing a wider variety of mental states. Patients with delusions are
described as being unconcerned with evidence or reasons for their ideas,
‘“It is just so”, and with this he appears to be quite satisfied’ (p.
118). Additionally, delusions are described – unlike a dogmatically held
belief – as sitting comfortably alongside other inconsistent ideas:
‘Unconnected or even mutually contradictory ideas can be maintained
simultaneously or appear one after the other within a short interval of
time’ (p. 125). Bleuler includes false statements that might not be held
with any conviction: ‘A catatonic's bed is a polar bear. “I lay on it
and it seemed like a bed, but it was nevertheless a polar bear”’ (p.
126). Additionally, Bleuler explicitly extends his description of
delusions into cases of non-belief-like states: ‘The delusions can
appear in the form of “hunches,” “intuitions,” etc., which can persist
permanently in their indefinite forms’ (p. 135).

Karl Jaspers, in his seminal description of the phenomenon of
delusions,7 does not speak of them in terms of belief, but rather builds
a complex picture through case examples and phenomenological
descriptions. For Jaspers, contrary to modern psychological
theorists,8\ :sup:`,`\ 9 delusions proper (what Jaspers terms ‘primary
delusions’) are not belief-like inferences that have been made from an
anomalous perceptual input, but form part of the direct experience
itself. Jaspers emphasises the immediacy of a delusional interpretation.
A delusional patient sees their delusion in their experience of the
world in the same way as ‘If I see a knife, I see a tool for cutting’2
(p. 99). The word ‘belief’ does not appear in this part of his
discussion.

Compare these rich and heterogeneous descriptions with the formal
definition of delusions provided in the DSM-5:10 ‘Delusions are fixed
beliefs that are not amenable to change in light of conflicting
evidence. Their content may include a variety of themes (e.g.,
persecutory, referential, somatic, religious, grandiose)’ (p. 87). This
historical transmogrification of psychotic symptomatology is a curious
phenomenon. I suggest that it represents something potentially
significant, occurring not only in the literature but also in the
patients. Paraphrasing the philosopher of science Ian Hacking (who
referred to ‘making up people’11), I call this ‘making up symptoms’.

.. _sec2:

Dynamic nominalism
==================

Historical variation in psychiatric presentations has been understood in
terms of bidirectional feedback loops between the patient and world that
shape the patient's expression of symptoms.12\ :sup:`,`\ 13 Consider the
phenomenon Hacking terms ‘dynamic nominalism’, the process he posits
whereby people come to fit the categories they are assigned. A
classification or description of people is created on the basis of some
observed regularity or classificatory principle (autistic, anorexic,
gay). Observations about this classification are then made by academics,
journalists, medics and so forth. Because the individuals classified are
people, and not rocks or trees, they can become aware of the
classification, and of various facts, fashions and stereotypes
associated with it. Such knowledge is apt to change people as they
behave increasingly in line with the way that they have come to see
themselves described. Hacking has suggested that entire disorders
(‘transient psychiatric illnesses’) can be brought into existence by
interactive processes he calls ‘looping effects’.12\ :sup:`,`\ 14
Plainly there are hard limits on the influence of looping effects
(people cannot, for example, become taller just because they have been
classified as belonging to a group that is stereotypically tall), but
the more plasticity there is associated with important elements of a
classification, the more we might expect looping effects to exert their
influence.

Thus, as clinical phenomenologists produce ever more succinct
descriptions of psychotic experiences, people may have come to
experience themselves as actually having these simpler symptoms. This,
in turn, would have changed the psychiatric classification of psychosis,
confirming ever more specific and limited definitions of the phenomena
at hand. This story is powerful, but – at least in Hacking's telling –
it leaves an explanatory gap in between the world and the patient's
symptoms. Dynamic nominalism can readily account for changes in
historical behaviour (the culturally determined manifestations of
psychiatric distress) because we can readily intuit the ways that
behaviour can be influenced by expectations. But there is more to
psychosis than behaviour. Mental symptoms feel a particular way, and it
is intuitive to suppose that the way they feel is a ‘bottom-up’ result
of internal illness processes. We need more detail about how personal
mental experiences could be subject to the same sorts of external
influence.

We cannot account for symptom variability without appeal to an important
but unacknowledged feature of the mental experience: its ethereal
nature. Unlike livers and larynxes, subjective conscious experiences can
never be directly observed by another person. Moreover, despite our
casual intuitive sense that we have direct access to our subjective
experience, it can be uncannily difficult to pin that experience down,
even for ourselves. Consciousness is messy, inchoate and often
ineffable. It may even be that its contents are indeterminate, and even
indeterminable.

.. _sec3:

Psychic indeterminacy
=====================

The indeterminacy of mental content has been perhaps most thoroughly
explored by the philosopher Eric Schwitzgebel.15 Schwitzgebel
articulates scepticism about the possibility of accurate introspection
on one's perceptual experiences. We might think that we know what our
perceptual experiences are like in some detailed and accurate way. At
first blush, what could be more immediately knowable? But subjectivity
is often transient and difficult to pin down. We are not always clear
whether an impression (the impression, for example, that one is looking
at a scene that contains spatial depth) arises from something that is
more directly perceptual or more inferential in character. For
Schwitzgebel, questions like ‘Do you always have a constant tactile
experience of your feet in your shoes?’ and ‘What do you see when your
eyes are closed?’ are not as readily answerable as they might appear.

Schwitzgebel provides an example of a historical change that he takes to
reflect this indeterminate nature of subjectivity.14 Multiple
researchers examining reports of dreams in the early 20th century found
that a minority of respondents' dreams (9–41%) involved the experience
of colour. Since the 1960s, however, that figure changed and research
participants reported that the majority of their dreams (74–100%)
included the experience of colour. Schwitzgebel takes this to suggest
that ‘I don't know, and you probably don't know, whether we dream in
color or not’ (p. 3), and suggests that the dramatic change in people's
assumptions about their dreams reflects the emergence of widespread
access to colour television and films. Dreamers changed their
assumptions about the nature of visual experiences and translated this
into a judgement about the quality of their dreams.

Schwitzgebel's pessimism about the reliability of introspection has
obvious implications for the assessment of psychiatric phenomena. If he
is right about the unreliability of naïve introspection, then the
assessment of experiences like hallucinations and delusions is open to
variability and influence. To ask whether someone is hearing voices or
whether they believe in a given proposition is doubly problematic. Such
queries presuppose that there is a fact of the matter, and create
unwarranted certainty as respondents confabulate an account of their
subjective impressions.

Something like this indeterminacy of the subjective has already been
posited in the realm of psychiatric symptoms. Citing Dennett's16
scepticism about the possibility of relying on inner experience,
Stephens and Graham17 note that not all auditory visual hallucinations
are voice-like, and suggest that individuals who come to hold certain
ideas may sometimes engage in a sort of *ad hoc* confabulation about
their origin. The result of such confabulation might be a conclusion
that an idea came to be held because a voice was heard8 (pp. 26–31). The
psychoanalyst Roy Schafer18 has also explored the indeterminacy of
psychiatrically relevant symptoms, pointing out that inquiring about
certain vague experiences (e.g. the location of a felt mental presence)
can alter the nature of the experience itself9 (p. 123).

Does this not lead us to phenomenological nihilism? If our mental life
is indeterminate, is there any value in asking people about their inner
lives? What about asking people whether they are in pain? (I am grateful
to an anonymous reviewer for raising this question.) I think we can
fruitfully distinguish more or less fine-grained aspects of experience,
with greater difficulty attendant on making determinations about more
detailed phenomenology. It is relatively straightforward to say, ‘I'm in
pain’, but far more complex to make detailed descriptions of the nature
and quality of that pain. Physicians also ask questions like ‘is the
pain sharp or dull?’ or ‘is it a shooting pain?’. Some people, lacking a
clear idea about how to answer, could have their experience of the pain
changed by the question. Equally, it may be possible to establish the
presence of a hallucinatory experience, but harder to describe its form
without contamination by interrogation.

If subjective experiences are indeterminate in this important way, then
there are grounds to worry about the emphasis on specific symptoms in
contemporary psychiatry and clinical psychology. Over the latter half of
the 20th century, psychiatry saw a push toward more precise measurement
of psychiatric phenomena. A loss of confidence in diagnostic categories
shifted attention to the observation and measurement of specific
symptomatic experiences.

Paradoxically, however, this focus on symptoms (and especially the use
of familiar terminology like hearing voices or unusual beliefs as
opposed to the vaguer and more clinical hallucinations or delusions) may
be taking us further from the individual experience of people in
profound states of disturbance. When we ask people whether their
experience is like hearing voices, they may be inclined – when
confronted with the immense difficulty of describing what it is really
like – to accede that it is.

Take a question like ‘Do you ever seem to hear noises or voices when
there is no one about, and nothing else to explain it?’ from Wing *et
al*'s Present State Examination.19 A person answers yes. In response to
the follow-up question (‘Do you ever seem to hear your name being
called?’), they also say yes. It is possible that this individual does
not, in fact, have those experiences (they do not actually hear noises
or voices, they experience something else that feels impossible to
describe in other terms), and that they do not actually hear their name
being called. Perhaps they just have some sense that there are voices or
noises in the vicinity that are having some kind of a perceptual effect
on them. Perhaps there is a sense in which they are feeling called, but
they never actually have the perceptual experience of a voice calling
their name.

I have administered this kind of a questionnaire to people, and it is
true that they can prompt the interviewee to provide reflections on how,
no their experience is not ‘quite’ like that being described in the
question. Interesting discussions about personal phenomenology can
ensue. However, people also have difficulties articulating their
experience. People have more or less ability to communicate, and more or
less interest in getting the nature of their experience precisely
articulated (‘I don't really hear the voices but, ah, close enough!’).

.. _sec4:

Making up their minds
=====================

The myth of measurable and determinate psychotic symptoms neglects
entire aspects of people's experiences and recent research has revealed
that some people with psychiatric illness can come to feel alienated by
the discipline's failure to encompass the variety of
phenomenology.4\ :sup:`,`\ 19 Jones and Shattell20 describe the
experiences of people who have had psychotic experiences that ‘simply
did not map onto available terms and constructs’ (p. 769). These authors
find participants afraid of describing their experiences to doctors in
case they were dismissed, and others who had been told there was ‘no
such thing’ as non-auditory voices: ‘It was not that the textbooks were
wrong … her experiences were’19 (p. 769). Too tight a focus on
preordained symptom categories (the core positive symptoms of the DSM-5)
omits those experiences that do not readily fit them. Psychiatric
symptom erasure is a systematic failure to take seriously an
individual's own account of what is happening to them.

But perhaps more fundamentally, the process of making up symptoms
unwittingly shapes people to clinician expectations. Anyone is
potentially vulnerable to introspective error and this vulnerability is
compounded by the frightening, unusual and private nature of a psychotic
symptom. The clinicians who assess such experiences ask specific
questions and have diagnostic expectations, thereby providing a
particular framework for their patients to fit into. It is a mistake to
minimise the potential power of such shaping.

In his discussion of multiple personality disorder,12 Hacking outlines
the moral hazard involved in the inadvertent creation of psychiatric
subjectivity by reference to a Marxist concept. To create and impose new
ways of being psychiatrically disturbed, he says, is to subject people
to a form of false consciousness. If my argument here is correct, we
cannot successfully demarcate false from true consciousness. If there is
no plain fact of the matter about the nature and contents of mental
states to begin with, there is no ‘pure’ unobserved form of
consciousness to compare against a putatively ‘false’ form. Nonetheless,
I submit that Hacking is on to something significant. When psychiatrists
come into contact with disturbances of consciousness, they cannot hope
to only observe them. The mind is not infinitely malleable (it would
salve much therapeutic angst if it were), but encounters with others –
especially powerful professional others – can be expected to influence
the form that peoples' thoughts can take.

**Huw Green** is a postdoctoral clinical fellow in psychology at the
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA.
