---
abstract: |
  # Summary {#sec_a1}

  In this paper, we summarise and critique a network meta-analysis (NMA)
  of antidepressant efficacy and tolerability for paediatric depression
  and an accompanying editorial. Although we agree that many of the
  extant studies are flawed, this meta-analysis showed clear efficacy of
  fluoxetine in the NMA, and for sertraline and escitalopram in pairwise
  analyses. Consequently, these papers underestimate the benefits of
  antidepressants for paediatric depression, and provide support for
  current practice guideline, which recommends the use of an
  antidepressant if the patient does not respond to psychotherapy. In
  these circumstances, fluoxetine should be the first choice, with
  escitalopram and sertraline as alternatives.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a2}

  D.A.B. receives royalties from Guilford Press, has or will receive
  royalties from the electronic self-rated version of the C-SSRS from
  eResearch Technology, Inc., is on the editorial board of UpToDate, and
  is a reviewer for Healthwise. R.D.G. serves as an expert witness for
  the US Department of Justice, Pfizer, Wyeth and GSK; and is the
  founder of Adaptive Testing Technologies. P.W. receives personal fees
  from Lundbeck and Takeda. B.D. reports a licensing agreement with
  Lundbeck for a psychosocial treatment manual for depression. No other
  disclosures were reported.
author:
- David A. Brent
- Robert D. Gibbons
- Paul Wilkinson
- Bernadka DubickaCorrespondence to David A. Brent (<brentda@upmc.edu>)
date: 2018-2
institute:
- 1Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, University of Pittsburgh
  Medical Center
- 2University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine
- 3The University of Chicago Biological Sciences
- 4University of Cambridge
- 5Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge
- 6Institute of Brain, Behaviour and Mental Health, University of
  Manchester
- 7Lancashire Care Foundation Trust, Preston
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
title: "Antidepressants in paediatric depression: do not look back in
  anger but around in awareness"
---

In this article, we review a network meta-analysis (NMA) that examines
the relative efficacy and tolerability of antidepressants for paediatric
depression, and the accompanying editorial that appeared in the Lancet.
The meta-analysis provides useful information for researchers and
practitioners, but undervalues the benefits of antidepressants and
over-weights the risks.^1^ The accompanying editorial takes this bias as
its point of departure, fuelled by righteous indignation about the
deceptive reporting and publication practices of some industry-led
studies.^2^ While this anger is justified, we believe that it should not
preclude the reporting of benefits from the use of antidepressants in
depressed youth, when supported by data.

Cipriani and colleagues have contributed a carefully and transparently
conducted NMA of the comparative efficacy and tolerability (defined as
discontinuation of the drug) of antidepressants for paediatric major
depression.^1^ This meta-analysis examined 34 randomised clinical trials
(RCTs) that encompassed 5260 participants and tested 14 different
antidepressants. In the overall NMA, fluoxetine was the only agent found
to be significantly more effective than placebo in reducing depressive
symptoms (*d*  =  −0.51, 95% CI −0.99 to −0.03). Fluoxetine was no
different from placebo with respect to tolerability and suicidal events,
and was better tolerated than duloxetine or imipramine. Furthermore,
imipramine, venlafaxine and duloxetine had more discontinuations than
placebo. The quality of evidence was rated as 'very low' for most
comparisons. The authors concluded that antidepressants do not appear to
offer a clear advantage for children and adolescents, but if a
pharmacological intervention is indicated, fluoxetine is 'probably the
best option'.

Pairwise meta-analyses found that three agents, fluoxetine, sertraline
and escitalopram, showed superiority to placebo for both continuous and
dichotomous outcomes. Venlafaxine was reported to have a higher
incidence of suicidal events (OR = 0.13, 95% CI 0.00--0.55) than placebo
and several other antidepressants, whereas none of the other agents
studied had a higher rate of suicidal events than placebo.

The authors are to be commended for their careful attention to
methodological quality, use of NMA and elegant presentation of results.
We agree with the authors about the limitations imposed by low study
quality, possible industry bias, incomplete assessment of suicidal
events and overall small number of studies. This leads us to a different
conclusion, which is that more studies that are conducted more
rigorously are needed. Moreover, we found the interpretation of the
findings to be inconsistent in three ways -- with the data itself,
across findings and compared with previous reports by some of the
authors.

For example, the meta-analysis found that fluoxetine, compared with
placebo, resulted in a medium effect size, yet because the confidence
interval upper limit was close to zero (−0.99 to −0.03), the authors
raise the question of 'whether this estimate is robust enough to inform
clinical practice'. Many statisticians would agree that after passing
the muster of NMA, this effect is robust enough. The authors do not
offer a bar above which these data are expected to pass. Moreover, the
authors support the use of evidence-based psychotherapy for the
treatment of paediatric depression, although it has a much smaller
effect on paediatric depression than does fluoxetine (*d* = 0.29).^3^

The authors raised appropriate suspicion about studies conducted by
industry, yet, in the case of fluoxetine, they raise the reverse concern
that most of the fluoxetine trials were done *without* industry
sponsorship and were of smaller sample size, 'which might result in an
exaggerated treatment effect'. These concerns are not grounded in facts.
First, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)-sponsored
Treatment of Adolescent Depression Study (TADS) was one of the largest
placebo-controlled paediatric depression trials, involving 423 young
people.^4^ Second, since both published and unpublished studies with
small samples were included, findings are just as likely to yield a Type
II error as to result in a spurious positive finding. Third, other
studies of paediatric and adult depression have found that the effect
size is lower, and the placebo effect higher, when a greater number of
sites is involved, as is more common in industry-sponsored
studies.^5^^--^^7^ In fact, a paper co-authored by the lead author
examining trends in clinical trials of antipsychotics observed that
'effect sizes were reduced by industry sponsorship and increasing
placebo response, not decreasing drug response', and recommended that
'drug development may benefit from *smaller samples but better-selected
patients*' (italics ours).^8^ We would argue that 'smaller samples' of
'better-selected patients' would be considered to be a positive design
feature in antidepressant RCTs for paediatric depression as well.
Finally, re-analyses of the fluoxetine trials for paediatric depression
using patient-level data have found efficacy in the reduction of
depression comparable to that reported in adults.^9^

The authors found that both sertraline and escitalopram had significant
effects on the reduction in depressive symptoms on pairwise
meta-analyses that apparently did not survive NMA. Given the reported
high degree of homogeneity in these studies, and the fact that there
were no indirect comparisons that would contribute extra studies, NMA
may be inappropriately stringent. In the case of low heterogeneity,
fixed effects meta-analysis, with narrow confidence intervals, may be
more appropriate than the random effects used in NMA. Moreover, it may
be justified to report also on the effects of *antidepressant drug
classes* such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),
serotonin--noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and tricyclic
antidepressants (TCAs). Inspection of the data suggests that SSRIs would
show a more favourable effect on depressive symptoms and better
tolerance compared with TCAs, which is a message found in previous
meta-analyses, but worth repeating.^10^

The authors state that the risk--benefit profile is not favourable for
antidepressants. Part of this argument is based on wide confidence
intervals for efficacy. It seems inconsistent then to not put similar
emphasis on the equally wide confidence intervals for discontinuation
and suicidality, especially as the antidepressants with the best
evidence for efficacy (i.e., fluoxetine, sertraline and escitalopram)
are not significantly different from placebo for discontinuation or
suicidality. With respect to suicidality, the rates of suicidal events
ranged from 0 to 13% in those assigned to the drug, and 0 to 14% for
those assigned to placebo. The authors report on a strong association
between venlafaxine and suicidal events (OR = 0.13, 95% CI 0.00--0.55).
While the rate of suicidal events in those assigned to venlafaxine (4%)
was statistically higher than in those assigned to placebo (0%), the
absence of events in the placebo group makes it difficult to obtain an
accurate estimate of the odds of suicidal events associated with this
agent.

The authors correctly point out limitations in the design and conduct of
these clinical trials, but there are other limitations that greater
access to data cannot remedy. First, the assessment of suicidal events
in the majority of these studies was based on spontaneous report, rather
than systematic assessment. One study that compared the rate of events
by spontaneous reporting and systematic assessment found that
spontaneous reporting of suicidal events underestimated the rate of
events by a factor of 2.5.^11^ Moreover, patients on medication, perhaps
owing to side-effects, might be more likely to report suicidal events,
thus biasing conclusions based on these methods. In one of the few
placebo-controlled trials that utilised systematic assessment of
suicidal events, no difference was found between duloxetine, fluoxetine
and placebo in the frequency of suicidal events.^12^ Second, there are
inherent limitations in clinical trials, since those patients most
likely to be treated with an antidepressant are least likely to be
enrolled into an RCT. For example, a recent suicide attempt is an
exclusion for almost all paediatric depression pharmacotherapy RCTs. In
a study of the relationship between a suicide attempt and initiation of
antidepressant treatment in one large healthcare system, a suicide
attempt was a common precipitant for *starting* an antidepressant in
adolescents and in adults.^13^ Moreover, in these youth, the rate of
suicide attempts was highest *prior* to the initiation of treatment,
suggesting that antidepressants are protective against suicidal
behaviour, even in young people. Although causal inferences cannot be
firmly drawn from observational studies, such studies have the advantage
of larger size, representativeness, longer duration of treatment, and
ability to link treatment to suicide, not just to suicidal events. While
not incontrovertible, there are many observational studies showing
strong inverse associations between prescription and sales rates of
SSRIs and suicide, including suicide in adolescents.^14^^--^^16^
Conversely, after the Black Box Warning, there has been at least a
temporary decline in antidepressant prescriptions in the United States,
Canada and The Netherlands, accompanied by an uptick in adolescent
suicides.^17^^,^^18^ If antidepressants were strongly associated with
suicide, one would expect that a decline in antidepressant prescriptions
would be accompanied by a corresponding decline in suicide, rather than
the exact opposite.

This carefully conducted meta-analysis was accompanied by an editorial
that was a polemic against the use of antidepressants, entitled
'Antidepressants fail, but no cause for therapeutic gloom'.^2^ The
editorialist asserted that the extant literature greatly exaggerates the
benefits of antidepressants and downplays their risks, owing to the poor
data quality and selective reporting of results. He recommended that
clinicians reading the literature assume that the benefits of a drug are
inflated, and that the occurrence of harmful events is more serious and
frequent than reported. This editorial asserted that the reported
association between fluoxetine treatment and improvement in symptoms and
functional outcomes is not necessarily causative, and that fluoxetine is
likely to be more dangerous, and less effective than presented in the
extant literature. This editorial further opined that fluoxetine has
never been compared with a supportive relationship, which the
editorialist considered was likely to be more helpful and less harmful
than antidepressant medication for depressed youth. The editorial
concluded that industry-sponsored research should provide transparency
and access to all data and procedures.

It is only with the last statement in this editorial that we can proffer
agreement. We wholeheartedly endorse the need for data transparency in
all clinical trials, including those conducted by industry, and
acknowledge the damage to the credibility of all studies caused by
failure to publish and disclose data. However, the largest single
clinical trial of antidepressants in paediatric depression, TADS, was
not sponsored by industry, but by NIMH. This study showed a higher rate
of response and better functioning in those assigned to fluoxetine
versus those assigned to placebo.^4^^,^^19^ While the editorialist
raised the question of whether association implies causality, a blinded
placebo-controlled trial has long been considered the gold standard for
causal inferences. The editorialist also suggests that supportive
therapy is likely to be more effective, and less harmful, than
fluoxetine. However, the placebo condition in TADS involved supportive
management, and resulted in a response rate of only 35% *v.* 61% for
those treated with fluoxetine.^4^ Although there were more spontaneously
reported suicidal events (which includes thoughts without acts) in those
treated with fluoxetine than in those treated with placebo, the response
rate after 12 weeks of treatment was much higher in those treated with
fluoxetine, and absolute risk differences were several-fold higher for
efficacy than for suicidal events.^20^^,^^21^ Moreover, a comparison of
another version of cognitive--behavioural therapy (CBT) with supportive
treatment found that CBT was much more efficacious.^22^ Therefore,
results of the TADS trial and other published data completely refute the
editorialist\'s assertions that industry sponsorship of some studies
automatically dilutes the efficacy reports of medication, including
fluoxetine, that causality cannot be inferred from an RCT, and that
supportive care would be superior to treatment with fluoxetine.

What is a clinician to make of this meta-analysis and editorial? We
believe that the findings from the meta-analysis support current
clinical guidelines. In the UK, National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) guidelines advise the first-line use of an
evidence-based psychotherapy such as interpersonal therapy or CBT, and,
if the patient does not respond, to then consider adding
pharmacotherapy, namely, fluoxetine.^23^ We continue to support this
approach. Also, as per NICE guidelines, in cases of severe, chronic or
treatment-resistant depression, there is evidence to support starting
with a combination of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy, which has been
shown to be superior to medication monotherapy for treatment-resistant
depression.^23^^--^^25^ Despite the 0% rate of suicidal events in the
placebo cells for venlafaxine studies, we agree that caution is
indicated in the use of this agent, insofar as SSRIs are just as
effective for treatment-resistant depression as venlafaxine, but their
use results in fewer side-effects, and lower levels of suicidal ideation
and events.^11^^,^^26^ Moreover, these meta-analyses are consistent with
the view that other antidepressants, such as sertraline and
escitalopram, are reasonable and effective alternatives should patients
have a history of not responding to an adequate trial of fluoxetine. The
risk--benefit ratio for use of antidepressants in paediatric depression
is relatively favourable, with about 11 times more young people
responding to an antidepressant than developing suicidal events.^5^
Moreover, the shadow cast by the Black Box Warning should not discourage
the clinician from using antidepressants for the treatment of anxiety
and obsessive--compulsive disorders, as treatment of these conditions
with SSRIs is more likely to result in a clinical response, and less
likely to result in a suicidal event, compared with antidepressant
treatment of paediatric depression.^5^^,^^27^

Our job as responsible scientists and clinicians is to inform patients
and families about the risks and benefits of each intervention, with
appropriate confidence intervals and without bias, and to use this
information to collaborate with families in making clinically
appropriate treatment decisions. It is justifiable to be angry about
scientific obfuscation and deception, but we should not paint all
studies and findings with the same broad brush. Instead, let us consider
the wise words of the blind, but insightful, author James Thurber, who
advised us to 'not look back in anger, or forward in fear, but around in
awareness'.^28^

This editorial was supported by grant MH108039 (to D.A.B.) from the
NIMH.

David A. Brent MD, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, University
of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, and Department of
Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA;
Robert D. Gibbons, PhD, Departments of Medicine and Public Health
Sciences, The University of Chicago Biological Sciences, Chicago, IL;
Paul Wilkinson, MD, Developmental of Psychiatry, University of
Cambridge, and Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust,
Cambridge, UK; Bernadka Dubicka, MD, Institute of Brain, Behaviour and
Mental Health, University of Manchester, UK, and Lancashire Care
Foundation Trust, Preston, UK.
