======================================================================================
Ethnic variation in personality disorder: evaluation of 6 years of hospital admissions
======================================================================================



A. Hossain
M. Malkov
T. Lee
K. Bhui
:Correspondence: Tennyson Lee (tennyson.lee1@nhs.net)

:date: 2018-8

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   There is limited evidence on ethnic differences in personality
   disorder prevalence rates. We compared rates of people with
   personality disorder admitted to hospital in East London from 2007 to
   2013.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Of all people admitted to hospital, 9.7% had a personality disorder
   diagnosis. The admission rate for personality disorder has increased
   each year. Compared with White subjects, personality disorder was
   significantly less prevalent among Black and other minority ethnic
   (BME) groups. Personality disorder was diagnosed in 20% of forensic,
   11% of general adult, 8% of adolescent and 2% of old-age in-patients.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The increasing number of personality disorder diagnoses year on year
   indicates the increasing impact of personality disorder on in-patient
   services. It is important to identify and appropriately manage
   patients with a personality disorder diagnosis due to the significant
   strain they place on resources. The reasons for fewer admissions of
   BME patients may reflect alternative service use, a truly lower
   prevalence rate or under-detection.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Personality disorders are characterised by enduring maladaptive patterns
of behaviour, cognition and inner experience, exhibited across many
domains and deviating markedly from those accepted by the individual's
culture.1 Comorbidity of personality disorder with other mental
disorders is common, and the presence of personality disorder often has
a negative effect on treatment outcome. Personality disorder is
associated with premature mortality and suicide2 and people with the
disorder often use services heavily,3 leading to calls for improved
identification in clinical practice.4

.. _sec2-1a:

Prevalance of personality disorder
==================================

The prevalence of personality disorder increases with levels of care. In
the community, estimates range from 4.4% in the UK,5 6.1% in a World
Health Organization (WHO) study across 13 countries,6 to 8.6% in
Bangalore.7 Prevalence of personality disorder is 24% in the UK at the
primary care level.8 At the secondary care level, psychiatric
out-patient prevalence rates varied between 40 and 92% in Europe, 45–51%
in the USA and 60% in Pakistan.9

Personality disorder is under-diagnosed in routine practice compared
with when structured instruments are used.10 A USA study showed 31% of
psychiatric in-patients met criteria for personality disorder, but only
12.8% of them had a chart diagnosis of personality disorder.11 In the
UK, there is a reported prevalence rate of 7% of admissions in general
adult psychiatry wards based on routine case note diagnosis.12

.. _sec2-1b:

Review of literature
====================

We searched the PubMed, PscyInfo and EMBase databases using the search
strategy ‘personality’ AND ‘disorder’ AND ‘prevalence and ethni*’. We
found 10 relevant results and hand-searched references of these papers
for additional relevant studies. A meta-analysis (which identified 391
relevant publications and finally included 14) showed significant
differences in prevalence between different ethnic groups, raising the
question of whether there is a neglect of diagnosis in some ethnic
groups or whether these are genuinely differing rates. However, the
study does highlight the paucity of research into the prevalence rates
of personality disorder among different ethnic minorities.13 A study
based on a national household survey suggests that the prevalence of
personality disorder is at least similar in minority populations to the
native population within the UK.14

.. _sec2-1c:

Local context
=============

London is one of the most ethnically diverse cities in the world, and
East London is the most ethnically diverse part of London with 73% of
the population being non-native in origin. East London contains 8 out of
the top 15 constituencies in the UK with the highest diversity index
scores,15 making it a useful area for investigating whether there is an
ethnic variation in prevalence of illness. Within the data gathering
period, East London National Health Service Foundation Trust provided
services to three boroughs – Tower Hamlets, Newham and City and Hackney
– comprising a population of 815 000.16 This audit and service
evaluation was undertaken in partnership with the Trust as a quality
improvement initiative.

.. _sec1-1:

Objectives
==========

The objectives of this audit were: 1.to describe the ethnic variation of
psychiatric in-patients with a personality disorder diagnosis in East
London;2.to contrast services such as old age, adolescent, forensic and
general adult services.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

Anonymised data from routine service contact were collected from the
Trust's electronic patient record system on all admissions between April
2007 and April 2013. Ethnicity categories from the 2001 UK census were
used. These data were then compared to census data of local demographics
from the census data of 2011. Individual identifiers were not examined
because routine clinical data were used in aggregate. As this was a
service audit to inform our quality improvement initiatives, ethical
approvals were deemed to not be necessary.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

Out of a total of 19 102 in-patient admissions in 6 years across three
boroughs in all services, 1853 of them had or were eventually given a
diagnosis of a personality disorder, which gives us a mean prevalence
estimate of 9.7%. Of these in-patients, 56% were female and 44% male.
This mean prevalence varied from 3% in Indian and Pakistani populations,
to 17% in the native White British population (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__).
There is a statistically significant lower prevalence of personality
disorder in all ethnicities compared with the White British population,
except in those of mixed race heritage where the sample size is too
small. There was little variation in personality disorder diagnosis
rates between Black and other minority ethnic (BME) groups where there
was a sufficiently large sample size. Table 1Mean period prevalence of
personality disorder diagnoses in in-patients in the years
2007–2013EthnicityPrevalence of personality disorderOdds ratio (95%
CI)White British17%1Irish7%0.3635 (0.25–0.52)Black African4%0.19
(0.105–0.24)Black Caribbean4%0.22 (0.17–0.28)Chinese4%0.17
(0.06–0.56)Indian3%0.17 (0.11–0.25)Bangladeshi4%0.22
(0.17–0.28)Pakistani3%0.28 (0.19–0.419)White/Asian mix20%1.192
(0.68–2.11)White/Black African mix1%0.0638 (0.009–0.46)White/Black
Caribbean mix16%0.8904 (0.62–1.28)Other mix14%0.799 (0.54–1.18)Other
Asian11%0.6 (0.46–0.9)Other Black7%0.38 (0.29–0.49)Other White8%0.408
(0.34–0.88)Other ethnicity7%0.36 (0.28–0.47)

`Table 2 <#tab02>`__ shows the breakdown of the prevalence of
personality disorder diagnosis in the different directorates of the
Trust. The prevalence was 20% in forensic, 11% in general adult, 8% in
adolescent services and 2% in old-age in-patients. `Table 3 <#tab03>`__
compares admission rates to the local population levels of each
ethnicity. Table 2Prevalence of personality disorder diagnosis in adult,
child and adolescent, old-age and forensic servicesDirectoratePrevalence
of patientsAdults11%Child and adolescent8%Forensic20%Old-age service2%
Table 3Comparison of admission rates to local population levelsWhite
BritishWhite IrishWhite otherMixed White and Black CaribbeanMixed White
and Black AfricanMixed White and AsianOther
mixedIndianPakistaniBangladeshiChineseOther AsianBlack AfricanBlack
CaribbeanOther BlackOther ethnicNot statedTotalGeneral
population224 02912 563107 89511 8307740877812 15157 09534 679125 06015 74732 66775 38939 61420 96029 690815 734
27.46%1.54%13.23%1.45%0.95%1.08%1.49%7.00%4.25%15.33%1.93%4.00%9.24%4.86%2.57%3.64%Number
of
in-patients6374473192123277762126964901611845692311166088585158019 102Percentage
of in-patients33%2%10%1%0%0%1%4%3%8%0%3%12%9%5%4%3%Number of patients
with personality
disorder109033149361153023176936389736459391853Prevalence of personality
disorder17%7%8%16%1%20%14%3%3%4%4%11%4%4%7%7%7%

The number of people admitted to hospital with a diagnosis of
personality disorder has increased year on year, nearly doubling at the
end of the 6 year period (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). Fig. 1Number of yearly
admissions of people with personality disorder.

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

Our analysis of in-patients in East London demonstrated a 9.7%
prevalence rate of personality disorder, which is in line with previous
studies of in-patients in the UK.12

Although our results indicate little variation in personality disorder
rates between different BME groups, they consistently show lower rates
compared to the White British population. Lower rates of referrals for
BME groups to the local personality disorder service have also been
found.17 Our findings raise key questions in light of international and
national data pointing to the contrary (e.g. the WHO study across 13
countries that found that personality disorder is no less prevalent
outside ‘westernised’ countries6 and the UK survey14). However, the
lower incidence of personality disorder presentations in psychiatric
emergencies in ethnic minorities has been noted before.18

Possible reasons for our findings may include that BME community
structures contain the mild to moderate presentations of the disorder,
meaning that only those people with extreme cases present to mental
health services. BME communities also have difficulties in accessing
healthcare, more complex pathways to specialist treatment19 and lower
rates of accessing healthcare than the majority of the population.20

There is some evidence that there are ethnic variations in the
presentation of the disorder,21\ :sup:`,`\ 22 that specific symptoms can
be shaped by culture23 and that individuals of differing ethnicity may
present with different patterns of personality disorder
pathology.24\ :sup:`,`\ 25 In the key population group in East London,
there is insufficient consistent evaluation into prevalence, recognition
and service access for people with personality disorder from Asian
populations26 and studies showing low rates of personality disorder in
Asian-origin samples may be a result of a lack of understanding of what
constitutes personality and personality disorder in Asian culture.27
Differences in the presentation of symptoms of personality disorder in
different cultures would not adequately be screened for by the tools
currently in use. The preceding factors raise the possibility of
misdiagnosis and suboptimal treatment.28 In addition, ‘reverse racism’
may be occurring, with psychiatrists reluctant to make a diagnosis of
personality disorder because it may be perceived as racist.

The annually increasing number of personality disorder diagnoses may
reflect an increased willingness to diagnose this condition due to the
increase in evidence-based treatment and the publication of National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines on personality
disorders in 2009. However, it is interesting to note that the
proportion of patients admitted under sections of the Mental Health Act
(2007) (MHA) has been steadily increasing since at least 2009
(http://www.cqc.org.uk/publications/major-report/monitoring-mental-health-act-report#old-reports),
and there could possibly be a correlate, especially after the changes
introduced to the act in 2007.29 Our analysis did not pick out whether
the people diagnosed with personality disorder were informal or under a
section of the MHA.

The prevalence of 8% of adolescent in-patients with a diagnosis of a
personality disorder is remarkable, as ICD-10 (1992) discourages the
diagnosis in under 18s.30 This suggests that clinicians may find the
diagnosis of heuristic value. There has been considerable evidence that
the diagnostic criteria for borderline personality disorder (and other
personality disorders) are as valid, reliable and stable before age 18
as after age 18.31

The prevalence of personality disorder among older people in the
community has been estimated to be about 10%.32 Among older in-patients,
personality disorder has been seen in 6% of those with organic mental
disorders and 24% of those with major depressive disorder.33 Our finding
of a 2% prevalence suggests that personality disorder may be
under-diagnosed significantly in routine practice in old-age patients.

.. _sec4-1:

Limitations
-----------

Data were collected from one Trust in the UK. However, it is the most
ethnically diverse one (Census 2011)16, and there is no reason to expect
differences in routine diagnostic practice in other Mental Health Trusts
in the UK. We do not anticipate problems relating to quality and
validity of the personality disorder data compared with other diagnostic
groups because all diagnoses are made on the basis of routine clinical
care provided by the Trust.

.. _sec4-2:

Recommendations
---------------

The significant and rising proportion of in-patients diagnosed with
personality disorder, combined with cost and pressures on in-patient
beds, indicates that variations in recognition, access and management of
these patients needs to be understood to ensure accurate identification
and an improvement in present services.

Research targeting reasons for the lower diagnostic rates of personality
disorder in BME groups could include whether there are cultural norms
shared between BME communities that limit seeking help from mental
health services for symptoms of personality disorder, whether there are
variations in pathways to care, or whether there are variations in the
attitudes of clinicians in diagnosing personality disorder in different
ethnic groups.

The high proportion of adolescent in-patients diagnosed with personality
disorder highlights the importance of a good transition from Child and
Adolescent Mental Health Services to adult services, especially given
difficulties these patients have with attachment. The ongoing presence
of personality disorder in old-age services indicates the need for
expertise in detecting and managing this diagnosis in these services, as
these patients may represent the most difficult of personality disorder
presentations in terms of not having ‘burnt out’ as is often expected.

There is a role for well-designed databases that lend themselves to
ongoing analyses of routinely collected clinical data reflecting real
service activity. All our results and inferences were obtained from such
data, which provides us a low-cost opportunity for comparison over time
and in different regions.34 These data inform our quality improvement
actions to improve clinical skills in assessment and management of
personality disorder, and to better understand the needs of adolescents
and elderly people with personality disorder.

We thank the staff at the Information Department of the East London
National Health Service Foundation Trust for their excellent help in
routine data retrieval. A poster presentation of preliminary results was
presented at the 3rd World Congress of Cultural Psychiatry in London on
9–11 Mar 2012.

**A. Hossain**, MRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist, North East London
National Health Service Foundation Trust, UK; **M. Malkov**, MRCPsych,
ST5 CAMHS Specialty Spr, Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust, UK;
**T. Lee**, FFCH, MRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist in Psychotherapy,
Deancross Personality Disorder Service, East London National Health
Service Foundation Trust, UK; **K. Bhui**, MD, FRCPsych, Professor of
Cultural Psychiatry and Epidemiology, Queen Mary University of London
and Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist, East London National Health
Service Foundation Trust, UK.
