====================================================================================================================================
Management of common mental disorders for psychogeriatric patients in Hong Kong: comparison of two clinics after 1 year of treatment
====================================================================================================================================



Mimi Mei Cheung Wong
Pui-fai Pang
Michael Gar Chung Yiu

:date: 2018-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We would like to update the findings of our pilot study which compared
the enhanced common mental disorder clinic (CMDC)1 and conventional
specialist psychiatric out-patient clinic (SOPC) in the management of
common mental disorders (CMDs) for psychogeriatric patients in our
hospital in Hong Kong. In our previous letter to the editor, different
clinical factors were compared between the two groups 6 months
post-treatment. This time, findings for 1 year post-treatment were
available.

The CMDC is a 1-year programme with multidisciplinary involvement. There
were 30 patients in each group. After 1 year of treatment, only 15
patients (50%) remained in the CMDC, while 23 remained in the SOPC
(*P* = 0.03). Ten patients (33.3%) completed the CMDC programme and were
successfully discharged from the CMDC. They did not require any
medication for their CMDs. One patient refused to attend medical
follow-up. One patient was transferred from CMDC to SOPC, as she was
found to have dementia. Another patient was transferred to the general
out-patient clinic for continuation of treatment for her mixed anxiety
and depressive disorder.

Concerning psychological intervention, half of the patients in the CMDC
group (50%) were referred to a clinical psychologist, and ten had good
adherence to appointments. For the SOPC group, only three patients (10%)
were referred to a clinical psychologist (*P* < 0.05).

Concerning antidepressant use, the rate at 1-year follow-up was 11
(36.7%) for CMDC *v.* 20 (69%) for SOPC patients (*P* = 0.02). Profiles
of benzodiazepine and hypnotic use and prescription were similar prior
to consultation, after the first consultation, 6 months post-treatment
and 1 year post-treatment. Eight patients (26.7%) in each group did not
require benzodiazepines or hypnotics after the first consultation. The
reduction in benzodiazepines and hypnotics was statistically significant
(*P* = 0.04). At 1 year after treatment, ten patients (33.3%) in each
group were taking benzodiazepines or hypnotics.

In summary, psychiatrists of both clinics were able to reduce
benzodiazepine and hypnotic use after the patients formally presented to
the psychiatric clinic. Nearly half of the patients who were given a
benzodiazepine or hypnotic did not require it afterwards. Instead, about
two-thirds of them were treated with antidepressants. Significantly more
patients did not require antidepressants at 1 year post-treatment in the
CMDC group. There were also significantly more patients who did not
require medical follow-up at 1 year for the CMDC group.

Remission of CMDs is possible for patients who have completed the 1-year
CMDC. Its psychological and pharmacological components, as well as
timely interventions, have contributed to its success. The treating team
and the patients are aware of the time-limited nature of the programme
and have expectations that suitable cases can be discharged from the
programme upon its completion. This helps to ensure that the clinic is
not overwhelmed by continual accumulation of cases. On the contrary, the
SOPC does not have a specified duration of treatment and the doctors are
less ready to discharge patients from the clinic if they are stable on
medical treatment. It is not common to refer back stable cases to
primary care. Enhanced collaboration between the SOPC and primary care
in the management of CMDs can help to reduce the burden on the SOPC, so
that it can have more capacity to deal with complicated and unstable
cases.2 The acceptability of psychological interventions is expected to
be better if they can be more tailored to elderly patients; in fact,
many older people expressed a preference for talking therapies.3
