==================================================================================
Size and clustering of ethnic groups and rates of psychiatric admission in England
==================================================================================

Gayathri Venkatesan
Scott Weich
Orla McBride
Liz Twigg
Helen Parsons
Jan Scott
Kamaldeep Bhui
Patrick KeownCorrespondence to Gayathri Venkatesan
(Gayathri.venkatesan@ntw.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2018-8

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To compare rates of admission for different types of severe mental
   illness between ethnic groups, and to test the hypothesis that larger
   and more clustered ethnic groups will have lower admission rates.
   This was a descriptive study of routinely collected data from the
   National Health Service in England.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   There was an eightfold difference in admission rates between ethnic
   groups for schizophreniform and mania admissions, and a fivefold
   variation in depression admissions. On average, Black and minority
   ethnic (BME) groups had higher rates of admission for
   schizophreniform and mania admissions but not for depression. This
   increased rate was greatest in the teenage years and early adulthood.
   Larger ethnic group size was associated with lower admission rates.
   However, greater clustering was associated with higher admission
   rates.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Our findings support the hypothesis that larger ethnic groups have
   lower rates of admission. This was a between-group comparison rather
   than within each group. Our findings do not support the hypothesis
   that more clustered groups have lower rates of admission. In fact,
   they suggest the opposite: groups with low clustering had lower
   admission rates. The BME population in the UK is increasing in size
   and becoming less clustered. Our results suggest that both of these
   factors should ameliorate the overrepresentation of BME groups among
   psychiatric in-patients. However, this overrepresentation continues,
   and our results suggest a possible explanation, namely, changes in
   the delivery of mental health services, particularly the marked
   reduction in admissions for depression.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

It has been known for some time that Black and minority ethnic (BME)
groups are overrepresented among psychiatric in-patients in the National
Health Service (NHS).(n.d.a) The Count Me In census confirmed that this
overrepresentation persists and may be becoming more pronounced.(n.d.b)
The census also consistently demonstrated significant variation between
BME groups, with most having higher rates of admission but some having
lower rates compared with the national average. These differences in
admission rates are likely to be explained by three main factors:
differences in the incidence and rates of mental disorder;
service-related factors, such as pathways into in-patient care; and
changes in the size and distribution of the ethnic minority groups in
the UK.(n.d.a)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.c)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.d)

.. _sec-1-1:

Background
==========

One of the earliest demonstrations of the ethnic density hypothesis was
the study of psychiatric admission rates in Chicago by Faris and
Dunham.(n.d.e) Several subsequent studies have supported this idea of a
‘protective’ ethnic density effect, whereby individuals living in areas
with a greater proportion of people of the same ethnicity have better
health.(n.d.f)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.g) However, not all studies have
consistently found results that support the ethnic density
hypothesis.(n.d.h) A study at a wider regional scale in England failed
to show any effect within individual ethnic groups, although there was
some evidence to support differences between ethnic groups.(n.d.i)

In response, Halpern argued that within-group ethnic density operates at
a local level, for example, by reducing levels of ethnic discrimination
and increasing levels of social support, and may not be detected when
the scale of investigation is at a regional or national level.(n.d.j)
Halpern made two predictions about between-group effects that might be
evident at a larger scale: (a) smaller ethnic groups will tend to have
higher psychiatric admission rates than larger groups, and (b) groups
that have a stronger tendency to cluster together will tend to have
lower admission rates. We aimed to empirically test these two
predictions at a national level in England by linking NHS mental health
admission rate data from 2005/06 to UK census ethnic group population
estimates, and examining national level mental health admission rates
for each BME group according to the population size of each group and
the degree of clustering of each group across England.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

Rates of admission were calculated for the 16 ethnic groups as used in
the UK census, while controlling for age and symptom type.

.. _sec2-1:

Population
----------

The population size of each ethnic group was obtained from the
‘Understanding Population Trends and Processes’ section of the Ethnic
Group Population Projection (ETHPOP) database. This is a web resource
maintained by the University of Leeds, which provides projections of
each ethnic group at various levels, including the national
level.(n.d.k)

The index of dissimilarity was used as a measure of clustering for each
ethnic group.(n.d.l) This ranges from 0 (indicating full integration) to
100 (indicating full segregation). An index of less than 40 indicates
low levels of segregation, while one of 40 or more indicates moderate to
high levels of segregation.(n.d.m) Data were obtained from the Centre on
Dynamics of Ethnicity website.(n.d.n)

.. _sec2-2:

Number of admissions and symptom type
-------------------------------------

Routine clinical data were used. The numbers of in-patient episodes in
the NHS (finished consultant episodes) in 2005/06 were obtained for
three broad diagnostic groups: schizophreniform (schizophrenia and
related disorders), mania (manic episodes) and depression (unipolar and
bipolar depressive episodes).

.. _sec2-3:

Age at admission
----------------

Five age bands were created: 10–19, 20–29, 30–39, 40–49 and 50–59 years.
The age range was restricted to 10–59 years for two reasons. First,
there are far fewer admissions for these diagnostic groups prior to the
teenage years. Second, beyond 60 years of age, the population size of
several ethnic groups is so small, even at the national level, that
there are too few admissions for the calculation of meaningful rates to
be possible.

.. _sec2-4:

Rates
-----

Rates of admission were calculated per 100 000 population for each
ethnic group. Age standardisation was used to compare the 16 groups by
assuming each group had the same population as the European standard.

.. _sec2-5:

Relative rates
--------------

The average rate of admission for BME groups was compared with the White
British group to calculate relative rates for each of the 10-year age
bands.

.. _sec2-6:

Outlier
-------

One group (other Black) had rates that were consistently outside the
spread of the other groups. Subsequent years of the Count Me In census
showed that this was the one group that decreased in size as
self-recording of ethnicity improved instead of staff recording of
ethnicity. An adjustment was made by distributing the excess admissions
among four other groups (Black Caribbean, Black African, mixed White and
Black Caribbean, and mixed White and Black African).

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Rates of admissions
-------------------

The average (s.d., range) age standardised rates of admission per
100 000 were 139.3 (89.9, 46.7–335.0) for schizophreniform disorders,
30.0 (16.3, 6.6–53.5) for mania and 66.9 (23.9, 21.9–106.6) for
depression. There was an eightfold difference in rates of
schizophreniform and mania admissions, and a fivefold difference in the
rate of depression admissions, between ethnic groups. The rate of
admission in the White British group was within the range for all three
types of admission, albeit at the lower end of the range for
schizophreniform (59.3) and mania admissions (14.3), and the middle of
the range for depression (63.7).

.. _sec3-2:

Relative rate of admission
--------------------------

In each of the 10 year age bands, the average relative rate of admission
for BME groups was higher than that of the White British group for
schizophreniform and mania admissions, but not for depression. These
differences were most pronounced in younger age bands and tended to
decrease with age. The relative rate of admission for mania dropped the
most, from 3.5 (1.6–5.4) to 1.7 (1.2–2.3). The relative rate of
admission for schizophreniform disorders dropped from 2.9 (2.0–4.0) to
2.3 (1.6–3.1). In depression, the relative rate was 1.5 (0.9–2.2) in
those aged 10–19 years and 1.1 (0.8–1.3) in those aged 50–59 years
(`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). Fig. 1Average relative rates (with confidence
intervals) of admissions for BME groups compared with the White British
group. Data are shown separately for schizophreniform (red), mania
(blue) and depression (black) admissions. Data are for England 2005/6.

.. _sec3-3:

Association of rate of admission with group size and clustering
---------------------------------------------------------------

The mean (s.d.) index of dissimilarity score for the 16 ethnic groups
(including White British) was 46% (13) with a range of 27–67%. The
average population size for those aged 10–59 years was 2116 k with a
range of 65 k to 28 170 k. There was a moderate positive rank
correlation between the index of dissimilarity score and rates of
admission for schizophreniform disorders, and a weak correlation with
rates of admission for mania, and no correlation with rates of admission
for depression. By contrast, there was a weak or moderate negative rank
correlation between the size of each of the 16 ethnic groups and the
corresponding age-standardised rate of each category of admission
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Table 1Spearman's correlation between
age-standardised rates of admission and ethnic group population size and
the index of dissimilarity score for each
groupSchizophreniformManiaDepressionIndex of
dissimilarityrho = +0.50rho = +0.20rho = +0.04\ *P* = 0.047\ *P* = 0.464\ *P* = 0.888\ *N* = 16\ *N* = 16\ *N* = 16Population
aged
10–59rho = −0.39rho = −0.47rho = −0.21\ *P* = 0.141\ *P* = 0.064\ *P* = 0.444\ *N* = 16\ *N* = 16\ *N* = 16 [1]_

Ethnic groups with populations aged between 10 and 59 years that were
larger than half a million had relatively low rates of admission.
Smaller ethnic groups with low levels of clustering (<40% index of
dissimilarity) also tended to have lower rates of admission. Smaller
ethnic groups with high levels of clustering (>40% index of
dissimilarity) had higher rates of admission.

This pattern was most evident in schizophreniform admissions, where
rates were on average three times higher in small clustered groups than
the rates in groups with a larger population size. The rates of
admission for mania were twice as high in smaller ethnic groups with
high levels of clustering when compared with rates of admission for
mania in ethnic groups with a larger population. The increase was least
evident in depression admissions, where rates were about 40% higher in
small clustered groups than the rates in groups with a larger population
size (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). Table 2The rate of admission in 16 ethnic
groups including White British for schizophreniform, mania and
depression admissions, according to large or small group population size
and high or low group clustering.Population > 500 000 aged
10–59Population < 500 000 aged 10–59ANOVAIndex of
dissimilarity<40%>40%No. ethnic
groups\ *N* = 4\ *N* = 4\ *N* = 8Schizophreniform71.673.0206.4F = 9.5195%
CI38.2, 105.07.1, 138.8141.1,
271.7\ *P* = 0.003Mania17.919.341.3F = 6.9895% CI8.0, 27.7−4.1,
42.330.6, 52.1\ *P* = 0.009Depression56.950.880.0F = 3.1695% CI21.9,
92.00.0, 101.668.8, 91.1\ *P* = 0.076

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

In line with previous studies, our results demonstrate an increased rate
of admission in the majority of BME groups. There was significant
variation in admission rates between ethnic groups, and there appeared
to be an interaction with age. According to our results, the greatest
increase in admission rates was in teenagers and young adults. By
contrast, the AESOP study indicated that the incidence of psychosis
remains raised in ethnic minority groups throughout the age range of our
study.(n.d.o) This may indicate a reduced risk of (re)admission with
increasing age in BME groups relative to the White British population.

Our findings provide support for the hypothesis that larger ethnic
groups have lower rates of admission. This is a between-group effect
rather than a within-group effect. In this study, located in England,
which has a population aged 10–59 years of 40 million, ethnic groups
with populations over half a million had lower rates of admission. Our
findings do not support the hypothesis the more clustered groups have
lower rates of admission. In fact, they suggest the opposite: groups
with low clustering had lower admission rates. Again, it is important to
emphasise that this study only looked at between-group effects and did
not investigate within-group effects.

The BME population in the UK is increasing in size and becoming less
clustered.(n.d.m) Our results suggest that both of these factors should
ameliorate the overrepresentation of BME groups among psychiatric
in-patients. However, the Count Me In census indicated that this
overrepresentation continues. The answer may lie in changes in the
delivery to mental health services. We have previously shown that that
although rates of admission have fallen across England, one of the
largest reductions has been in admissions for depression, whereas
admissions for schizophrenia and mania have shown only a modest, if any,
reduction.(n.d.p)

In this work, we have shown that the increased rate of admission for BME
groups was confined to schizophreniform disorders and mania, but was not
found in depression. Therefore, all other things being equal, reducing
the rate of admissions for depression alone will have the unintended
consequence of increasing the overrepresentation of BME groups in the
psychiatric in-patient population. The same applies to interventions
that are more effective in reducing admissions in adults over 35 years
of age than in younger adults, such as crisis resolution home-based
treatment (http://www.ethpop.org).

.. _sec5:

Limitations
===========

Gender-specific data were not available; hence, standardisation by
gender was not possible. The diagnostic information was from routine
clinical practice. For the majority of patients, ethnicity was
self-determined, but for a minority of patients the ethnicity category
would have been picked by staff.

It is impossible to avoid the ecological fallacy when analysing
population level data. This ecological study was undertaken at a
national level and, therefore, the results may be affected by the
ecological fallacy (i.e. associative results observed at this national
level are not necessarily replicated at the individual or smaller
geographical levels.(n.d.q) However, the finding of an association
between ethnic groups and higher rates of detention is fully consistent
with a number of studies that have found higher rates of psychosis and
admission among individuals from BME groups.

Local area of residence is likely to reflect aspects of group membership
dynamics, such as local ethnic density, dissimilarity and sense of
membership. These are likely to be more fluid than individual-level
variables. We argue that ethnicity may operate at various levels,
including those of the individual, local area, region, and nation, and
perhaps even beyond national boundaries; however, our national-level
data did not allow us to investigate these nuances.

This study included information on the number of admissions in England
for each ethnic group. It did not have access to any individual-level
data or local area data. A further study is required with a more
detailed data-set, including detention outcomes recorded at individual,
local area, regional and national levels, and corresponding explanatory
variables as in our previous study.(n.d.r) Dual diagnoses, specific
substance use and multiple admissions should all be considered in future
studies.

.. _sec6:

Clinical implications
=====================

If these associations are replicated, then this study has several
implications. The first is that as ethnic groups increase in size and
become more evenly spread, relative rates of admission will fall.

Second, any change in the pattern of admission, according to broad
diagnostic group, symptom type or age, is likely to affect the ethnic
make-up of the psychiatric in-patient population. For example,
home-based treatment as an alternative to admission has been shown to be
more effective for depression and for adults over the age of 35. An
indirect consequence of this could be an exacerbation of the
overrepresentation of BME groups among the remaining in-patient
population.

Future research in this area will model the effects that population
change and changes in psychiatric practice since 2005/6 have had on the
psychiatric in-patient population over the subsequent decade.

**Gayathri Venkatesan** is a Consultant Neuropsychiatrist at Walkergate
Park, Newcastle, UK; **Scott Weich** is a Professor of Mental Health at
the Division of Mental Health and Wellbeing, Warwick Medical School,
University of Warwick, Coventry, UK; **Orla McBride** is a Lecturer in
Psychology at the School of Psychology, University of Ulster, County
Londonderry, Ulster, UK; **Liz Twigg** is a Professor of Human Geography
at the Department of Geography, University of Portsmouth, Buckingham
Building, Portsmouth, UK; **Helen Parsons** is a Senior Research Fellow
at the Division of Health Sciences, Warwick Medical School, University
of Warwick, Coventry, UK; **Jan Scott** and **Patrick Keown** are
Consultant Psychiatrists at Newcastle University, Academic Psychiatry,
Campus for Ageing & Vitality, Newcastle, UK; and **Kamaldeep Bhui** is a
Professor of Cultural Psychiatry and Epidemiology at the Centre for
Psychiatry, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen
Mary University of London, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.r.

.. [1]
   The data are for 16 ethnic groups in England.
