---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  This article examines mental health disorders as individuals
  transition from adolescence to adulthood. Data were collected from
  clinical records of patients who had transitioned from child and
  adolescent mental health services to adult mental health services in a
  region in South Wales. Demographics and clinical diagnoses under both
  services were recorded. Patterns between adolescent and adult
  disorders as well as comorbidities were investigated using Pearson\'s
  χ^2^-test and Fisher\'s exact test.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  Of the 98 patients that transitioned from one service to the other, 74
  had changes to their diagnoses. There were 164 total changes to
  diagnoses, with patients no longer meeting diagnostic criteria for 64
  disorders and 100 new disorders being diagnosed. Comorbidity increased
  in adulthood.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  Diagnoses can evolve, particularly during adolescence and early
  adulthood. Therefore regular reassessment is paramount for successful
  treatment.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a4}

  None.
author:
- Ann Collins
- Antonio Muñoz-SolomandoCorrespondence to Dr Ann Collins
  (<ann.collins@wales.nhs.uk>)
date: 2018-10
institute:
- 1Tonteg Child and Family Clinic, Cwm Taf University Health Board,
  Pontypridd, Wales
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
title: The transition from child and adolescent to adult mental health
  services with a focus on diagnosis progression
---

The majority of mental health disorders are identified during
adolescence and early adulthood.^1^ By the age of 21, more than half of
the population have experienced at least one mental health
disorder.^2^^,^^3^ Adolescent mental health disorders also place
individuals at an increased risk of further difficulties as
adults.^4^^,^^5^ However, this effect has been found to be limited when
adolescent episodes are brief, emphasising the need for prompt and
effective treatment.^6^ Despite many studies having identified
adolescence as a risk period for the onset of mental health disorders,
the course these disorders take is not yet fully understood. To date, it
is unclear why some individuals develop a recurrent pattern of mental
illness, whereas mental illness is confined to the adolescent period for
others.

# Patterns of diagnostic transition {#sec10-1}

As people with mental health disorders transition from adolescence to
adulthood, their disorders can follow different trajectories. In some
cases, they can be predecessors of a different disorder in adulthood,
displaying a heterotypic pattern.^4^^,^^5^^,^^7^^,^^8^ In other cases,
they may remain diagnostically stable and follow a homotypic
pattern.^1^^,^^4^ It is possible for both a heterotypic and homotypic
pattern of transition to be displayed along with the development of
comorbid disorders, especially as these are more likely to develop
during the adolescent and young-adulthood phase of
development.^9^^,^^10^

# Study aims {#sec10-2}

Using a clinical sample, this study aims to examine mental disorders as
people transition from adolescence to adulthood in a population in South
Wales, UK. Patterns between adolescent and adult mental health disorders
as well as comorbidities were investigated.

# Method {#sec1}

Data were collected in July 2013. Clinical records were examined
retrospectively for all patients referred to adult mental health
services (AMHS) within Cwm Taf University Health Board over a 5-year
period.

## Inclusion criteria {#sec1-1}

Included participants were aged 15--22 at the time of referral and had a
documented history of involvement with child and adolescent mental
health services (CAMHS) in the 2-year period prior to referral to adult
services.

## Exclusion criteria {#sec1-2}

People were excluded from the study for the following reasons: •lack of
sufficient engagement with CAMHS or AMHS to allow a full
assessment;•AMHS involvement of less than a year;•lack of documented
diagnosis from CAMHS or AMHS;•CAMHS service provided by another health
board.

## Data collection {#sec1-3}

Electronic AMHS notes were analysed. CAMHS paper documentation were
accessed if required. The data collected included: •date of referral to
AMHS;•age at time of referral;•geographical area;•documented diagnosis
in discharge paperwork from CAMHS;•documented diagnosis in AMHS clinical
notes or correspondence.

Diagnoses were recorded as per clinical coding, based on the ICD-10
(1992). In a small number of participants (*n* = 17), no formal ICD-10
diagnosis was made by CAMHS clinicians. Instead, formulation was used to
describe the participant\'s presentation at the time. The term emotional
difficulties was used to capture these cases.

Some disorders were grouped into categories. Hyperkinetic disorder,
conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) were classified
together as externalising disorders. Generalised anxiety disorder,
obsessive--compulsive disorder (OCD) and phobic disorders were
classified together as anxiety disorders. Different forms of substance
misuse were categorised as mental and behavioural disorders due to
psychoactive substance use. These disorders were grouped in this way
because of their level of comorbidity within the category. No diagnosis
of conduct disorder or ODD presented without comorbid hyperkinetic
disorder. Phobic disorder and OCD did not present as single anxiety
disorders. Those participants who misused substances, misused at least
two. Therefore, we could not make conclusions regarding an individual
diagnosis transition for those individual disorders. Listing all the
individual disorders led to a multitude of combinations within the
categories and a pragmatic decision was made to group the disorders.

## Ethical approval {#sec1-4}

Support for this research was obtained from the Research and Development
Department within Cwm Taf University Health Board, which is responsible
for both the AMHS and CAMHS clinical records. The need for ethical
approval was discussed extensively but deemed unnecessary for the
following reasons: we were trust employees and collected data on site,
originally as part of an audit; the method of data collection allowed
identifiable information to be anonymised at the point of collection;
and the data used in this study were limited to demographic and
diagnosis details.

## Statistical analysis {#sec1-5}

Pearson\'s χ^2^-test and Fisher\'s exact test were used for the
comparison of frequencies between two discrete variables. All of the
reported *P*-values are two tailed. Statistical significance was set at
0.05 and analyses were conducted using the SPSS version 21 statistical
software for windows. Standardised residuals (S~*i*~) were calculated
where a significant result was found.

# Results {#sec2}

A total of 207 people aged 15--22 were referred to AMHS in the study
period. [Figure 1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"} illustrates how the final
sample of 98 participants was created. Of the 98 participants, 60 were
male (61.2%). The mean age was 18.1 (s.d. 1.46), with an age range of
16--23. There were three sources of referrals to AMHS: 60 participants
(61%) were referred by their general practitioner, 37 (38%) by CAMHS and
1 (1%) by the AMHS Crisis Resolution Team. There were 42 participants
(43%) who had been referred within 1--12 months of 1 July 2012; 19 (19%)
were referred within 13--24 months; and 19 (19%) were referred within
25--36 months, 9 (9%) within 37--48 months and 9 (9%) within 49--60
months. Fig. 1Flow chart illustrating the selection process for
participation in the study.

The CAMHS disorders were categorised into 13 diagnostic categories. A
total of 65 participants (66%) had a singular diagnosis, 29 (30%) had
two diagnoses and 4 (4%) had three diagnoses. This led to 135 individual
diagnoses. The most common diagnostic category in CAMHS was the
externalising disorders. The AMHS disorders were also categorised into
13 diagnostic categories, 10 of which were present in the CAMHS sample.
A total of 46 participants (47%) had a singular diagnosis, 37 (38%) had
two diagnoses, 14 (14%) had three and 1 (1%) had four diagnoses. This
led to 166 individual diagnoses. Externalising disorders remained the
most prevalent diagnosis. Frequencies of individual diagnostic
categories are detailed in [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}. Table
1Frequencies of individual diagnostic categoriesClinical code of
disorders (ICD-10 codes)CAMHS frequency (%)AMHS frequency (%)Bipolar
affective disorder (F31)2 (1)5 (3)Depression (F32)19 (14)30 (18)Elective
mutism (F94)1 (1)0 (0)Dissocial personality disorder (F60.2)0 (0)8
(5)Anorexia nervosa (F50)5 (4)0 (0)Emotional difficulties17 (13)0
(0)Emotionally unstable personality disorder (F60.3)0 (0)12
(7)Externalising disorder (F90--91)57 (42)38 (23)Learning disability
(F81.9)1 (1)1 (1)Neurotic disorder (F40--42)14 (10)23 (14)Mental and
behavioural disorder due to psychoactive substance use (F10--19)5 (4)25
(15)Mental disorder due to brain damage or dysfunction (F06)0 (0)1
(1)Pervasive developmental disorder (F84)8 (6)7 (4)Schizophrenia (F20)4
(3)6 (4)Acute and transient psychotic disorders (F23)1 (1)9 (7)Tic
disorder (F95)1 (1)1 (1)

When the diagnoses of participants in CAMHS were compared with the
diagnoses in AMHS, 164 changes (mean 1.65, s.d. 1.15) were found. Of the
disorders diagnosed by CAMHS, 64 were no longer present after
participants transferred to AMHS, and 100 new disorders were diagnosed
in AMHS. Of the 98 participants, 23 (23%) had no changes to their
diagnosis.

Disorders diagnosed in CAMHS were examined retrospectively, observing
how these cases developed diagnostically under AMHS. Heterotypic
continuity was observed to be significant in three disorder categories.
These categories were CAMHS externalising disorders to dissocial
personality disorders (DPP) (*P* = 0.01), CAMHS eating disorders to
emotionally unstable personality disorders (EUPD) (*P* = 0.01) and CAMHS
emotional difficulties to EUPD (*P* = 0.01). Homotypic continuity was
evident for externalising disorders (χ^2^ = 37.5, *P* \< 0.001),
neurotic disorders (χ^2^ = 6.04, *P* = 0.01), bipolar affective disorder
(*P* \< 0.001), pervasive developmental disorder (*P* \< 0.001), mental
and behavioural disorder due to psychoactive substance use (*P* = 0.01)
and Tourette\'s syndrome (*P* = 0.01). Several disorders displayed an
inverse relationship and, if present in CAMHS, the presence of other
disorders in AMHS decreased. This was the case for the following
diagnoses: CAMHS neurotic disorder and AMHS externalising disorder
(χ^2^ = 5.47, *P* = 0.02), CAMHS externalising disorders with both AMHS
neurotic disorders (χ^2^ = 5.02, *P* = 0.03) and EUPD (χ^2^ = 8.07,
*P* \< 0.001), and CAMHS depression and AMHS externalising disorder
(χ^2^ = 6.08, *P* = 0.02).

There were two new cases of schizophrenia in the AMHS sample. The
participants had diagnoses of emotional difficulties and externalising
disorder while under CAMHS. Of the three new cases of bipolar affective
disorder, one participant had a diagnosis of externalising disorder and
two had a diagnosis of depression while under CAMHS.

# Discussion {#sec3}

In our sample, the majority of participants experienced a change in
diagnosis between adolescence and adulthood. The aim of this study was
to explore the patterns of this change. A total of 59% of participants
recovered from their CAMHS diagnosis, indicating effective treatment or
evolving symptoms. After transitioning to AMHS, 75% of all participants
had been diagnosed with a new diagnosis. This highlights that
comorbidity and complexity is still developing.

Cwm Taf University Health Board has an agreed transition policy between
CAMHS and AMHS. Since 2011, patients are referred from CAMHS when they
are 17.5 years old. A period of transition is then expected, with joint
clinical reviews, until the patient reaches the age of 18. Prior
policies recommended the transfer to adult services at age 16 or when
formal education ended. Previous research has indicated that only 49% of
CAMHS patients that have reached the age of service transition
successfully engage with AMHS.^11^ If these individuals had a history of
severe mental illness, prescriptions or previous admissions they were
more likely to transition. Our study includes people who have been
assessed and diagnosed by both CAMHS and AMHS. In this context, it is
therefore difficult to establish if the sample is representative as
comparable research has mostly been done on a population level. This may
explain why several disorders displayed an inverse relationship although
research indicates a comorbid relationship.^8^^,^^10^^,^^12^ In our
sample, externalising disorders were more prevalent than depression.
This is a possible explanation for the higher proportion of male
participants in our sample.^13^ This is important as females are at a
higher risk for adolescent mental illness continuing into adulthood^6^
and are more likely to develop comorbid mental disorders than males.^14^

Homotypic continuity into adulthood was statistically present for
several disorders, including externalising disorders. This was an
expected finding as attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder has an
accepted degree of diagnostic stability, continuing into adulthood with
population rates ranging from 1.2 to 7.3%.^15^ Neurotic disorders also
continued into adulthood. This supports research showing adolescent
depression and neurotic disorders displaying a modest continuity into
adulthood, in a relapsing and remitting pattern.^4^^,^^16^ This pattern
may have influenced why neurotic disorders, but not depression, showed
homotypic continuity in this cross-sectional study. Homotypic continuity
was also evident for bipolar disorder. Despite this being a small
sample, the finding is in keeping with research showing bipolar disorder
to be relatively stable diagnostically.^17^ Homotypic continuity was
also present for pervasive developmental disorder. This is to be
expected as it is considered a lifelong diagnosis.

All CAMHS participants with anorexia nervosa had recovered, and 60%
developed EUPD. The DSM defines borderline personality disorder (BPD)
instead of EUPD. As EUPD and BPD are comparable, research into both
disorders may provide insights into their relationship with eating
disorders. Eating disorders have been reported in histories of people
with BPD at a rate of 54%, a percentage comparable with our
findings.^18^ Difficulty in mood regulation, less distress tolerance and
a history of childhood emotional abuse are shared findings for these
disorders.^19^^--^^22^ Identifying such shared characteristics may be
the key to developing an understanding of which individual\'s disorders
progress and which resolve.

Within the EUPD population in AMHS, six participants (50%) had a history
of emotional difficulties in their childhoods. In the ICD-10, diagnostic
categories separate children and adults at times. It could therefore be
argued that homotypic continuity be considered despite a change in
diagnosis. However, we would argue the existence of these age-related
restrictions highlights that symptoms are different at different
developmental stages. It is important to note that no diagnostic
criteria for child- or adult-specific disorders are the same, minus the
age restriction. For this reason, CAMHS emotional difficulties
progressing to AMHS EUPD was considered a heterotypic transition.
Similarly, externalising disorders transitioning to DPD was considered a
heterotypic transition. This is despite the frequency of this particular
diagnostic transition.^23^ Research has shown that particular traits
make the transition to DPD more frequent.^24^ These traits include
persistent conduct problems and engaging in more victim-orientated and
violent offences. In our sample, 15% of CAMHS externalising disorders
progressed to DPD. All of these participants were initially diagnosed
with conduct disorder. As antisocial behaviour peaks in adolescence,
this could be considered the ideal time to target intervention,
especially as research indicates poor outcomes when antisocial behaviour
is related to conduct disorder and substance misuse.^25^

Two cases of adolescent depression developed into bipolar disorder.
Bipolar disorder is commonly diagnosed within the first 5 years after
the first depressive episode.^26^^,^^27^ This time frame highlights
diagnostic progression during the transition to adulthood. Prodromal
syndromes, preceding schizophrenia, are also often associated with this
epoch. These non-specific changes to a person\'s mental state are often
assumed to be normal behaviour or mental disorders, such as depression
or anxiety.^28^ It is debatable as to whether these adolescent diagnoses
should be seen as displaying heterotypic change or are better
characterised as prodromal syndromes. Although prodromal symptoms may be
present in the childhoods of people with schizophrenia, diagnosable
mental health difficulties may also be present. It is hoped that further
research in this area will benefit from the DSM-5 (2013) inclusion of
attenuated psychosis syndrome.

This study has highlighted patterns of disorder transition as
individuals move from adolescence to adulthood. A developmental
perspective of mental illness would postulate that these disorders
develop from common vulnerabilities, displaying different symptoms at
different developmental stages.^1^^,^^4^ Research has also indicated
diagnostic transition peaks in adolescence and early
adulthood.^4^^,^^9^^,^^10^ Future research, focusing on adolescence and
young adulthood as the formative years for mental health, could
facilitate an early identification of individuals at risk and the
development of targeted interventions.

Owing to this study\'s sample size, there is a limit on how
generalisable the results are to other mental health teams. This study
also contained young people, on average aged 18, and over half had
transitioned within 2 years. Follow-up until the mid-twenties may have
better captured the diagnostic change during the at-risk period of early
adulthood.^6^^,^^29^ It is assumed that the standard of practice would
have been similar among the CAMHS professionals as they worked for the
same organisation and used the same diagnostic criteria, and the same is
assumed for the AMHS professionals. However, bias may have been
introduced into this study during the transition from CAMHS and AMHS.
CAMHS services were developed using the Common Assessment Framework or
the Choice and Partnership Approach, with a focus on formulation. Care
and Treatment Plans, with a diagnostic focus, were more common in AMHS.
In Wales, both teams are now required to produce a Care and Treatment
Plan in keeping with Part 2 of the Mental Health Measure.^30^ This was
made law in 2012 and one of the key aims is that it would improve
consistency. As this study captures a predominately earlier cohort, it
would be interesting to see if legislation has had its desired effect
and if bias in diagnosis is now less of a concern. In our opinion,
further research would benefit from a larger sample size, longer
follow-up and structured interviews by blinded researchers.

**Ann Collins** is a Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
Speciality Registrar at the Tonteg Child and Family Clinic, Cwm Taf
University Health Board, Pontypridd, Wales, UK. **Antonio
Muñoz-Solomando** is a Consultant Child and Adolescent Mental Health
Services Psychiatrist at the Tonteg Child and Family Centre, Cwm Taf
University Health Board, Pontypridd, Wales, UK.
