==============================================================================================================================
Against the Stream: religion and mental health – the case for the inclusion of religion and spirituality into psychiatric care
==============================================================================================================================



Simon DeinCorrespondence to Simon Dein (s.dein@qmul.ac.uk)
:Date: 2018-6

:Abstract:
   This paper argues for the inclusion of religion and spirituality in
   psychiatric care. After discussing the antagonism of psychiatrists
   and psychologists to religion, I present a critical overview of
   studies examining the relationships between spirituality, religion
   and diverse aspects of mental health: depression, suicide, anxiety,
   delinquency, drug abuse and schizophrenia. The need to assesses the
   impact of religion in different faith groups is discussed. Measures
   of religious coping, both positive and negative, may provide a more
   accurate portrayal as to how individuals deploy religion in their
   lives than global measures such as belief and attendance. I highlight
   the fact that there is a dearth of research on ritual, prayer and
   other aspects of religious experience. While many studies demonstrate
   positive effects of religion on mental health, others find
   detrimental effects. Finally I examine the clinical implications of
   these findings.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Psychiatry and religion have traditionally had a difficult relationship.
The views of Freud and others such as Albert Ellis have negatively
affected the attitudes of mental health professionals pertaining to the
mental health effects of religion. Religious beliefs and practices are
widely seen to be ‘primitive’, dependency forming, guilt inducing,
non-empirical and necessarily bad for mental health. However, compared
with psychologists and psychiatrists, the patients consulting them have
been found to have higher levels of religiosity – there is a so called
‘religiosity gap’ between mental health professionals and those they
treat.1 For many people, religion is not only important in their lives
but the central aspect of coping with life stresses. There is, moreover,
evidence that psychiatrists tend to ignore religion; it is rarely part
of standard psychiatric assessment and treatment. As Rosmarin *et al*
state2: “[R]eligious beliefs are often ignored in the context of
treatment as mental health professionals are often ill-trained in the
assessment of these factors in clinical settings. This deficit creates a
reticence to broach this topic in psychiatric research and
practice\ :sub:`,` which in turn perpetuates assumptions throughout the
field that these facets are tangential to human functioning and a side
issue in treatment. Protocols for assessment seem to ignore religious
beliefs and there seem to be few interventions that take account of
religious and spiritual beliefs.”

Here I argue against the assumption that religious beliefs are largely
irrelevant to clinical psychiatric practice.

.. _sec1:

Recent findings
===============

In the past 20 years, there has been escalating research focusing on the
relationships between various dimensions of religiosity and mental
health. To date, several thousand studies demonstrate positive
associations between the two.3\ :sup:`,`\ 4 Results indicate that those
who are more religious generally fare better in terms of mental health.

The presence of religious faith is associated with greater hope,
increased sense of meaning in life, higher self-esteem, optimism and
life satisfaction. In terms of depression, Koenig (2012) reports that of
70 prospective cohort studies, 39 (56%) indicated that greater
religion/spirituality (R/S) predicted lower levels of depression or
faster remission of depression, seven (10%) predicted worse future
depression and seven (10%) reported mixed results (both significant
positive and negative associations depending on R/S characteristics).5
Higher religiosity has also been associated with lower rates of
suicide,6 reduced prevalence of drug and alcohol misuse,7 and reduced
delinquency.8 Findings in relation to anxiety are rather mixed. Although
some studies demonstrate reduced anxiety rates, others indicate that
anxiety levels are increased in the more religious.9 There are few
studies relating schizophrenia to R/S. Recent studies from Switzerland
suggest that religious individuals with psychotic illnesses frequently
pray and read the Bible to facilitate coping with their voices, and that
higher levels of religiosity may increase medication adherence.10 Little
work has been conducted on explanatory models, treatment-seeking and
outcomes in this condition.

Although the focus of the existing literature on religion and mental
health predominantly relates to Christianity, there has been recent work
on Islam,11 Judaism12 and Hinduism,13 similarly suggesting that those
who are religious have better indices of mental health. Furthermore,
these studies suggest that religious beliefs have different effects on
mental health depending upon the faith group of subjects.

Global measures of religion such as belief may reflect dispositional
religiousness rather than how people actually deploy religion during
crises. As Pargament and colleagues14 (p. 521) state, ‘It is not enough
to know that the individual prays, attends church, or watches religious
television. Measures of religious coping should specify how the
individual is making use of religion to understand and deal with
stressors.’ There is evidence that some forms of religious coping are
protective in the wake of adverse life events, while others may be
maladaptive. This author contends that there are two sorts of coping:
positive religious coping and negative religious coping.15 The former
(e.g. benevolent religious appraisals, religious forgiveness) reflects a
secure relationship with God and generally results in improved mental
health. By contrast, the latter (e.g. reappraisals of God's powers,
feeling abandoned or punished by God) reflects a weak relationship with
God and is associated with worse mental health indices. There is some
recent discussion of the psychological implications of theodicy – the
defence of God's goodness and omnipotence in view of the existence of
evil.16

There a dearth of research examining the mental health effects of
ritual, prayer and other aspects of religious experience. Although
popularised in William James’ classic *The Varieties of Religious
Experience*,17 religious experience has attracted less research than
attendance, beliefs and coping, possibly because of its subjective
nature and lack of clarity in definition. The focus has been on three
main areas: mysticism, conversion and religious hallucinations.
Religious conversion has generally been found to enhance mental health.
There are phenomenological parallels between mystical and psychotic
states (including visions, voices, loss of sense of self) although the
outcomes are different. While mystical experiences typically affect
mental health positively, psychosis is generally a negative
experience.18 There has been some phenomenological research on hearing
God's voice among Pentecostal Christians in London. Among this group,
hearing his voice is normative and many reported its utility in
resolving distress.19 Finally, one study examined the differences
between prophecy and loss of agency and thought insertion in
schizophrenia. In contrast to schizophrenia, in prophetic experiences
agency is preserved.20

However, religion may also have a negative effect on health through
inducing guilt and dependency, and in extreme cases may precipitate
suicide (e.g. in extreme cultic groups).21 Of great contemporary
interest, the wider social impact of mental health on radicalisation
remains to be investigated. Bhui has provided initial data suggesting
that among Pakistani and Bangladeshi Muslims, those endorsing the most
sympathy for violent protest and terrorism were more likely to report
depression.22

.. _sec2:

Criticisms
==========

There have been a number of criticisms of the above findings.23 First,
there may be selection biases in recruiting subjects. Second, more work
needs to be conducted on the non-religious and their mental health
associations, including atheism and agnosticism.24 Third, the vast
majority of these studies have focused on religious attendance and
beliefs among North American Christians, and findings cannot be
generalised to other religious groups. Fourth, some people are spiritual
– connected to a higher power from which they derive meaning – although
not belonging to and participating in institutionalised religion. The
similarities and differences between religion and spirituality warrant
further research, as do the associations of spirituality with mental
health. Finally, measurement scales need to be more culturally and
theologically sensitive.25

.. _sec3:

Clinical implications
=====================

Given the above findings, what are the clinical implications? It is
clear that the assessment of religious belief should be included
routinely in psychiatric assessment. It may be that the incorporation of
religious activities such as prayer, Bible reading and ritual into
cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) could enhance its effectiveness.
Evidence suggests that Christian-based CBT is more effective among
Christian patients with depression and anxiety than traditional
non-religious CBT.26 Future work in this area should concentrate on
which therapies are efficacious, for which patients, and which
therapists should be conducting them. Pargament provides a number of
illustrative examples of how spirituality can be incorporated into
psychotherapy.27

.. _sec4:

Conclusion
==========

There is now a voluminous literature examining the relationship between
religion and mental health. On balance, it appears that being religious
enhances mental health. Future work in this area needs to explore the
clinical implications of these findings, and how working with patients’
theological constructs such as guilt, sin and forgiveness helps to
promote recovery. Most importantly, both clinical work and research need
to be more sensitive to cultural and theological issues.28 The Royal
College of Psychiatrists29 and the WPA30 have published two Position
Statements on spirituality, religion and clinical care.

**Simon Dein**, Honorary Professor at Queen Mary University of London
and at Durham University, Honorary Senior Lecturer at University College
London. He is on the Executive Committee of the Spirituality and
Psychiatry SIG.
