====================================
Donald Eccleston, FRCPsych, PhD, DSc
====================================



Ian McKeith

:date: 2018-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Formerly Professor of Psychiatry, Newcastle upon Tyne Medical School, UK

.. image:: S2056469418000608_inline1.jpg

Donald (Don) Eccleston, who died recently at the age of 86 years, was
one of the first to elaborate a hypothesis of depression which argued
for the role of monoamines, particularly 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), in
the regulation of mood. He went on to translate his experimental
observations into treatment for patients with refractory depressive
disorders, devising the ‘Newcastle cocktail’ (phenelzine, L-tryptophan
and lithium). This was a pharmacological strategy offering a window of
opportunity through which cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) and
intensive nursing care could be directed to reduce the secondary
handicaps of chronic depression.

In 1962, he took up a post at the Medical Research Council (MRC) Brain
Metabolism Unit at the University of Edinburgh, joining a highly
innovative group of psycho-pharmacologists including George Ashcroft.
Between them, over the next decade, they elaborated the role of amines,
in particular 5-HT, in the regulation of mood. In the absence of today's
sophisticated imaging and analytical techniques, these must have been
difficult experiments to conduct; his first published paper describes
measuring changes in 5-HT metabolites in volunteers who were being
investigated for neurological disorders by air encephalography, a
procedure in which most of the cerebrospinal fluid was drained from
around the brain by means of a lumbar puncture and replaced with air.

In 1966, he spent an enjoyable year at the National Institutes of Health
in Bethesda, Maryland, USA, where he worked with Julius Axelrod – one of
the three winners who shared the 1970 Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine for their discovery of the actions of neurotransmitters in
regulating the metabolism of the nervous system. He then returned to
Edinburgh to be appointed Deputy Director of the MRC unit, where he
continued to elaborate the monoamine hypothesis of depression by
demonstrating that drugs which influence mood in humans may alter the
turnover of 5-HT, and levels of 5-HT, in the brains of animals.

On appointment to the Chair of Psychiatry in Newcastle upon Tyne in
1977, he set up his own research unit at 1–4 Claremont Terrace and
established the Regional Affective Disorders Unit, the longest-standing
in-patient unit for the treatment of depression in the UK. The Newcastle
Chronic Depression Study, published in 1987, described new therapeutic
approaches to treatment-resistant chronic depression, including the use
of CBT, which was just emerging from US research as having
antidepressant potential. The Chronic Depression Study demonstrated a
now well-accepted principle in the treatment of chronic depression,
namely that intensive drug treatment may be a necessary preliminary that
enables effective rehabilitation of the secondary handicaps. Donald
promoted development of psychotherapeutic treatments, particularly CBT,
and innovative nursing practices for his patients, and became
increasingly interested in predictors of refractory depression and its
prophylaxis.

While he was Head of the Academic Department of Psychiatry in Newcastle,
lecturer and fellowship posts in his department were always in demand;
it was a happy place to work, with many appointees going on to
professorial appointments in psychiatry, psychology, nursing and
neuroscience, both within and beyond Newcastle. He also trained a
generation of research-supportive National Health Service (NHS)
clinicians who, through him, had been exposed to evidence-based medicine
just as the term began to be coined. Early on, he realised the
limitations of an academic ivory tower. As the management of the NHS
started to change, he recognised the mutual benefits of close
partnerships between academia and care providers.

Born in Preston, Lancashire, Don was encouraged by his local general
practitioner to consider a career in medicine, even if only to get
enough money to support his preferred option of working on the land! He
attended Preston Boys’ Grammar School. After leaving school, Don studied
medicine in Aberdeen, balancing bookwork with what became lifelong
interests: fishing, tennis and squash. In 1958, he married Maureen (Mo)
Ellison and they settled in Aberdeen where he had commenced psychiatric
training.

He was an early advocate of work–life balance, and this at a time when
medical prowess was generally measured by how much time one spent at
work. In addition to his family life, home and animals, Don made sure
that he found plenty of time for his friends, his love of food and wine,
fishing, squash, gardening and his art collection. His welcoming family
home, West Luddick House, with its walled garden and greenhouses, was
populated not only by Don and his family, but by generations of cats,
dogs and hens. The monthly entry in his diary for ‘the Melrose Clinic’
was a euphemism for a day's fishing in the Scottish Borders and wasn't
the most closely guarded secret from those around him.

After retirement in 1995, at the age of 64, Donald continued to see
patients and remained involved in University life, but had more time to
busy himself with his cottage deep in the Borders where he spent happy
days foresting and looking after the land. He benefited from modern
surgical advances, with a total of five joint replacements that kept him
mobile. He died suddenly at home on 18 March 2018.

Don is survived by his wife Mo, three children and five grandchildren.
