======================================================
Against the Stream: lowering the age of sexual consent
======================================================

Philip GrahamCorrespondence to Philip Graham (pjgraham1@aol.com)
:Date: 2018-8

:Abstract:
   Lowering the legal age of sexual consent would decriminalise a large
   number of ‘underage’ young people engaging in sexual intercourse. The
   arguments against such a change in the law are summarised and shown
   to lack validity.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The proposal that the age of consent should be lowered is not just
‘against the stream’. It is regarded by many as a preposterous idea.
When, in 2013, the then President of the Faculty of Public Health,
Professor John Ashton, made the proposal that the age of consent should
be reduced from 16 years to 15 or even 14 years, it was immediately
rejected by both government and opposition spokesmen.(n.d.a) Indeed,
David Cameron, when Prime Minister referred to the proposal as
‘offensive’.

.. _sec1:

The present legal situation
===========================

It is the case that there are many cogent arguments against such a move.
It will be claimed here that none of these is valid. Further, it will be
proposed not only that there would be specific advantages to changing
the law in this way, but that the principles on which this proposal is
based have implications for other ways in which the rights of young
people are inappropriately curtailed.

The existing laws in all the jurisdictions of the UK state(n.d.b) that
the age of consent for any form of sexual activity is 16 years for both
men and women. The age of consent is the same regardless of the gender
or sexual orientation of a person and whether the sexual activity is
between people of the same or different gender.

It is an offence for anyone to have any sexual activity with a person
under the age of 16. However, Home Office guidance is clear that there
is no intention to prosecute teenagers under the age of 16 where both
mutually agree and where they are of a similar age.(n.d.c) Further, it
is an offence for a person aged 18 or over to have any sexual activity
with a person under the age of 18 if the older person holds a position
of trust (for example, a teacher or social worker) as such sexual
activity is an abuse of the position of trust.

There is wide variation between countries in the age of sexual consent.
In Europe, all countries have minimum age limits for sexual relations.
Nowhere is this age set lower than 14 years.(n.d.d) In Europe,
consensual relations with 14-year-olds are legal in half of the
jurisdictions, and with 15-year-olds in three-quarters.(n.d.e) This
places the UK among the quarter with the most restrictive legislation.
There is no evidence that the legal minimum age of sexual consent in a
country is in any way correlated with the sexual behaviour of young
people.

Various principles have been adduced which should govern the legal
position of minors.(n.d.f) Although it is often implied that children
should not be regarded as such, Waites(n.d.f) (p. 218) suggests that
children are indeed citizens who, like adult citizens, have a right to
protection as well as a right to freedom of activity. He argues that
sexual behaviour below the age of 14 should be criminal, and that there
is a role for legal prohibitions for the collective good which goes
beyond preventing harm in individual cases (pp. 220–241).

.. _sec2:

The arguments against
=====================

The following arguments have been used against the proposal to lower the
age of sexual consent. These are followed by counter-arguments. (a)A
change in the law would result in more younger children becoming
inappropriately engaged in sexual activity. There is a lack of evidence
this is the case and, indeed, much evidence suggesting that the existing
law has no effect on the sexual behaviour of young people. Information
collected between 2010 and 2012 suggests that 31% of British males and
29% of British females had full sexual intercourse before the age of 16
years. Fifty years previously, this had been the case for 15% of males
and 4% of females.(n.d.g) There had been no change in the law in
relation to heterosexual intercourse in the interim. A study of the
reasons for sexual abstinence in American school students revealed that
the law was not cited as a reason for abstaining from sexual
activity.(n.d.h)(b)The existing law gives young people, especially
girls, who do not want to engage in sexual activity a powerful reason
for refusing to consent. Although this reason is often cited, there is
not even anecdotal evidence to suggest it is valid. It is indeed
difficult to imagine a girl saying to her boyfriend that she does not
wish to have sex with him because it is against the law. She might not
wish to have sex with him, but she wouldn't want him to laugh at her
either.(c)Focus group discussions with 11–16 year-olds reveal that they
are generally opposed to a change in the law on this matter.(n.d.i) This
is indeed the case, but, as indicated above, there is a marked disparity
between the behaviour of young people and their views on the existing
law.(d)Young people aged 14 years are not physically mature enough to
engage in full sexual activity. The median age of menarche in English
and Welsh girls born between 1982 and 1986 was 12 years and 11
months.(n.d.j) Thus, the great majority of girls of 14 years are indeed
sufficiently physically mature to engage in full sexual
activity.(e)Young people aged 14 years are not cognitively mature enough
to evaluate the risks of engaging in sexual activity. There is ample
evidence that 14-year-olds are as capable of analysing the risks and
benefits of different interventions in complex medical situations as are
21-year-olds.(n.d.k)(f)Young people aged 14 years are not emotionally
mature enough to engage in full sexual activity. Steinberg(n.d.l) –
while accepting that mid-teenagers have sufficient cognitive maturity –
suggests there is evidence that this is not the case when they are
emotionally aroused or exposed to peer pressure. In particular, he cites
his own work(n.d.m) pointing to age differences in sensation-seeking and
impulsivity. These studies of young people aged from 10 to 11 years up
to 30 years show reduction of impulsivity with increasing age under
experimental conditions. The problem with his argument is that the
greatest reduction in impulsivity occurs between adults aged 22–25 and
those aged 26–30 years. Is it really suggested that sexual consent
should be invalid up to the age of 26 years?(g)Neuroscientific evidence
suggests that the adolescent brain undergoes significant changes
throughout the teens and beyond. For example, Casey *et al*\ (n.d.n)
report that ‘recent human imaging and animal studies provide a
biological basis […] suggesting differential development of subcortical
limbic systems relative to top-down control systems during adolescence
relative to childhood and adulthood’. This is taken to mean that those
in their teens are not physiologically competent to make important
decisions relating to risk-taking. It is surely unwise to rely on such
indirect evidence when much more directly relevant studies suggest that
it is the inexperience of the young rather than biological limitations
that lead to their greater vulnerability in risky situations. For
example, McCartt *et al*,(n.d.o) studying traffic accidents among young
people, found that ‘of the studies that attempted to quantify the
relative importance of age and experience factors, most found a more
powerful effect from length of licensure’.

.. _sec3:

The arguments in favour
=======================

Having effectively countered the arguments against lowering the age of
sexual consent, it only remains for me to point briefly to the obvious
advantages of such a change in the law. (a)Lowering the age of sexual
consent would result in the decriminalisation of just under one-third of
the adolescent population. Most such law-breakers are not currently
prosecuted, but it cannot be right that their freely given sexual
consent is deemed illegal.(b)The numbers of young people whose sexual
activity results in sexually transmitted infections is
substantial.(n.d.p) The number of pregnancies in 15–17-year-olds,
although it is reducing, remains substantial.(n.d.q) Further, the sexual
experience of many young people, particularly girls, is distressing, and
a substantial number of girls regret their first full sexual
experience.(n.d.r) Lowering the age of sexual consent would make it
distinctly easier for appropriate sex education to be provided to
children and young people to enable them to make wiser decisions. It
would also make it easier to provide sexual health services to people of
this age without the fear of conniving in illegal activity.

Note that it is not proposed here that there should be any changes in
the position of those adults who abuse their positions of trust to have
sex with people younger than themselves. Further, it is firmly accepted
there should be a minimum age limit for sexual consent, a view that has
been contested. It is important that it remains recognised that children
under the age of 14 years have neither the cognitive nor the emotional
maturity to make decisions about their own sexual behaviour.

It will not have escaped the notice of the attentive reader that the
principles and evidence adduced here are also relevant to a number of
other situations in which the current legal position of minors is highly
questionable. For example, at the present time, the age of criminal
responsibility in England and Wales is 10 years, while in Scotland it is
currently 8 years, with 12 years as the age of criminal prosecution. The
age of criminal responsibility should surely be raised to 14 years. The
voting age in England and Wales is currently 18 years, while in Scotland
it is 16 years. The voting age should surely be reduced to 16 years in
England and Wales, with an expectation of a further reduction in due
course.

**Philip Graham** is Emeritus Professor of Child Psychiatry at the
Institute of Child Health, University College London, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.
