---
abstract: |
  This paper looks at the relationship between fiction and psychiatry.
  Specifically, the idea of psychiatrists as fiction writers is
  explored, and reference is made to various fictional texts to
  illustrate the problems of stigma and negative imagery. These two main
  areas of focus are highlighted as ones that the practice of writing
  fiction might address, and some potential pitfalls are discussed. The
  paper suggests how psychiatrists might ameliorate the present problems
  by incorporating their unique clinical skills and knowledge into
  fictional narratives.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a1}

  None.
author:
- Henry BladonCorrespondence to Henry Bladon (<hxb455@bham.ac.uk>)
date: 2018-4
institute:
- 1Department of Creative Writing and Film Studies, University of
  Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
- id: ref34
- id: ref35
- id: ref36
- id: ref37
title: Should psychiatrists write fiction?
---

In 2003, Allan Beveridge examined the idea of whether psychiatrists
should read fiction.^1^ This paper asks the related question of whether
psychiatrists should *write* fiction? Chekhov did it, and so did Oliver
Sacks, even if he did burn his first efforts. Femi Oyebode^2^ notes the
similarity in the tasks of the fiction writer and the psychiatrist,
pointing out that they are both trying to make sense of human behaviour.
This observation is pertinent to this paper, which will look at the
connection between psychiatrists and fiction writing. Certainly, fiction
can be powerful, but so can psychiatry. Garcia-Nieto^3^ says that there
used to be a strong connection between literature and psychiatry, a
connection that was severed during the 20th century.
Psychiatrist/writers can help to restore that link.

Novelists write about the human condition, that much is evident. As
Baker *et al*^4^ note, for writers 'madness has long been, and remains,
a compelling preoccupation'. Fiction writers often write about
psychiatry for dramatic effect, but not always faithfully. The result
can produce stereotypical depictions of mental health and of the people
who work in that arena. Writers also write about psychiatrists, often
with the same result.

Patrick McGrath has done both; he has written about psychiatry and the
experience of mental suffering (*Spider*), but he has also written about
psychiatrists. In *Trauma*, his character, Charlie Weir, is a
psychiatrist struggling to come to terms with his mother\'s death.

McGrath has also combined the two. In *Asylum,* set in a secure hospital
in the late 1950s, McGrath writes about the experience of suffering, and
about a young psychiatrist and his family.^5^^--^^7^

Drawing on experience is something that every writer does, but some
knowledge of psychiatry is important for such genre writing. I want to
suggest that writing fiction, as an avenue open to psychiatrists,
presents a great opportunity to provide positive models of mental
health. The understanding psychiatrists have for their patients is
likely to encourage a more complete illustration of character and
setting. So the answer to the question posed by this paper should be
yes. The writing process essentially involves three stages. First, the
writer gathers information through research. Second, a story framework,
however loose or rigid that may be, is devised. Third, a coherent
narrative is constructed through putting the words on to paper. When it
comes to writing about psychiatry, it is plain that psychiatrists have a
head start. Step one, where Sebastian Faulks, for example, spent 5 years
researching his epic book about psychiatry, *Human Traces,* can be
leap-frogged by psychiatrists. Similarly, the difficulty that Patrick
McGrath^8^ talks about in drawing from psychiatry for fiction is largely
circumvented by the closeness of psychiatrists to their subject matter
and their ability to make sense of human experience.

Before the reader dashes away from the clinic armed with a notebook
stuffed with observations and ideas for their new novel, I should
introduce something by way of balance. The critics would suggest, for
example, that somebody working therapeutically should not write, or that
they may end up manipulating patients.^9^ Those in the 'no they
shouldn\'t write' camp might also caution against the danger of clinical
narrow-mindedness and an overkill of technical psychiatric jargon. This
pitfall will be examined below. For the moment, it should be sufficient
to note that the skill of a writer is in creating a world *apart* from
real-world experience. Paradoxically, though, this subtle shift from
fact to fiction has the aim of *seeming* real. I therefore suggest that,
beyond wishing to produce an entertaining product, psychiatrists should
have two principal goals in mind when approaching the writing of
fiction. These are: •correcting stigma by raising awareness, educating
others and promoting good mental health•countering the negative image of
psychiatry and the psychiatrist.

# Raising awareness {#sec1}

The impact of media representations has major effects on the stigma
experienced in mental health. That media portrayals of mental health and
mental health professionals influence public perception is a
well-documented phenomenon.^10^^,^^11^ As Stuart^12^ notes, the media
has a 'vast store' of negative images in relation to mental illness.

As Liam Clarke said, literature\'s take on human behaviour 'surpasses
the descriptions of social and psychological sciences'.^13^ The
potential power of the combination of fictional narrative and
psychiatric insight could offer a potent formula of truth and wisdom
resulting in enlightened understanding. The demystification of mental
health services through the normalising effect of honest and informed
writing cannot be understated. As Oyebode^14^ suggests, these narratives
influence 'how wider society perceives mental illness'. It therefore
follows that sensitive portrayals of psychiatry would encourage a more
informed and sympathetic view of the work done by psychiatrists. Rightly
or wrongly, psychiatry has always endured its critics. Many of these
issues are still current, whether they relate to concerns about
paternalism,^15^ over-reliance on medication,^16^ the use of
'specialist' knowledge in the maintenance of power,^17^ criticisms of
biological models,^18^ or even debates about the value of diagnostic
labels.^19^^,^^20^ Psychiatrists might, therefore, wish to respond to
such commentary through writing fiction that points to a more eclectic
nature in the profession and what they do.

The acknowledgement that psychiatrists can move to a more collaborative
relationship with the service user movement^21^ would suggest one area
where fiction could develop a stronger image for psychiatrists and
patients alike. Such efforts are starting to show potential, as in the
recent novel by Monica Starkman, *The End of Miracles*.

The other thing to bear in mind is that although fiction may be the poor
relation to the medical textbook,^22^ fiction is more accessible, and
people are more likely to read a fictional account than a research paper
or the DSM-5.

# Correcting the image {#sec2}

Psychiatry has had its periods of self-doubt. In fact, it would be hard
not to see the problem as a perennial identity crisis.^23^^--^^25^
Fiction does little, it seems, to help. In her study of media
representations of psychiatrists, Jacqueline Hopson claims that
psychiatrists are 'demonised' by fiction. She asserts that that
psychiatrists are regarded with suspicion and fear, and that the
portrayals in fiction, which are frequently related to power, are
deleterious to the profession. She points to representations such as
*The Snake Pit* and Antonia White\'s *Beyond the Glass* in support of
her thesis.^26^ Psychiatrists are without doubt in a position of power,
and the idea of using psychiatric treatment as a punishment is a popular
theme in fiction. If we believe what we read, it is a short step from
administering medication to using it to control and punish others. *The
Bell Jar*, Sylvia Plath\'s classic book, with its references to
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), self-harm and suicide, shows us the
confusion depicted in the character of Esther Greenwood, confusion which
is epitomised after her first ECT session, when she remarks: '*I wonder
what terrible thing it was that I had done*'.

In *The Trick is to Keep Breathing*, by Janice Galloway, her character,
27-year-old Joy Stone, has doubts about her psychiatrists. Joy sets out
a list of general 'lessons' she has learned about them, including her
belief that psychiatrists are 'devious and persistent. They always win
in the end'. Such portrayals have significant consequences for those who
work in mental health settings, just as they do for sufferers. For
psychiatrists, negative imagery can lead to problems with
recruitment,^27^ difficulties with their public image,^28^ and
denigration from their colleagues in other branches of medicine.^29^

With a more positive mindset, fiction can act as a beacon of truth. Andy
Bickle^30^ urges that we 'should not underestimate the importance of
literary and other media representation in creating the milieu in which
we work'. In the same way that social worker Freya Barrington had the
aim of raising awareness of her profession in her book, *Known to Social
Services*,^31^ psychiatrist Monica Starkman relates her goal of showing
psychiatry and psychiatrists as they are, and not as the stereotypes
portrayed in books or films.^32^ So, a prime motivator for psychiatrists
might be to adopt the 'inform and entertain' ideal in their approach to
writing fiction, and tell readers what being a psychiatrist is *really*
like. As I have already said, there are plenty of fictional
psychiatrists, and they are by no means universally negative, despite
what Hopson claims in her paper. In his latest novel, *Where My Heart
Used to Beat*, Sebastian Faulks presents Robert Hendricks, a post-war
psychiatrist who is a long way from the unpleasant stereotype Hopson
bemoans. Nevertheless, there is potentially a different dimension to
'psychiatrist point-of-view' novels written *by* psychiatrists.

As well as correcting erroneous imagery, psychiatrists might wish to
portray something of the conditions in which they work. The political
dimension of psychiatry has been written about before, perhaps most
strikingly in *One Flew Over the Cuckoo\'s Nest*, but there are other
books that use narrative as a form of commentary on the state of mental
health or welfare services. *Poppy Shakespeare*, by Clare Allan, is set
in a psychiatric day unit. This novel, which raises issues of
institutional relationships and of benefits payments, is a notable
example of how fiction can highlight current difficulties in service
provision.

# Pitfalls {#sec3}

## Ethics {#sec3-1}

*The writer is a member of society and therefore has ethical and moral
responsibilities. We need to take care in the construction of our own
'make believe' worlds*.^33^ Ethical considerations are always prevalent
in psychiatry. For psychiatrists writing fiction, there are issues of
confidentiality and professional sensitivity to consider. There are
always those who claim that fiction is simply fiction, but Gandolfo
would disagree on the basis that fiction has the power to make a
difference to people\'s lives. He has argued that writers should
'rigorously question both themselves and their writing'.^34^ The fiction
produced by psychiatrists might be governed not only by the desire to
tell a story, it will also be tempered by the need to provide honest and
realistic portrayals of the subject matter. Of course, the ethical
dimension can be productive in itself. Beveridge^35^ points out that
writers might want to explore moral quandaries, a subject particularly
prevalent in psychiatry. Issues of power, liberty, treatment and the
like are fertile topics that do not have to be restricted to textbooks
and non-fiction.

## 'Medical' fiction {#sec3-2}

Psychiatrist Monica Starkman asks whether psychiatrists write good
novels. In attempting to answer her own question, she points out that
psychiatrists have access to 'the deepest, most private thoughts and
feelings of many people', which might lead one to assume that fiction
writing should be easier for a psychiatrist. However, writing should be
informed, but it should also be entertaining, and another obstacle for
potential 'psychiatrist fiction writers' is technical language.
Beveridge^36^ suggests that writers are attempting to do crudely what
modern psychologists do in a sophisticated manner. This is missing the
point of fiction, but it is a point he later seems to correct. In 2010,
he said that fiction can 'deepen our understanding of people with a
mental illness' and divert from the narrow evidence-based approach to
psychiatry.^37^ Potential writers should always think about the reader,
so psychiatrist/writers should resist the desire to overdo psychiatric
terminology. As Crawford and Baker note,^2^^2^ it should be remembered
that fictional texts are *representations* of illnesses. They also
reiterate the fact that fiction is not written for the purposes of
diagnosis. To 'diagnose or not' is a consideration psychiatrist fiction
writers will face. Oyebode^14^ points out that novels are not scientific
studies of psychopathology; in a discussion I had with award-winning
novelist Nathan Filer (*The Shock of the Fall*), Filer pointed out that,
despite the protagonist in the novel having a strong psychotic
dislocation, the term 'schizophrenia' was only used twice in his book.
There are other writers, Nicola Barker, for instance (*Reversed
Forecast*), who similarly convey a sense of suffering without resorting
to psychiatric terminology.

# Conclusion {#sec4}

Psychiatrists are dealt a rough hand by fiction. Despite more
light-hearted depictions such as the satirical archetype produced by
Will Self in a number of his novels (Dr Zack Busner appears in a
succession of Self\'s novels and short stories, *The Quantity Theory of
Insanity*, *Ward 9*, *Dr Mukti*, *Umbrella*, *The Book of Dave*,
*Shark*), the work of the psychiatrist is depicted as mysterious at best
and threatening at worst. Such imagery is only likely to have negative
results. Not only does this affect the profession, but it filters down
to the end-users of mental health services.

Although Bickle^30^ suggests that fiction deals with the 'wrong type of
data' to convey a comprehensive knowledge of mental illness, Bickle^30^
makes the point that it offers the chance to step back from the world
and to explore these issues, thereby helping psychiatrists reflect on
their practice. The efforts of psychiatrist/writers in producing fiction
presents an opportunity to correct some of these ills. If psychiatrists
can avoid the pitfalls, then writing fiction can achieve a number of
positive outcomes.

**Henry Bladon**, Final-year PhD student at the University of Birmingham
in the Department of Creative Writing and Film Studies, Birmingham, UK.
