---
author:
- Lisa Conlan
date: 2018-8
institute:
- "Consultant Psychiatrist, South London and Maudsley National Health
  Service Foundation Trust; email: <lisa.conlan@slam.nhs.uk>"
---

I am a big fan of short books and, at around 100 pages, this is a
remarkably short book. The authors outline the debate between autonomy
and paternalism, and also aim to demonstrate where philosophy can be
useful to psychiatry and medicine. The book succeeds in both areas,
although in places it could have benefited from further elaboration and
exposition.

Part 1 summarises the arguments for personal autonomy, defined as
'acting on one\'s own reasons, not on those of other people'. The
authors outline why this is valued as a good in its own right, only to
be interfered in with significant moral justification. Paternalism is
shown generally to act to undermine individual autonomy (although it can
be justified e.g. for public health). Medicine is defined 'not as a
science but an interpretive practice relying on clinical reasoning'. The
patient--doctor consultation is rightly situated as the 'central act of
medicine'. The way people make decisions is considered: not as isolated
units but in dialogue with their significant others.

The best section is on Miranda Fricker\'s concept of epistemic
injustice. Fricker has highlighted two types of injustice: testimonial
and hermeneutical. Testimonial injustice refers to a speaker being
awarded less credibility owing to prejudice on the listener\'s part,
e.g. a woman speaking in a male-dominated boardroom. Psychiatric
patients are particularly susceptible to this *credibility deficit*. The
authors cite Elyn Saks\'s account of attending the accident and
emergency department with a brain haemorrhage. When doctors heard of her
history of schizophrenia, they stopped diagnostic investigations and
sent her home. Hermeneutic injustice occurs when an individual/group
does not have access to, or is not represented within, the shared
generation of meaning. Here the injustice is often to the subject who
questions the credibility of their own testimony. An example is a
depressed new mother trying to make sense of her feelings without any
knowledge of postnatal depression.

Part 2 addresses specific problems: mental health legislation,
do-not-resuscitate orders, and assisted dying. These are condensed and
well-written, but there is nothing new for anyone working clinically in
these specialties.

Overall, this is a clear and concise introductory work useful for anyone
interested in this area.
