=============================
Psychiatry, not mental health
=============================



Richard Braithwaite
:Date: 2018-2


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Timms begins his article on solid ground, highlighting the serious
problem of psychiatric jargon.1 Sadly, it descends into a light-hearted
list, focused on the gulf between manager and clinician in the British
health service. Most importantly, he omits four gravely misused jargon
terms prevalent in psychiatry.

First, the noun ‘depression’ and its adjective ‘depressed’. The noun has
half a dozen dictionary definitions unrelated to medicine2 and, as a
word on its own, it is not a recognised diagnosis in either psychiatric
classification.3\ :sup:`,`\ 4 Yet it is used by the lay public, patients
and healthcare professionals alike to refer to a medical diagnosis, a
single symptom or a normal emotion. It is invariably unclear which
meaning is intended by the speaker. This confusion contributes to
massive over-prescription of an unfortunately named class of drugs;5
anecdotally, it is not uncommon even for senior psychiatrists to justify
antidepressant treatment, having cast aside clear diagnostic
criteria,3\ :sup:`,`\ 4 with comments such as: ‘Well, there's definitely
a bit of depression there’ or ‘She says she feels depressed’.

In a similar vein, ‘paranoia’ and ‘paranoid’ are often used by
clinicians in their lay meaning of ‘intense suspicion’,2 when the true
psychiatric definition is ‘delusional’;6 such ideation might involve
purely grandiose or somatic themes. Despite this, one often sees
‘paranoid’ and ‘persecutory’ used synonymously. The subjective complaint
of ‘paranoia’ is common in patients with neurotic presentations and
personality disorders, and its inappropriate use in case notes without
careful use of inverted commas, to signify a verbatim quote, risks
inappropriate labelling of patients as psychotic and overtreatment with
antipsychotics.

Next, the term ‘psychosis’ is increasingly used as a diagnosis – as if
it were a singular disease for which specific treatments were indicated7
– rather than the syndrome that it is. It can occur in organic,
substance-induced or affective disorders, yet I contend that ‘psychosis’
is often used, lazily, as a euphemism for schizophrenia, by
psychiatrists either ignorant of established diagnostic
criteria3\ :sup:`,`\ 4 or wary of stigmatising their patients (as if one
would happily tell guests at a dinner party that one was ‘psychotic’).

Most concerning, though, is the jargon that Timms includes in his own
title: ‘mental health’.1 The assumption that ‘mental health’ and the
oxymoronic ‘mental health disorder’ are synonymous with psychiatry and
its diseases is quite erroneous. Psychiatry, as practised by psychiatric
nurses and psychiatrists, was once charged with the management of
patients with psychiatric diseases. But our colleagues are now mental
health nurses and our departments mental health services. Far from
relating to recognised diseases, the doublespeak ‘mental health’ has
become synonymous with a vague and unattainable concept of complete
emotional well-being. Consequently, an increasing fraction of our
population, even a majority according to some reports,8 young and old,
are reported to have ‘mental health problems’. The jargon underlying
this explosion has set us and our entire healthcare system up to fail,
through unrealistic public expectations and ever unmet need.

Let us be psychiatrists and psychiatric nurses once more; let us work in
psychiatric services. Let us diagnose schizophrenia and depressive
episodes using recognised criteria and be judicious in our use of
potentially hazardous and costly treatments; most of all, let us avoid
terms steeped in ambiguity.
