========================================================================
The development of an outcome measure for liaison mental health services
========================================================================



Else Guthrie
Mathew Harrison
Richard Brown
Rajdeep Sandhu
Peter Trigwell
Seri Abraham
Shazada Nawaz
Peter Kelsall
Rachel Thomasson

:Correspondence: Rachel Thomasson
(dr.rachel.thomasson@gmail.com)

:date: 2018-6

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To develop and pilot a clinician-rated outcome scale to evaluate
   symptomatic outcomes in liaison psychiatry services. Three hundred
   and sixty patient contacts with 207 separate individuals were rated
   using six subscales (mood, psychosis, cognition, substance misuse,
   mind–body problems and behavioural disturbance) plus two additional
   items (side-effects of medication and capacity to consent for medical
   treatment). Each item was rated on a five-point scale from 0 to 5
   (nil, mild, moderate, severe and very severe).

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   The liaison outcome measure was acceptable and easy to use. All
   subscales showed acceptable interrater reliability, with the
   exception of the mind–body subscale. Overall, the measure appears to
   show stability and sensitivity to change.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The measure provides a useful and robust way to determine symptomatic
   change in a liaison mental health setting, although the mind–body
   subscale requires modification.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Routine outcome measurement is important in mental health settings and
can facilitate improvements in quality and outcome.1 At present, there
is no recognised, specific, routine outcome measure for liaison
psychiatry services. The Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS)
have been used routinely in general psychiatry settings for the past 20
years,2 but attempts to adapt them for liaison settings have never been
realised. Liaison mental health services operate in a variety of
different settings and treat people with a wide range of complex and
heterogeneous clinical problems, which makes the development of a single
outcome tool challenging.3

The Faculty of Liaison Psychiatry of the Royal College of Psychiatrists
has developed an outcome framework (FROM-LP),4 which includes measures
of patient and referrer satisfaction, and a generic clinician-rated
measure, the Clinical Global Impression Improvement Scale (CGI-I).5 This
measure, however, is not specific for liaison settings and does not
generate individual symptom ratings.

The aim of this project was to develop and pilot a liaison outcome
instrument to be used for local service evaluation, to supplement the
FROM-LP framework and to provide data on symptom outcomes. Our intention
was to develop a brief, acceptable and easy to use measure that covered
common liaison mental health problems, with good reliability, stability
and sensitivity to change. This paper describes the development of the
measure and preliminary results from its use in two local acute hospital
services in Manchester.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

Items included in the measure were determined using a modified version
of the mini-Delphi method.6 We ran three cycles of the mini-Delphi
process using panels of clinicians (nurses and psychiatrists) working in
different types of liaison mental health services in the North West of
England, including acute hospital wards, emergency departments,
out-patient and community liaison services, and liaison services for
older adults. A pool of potential items (64 items) was initially
generated, and a prototypic measure was produced which then underwent 6
months of field testing in a Manchester liaison mental health service.
Following this, the measure underwent a series of modifications,
including the exclusion and rewording of many items. A subsequent
12-month testing period generated further minor revisions.

The final measure was piloted in this study. It had 22 items consisting
of six subscales (mood, psychosis, cognition, substance misuse,
mind–body problems and behavioural disturbance) and two additional items
(side-effects of medication and capacity to consent to medical
treatment). Each item was rated on a five-point scale from 0 to 5 (nil,
mild, moderate, severe and very severe). In response to feedback from
clinicians, a contextual subscale was also added to represent items
which may not necessarily change because of a liaison intervention but
may influence or affect outcome (e.g. prior history of severe mental
illness). These items are meant to be rated at baseline only (`Table
1 <#tab01>`__). Table 1Liaison outcome measure subscales and
itemsSubscaleItemsMood1. Low mood2. Suicidal ideation or self-harm3.
Psychological adjustment to physical illnessPsychosis4. Perceptual
disturbances5. Abnormal thought content6. Abnormal mood (excluding
depression)Cognition7. Problems with orientation8. Problems with
concentration9. Problems with memorySubstance misuse10. Alcohol-related
problems11. Illicit drug-related problems12. Proprietary medication
problems13. Acute alcohol or drug withdrawalMind–body14.
Disproportionate disability15. Excessive or major worry about physical
health16. Pain17. Disproportionate treatment-seeking behaviourDisturbed
behaviour18. Agitation or aggressive behaviour19. Non-adherence to
treatment20. Consciousness and hypoactivityAdditional items21.
Side-effects of psychotropic medication22. Problems with capacity to
consent to medical or surgical treatmentContextual itemsPhysical
illnessPhysical disabilityIntellectual difficultiesPsychosocial
stressorsEnduring mental health problemsSocial functionActivities of
daily living

.. _sec1-1:

Settings
--------

Both services involved in the evaluation were based in Greater
Manchester. The first was a consultant-led ward-based service for
working adults, which operates on a 09.00 to 17.00 h basis from Monday
to Friday, based in a hospital with 850 beds. The second was a
consultant-led liaison service for older adults, which operates from
09.00 to 17.00 h, Monday to Friday, based in a hospital with 778 beds.
The older adult liaison service sees patients on general hospital wards
and has a broad reach within the community, including residential and
nursing homes, intermediate care units, hospices, home visits and an
out-patient clinic in a local mental health unit for older people.

.. _sec1-2:

Acceptability and ease of use
-----------------------------

Acceptability was measured by asking clinicians who used the measure to
record the time taken to complete the measure, and to rate on a
seven-point Likert scale the ease or difficulty of completion (1 = very
easy, 4 = neither easy nor difficult, 7 = very difficult). Feedback was
obtained from nine clinicians, including one consultant liaison
psychiatrist, one consultant liaison older adult psychiatrist, three
higher trainees in psychiatry, one specialist liaison nurse, two core
psychiatry trainees and one FY2 trainee.

.. _sec1-3:

Interrater reliability
----------------------

Interrater reliability was assessed by independent paired raters. Paired
ratings were obtained when a patient was assessed on the same day by
different members of the same team, or when jointly assessed by a
trainee and a senior colleague for the purposes of a workplace-based
assessment. Ratings were made separately, without consultation between
the raters. Agreement between raters was assessed using intraclass
correlation coefficients (ICC).

.. _sec1-4:

Sensitivity to change
---------------------

The sensitivity to change of an instrument is its ability to accurately
detect changes if they occur. For the purposes of this evaluation,
change was determined by the Clinical Global Outcome Scale-I,5 which is
recommended by FROM-LP4 and was completed routinely as part of clinical
care for patients who were reviewed on at least two occasions. The CGI-I
is a seven-point scale (1 = very much improved, 2 = much improved,
3 = minimally improved, 4 = no change, 5 = minimally worse, 6 = much
worse, 7 = very much worse).5 Patients were divided into three groups:
improved (a score of 1 or 2 on the CGI-I), no change (a score of 3, 4 or
5 on the CGI-I) and deteriorated (a score of 6 or 7 on the CGI-I).

It was hypothesised that, if the liaison measure was sensitive to
change, there would be a significant difference between the above three
outcome groups, and the improved group would show significant
improvement on pre and post ratings of the liaison measure, while the
deteriorated group would show significant worsening on the liaison
symptomatic scores, and the no-change group would show no difference on
pre and post scores. The effect size7
(*M*\ :sub:`2` − *M*\ :sub:`1`/s.d.\ :sub:`1`, where
*M*\ :sub:`2` = mean at time 2, *M*\ :sub:`1` = mean at time 1,
s.d.\ :sub:`1` = s.d. at time 1) for each group was also calculated.

.. _sec1-5:

Comparability
-------------

It was beyond the scope of this service evaluation project to compare
all of the subscales of the measure with appropriate recognised,
validated instruments. However, it was possible to compare two of the
subscales of the liaison instrument with recognised, validated measures
that are used routinely in the Manchester liaison services. The CORE-108
is a brief outcome measure comprising ten items, which has been widely
adopted in the evaluation of counselling and psychological therapies in
the UK. The CORE-10 is recommended by FROM-LP for appropriate subgroups
of patients. The Confusion Assessment Method (CAM)9 is a standardised
evidence-based tool that enables clinicians to identify and recognise
delirium quickly and accurately in both clinical and research settings.

It was hypothesised that the CORE-10 scores would correlate highly with
the depression subscale of the liaison measure, but not with the other
subscales. As the CAM scale produces a positive or negative outcome,
patients who scored positively on the CAM were compared with those who
had a negative score (i.e. no evidence of confusion). It was
hypothesised that those who had a positive score on the CAM would score
significantly higher on the cognitive subscale of the liaison measure
than those who had a negative score (i.e. no delirium).

This project was checked using the Health Research Authority website to
determine whether or not it would be classed as research, and discussed
with the local Research and Development lead. There was collective
consensus that it should be classed as a local service evaluation.

.. _sec1-6:

Statistical methods
-------------------

Data were collated and stored, and descriptive statistics were completed
using SPSS version 22. Further statistical analysis used the R
statistical programming language (version 3.2.5) with the assistance of
the ‘RKWard’ graphical user interface (https://rkward.kde.org/), as well
as the ‘irr’ (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/irr/irr.pdf) and
‘psych’ (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/psych/psych.pdf).
packages. Normally distributed data were compared using either
independent or paired-sample *t*-tests (for before and after
comparisons). Non-parametric tests were used for comparison of data that
were not normally distributed.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

A total of 360 patient contacts with 207 separate individuals were rated
using the liaison outcome measure. One person had two separate episodes
of care under the liaison team, resulting in 208 individual episodes of
care. One hundred and thirteen people had only one rating, 64 people had
two ratings, 18 people had three ratings, eight people had four ratings,
two people had five ratings, and one person each had six, seven and ten
ratings, respectively.

There were 45 parallel assessments of the same individual at the same
point in time. Of these, 41 were paired ratings and four involved three
raters. There were 78 pre–post ratings which were of the same individual
at different points in time. Of these, 47 were undertaken by the same
rater and 31 by a different assessor. Demographic information was
recorded for 198 individuals, of whom 104 (52.5%) were male. The mean
age was 52.6 years (s.d. = 21.7 years).

.. _sec2-1:

Scale acceptability
-------------------

The ease of use of the scale was rated for 228 (63.3%) contacts
(*x* = 2.1; s.d. = 1.1). The time taken to complete the measure was
recorded for 233 (64.7%) contacts (*x* = 2 min, 30 s; s.d. = 2 min,
8 s).

.. _sec2-2:

Interrater reliability
----------------------

`Table 2 <#tab02>`__ shows the ICC for each item of the scale as rated
by 45 rater pairs. Kappa (Κ) scores for 15 of the 22 items of the scale
and five of the seven contextual factors demonstrated ‘good’
(Κ = 0.61–0.80) or ‘very good’ interrater reliability (Κ = 0.81–1.00),
using agreement categories as described by Landis and Koch.10 Four items
involving the mind–body subscale showed very low kappa scores (14, 15,
16 and 17). Table 2Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) for items
of the liaison outcome measureMeasure item\ *n*\ ICC (95% CI)1Low
mood360.827 (0.687–0.908)***2Suicidal ideation or self-harm410.802
(0.658–0.889)***3Problems with psychological adjustment to physical
illness340.656 (0.413–0.812)***4Perceptual disturbances400.929
(0.869–0.962)***5Abnormal thought content420.920
(0.856–0.956)***6Abnormal mood (excluding depression)380.828
(0.693–0.906)***7Problems with orientation410.861
(0.754–0.923)***8Problems with concentration330.816
(0.660–0.905)***9Problems with memory310.821
(0.662–0.910)***10Alcohol-related problems390.825
(0.691–0.904)***11Illicit drug-related problems320.921
(0.844–0.960)***12Proprietary medication problems370.947
(0.899–0.972)***13Acute alcohol or drug withdrawal400.954
(0.915–0.975)***14Disproportionate disability360.224
(−0.109–0.511)15Excessive or major worry about physical health38−0.0523
(−0.362–0.268)16Pain370.299 (−0.023–0.565)*17Disproportionate
treatment-seeking behaviour370.211 (−0.117–0.498)18Agitation or
aggressive behaviour420.776 (0.620–0.873)***19Non-adherence to
treatment410.518 (0.253–0.710)**20Consciousness and hypoactivity420.805
(0.665–0.890)***21Side-effects of psychotropic medication340.546
(0.259–0.744)**22Problems with capacity to give informed consent to
treatment310.593 (0.307–0.780)**1–22Scale total450.799
(0.662–0.889)**\*\ **Subscale scores**\ AMood450.768
(0.614–0.865)***BPsychosis450.924 (0.866–0.958)***CCognition450.802
(0.667–0.886)***DSubstance misuse450.930
(0.876–0.961)***EMind–body450.253 (−0.041–0.506)FBehaviour450.748
(0.584–0.853)**\* [1]_ [2]_

The ICCs and their 95% confidence intervals for the contextual items
were as follows: physical health problems (*n* = 43; ICC = 0.496;
CI = 0.233–0.692**); physical disability (*n* = 37; ICC = 0.601;
CI = 0.347–0.772***); intellectual difficulties (*n* = 35; ICC = 0.670;
CI = 0.437–0.819**); psychosocial stressors (*n* = 35; ICC = 0.696;
CI = 0.476–0.843***); enduring mental health problems (*n* = 19;
ICC = 0.750; CI = 0.459–0.896***); social function (*n* = 28;
ICC = 0.556; CI = 0.237–0.767**); and activities of daily living
(*n* = 28; ICC = 0.727; CI = 0.491–0.864***).

With the exception of the mind–body subscale, all subscales of the
measure showed ‘good’ or ‘very good’ interrater agreement (`Table
2 <#tab02>`__). Agreement for the total score was ‘good’ at 0.799. This
increased to ‘very good’ with an ICC of 0.845 (CI = 0.734–0.911,
*P* < 0.001) when the mind–body subscale was excluded from the total
score.

.. _sec2-3:

Sensitivity to change
---------------------

Seventy-eight patients had a baseline assessment and a final rating, at
least 1 week apart. There was an overall improvement on the liaison
outcome measure, with a baseline mean of 15.68 (s.d. 10.90) and a
post-intervention mean of 8.41 (s.d. 7.66). This was statistically
significant (*t* = 5.28, d.f. = 77, *P* < 0.001). Thirty-seven of these
patients were classed as showing improvement on the CGI-I (a rating of
much improved or very much improved), 35 patients were classed as
showing no change (a rating of minimally improved, no change or
minimally worse) and five patients were classed as showing a
deterioration (much worse or very much worse). One rating for the CGI-I
was not recorded, so this individual could not be classified. `Table
3 <#tab03>`__ shows the mean scores for each of the three outcome
groups, at the baseline assessment and the final assessment. The change
in outcome among the three groups was also significantly different
(Kruskal–Wallis test, *P* < 0.001). Table 3Baseline and
post-intervention scores, change scores and effect sizes for patients in
the Clinical Global Impression Improvement Scale (CGI-I) improved, no
change and worse groupsCGI-I outcome
categoryBaselinePost-interventionLiaison change score\ *P*-value
(pre–post)Effect sizeMeans.d.Means.d.Means.d.Improved
(*N* = 37)20.0012.044.545.1617.6111.65<0.0011.29No change
(*N* = 35)12.778.0811.918.030.687.860.4770.08Worse
(*N* = 5)4.805.3612.808.38−8.755.730.027−1.64

.. _sec2-4:

Comparability with the CORE-10
------------------------------

Twenty-three patients completed the CORE-10. For these patients, there
was a significant correlation between the mood subscale and the CORE-10
score (*r* = 0.60; 95% CI 0.31–1.00; *P* = 0.001) and the overall
liaison measure (*r* = 0.46; 95% CI 0.13–1.00; *P* = 0.013). There was
no significant correlation between the CORE-10 and any of the other
subscales: psychosis (*r* = 0.31; 95% CI −0.04 to 1.00; *P* = 0.072);
cognition (*r* = −0.15; 95% CI −0.48 to 1.00; *P* = 0.705); substance
misuse (*r* = 0.10; 95% CI −0.26 to 1.00; *P* = 0.322); mind–body
(*r* = 0.24; 95% CI −0.13 to 1.00; *P* = 0.140); and behaviour
(*r* = −0.06; 95% CI −0.40 to 1.00; *P* = 0.603).

.. _sec2-5:

CAM
---

CAM scores were available for 41 patients; 11 of these were positive
scores. Patients who scored positively on the CAM had a significantly
higher score on the cognition subscale of the measure than those who did
not (mean 7.18, s.d. 3.42 *v.* mean 0.47, s.d. 1.43; *P* < 0.001). They
also had higher scores on the psychosis subscale (mean 7.37, s.d. 3.26
*v.* mean 1.50, s.d. 2.56; *P* < 0.001) and the behaviour subscale (mean
5.64, s.d. 1.51 *v.* mean 0.73, s.d. 1.68; *P* < 0.001), but not on the
mood subscale (mean 1.91, s.d. 2.34 *v.* mean 2.1, s.d. 3.00;
*P* = 0.612) or the substance misuse subscale (mean 3.09, s.d. 4.11 *v.*
mean 1.43, s.d. 2.22; *P* = 0.441). Comparisons were made using the
Mann–Whitney *U*-test for independent samples. Data for the mind–body
subscale were not analysed owing to the poor interrater agreement for
these items.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

This study represents a preliminary attempt to develop an outcome
measure for local use in Greater Manchester liaison psychiatry services.
The findings are encouraging, but cannot currently be generalised beyond
the settings involved in the evaluation. Strengths of the measure
include: extensive involvement of liaison clinicians in all stages of
development, particularly item generation; field testing and refinement
of the measure; positive feedback from clinicians regarding ease of use
and acceptability; good interrater reliability for most items and
subscales, with the exception of the mind–body subscale; preliminary
evidence of the instrument's stability and sensitivity to change, and
reasonable comparability for two of the measure's subscales with
recognised instruments used routinely for sub-populations of patients
seen by liaison services.

The measure shares some similarities with HoNOS, although many items are
more specific to liaison settings (items 2, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21
and 22). Like HoNOS, however, the measure was designed to cover a broad
clinical area, rather than a specific psychological dimension.

The measure appears to have face validity in that it covers areas
relevant to liaison psychiatry, and all the items were generated by
working clinicians in the field. On average, it takes approximately 2
min to complete, but clinicians who are familiar with the instrument can
complete it in shorter periods of time.

The heterogeneity of the instrument makes it challenging to validate in
a conventional way, as each of the six subscales would need comparison
with a separate recognised instrument. We compared it with two measures
that are used routinely in our services. There was a significant
association between the CORE-10 (a measure of psychological symptoms)
and the mood subscale of the liaison instrument, which provides some
support for the utility of this subscale. The cognition subscale scores
correlated well with positive CAM scores, as did the psychosis and
behaviour subscales. These findings provide support for the clinical
utility of the instrument, as one might expect that patients who are
confused and suffering from delirium may also have symptoms related to
behavioural disturbance and psychosis.

It was beyond the scope of this project to use any other recognised
appropriate measures for comparison with the other subscales, as no
other measures are used routinely in the clinical services involved in
this evaluation.

The mind–body items showed disappointingly poor interrater reliability.
In the development of the scale, clinicians felt it was important to
include mind–body items, but judgements as to whether behaviour or
treatment-seeking are ‘disproportionate’ are difficult to make in
practice. These items have subsequently been revised and rewritten for
further evaluation.

Our clinician panels recommended inclusion of contextual items in
addition to the main measure, in order to assess the complexity of
patients’ physical, mental and social status. We will report in detail
on the utility of these additional baseline items in a subsequent
report.

The measure was primarily tested on acute general hospital wards; we are
currently exploring the potential utility of the measure in out-patient
and emergency department settings with a view to field testing. In
addition, most of the raters were doctors, as opposed to nurses. This
reflected the staffing of the two services involved in the evaluation,
and the requirement of psychiatric trainees to have training in audit
and service evaluation. The measure has no items that require specific
medical expertise; further evaluation of its use by nursing staff would
be informative.

The main purpose of developing the measure was to be able to record
symptomatic outcomes in our local services, which would be credible and
informative. Despite the above caveats, we believe the measure is better
than any other currently available instrument for recording overall
outcomes in the liaison setting, and it has been adopted locally and
incorporated into an electronic format for routine use, in addition to
the FROM-LP framework.

The measure requires further development and field testing in different
settings before it can be recommended for widespread use. With this in
mind, we are now in the process of applying for funding and ethical
approval for a more robust evaluation of the instrument.

**Elspeth Guthrie** is a professor of psychological medicine at the
University of Leeds. **Mathew Harrison** is a specialist registrar in
general adult psychiatry and medical psychotherapy in the Leeds and York
Partnership NHS Foundation Trust. **Richard Brown** is a senior lecturer
in clinical psychology and honorary consultant clinical psychologist in
the Division of Psychology and Mental Health, School of Health Sciences,
University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre.
**Rajdeep Sandhu** is a locum consultant in old age psychiatry in the
Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust. **Peter Trigwell** is a consultant in
psychological medicine in the Leeds and York Partnership NHS Foundation
Trust. **Seri Abraham** and **Shazada Nawaz** are specialist registrars
in general adult psychiatry in the Lancashire Care NHS Foundation Trust.
**Peter Kelsall** is a specialist registrar in general adult psychiatry
in the Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust. **Rachel Thomasson** is a
consultant neuropsychiatrist in the Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust.

.. [1]
   *n*: number of rater pairs.

.. [2]
   \*\ \ *P* < 0.05; \*\*\ \ *P* < 0.001; \**\*\ \ *P* < 0.0001.
