======================================================================================================================
Patients with depression who self-refer for transcranial magnetic stimulation treatment: exploratory qualitative study
======================================================================================================================



Martin Clarke
Sudheer Lankappa
Mark Burnett
Najat Khalifa
Charlotte Beer
:Correspondence: Dr Martin Clarke
(martin.clarke@nottshc.nhs.uk)

:date: 2018-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   As part of a larger clinical trial concerning the use of transcranial
   magnetic stimulation (TMS) for treatment-resistant depression, the
   current study aimed to examine referral emails to describe the
   clinical characteristics of people who self-refer and explore the
   reasons for self-referral for TMS treatment. We used content analysis
   to explore these characteristics and thematic analysis to explore the
   reasons for self-referral.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Of the 98 referrals, 57 (58%) were for women. Depressive disorder was
   the most commonly cited diagnosis, followed by bipolar affective
   disorder. Six themes emerged from the thematic analysis: treatment
   resistance, side-effects of other treatments, desperation for relief,
   proactively seeking information, long-term illness and illness
   getting worse.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   TMS has recently been recommended in the UK for routine use in
   clinical practice. Therefore, the number of people who self-refer for
   TMS treatment is likely to increase as its availability increases.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1-1a:

Depression
==========

Approximately one-half of patients with depression do not achieve an
adequate response to antidepressants.1 A review found that approximately
one-third of patients with depression showed no response while some
achieved only a partial response to treatment, as operationalised by a
reduction in depressive symptoms.2

.. _sec1-1b:

Brain stimulation technique
===========================

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a well-established neuromodulation
technique used to treat depression,3\ :sup:`,`\ 4 but it is associated
with side-effects such as memory deficits5 and risks associated with
general anaesthesia. This has provided the impetus to develop other
brain stimulation techniques, such as transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS). TMS is a non-invasive brain stimulation technique that induces
changes in cortical excitability using high-intensity magnetic pulses
delivered through the scalp.6\ :sup:`,`\ 7 It has been used to treat
various neuropsychiatric conditions including depression. In the UK,
repetitive TMS (rTMS) for depression has been recently recommended for
use in routine clinical practice.8 In comparison with ECT, TMS treatment
confers certain advantages, in terms of tolerability and ease of
adminstration.9

.. _sec1-1c:

The TMS trial
=============

The current study was conducted as part of a clinical trial (TDep TMS
trial, Clinicaltrials.gov: NCT02016456), which sought to examine the
effectiveness of repetitive high-frequency TMS versus intermittent theta
burst TMS in reducing the symptoms of treatment-resistant depression.
The trial was conducted under the auspices of the Nottingham
Neuromodulation Unit. The lead trial investigator (S.L.) received emails
from patients enquiring about the trial or requesting TMS treatment.
Such enquiries were considered important given the generally poor rates
of treatment-seeking and self-referral by people with depression.10

.. _sec1-1d:

The current study
=================

The self-referral emails offered a novel opportunity to explore why
people with depression self-referred for TMS. The current study aimed to
explore the referral emails and describe the clinical characteristics of
people who self-refer and the reasons for self-referral for TMS
treatment.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Design
------

This qualitative study used self-referral email correspondence to
explore the characteristics of patients self-referring and the reasons
for self-referral for TMS treatment. Emails had been sent by the
self-referrer, their relative or their doctor, and requested TMS
treatment for medical conditions (most often depression).

.. _sec1-2:

Approvals
---------

This study is part of a clinical trial which has both research ethics
and Research and Development approval. Approval to review the content of
the referral emails was granted by the Research and Innovation
Department of the Nottinghamshire Healthcare National Health Service
(NHS) Foundation Trust.

.. _sec1-3:

Participants
------------

The participants were people with a health condition, most commonly
depression, seeking treatment or further information on TMS. The emails
were often sent by the potential participant themselves; however, a few
were sent by doctors or family members. These were also regarded as
self-referrals because it was clear that they were written on the
instruction of, or in collaboration with, the patient. All 98
self-referral emails received between the start of the trial in May 2014
and October 2015 were analysed.

.. _sec1-4:

Analysis
--------

Referral emails were redacted to obscure all identifiable patient
information. They were analysed using content and thematic analysis.
Details about participant characteristics were briefly stated in the
emails or in some instances inferred from details such as name, and so
content analysis was used to extract and analyse these data. Thematic
analysis was used to explore reasons for self-referral, as this approach
enables the researcher to explore themes both inductively from the data
and deductively based on theory and research.11 Analysis followed Braun
and Clarke's six phases of thematic analysis.11 Emails were read and
re-read (by M.B.) and, after familiarisation with the data, codes were
generated by coding interesting and shared features in a systematic way
across all the emails. Codes were sorted into potential themes and the
coded extracts were collated into these themes. Analysis proceeded
iteratively and was refined in collaboration with another qualitative
researcher (C.B.). Themes were defined and coded, following accepted
guidelines.12 Interrater reliability of coding was also assessed; 89%
interrater reliability was achieved (scores >70% are considered
acceptable).12

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Participant characteristics
---------------------------

Of the 98 referral emails analysed, in 90 (91.8%), it was clear whether
the potential participant or someone else had written the email. Of
these, the majority (78.9%, *n* = 71) were written by an individual who
was applying to take part in the TMS treatment, with the others written
by doctors (11.1%, *n* = 10) or family members on behalf of the
individual (10.0%, *n* = 9). Gender was explicitly stated, or could be
inferred from the name, for 83 referrals (84.7%). Of these, there were
48 women (57.8%) and 35 (42.2%) men. Age was provided for 31 referrals
(31.6%). The mean age was 44 years (range early 20s to mid-70s). The
length of illness was given for 33 referrals (33.7%). Where stated, the
mean length of illness was 17 years (range 4 months to more than 40
years). The primary diagnosis was specified for 63 referrals (64.3%).
Depression was the most commonly cited diagnosis (88.9%, *n* = 56),
followed by bipolar affective disorder (6.3%, *n* = 4) and schizophrenia
(4.8%, *n* = 3). Twenty referrals (20.4%) mentioned comorbidities, the
most common being anxiety (50.0%, *n* = 10).

.. _sec2-2:

Reasons for self-referral
-------------------------

Thematic analysis of the data revealed six themes that explained the
reasons for self-referral for TMS treatment. The self-referral emails
varied widely in the depth of detail provided, and themes were expressed
in very diverse ways. Given that there were 98 emails, the prevalence of
themes was reported (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). This is important since a
powerful and memorably described theme might assume disproportionate
importance. Table 1List of themesThemeNumber of participants identifying
with theme1. Current treatment not working39 (39.8%)2. Proactively
seeking information about treatment for depression29 (29.6%)3. Suffering
from chronic or long-term depression25 (25.5%)4. Desperate for relief
from depression13 (13.3%)5. Motivated to seek alternative treatment
owing to side-effects of current or previous treatment12 (12.2%)6.
Getting worse in spite of current treatment regime6 (6.1%)

.. _sec2-3:

Current treatment not working
-----------------------------

This theme was coded in 40% of the emails. The most commonly cited
reason for self-referral for the TMS trial was lack of, or only limited
response to, treatment despite undergoing various treatment modalities.
For example, one email described constant relapsing even after many
different treatments. “I have tried various medications, CBT and
Mindfulness but I relapse again and again (W7, Female).”

Another email described how treatment, including ECT, had never worked,
even partially or for a short period of time. “I have tried at least 20
different types of anti-depressant tablets … none of which have worked.
I have also has [sic] 2 courses of ECT and several years of CBT (both
group and individual) all with no effect (M15, Male).”

This theme reflects the definition of treatment resistance used in the
wider study, namely the ‘failure to improve or only partially improve
after trying two or more antidepressants or two or more
psychotherapies/ECT’. Indeed one writer explicitly stated that her
mother's depression was treatment resistant. “… has suffered with what
is proving to be treatment resistant depression for over 12 months (W61,
Female).”

.. _sec2-4:

Suffering from chronic or long-term depression
----------------------------------------------

Another important motivator for self-referral was experiencing chronic
or long-term depression, with this theme coded in a quarter of the
emails. For example, one writer stated that he had suffered with
depression for more than 20 years. “I have been suffering with
depression for over 20 years (M30, Male).”

.. _sec2-5:

‘Desperate’ for relief from depression
--------------------------------------

For some participants, their self-referral was prompted by their
desperation for relief from depression (13%). One writer powerfully
described how he was not even really ‘living’ and was desperate for this
to happen. “I am desperate of finding a way to start living and
enjoining [sic] life again (M3, Male).”

Another writer described their increasing state of despair. “As I feel
that age and time are against me, and I feel that I am slipping further
and further down the well of total despair (M15, Male).”

These calls for help are all the more powerful given that they were sent
to a clinician with whom the patient had no therapeutic relationship.
Such desperation is clear in the following plea. “Sir, I have no idea
where to turn next, please offer me some help and hope before my
marriage is stretched beyond it's [sic] tolerance – before it is too
late (M7, Male).”

For some, this desperation was caused by depression affecting their
ability to function normally. This impaired functionality often affected
the participant's ability to work. It also manifested in other ways such
as problems with social functioning and lack of motivation. One email
described how the writer had previously had a good career, but
depression had significantly affected this and resulted in him losing
his job. “Although I had a good professional career, 2 postgraduate
degrees, my personal, social and working life is seriously limited by
depression (I lost my job as well) (M3, Male).”

Another email described how his social life had been affected so badly
that he had cut himself off from those around him. “Have not been able
to work since and have now become a recluse cutting myself off from
family and friends (M20, Male).”

Another writer talked about how upsetting they found their lack of
functionality. “I am finding it very tedious and upsetting that I am
unable to do the things I would [want] to do and need to do at times
(W46, Female).”

.. _sec2-6:

Motivated to seek alternative treatment by side-effects of current or previous treatment
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Self-referral was sometimes prompted by a desire to seek an alternative
treatment to avoid side-effects. TMS is a treatment with few
side-effects; these include headache, nausea, tiredness, syncope and,
very rarely, epileptic seizures. As such it was attractive to people who
had previously experienced negative side-effects with other treatments.
Participants were clearly aware of this and referred in their emails to
the intolerable side-effects they had previously experienced. “I was on
medication for several years but after coming off I have found it
impossible to get back to a medication without intolerable side effects
(W1, Female).”

Some participants had received ECT treatment and also had problems with
the severe side-effects associated with it. TMS is recognised has having
fewer severe side-effects, which is probably why the opportunity to
receive TMS was being explored. For example, one email described a
patient who had previously tried ECT but could not tolerate it so was
looking for a similar treatment but with less severe side-effects. “I
attempted ECT with her which she could not tolerate (W11, Female).”

.. _sec2-7:

Getting worse in spite of current treatment regime
--------------------------------------------------

A small number of people requesting TMS mentioned that their symptoms
were worsening despite treatment and that this is what prompted their
request to participate in the trial (6%). While this theme appeared in
only six emails, it powerfully describes the effect of progressive
deterioration on people's lives, as in the account below of a patient's
relative. “She is now living a twilight existence and progressively
deteriorating (W61, Female).”

.. _sec2-8:

Proactively seeking information about treatment for depression
--------------------------------------------------------------

An interesting inductive theme that emerged from the data was that for
some individuals, the self-referral was motivated by a desire to try
newer, unconventional, treatments for their illness (29.6%). Proactive
searching of the internet or health-related articles in papers and
magazines for novel treatments was how these individuals had found out
about the TMS trial.

Many of the patients had significant knowledge about TMS, having
previously researched TMS treatment. This theme illustrates how patients
with depression wish to be actively involved in exploring treatment
choices which are not offered by their general practitioner or
psychiatrist. For example, one patient described how they had been
researching TMS compared to other treatments they had been offered and
had found that it could be better. “I have read and looked at articles
regarding TMS and they look promising to cure depression with much
better success rate than medications alone or medication and counselling
(W7, Female).”

Another patient had been offered ECT but, having researched TMS, decided
that TMS was superior to ECT. “I have researched ECT and found that TMS
seems to [be] much superior but still evolving as a treatment for
depression (M20, Male).”

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

Depression is one of the most commonly cited causes of morbidity
worldwide,13 with a lifetime prevalence of approximately
8–12%.14\ :sup:`,`\ 15 Depression can result in suicide,16 which
accounts for 1.4% of all deaths worldwide.17 To our knowledge, this is
the first study to describe the characteristics of people with
depression self-referring and the reasons for self-referral for TMS
treatment, albeit in the context of a trial.

Content analysis of the emails revealed that self-referrers were a
heterogeneous group. There was a broad age range, indicating that TMS
has a broad appeal across all age groups. Participants had generally
experienced their illness for several years. However, the average
illness length may be confounded if those who included their length of
illness were those who had experienced it for longer. For example,
participants may have included their long length of illness to emphasise
its severity, perhaps in the belief that it would increase their chance
of being accepted onto the trial.

More women than men self-referred for TMS treatment. This is in line
with research that has shown that women are more likely than men to seek
help for mental disorders,18\ :sup:`,`\ 19 and that depression is more
prevalent in women than men.20

Thematic analysis of the emails revealed a number of factors prompting
self-referral. The themes offer some important insights into what
motivates people with depression to enquire about TMS treatment. The
most common theme that emerged was ‘current treatment not working’.
Other related themes included ‘motivated to seek alternative treatment
owing to side-effects of current or previous treatment’, ‘suffering from
chronic or long-term depression’ and ‘getting worse in spite of current
treatment regime’. The side-effects of treatments with antidepressants
have been well documented21\ :sup:`,`\ 22 and so this was not an
unexpected theme. The chronicity and possible long-term nature of
depression are also well documented23 and perhaps unsurprisingly this
was mentioned in one-quarter of self-referrals. Self-referrers also
reported that their symptoms were ‘getting worse in spite of a current
treatment regime’. Although this theme was the least common, revealed in
only six emails, it was powerfully described and resonates with the
literature on why people seek help,24 and so should not be ignored.

A related and powerful theme was ‘desperate for relief from depression’.
Participants movingly described their desperation for relief from
depression. The lack of treatment options, and not just symptom
severity, may contribute to feelings of desperation.25 Evidence of such
themes need not exclude participants from trials; as Swift26 commented,
desperation affects voluntariness rather than capacity to enter into a
trial, and this is related to whether acceptable alternative treatments
are available. Moreover, Dunn and colleagues argued that including
desperate patients in clinical trials is ethical.25

The themes described above go some way towards explaining why, despite
their depression, participants were actively seeking information about
treatment. The unexpected and inductive theme ‘proactively seeking
information about treatment for depression’ revealed how participants
had found information about the TMS trial while researching alternative
treatments.

To date, no published studies have examined why patients with depression
self-refer for TMS. However, gaining access to additional services, such
as otherwise unavailable interventions, has been identified as a key
facilitator for recruiting people with depression into clinical
trials.27 Although TMS was not discussed, the authors noted a preference
for interventions that did not involve medication.27 This has important
implications for recruitment and resonates with Locock and Smith's
study, which found personal benefit to be a primary motivation for
volunteering in a research study, more so than altruistic
considerations.28 Their study explored the reasons people volunteered to
participate in clinical trials across different (mainly physical)
conditions, and found that such personal benefits included access to new
treatment, access to better information and receiving care from expert
specialised teams.28

.. _sec3-1:

Limitations
-----------

The main limitation of this study was the availability of data. Analyses
were constrained by the information available in the initial referral
email. Emails tend to be short and contain only information the writer
wishes to share. Accordingly, there was no opportunity to clarify
information with the participants, and relevant information may have
been omitted in the referral email. For example, there were missing data
for some of the participant characteristics. Furthermore, the
prospective provision of TMS was linked to a clinical trial where
participants received an intervention 4 days a week for 4 weeks.
Potential self-referrers may have been restricted by this costly and
time-consuming commitment, especially for those who lived further
afield. However, while these constraints may have had an influence on
who ultimately participated in the trial, the email writers were
enquiring about, rather than enrolling in, the study. Therefore, the
participant demographics may still be credible. Future research should
include interviews with participants to explore their reasons for
referral to TMS, to see whether similar reasons are identified which
support our findings. There was also no opportunity for participants to
provide feedback on the findings. It would also be informative to
explore whether participants’ reasons for referral were related to their
response to TMS. However, given that TMS is a relatively new technique
and is not yet widely used in the NHS, we are not aware of any previous
research on the characteristics of those who request the treatment or
their reasons for referral to it, particularly in the UK.

.. _sec3-2:

Summary
-------

In conclusion, the 98 people who self-referred for TMS were a
heterogeneous group, although the majority were female (57.8%). Thematic
analysis of the self-referral emails revealed that participants were
motivated by a desire for an effective alternative treatment for their
treatment-resistant depression. These findings have implications for how
participants for future TMS trials could be targeted; they also suggest
an increased demand for TMS as it becomes more widely known. Given the
updated guidance recommending rTMS for depression in routine clinical
practice in the UK8, it is likely that more treatment centres will be
developed to facilitate this.29 Prior to this, rTMS was only
administered in research settings as National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence guidelines stated that although TMS was judged to be
safe, there was uncertainty about the clinical efficacy.6\ :sup:`,`\ 30

**Martin Clarke** is a Research Fellow at Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS
Foundation Trust and Honorary Assistant Professor at the School of
Medicine, University of Nottingham, UK; **Sudheer Lankappa** is a
Consultant Psychiatrist at Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Foundation
Trust and Honorary Clinical Associate Professor at the School of
Medicine, University of Nottingham, UK; **Najat Khalifa** is a
Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist at Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS
Foundation Trust and an Associate Professor at the School of Medicine,
University of Nottingham, UK; **Mark Burnett** is a Medical Student at
the School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, UK; **Charlotte Beer**
is an Assistant Professor at the School of Medicine, University of
Nottingham, UK.
