====================================================================================================================
Getting a balance between generalisation and specialisation in mental health services: a defence of general services
====================================================================================================================



Richard Laugharne
Matthew Thompson
Alind Srivastava
Simon Marlow
Rohit ShankarCorrespondence to Dr Richard Laugharne
(richard.laugharne@nhs.net)
:Date: 2018-12

:Abstract:
   Mental health services in the UK National Health Service have evolved
   to include primary-care generalist, secondary-care generalist and
   secondary-care specialist services. We argue that there continues to
   be an important role for the secondary-care generalists as they
   minimise interfaces, can live with diagnostic uncertainty and support
   continuity of care. The lack of commissioning and clinical boundaries
   in secondary-care generalist services can undermine their
   feasibility, leading to difficulties recruiting and retaining staff.
   There is a risk of a polo-mint service, where the specialist services
   on the edge are well resourced, but the secondary-care generalist
   services taking the greatest burden struggle to recruit and retain
   clinicians. We need to establish equity in resources and expectations
   between generalist and specialist mental health services.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We all like to feel special. The word ‘generalist’ seems to imply the
opposite – ‘Jack of all trades, master of none’. Being a specialist
suggests one is at the top of the knowledge tree, whereas the generalist
might feel that the term implies that there is someone out there with
greater expertise.

And yet … the crowning glory of the British National Health Service
(NHS) is the general practitioner (GP). All western countries have
specialists, but the central role of the GP in British medicine is a
distinctive characteristic of the NHS. There is a high degree of trust
between the GP and patient,1 created by continuity of care, good
therapeutic relationships and a holistic view of the whole patient. The
role of the GP creates a degree of efficiency, as those referred to the
specialists are screened by doctors who know the patient and ration
precious health resources according to need. This may be an idealised
picture, but there is still a strong coherent relationship between the
GP and patient in the UK. Leinster2 argued that medical schools need to
concentrate on producing doctors who are good generalists who can
orchestrate good care by specialists.

Within UK secondary-care mental health services, there are disparities
between general services and specialist services. The latter include
specialist services defined by diagnosis or treatment: rehabilitation,
early intervention in psychosis, eating disorder, forensic and
personality disorder teams. Within secondary-care mental health general
services, there can be specialised services according to the environment
(in-patient wards), crisis teams and community mental health teams.

As a result, it can be argued that a three-tier service structure has
developed, in terms of medical treatment of mental illness in the NHS
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Some areas straddle the secondary-care
generalist and specialist categories, such as forensic teams who are
accessed through secondary-care generalists but also through the
criminal justice system. We will refer to ‘secondary-care generalist
psychiatrists’ as generalists for brevity in this article. Table 1The
three-tier service structure for medical treatment of mental illness in
the National Health ServiceMedical expertiseCharacteristicsExample
environmentsPatients treatedPrimary-care generalistsGPs with broad
medical knowledge, open access to the publicGeneral practiceMild to
moderate depression and anxietySecondary-care generalist
psychiatristsPsychiatrists working across an age group, usual access by
referral from a GPPsychiatric wards, community mental health teams,
crisis teams, liaison teamsSevere mental illnessSecondary-care
specialist psychiatristsPsychiatrists working in narrow diagnostic
fields, usual access through secondary-care generalist
psychiatristsEarly intervention teams, personality disorder teams,
eating disorder teams, rehabilitation/recovery teamsAs defined by the
team diagnoses [1]_

.. _sec1:

Strengths and weaknesses of generalists and specialists in secondary-care psychiatry
====================================================================================

Specialists concentrate on a specific diagnosis or treatment of mental
illness. In doing so, they develop greater expertise in interventions,
which may improve clinical outcomes. There is clear coherent
communication to the team and regarding what they are trying to achieve.
Often, workload is more precisely commissioned and framed by inclusion
criteria and case-load limits. Evidence suggests experts may be better
at detecting clinical errors in their field.3

Generalist psychiatrists take responsibility for patients across a broad
group of diagnoses and often across different environments. Their
strength is in their versatility, working across situations, with
diagnostic uncertainty and with patients who have more than one
diagnosis. As such, they may provide more holistic care, and interfaces
between services are less likely to hinder care or waste time.
Continuity of care and therapeutic relationships may be easier to
establish.

The weaknesses of specialisation include interfaces between teams, which
are often inefficient. Working with one group of patients can get boring
for staff and they can miss the variety that comes with being a
generalist. There is evidence that specialists ‘pull’ cases toward their
specialism and are less flexible in their thinking. Their specialism can
lead to a bias in their clinical reasoning.4

The weaknesses of generalists mirror the strengths of the specialist in
that, because they are doing a variety of interventions less often, they
can have less expertise, and this can compromise outcomes. Paediatric
heart surgery is an example of specialist teams having better outcomes
than general heart surgeons in the cardiac care of children. Generalists
may neglect certain diagnoses that are difficult to treat and provide a
service skewed toward their own interests.

.. _sec2:

A defence of generalist services
================================

.. _sec2-1:

The issue of diagnostic uncertainty and avoiding difficult patients
-------------------------------------------------------------------

A difficulty in mental health is that diagnostic boundaries are not so
sharp that competent colleagues may disagree. For example, there can be
differences in defining psychosis from non-psychosis, leading to
disagreements as to individual suitability for the early intervention
teams. The distinction between bipolar type II disorder and emotionally
unstable personality disorder is grey, so that many patients meet
diagnostic criteria for both. Dual diagnoses are common, for example,
between depression and personality disorder, and psychosis and substance
misuse. It is human nature that if a particular patient is challenging
to treat, we see aspects of their presentation that exclude them from
our responsibility and make them suitable for another team.

.. _sec2-2:

The pain of interfaces
----------------------

The resulting disagreements between multiple teams are distressing for
patients, inefficient and cause resentment between staff, in that
referrers have to convince the specialist team that a patient is
appropriate. The fewer interfaces the better, and if different staff
members know each other and have a relationship, these problems are
easier. For a successful service, therapeutic relationships between
staff are as important as the therapeutic relationships between patients
and clinicians.

.. _sec2-3:

The inequitable distortion of resource allocation
-------------------------------------------------

Specialist services often have more tightly defined boundaries than
general services and are often commissioned with a defined capacity. For
example, specialist teams may have a cap on individual clinician
case-loads (e.g. 12–15 in early intervention services) whereas generic
community mental health teams (CMHTs) often do not, and case-loads can
increase to over 40, with no managerial definition of a reasonable
case-load despite the same team taking and assessing most referrals from
primary care. The lack of a ‘lid’ on capacity in generalist CMHTs can
lead to staff burnout, difficulties in retention and unsafe services.

.. _sec2-4:

The risk of the polo-mint service
---------------------------------

Commissioners can prioritise specialist teams over generic teams and
skew the service. When the more specialist teams have a protected
case-load size and patient number, they can effectively become a local
tertiary service. Staff can observe that clinicians have the time and
resource in the specialist teams to deliver better quality care that
they do not have in generic teams on the wards and in the CMHTs, and
apply for specialist posts. This can result in a polo-mint service:
posts are filled in specialist teams, which do not take on the immediate
burden of new assessments, admissions and the ongoing care of the
majority of the patients. Generic teams can be staffed with
less-experienced staff and temporary staff. This is inequitable and
breeds resentment. There is good evidence that staff burnout increases
levels of sickness absence and staff turnover.5

.. _sec2-5:

The needs for specialist teams change over time
-----------------------------------------------

In the 1980s the day hospital specialist was popular as the asylums were
closing. There are very few day hospitals now. The HIV psychiatrist
emerged in the 1990s, but thankfully was soon not needed because of the
rise of better treatments for HIV. Specialists in assertive outreach
were appointed in the 1990s and 2000s but are now disappearing. In the
past decade, addiction specialist posts have been eroded, but liaison
psychiatry is experiencing a renaissance with medically unexplained
symptoms a rediscovered clinical challenge and patients with dementia in
general hospitals also a priority to manage.

So what? The world changes, patients’ needs change and specialisms come
and go. That may be a good thing, but it emphasises the need for
psychiatrists and mental health clinicians to protect their core generic
skills and adapt them to fluid challenges. Being a specialist and
protecting your speciality may stifle innovation and generalists have
the overview to spot new needs requiring innovation.

.. _sec3:

How do we get the balance right?
================================

We offer some scenarios to consider.

.. _sec3-1:

Abolish secondary-care generalist teams and have specialist-only teams
----------------------------------------------------------------------

This would be an answer, and has parallels in acute medicine where the
role of the general physician has diminished and cardiologists, renal
physicians, gastroenterologists and other subspecialists have emerged.
This may have led to better treatments and outcomes. However, the care
of elderly patients with multiple morbidities has fragmented, and the
experience of going to hospital has become socially quite unpleasant
because of this fragmentation. Patients often do not have a named
consultant or a named nurse.

Both politicians and leaders in the Royal College of Physicians have
called for a greater emphasis on generalism.6 The former editor of the
*BMJ* has stated that doctors and patients are heading in opposite
directions, ‘patients have multiple conditions whilst doctors are
specialising not just in organ systems but parts of organs’.7 In the
USA, the Council on Graduate Medical Education recommended an increase
in the percentage of generalists among practicing physicians to increase
from 32 to 40% in 2010 – not only is this target predicted to be unmet,
but the percentage of generalists is likely to fall to 25%.8

The biggest difficulty for psychiatry is that the lack of clear
delineation between diagnoses and patients could be passed between
disagreeing teams. However, it is an option that needs consideration.

.. _sec3-2:

Minimise the use of local specialist teams and return to generalist mental health teams
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This does seem somewhat backward, but may be a less-fashionable
description of integrated services. After all, general adult psychiatry
is a speciality in its own right, so why can't one team treat all
diagnoses? Generic psychiatric skills require a holistic biopsychosocial
approach and the incorporation of a full multidisciplinary team. The
secondary-care generalist psychiatrist does not become deskilled when
they are on call as they are used to diagnostic uncertainty and a broad
view of aetiology and treatment.

Many specialist teams were introduced because of charismatic proponents
claiming better outcomes but without evidence for effectiveness, and
subsequent research failed to demonstrate efficacy. Just as assertive
outreach teams have waned in the UK because of a lack of evidence of
better outcomes, with patients returning to generalist teams, others may
go the same way.9 Some staff might take on a specialist interest within
a generalist team, although it is hard to meet and learn with specialist
peers if they are separated between teams.

.. _sec3-3:

Have realistic and equitable estimates for all teams in terms of clinician case-load and team case-load
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There needs to be equity in the commissioning of secondary-care mental
health generalist and specialist services. Specialist teams often have
tightly defined commissioning criteria whereas the criteria for generic
CMHTs are not defined. The case-load size for different teams may not
need to be equal, but they do need to be justified. Although generic
teams exist, it is likely they will be the default service for complex
patients with diagnostic uncertainty, and boundaries are harder to
define than for specialist teams.

Generic CMHTs have tried to control their workload by defining inclusion
and exclusion criteria and treatment pathways. However, commissioning
needs to allow for the uncertainty of the interface between primary and
secondary care. Patients and GPs get frustrated when criteria are so
inflexibly followed that patients who are presenting in an unusual or
atypical manner are refused care, or have to get worse before they are
offered help. Some patients who are ill and at risk do not follow the
pathway or treatments recommended. Mental health services are unique in
being asked to be assertive in caring for reluctant patients and forcing
care in certain circumstances.

.. _sec4:

Some suggestions
================

We believe that generic general adult psychiatric services are likely to
be required because specialist-only services will not have the
flexibility to roll with diagnostic uncertainty and changes in patient
needs. In the past 30 years, new treatments have emerged for emotionally
unstable personality disorder, which was once a diagnosis of exclusion
and adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, which was completely
ignored (and still is in some places). Patients with high-functioning
autism still tend to be pushed away, but treatments may emerge.
Generalists are flexible and can think on their feet.

Somehow, we need to make working in a generalist CMHT attractive again.
This may be through better management of expectations and case-load,
career opportunities, pay or quality of life. We cannot lose good staff
to specialist teams and leave more junior staff doing demanding
generalist jobs.

Currently, the most pressing need is for equity between generic and
specialist teams in terms of defined case-load. Staff/patient ratios are
a cause of burnout, which increases staff turnover.5 Staff in generic
CMHTs must have boundaries put on their patient case-load in the same
way that specialist teams define their capacity. This does not have to
be equal – it may be 35 cases compared with 15 for teams with more
intensive input. There have been attempts to develop tools to promote
equity between teams in Australia.10 Government policy and commissioners
cannot continue to be inequitable in their expectations of generic and
specialist teams, and as long as CMHTs are treated as inexhaustible,
they will not retain the skilled clinicians they need.

**Richard Laugharne** (FRCPsych) is a consultant psychiatrist at
Cornwall Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, UK, and Honorary Senior
Lecturer at University of Exeter Medical School, UK. **Matthew
Thompson** (MRCPsych) is an associate specialist psychiatrist at
Cornwall Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Alind Srivastava**
(MRCPsych) and **Simon Marlow** (MRCPsych) are consultant psychiatrists
at Cornwall Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Rohit Shankar**
(FRCPsych MBE) is a consultant psychiatrist at Cornwall Partnership NHS
Foundation Trust, UK, and Honorary Senior Lecturer at University of
Exeter Medical School, UK.

.. [1]
   GP, general practitioner.
