=====================================================================================================================
A new inner-city specialist programme reduces readmission rates in frequently admitted patients with bipolar disorder
=====================================================================================================================



Karine Macritchie
Tim Mantingh
Diego Hidalgo-Mazzei
Sarah Bourne
Emma Borthwick
Allan H. Young
:Correspondence: Professor Allan H. Young
(allan.young@kcl.ac.uk)

:date: 2019-4

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The OPTIMA mood disorders service is a newly established specialist
   programme for people with bipolar disorder requiring frequent
   admissions. This audit compared data on hospital admissions and home
   treatment team (HTT) spells in patients before entry to and after
   discharge from the core programme. We included patients admitted
   between April 2015 and March 2017 who were subsequently discharged.
   Basic demographic data and numbers of admissions and HTT spells three
   years before and after discharge were collected and analysed.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Thirty patients who completed the programme were included in the
   analyses. The median monthly rate of hospital admissions after OPTIMA
   was significantly reduced compared with the rate prior to the
   programme. HTT utilisation was numerically reduced, but this
   difference was not statistically significant.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a4

   These results highlight the effectiveness and importance of
   individually tailored, specialist care for patients with bipolar
   disorder following discharge from hospital.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a5

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The period immediately following hospital admission for mania or bipolar
depression is an important opportunity to optimise treatment and to
prevent episode recurrence and readmission.1 Studies show that this
period is one of high risk of readmission and episode
recurrence.2\ :sup:`–`\ 4 It is also a period of high suicide risk.5 The
OPTIMA mood disorders service was established in 2015 in the South
London and Maudsley (SLaM) NHS Foundation Trust.6 OPTIMA's core
programme aims to consolidate recovery for people with bipolar disorder
who have recently required a hospital admission or home treatment team
(HTT) care for an episode of mania or depression. Importantly, the core
programme focuses particularly on those who have required frequent
hospital admissions. In a preparatory audit of admissions for bipolar
disorder in the Trust, over a three-year period, there were
approximately 500 admissions per year for bipolar disorder. Two-thirds
of these were readmissions, emphasising the need for better preventive
strategies. Approximately 150 people were admitted more than once a
year: this group accounted for a quarter of the total number of
admissions for patients in this diagnostic group.

The OPTIMA core programme offers an individually tailored treatment,
comprising ongoing psychiatric assessment and review, the prescribing of
psychotropic medication, specialist nursing, occupational therapy and
individual psychoeducation.

This preliminary audit assessed the effect of this programme on
readmission rates by comparing median admission rates before and after
engagement with OPTIMA. A similar comparison was made with rates of HTT
episodes.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

Approval for this audit was obtained from the SLaM Mood, Anxiety and
Personality Clinical Academic Group Governance Committee. The audit
focused on patients who had been admitted to the OPTIMA core programme
between April 2015 and March 2017.

The core programme began with an assessment appointment with a
consultant psychiatrist or senior trainee, and a key worker (a senior
nurse or an occupational therapist). When the patient entered the
programme, they were offered a period of engagement in which goals were
agreed. Psychiatric review and medication changes were made to address
ongoing affective episodes or subsyndromal symptoms. ‘Key working’ was
offered: this was an individually tailored psychoeducation programme
which aimed to reinforce prevention strategies. It included sensitive
work, such as the identification of past episode triggers and early
warning signs of mania and depression. Self-management skills, early
intervention strategies and crisis planning were taught to prevent full
episode recurrence.7

The programme also offered specialist nursing interventions and
occupational therapy. Appointments were offered at times and at a
frequency convenient to the patient to encourage attendance. Initially,
it was planned that the core programme should last 12 weeks, followed by
less frequent contacts prior to discharge to the patient's community
team. However, in practice, a more flexible approach was used, and the
duration of the core programme was adapted in each case to allow for
individual variation in the time needed to engage patients and to
address ongoing affective symptoms.

Basic demographic data were collected. The number of hospital admissions
and HTT episodes in the three-year period before entering OPTIMA were
extracted from electronic health records. Similarly, the number of
hospital admissions and the number of HTT episodes in the (shorter)
period following discharge were determined. Monthly rates of admission
and HTT episodes in the 36 months before OPTIMA were calculated. For the
period following discharge from OPTIMA, rates of admission and HTT
contacts were calculated by dividing the number of admissions/HTT
contacts by the number of months since discharge from the programme.
Descriptive statistical analyses were used to characterise the audit
sample. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Shapiro–Wilk, *P* = 0.001) was used
to conduct comparisons of pre- and post-OPTIMA admission and HTT rates.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

At the time of this audit, 30 people had engaged with and had been
discharged from the OPTIMA core programme; a further 22 patients
remained in the programme. Of the group of 30 discharged patients, 20
were female and 10 were male. The median age was 40.5 years, with an
interquartile range (IQR) of 25.

The median number of months since discharge from OPTIMA was 9.5 (IQR 8).
Eighteen people did not complete the whole programme for the following
reasons: recurrence of illness (*n* = 4), personal issues (*n* = 6) and
lack of engagement (*n* = 8). For purposes of our analysis, these 18
patients were included in the analyses as they received at least one
therapeutic intervention during their stay in the programme.

The median monthly rate of hospital admissions after OPTIMA was 0.00
(IQR 0.00), which was significantly different from the median monthly
rate in the three years prior to OPTIMA (0.04; IQR 0.06; Wilcoxon
signed-rank test Z = 3.1; *P* = 0.002). The post-OPTIMA median monthly
rate of HTT episodes (0.00; IQR 0.02) was numerically reduced compared
with the rate prior to OPTIMA (0.03; IQR 0.06), but this difference did
not reach statistical significance (Wilcoxon signed-rank test Z = −1.5,
*P* = 0.136).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

These results provide preliminary evidence of the effectiveness of the
OPTIMA core programme in reducing hospital readmissions in a group of
frequently admitted patients from an inner-city catchment area.

There was no statistical difference in HTT spells of care required
before and after the programme. This may reflect the limited sample size
and the short follow-up period of this early audit. However, it is
possible that when OPTIMA ‘graduates’ do suffer recurrence, symptoms are
recognised earlier, and patients are better able to use home treatment,
and so hospital admissions are avoided.

The role of specialised programmes has been debated in recent years. Do
the long-term benefits of specialised services justify the resources
they require and their costs8? A growing body of evidence supports the
need for and the effectiveness of specialist services, particularly in
the case of complex and disabling illnesses, such as bipolar disorder.9
In a recent study, Kessing *et al*\ 1 randomised 158 recently discharged
patients with bipolar disorder to the treatment arms of a specialised
bipolar clinic or standard care. The specialised intervention consisted
of a two-year comprehensive programme that combined individual and group
treatments, including group-based psychoeducation, provided by
psychiatrists, psychologists, nurses and social workers with relevant
training and experience in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Over a
period of almost six years, a significant reduction in the rates of
readmission was found in the group receiving specialist care.
Importantly, there was a significant associated reduction in the
financial costs to the care provider, as well as higher patient
satisfaction rates. The OPTIMA mood disorders programme used a similar
approach, but there were several important differences. First, the
OPTIMA mood disorders service provided intensive clinical care to
recently discharged patients at any stage in their bipolar illness, but
selected them on the frequency of their admissions; the Kessing study
focused on those early in their bipolar course. Second, the OPTIMA
programme was designed to recruit the Trust's most frequently admitted
patients to our core programme. Third, patients on our core programme
were often symptomatic and could not attend our structured group
psychoeducation programme; in these cases, individual psychoeducation
was provided instead.

Specialised programmes such as OPTIMA provide opportunities for
education and research.8\ :sup:`,`\ 10 The South London and Maudsley NHS
Foundation Trust comprises a number of clinical academic groups which
aim to facilitate the provision of evidence-based treatment, research
and training in its clinical services. The OPTIMA programme hosts
students, postgraduate students and trainees who wish to learn more
about bipolar disorder.

Interpretation of the results of this early audit of a new service is
subject to several limitations. The number of patients who completed the
programme was small, and the period since discharge is short. Our
results are based on an observational design with intra-individual
comparisons: there was no control group to compare effects with standard
treatment offered by the Trust. Despite these limitations, our initial
findings support the importance of frequent specialist post-episode
psychiatric review and maintenance phase interventions to stabilise
bipolar disorder in frequently admitted patients. Future work will
include the expansion of this model of care in the development of an
OPTIMA ward liaison service to improve continuity of care from the
in-patient to the community setting, and recruitment to the OPTIMA core
programme.

This report represents work funded by the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at SLaM NHS Foundation Trust
and King's College London. The views expressed are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Health Service, the NIHR, or
the Department of Health.

**Karine Macritchie** is the lead consultant psychiatrist at OPTIMA mood
disorders service, South London and NHS Foundation Trust (SLaM), London,
UK. **Tim Mantingh** is a research assistant at SLaM and the Institute
of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience (IoPPN), King's College
London, UK. **Diego Hidalgo-Mazzei** is a postdoctoral researcher at the
Centre for Affective Disorders, IoPPN, King's College London, UK, and a
psychiatrist with the bipolar disorders programme at the Hospital Clinic
of Barcelona, Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Barcelona, Spain.
**Sarah Bourne** is the Clinical Team Leader at OPTIMA mood disorders
service, SlaM, London, UK. **Emma Borthwick** is an occupational
therapist at the Early Intervention Crisis Assessment Service in
Lambeth, SLaM, London, UK. **Allan H. Young** is a professor of
psychiatry at OPTIMA mood disorders service, SLaM, London, UK, and
director of the Centre for Affective Disorders, IoPPN, King's College
London, UK.
