---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  Recent funding from Welsh Government for mental health has helped to
  develop liaison psychiatry services in Wales. Systematic data
  collection was undertaken to map the liaison psychiatry services in
  Wales in collaboration with the Royal College of Psychiatrists in
  Wales and Public Health Wales 1000 Lives Improvement. A questionnaire
  was designed and circulated to all the health boards in Wales to
  gather information to map liaison psychiatry services in Wales.
  Up-to-date information was confirmed in January 2018, via email.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  Over the past 2 years, liaison psychiatry services have been set up in
  six out of seven health boards in Wales. Staffing levels have
  increased and the remit of services has broadened.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  Mapping has highlighted that liaison psychiatry services in Wales
  continue to evolve. It will be important to continue to monitor these
  developments and their effects. Comparison with services in England
  will provide a useful comparison of service provision. A particular
  challenge will be to establish and monitor liaison psychiatry
  standards in Wales.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a4}

  None.
author:
- Tayyeb A. Tahir
- Adam Watkins
- Philip Slack
- Phil Chick
- William Lee
- Andrea GrayCorrespondence to Tayyeb A. Tahir
  (<tayyeb.tahir@wales.nhs.uk>)
date: 2019-2
institute:
- 1Department of Liaison Psychiatry, University Hospital of Wales,
  Cardiff & Vale University Health Board and Liaison Psychiatry for
  Wales, UK
- 2Public Health Wales, 1000 Lives Improvement, UK
- 3Department of Liaison Psychiatry, University Hospital of Wales,
  Cardiff & Vale University Health Board, UK
- 4NHS Delivery Unit, NHS Wales, UK
- 5Community and Primary Care Research Group, Peninsula Schools of
  Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth University, UK
- 6Public Health Wales, 1000 Lives Improvement, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
title: Liaison psychiatry services in Wales
---

In 2008, Wales had 2.6 full-time equivalent consultants in liaison
psychiatry.^1^ Overall, where provided, liaison psychiatry services were
not meeting the standards specified in the guidance '*Developing Models
for Liaison Psychiatry Services*'.^2^ Furthermore, three Welsh National
Health Service (NHS) trusts did not provide a liaison psychiatry
service.^1^ In 2009, 29 NHS organisations merged to form seven
integrated health boards, providing all healthcare in Wales.^3^ Unlike
England, there are no separate mental health trusts. Therefore mental
health services are part of unified health boards that comprise both
mental health and general hospitals. Every health board caters for a
number of large and some smaller community hospitals within the
geographical area covered by the respective health board.

A policy paper for England, '*Achieving Better Access to Mental Health
Services by 2020*',^4^ outlines the need to provide liaison psychiatry
cover for all ages in the accident and emergency (A&E) department. In
2012, the Welsh Government published '*Together for Mental Health'*, its
10-year strategy to improve mental health services.^5^ Within this
document there was an acknowledgement that 'Improved liaison psychiatry
services can ensure that mental health care needs are met for those
people on general wards and reduce length of stay' (p. 65).^5^ The
strategy required that all district general hospitals in Wales should
have a liaison psychiatry team in place by March 2017.

In response to a request from NHS England, the national surveys of
Liaison Psychiatry in England (LPSE) in collaboration with the Liaison
Faculty of the Royal College of Psychiatrists charted the extent and
growth of liaison psychiatry in England.^6^

In 2015 the Welsh Government allocated more than £8 m of recurrent
revenue investment to establish enhanced dementia, liaison psychiatry,
psychological therapy and women and perinatal services. Additional
funding was also made available to implement the legislative
requirements of the Mental Capacity Act 2005.

# Method {#sec1}

A collaboration between Public Health Wales 1000 Lives Improvement
service, the Welsh Government, the NHS Delivery Unit and the Royal
College of Psychiatrists in Wales systematically mapped liaison
psychiatry services in Wales. This multi-agency quality improvement
project did not require approval from an ethics committee.

A structured questionnaire was designed to gather information on the
level of service provision, the make-up of teams by discipline, the type
of service provided, the clinical areas and hospitals covered, the hours
of working and any plans for further service development. The first
draft of the questionnaire was piloted to test for suitability and for
ease of data collection. Suggested changes were made to improve the
quality of data collection, using Microsoft Excel. A lead clinician or
manager (link person) with a remit for liaison psychiatry service was
identified within each health board in Wales. The final questionnaire
was disseminated electronically by the Public Health Wales 1000 Lives
Improvement service to the link person in each health board. The data
was collected and analysed with Microsoft Excel.

The collected information was presented in a meeting organised by the
Public Health Wales 1000 Lives Improvement service attended by
representatives from the liaison psychiatry services in Wales. In
January 2018 the level of services across Wales were reconfirmed via
email by each health board. This provided an opportunity to confirm or
reconcile the information collected in the initial distribution of the
questionnaire. The information collected in this mapping exercise is set
out below.

# Results {#sec2}

The six health boards in Wales with general hospitals responded to the
questionnaire. The seventh health board, Powys Teaching Health Board,
does not have an acute hospital and therefore did not respond. The
liaison psychiatry services for working-age adults and older age adults
were the main focus of this mapping exercise. The information gathered
is summarised in [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}. Table 1Remit of
liaison psychiatry services in WalesHealth board (geographical areas
covered)Notes on service structure and remitAbertawe Bro Morgannwg
(Swansea, Neath Port Talbot)Services split geographically. One area has
a combined service, the other has services split by age and combined
with other teams.Aneurin Bevan (Gwent, Monmouthshire)Services split by
age, adult combined with crisis resolution home treatment team.Betsi
Cadwaladr (North Wales)Single all-age service, meeting Core 24
criteria.Cardiff & Vale (Cardiff and Vale of Glamorgan)Services split by
age, Poisons Unit linked with the adult service.Cwm Taf (Merthyr Tydfil,
Rhondda Cynon Taf)Single all-age service.Hywel Dda (West Wales)Older
adult service in place. Adult being set-up. Table 2Staffing
establishment comparison by health board between 2007 and 2018Total in
Wales 2007Total in Wales 2018Abertawe Bro MorgannwgAneurin BevanBetsi
CadwaladrCardiff & ValeCwm TafHywel Dda≥65\<65≥65\<65Average daily
available beds, 2016--2017^8^174515771975148710671011Major
hospitals433424Consultant2.69213111Other medical
staff3.67.710.80.130.811Nurses band 719.722.5422325.522Nurses band
611.2510.821[^a^](#tfn2_2){ref-type="table-fn"}492.584Nursing band 5 and
below18.876Psychology2.44.50.51.510.51Occupational
therapists31122Dementia support workers8.512Admin
staff6212.110.82.31Pharmacists1.50.40.4[^1][^2]

## Service expansion {#sec2-1}

There has been a significant increase in the availability of psychiatric
liaison services in Wales in the past 10 years. Six Welsh health boards
now provide a liaison psychiatry service for older adults, and all but
one provide a working-age adult service. All services now operate in A&E
departments.

[Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"} shows the variation in the structure
and remit of psychiatric liaison services across Wales. Some health
boards have combined services covering working-age adults and older
adults whereas others were split by age. One health board provides
distinct geographical services. Two health boards have combined the
crisis resolution home treatment team with the adult liaison psychiatry
team. [Table 2](#tab02){ref-type="table"} identifies the total number of
general hospital beds in each health board and the number of major
general hospitals that make up each health board.

Betsi Cadwalder University Health Board provides a 24 hour liaison
psychiatry service. This service meets the requirements of the Mental
Health Partnerships' Core 24 model and is an accredited by the
Psychiatric Liaison Accreditation Network (PLAN)^7^ service. Other
services provide a broadly '9 to 5' service, although in many cases,
this includes weekends and some services provide extended 12 or 14 hour
cover of A&E departments. Two health boards, Cardiff & Vale University
Health Board (C&V UHB) and Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University Health
Board, provide liaison psychiatry out-patient clinics. The liaison
psychiatry service in Betsi Cadwalder University Health Board provides
follow-up out-patient review appointments.

Dedicated intellectual disability liaison services (also known as
learning disability in UK health services), substance misuse liaison
services and child and adolescent liaison services were not the main
focus of this survey. Some information was included in some of the
responses. Two health boards have substance misuse liaison services as a
stand-alone service.

## Staffing {#sec2-2}

[Table 2](#tab02){ref-type="table"} summarises the staffing levels for
the liaison services by discipline, together with total staffing levels
in Wales in 2007.^1^ The table also identifies variation in the staffing
levels between health boards; however, direct comparison is not possible
given the different structures and remits of services. At this stage
service provision cannot be explained by level of need or referral
numbers in each health board as this information is only collected on a
local level. To present the mapping more clearly and allow easier
comparison, the data is set out by health board rather than by
individual liaison teams or hospitals covered by the teams. In the two
health boards where age-specific liaison teams operate, we have included
the breakdown of these teams.

We identified that in the past 2 years there has been a considerable
overall increase in the level of staffing within liaison psychiatry
services in Wales. No health board has a liaison service comprising only
nursing staff, whereas in 2007, this was the case in three out of eight
liaison psychiatry services. Dementia support workers have been included
in two old-age liaison psychiatry services. Five health boards include
the provision of occupational therapy services. One old-age service
includes support from a pharmacist. C&V UHB previously established a
nurse-led substance misuse liaison service consisting of three nurses.
The health board also has a dedicated service for people presenting to
the A&E department with alcohol-related issues, which was developed with
separate public health funding. Betsi Cadwalder University Health Board
provides two nurses dedicated to an alcohol misuse service within its
liaison psychiatry service.

# Discussion {#sec3}

This is the first survey of liaison psychiatry services in Wales since
additional funding was provided by the Welsh Government in 2015. At a
national level, medical staffing has trebled and nurse staffing has
doubled since 2007. This mapping process identified the progress in
establishing multi-disciplinary services with an increase in the number
of nurses, dedicated psychology support, the inclusion of occupational
therapists and dementia support workers with additional consultant
posts. This mapping exercise was undertaken using the available
resources, with no additional funding for this work. We achieved this
through multi-agency collaborative work between the Public Health Wales
1000 Lives Improvement service, NHS Wales Delivery Unit and the Royal
College of Psychiatrists in Wales.

Historically some health boards had no specific liaison psychiatry teams
and relied on community mental health teams and duty psychiatrist cover.
In some areas a collaborative 'goodwill' arrangement existed between
consultant colleagues to provide cover for the mental health needs of
patients in acute hospitals where no specific cover for liaison
psychiatry teams was in place. For these health boards, the new funding
from the Welsh Government for liaison psychiatry has been of particular
significance. In certain instances, the duty system and crisis teams
continue to provide cover to A&E departments out of hours. In addition
to government-funded developments, locally funded initiatives have also
enhanced these services. This survey did not collect detailed
information on these local arrangements or the division of government
funding for setting up these services, which is a potential limitation.

The health boards in Wales had autonomously established services
according to local needs and requirements. Wales is diverse in its
geography and demography, with a mix of rural and urban centres, and the
size of geographical areas covered by the individual health board
varies. These factors could have influenced the manner in which liaison
psychiatry teams have been established by health boards.

The previous survey undertaken in 2008 reported that, in total, there
were only two relatively well-established services in Wales: Cardiff and
Swansea.^1^ In North Wales, a service delivered by a less than full-time
consultant with some nursing support existed. Before funding from the
Welsh Government becoming available, Cardiff and Swansea had set up
old-age liaison psychiatry services. Aneurin Bevan University Health
Board piloted the old-age Rapid Assessment, Interface and Discharge^9^
model in the Royal Gwent Hospital and this is now also the model used by
the old-age liaison service in C&V UHB.

A liaison psychiatry team should include a consultant psychiatrist,
mental health nurses and a psychologist as a core part of this team.
Recommended minimum staffing numbers vary with the size of the hospital
and type of service.^2^ Published models of liaison psychiatry are named
Core, Core 24, Enhanced 24 and Comprehensive. For example, the minimum
numbers for a Core liaison psychiatry service covering around 500 beds
are two whole-time equivalent consultant psychiatrists and eight
whole-time equivalent nurses, in addition to other staff.

The PLAN^7^ has provided quality standards for liaison psychiatry
services. Since LPSE-1 was undertaken, there have been two further
surveys of liaison psychiatry in England, with response rates of 100%
and 97%, respectively. The LPSE has charted the growth of liaison
psychiatry in England against the government commitment to establish
liaison psychiatry in every acute hospital with an A&E department in
England by 2021, with half of these meeting the Core 24 specifications.
A fourth survey, LPSE-4, is planned for 2018.

The challenge within Wales will be to evaluate the effect of the newly
established liaison psychiatry services. Information currently available
suggests that different health boards have invested in developing
services in line with their local vision and perceived requirements.
Within the relatively small sample of Welsh health boards, there is
diversity in the type of liaison psychiatry services provided.

We recommend that information for the next logical phase should be
obtained on referral rates to these services. Furthermore, it would be
prudent to set standards for liaison psychiatry services in Wales. These
standards could be similar to the standards that have evolved in England
or bespoke liaison psychiatry standards could be developed for Wales.
Hence, further work might also involve assessment of adherence to the
agreed standards.

There is an opportunity to learn from the experiences in England. An
important lesson from the experience of the LPSE process in England is
the need to repeat the mapping exercise over a period of time to assess
progress. Moreover, comparison with services in England may emphasise
the need for future funding to develop liaison psychiatry services in
Wales.

There is an opportunity to gather further data on referrals, standards,
patient experience, outcome measures and the evolution of services.
There is also an opportunity for health boards to learn from services
with a well-established substance misuse liaison service and
intellectual disability liaison service.

Liaison psychiatry for children and adolescents in Wales, as in England,
is less well developed. Furthermore, investment in a liaison psychiatry
service for the specialist Velindre Cancer Centre will need to be
considered, as will the arrangements in Powys Teaching Health Board,
which does not have any acute general hospitals.

It is anticipated that the development in Welsh liaison psychiatry
services will attract trainees to liaison psychiatry for foundation,
core and higher training. Previously there were only two services in
Wales that provided higher training leading to endorsement in liaison
psychiatry.

In conclusion, liaison psychiatry services in Wales are developing and
evolving. It would be prudent to monitor this evolution with a view to
setting standards, surveying adherence to the standards and monitoring
the referrals for an outcome-oriented evaluation of these services.
Already, in collaboration with Public Health Wales and the NHS Delivery
Unit, plans are in place for developing the governance to address the
recommendations discussed in this paper.

We are grateful to all the liaison psychiatry teams in the health boards
who contributed to information for this paper.

**Tayyeb A. Tahir** is a Consultant Liaison Psychiatrist in the
Department of Liaison Psychiatry, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff
& Vale University Health Board and National Clinical Lead for Liaison
Psychiatry for Wales, UK. **Adam Watkins** is an Information Analyst
with Public Health Wales, 1000 Lives Improvement, UK. **Philip Slack**
is an ST5 in Old Age Psychiatry in the Department of Liaison Psychiatry,
University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff & Vale University Health Board,
UK. **Phil Chick** is Assistant Director of the NHS Delivery Unit, NHS
Wales, UK. **William Lee** is an Associate Professor in psychiatry and a
Consultant Psychiatrist with the Community and Primary Care Research
Group, Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth University,
UK. **Andrea Gray** is the Mental Health Development Lead for Wales at
Public Health Wales, 1000 Lives Improvement, UK.

[^1]: Average daily bed availability for 2016--2017. Staffing numbers
    for old age (≥65) and working age adult (\<65) teams are split for
    Aneurin Bevan Health Board and Cardiff & Vale University Health
    Board. For all other services, establishment numbers are presented
    as one team.

[^2]: Aneurin Bevan Crisis Resolution Home Treatment Team covers liaison
    psychiatry work.
