================================================
Depression, memory and electroconvulsive therapy
================================================



Rudi CoetzerCorrespondence to Dr Rudi Coetzer
(b.r.coetzer@bangor.ac.uk) [1]_
:Date: 2019-4

:Abstract:
   Current neuroscience suggests that although short-term memory
   difficulties frequently occur immediately after electroconvulsive
   therapy (ECT), longer-term problems are less common. However, gaps in
   our knowledge remain regarding longer-term cognitive problems after
   ECT, including memory function. Some of these relate to the
   complexities surrounding cognitive testing and interpretation of test
   results. An important question in clinical decision-making is why,
   despite current evidence suggesting long-term memory problems are
   less frequent, some patients still report subjective memory
   difficulties. To further advance clinical practice and the
   neuroscience surrounding post-ECT cognitive function, assessment of
   cognitive function, possibly including neuropsychological testing,
   should potentially become more routine as part of clinical practice.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Measuring treatment response after depression is often not entirely
straightforward in clinical practice. What matters to clinicians might
not always perfectly align with what is important to their patients. For
example, the DSM-5 lists a combination of physical, cognitive, affective
and behavioural diagnostic criteria representing major depressive
disorder (MDD).1 For patients with MDD, subjectively, fatigue is
sometimes the most disconcerting symptom, whereas for others it might be
impaired concentration or the persistent feelings of sadness and
hopelessness, resulting in a range of subtly different presentations.
Similarly, a wide range of effective treatments for MDD are now
available, depending on patients' clinical presentation. Treatments
range from pharmacological approaches, talking therapies and physical
exercise, to electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) or a combination of these,
among others. Treatment approaches all have different levels of
efficacy, potential side-effects, and accordingly their acceptability to
patients with MDD varies.

A recent retrospective study found that patients were generally
satisfied with ECT as a safe and effective treatment for depression.2
Nevertheless, one of the suggested adverse side-effects of ECT concerns
possible memory problems. Whether ECT can have a deleterious effect on
memory presents an important question for both the clinician and patient
when discussing treatment options. An appraisal of the current
neuroscience knowledge on memory and ECT can provide some guidance to
further inform clinical decision-making, including addressing patients'
concerns regarding treatment choice. Lezak *et al*, reviewing
neuropsychology and other neuroscience findings concerning ECT and
memory, conclude that memory difficulties immediately post-ECT can be
present in some patients, but that it is less common beyond this period,
even in patients who have had longer-term treatment.3 Similarly, Kirov
*et al* conclude that long-term memory effects are rare and that ECT
appears to be safe as regards adverse neuropsychological outcomes.4
Furthermore, a recently published, large cohort study found that the
risk of developing dementia in patients previously treated with ECT was
not significant.5 These findings might reassure clinicians, but what
about patients' views? Understanding patients' preferences and concerns
as regards treatment choice is an important aspect of clinical
decision-making and ultimately for determining overall treatment
response.

.. _sec1:

Memory complaints post-ECT
==========================

Vann Jones and McCollum6 report the findings from their systematic
review of ECT and subjective memory complaints. Although there were
methodological limitations to some of the included studies, which made
definitive conclusions difficult, their review does suggest that
generally subjective memory ratings improve over time, and that
ultrabrief-pulse ECT potentially has less side-effects. Interestingly,
another study not included in their review reported that although
cognitive function appears to be largely unchanged in many (but not all)
areas of neuropsychological functioning, improved depression long-term
post-ECT appears to be associated with improvement in some cognitive
functions.7 Vann Jones and McCollum's review raises some interesting
questions for clinical practice and neuroscience. In particular, if the
above (and other) findings from the research literature is correct in
concluding that ECT is safe as regards memory functions, why is it that
a number of patients consistently continue to report longer-term
subjective memory difficulties after ECT?

Addressing the above question is potentially of considerable relevance
not only to patients, but also clinicians. For example, from a policy
and practice perspective there is an acknowledgement of the importance
of considering cognition as part of ECT service delivery. The Royal
College of Psychiatrists Statement on Electroconvulsive Therapy advises
that cognitive functioning should be assessed before ECT and monitored
after every three or four ECTs, and also after the final ECT.8
Furthermore, the Statement indicates that in addition to orientation
being assessed after each ECT, retrograde amnesia, new learning and
subjective memory complaints should be tested more than 24 h post-ECT.
However, exactly how to perform testing of these functions is not
specified. Interestingly, looking at some current National Health
Service ECT policies fails to identify a consistent and clearly defined
approach to assessing cognition in ECT services. To summarise, although
the relevance of assessing cognition after ECT is clearly acknowledged,
how to do this remains less clear. At present, there is not a
straightforward answer doctors can give to patients receiving ECT, if
they ask exactly how their memory functions will be monitored.

.. _sec2:

Assessing cognition post-ECT
============================

Assessment of cognition can be performed at different levels, providing
objective or subjective data. Patients can be asked about their own
views on their cognitive functioning, which provide subjective data.
Objective testing can be performed at the bedside, or can constitute
formal neuropsychological testing. In the latter case, the patient's
results are compared against standardised norms as well as their own
predicted premorbid level of functioning. Patient effort is also
measured to identify any underperformance that might influence the
interpretation of test results. Cognitive domains assessed generally
include information processing, language functions, new learning and
retention, construction, visual–spatial abilities and executive control
functions, among several others. Kolar suggests that neuropsychological
testing should be an integral part of ECT service provision.9 In ECT
services, testing will most likely focus on cognitive domains such as
new learning and retention, as well as information processing. Although
the assessment of cognitive functions appears straightforward enough,
interpretation of the results is not. This may be one of the reasons why
wider implementation of cognitive assessment post-ECT has not occurred.

Returning to the relevance of diagnostic criteria as outlined at the
beginning of this editorial provides a good example of some of the
complexities surrounding post-ECT cognitive assessment. Cognitive
symptoms of MDD, such as poor concentration, can be affected by some of
the other features of the disorder. For example, insomnia can adversely
affect concentration, which will have a negative downstream effect on
memory (new learning and retention). The same applies to fatigue. In
terms of the statistical interpretation of neuropsychological test
results, one example would be that consideration should be given to the
possibility that when compared with standardised norms, depressed
patients may already (before ECT) be underperforming, or even be near
floor level (a score that is too low to reliably identify any further
decline in performance). This is one of the reasons why the individual
patient's neuropsychological profile ideally should be interpreted
against their own predicted premorbid level of cognitive function by
using, for example, demographic data or formal tests of premorbid
intellectual function. Other issues related to interpretation of test
results concerns for example determining what constitutes a reliable
clinical change during serial testing, or identifying what represents an
impairment versus a below average performance of a given cognitive
function in a test protocol.

There are also non-cognitive factors to consider when interpreting data.
Particularly relevant to Vann Jones and McCollum's study would be the
effect of patients' self-awareness (or ‘insight’) on their subjective
judgements of memory function. Problems in this area can influence how
patients rate their memory performance and result in very different
scores from actual objective test performance. For example, a small
study looking at repeated neuropsychological testing about 3 weeks after
ECT found objective as well as subjective memory difficulties to be
present, but the authors cautioned that subjective post-ECT reports of
memory problems may be influenced also by problems of awareness,
questioning their reliability.10 Perhaps if routine standard cognitive
assessment were available in ECT services, patients could be reassured
that in addition to their own ‘report back’ opportunities to identify
their concerns about memory problems with their doctor, their cognitive
functions (including memory) would be closely monitored for objective
change.

.. _sec3:

Remaining questions
===================

Although current research appears to indicate that ECT in most patients
does not appear to have lasting adverse effects on memory, we can, of
course, not be entirely sure that this is always the case for all
patients. For example, prospective studies that look at ECT effects on
cognition, where baseline neuropsychological testing including
consideration of premorbid intellectual ability is included and compared
with a control group, could help to further advance our understanding of
the cognitive neuroscience surrounding this topic. However, of
particular relevance to Vann Jones and McCollum's interesting review, to
help address patients' concerns expressed through their subjective
reports of ongoing memory difficulties, the following could possibly be
helpful to think about. Future research in the area may wish to consider
more closely which specific non-cognitive factors, including
self-awareness, might account for a discrepancy between actual and
reported cognitive impairment. For example, a recent study of patients
with acquired brain injury found that most of the variance between
actual and perceived cognitive impairment was explained by affective
factors such as anxiety or low mood.11 Conversely, it may be helpful to
also look more closely at which specific symptom(s) of MDD improve
post-ECT. As an example, one interesting hypothesis to test would be to
determine how much of improvement in depression can be accounted for (or
not) by a specific improvement in patients' ability to think or
concentrate post-ECT.

As regards clinical practice, one of the possible implications from Vann
Jones and McCollum's study is that there may be a need to consider if it
is necessary to determine recommended standards of cognitive testing or
clearer guidance on testing for UK ECT services. It may, of course
transpire, that routine standardised cognitive testing of all patients
receiving ECT would possibly be unhelpful or even harmful, raising
anxiety-provoking questions in patients' minds that were not there
before. However, if standardised testing were deemed necessary to
implement, close consideration might need to be given to factors such as
which cognitive functions are most relevant to test in the ECT
situation, the length of such assessments and, closely related to the
latter, what type of assessment (bedside, formal neuropsychological
testing or a hybrid approach), among other questions. To conclude,
several recent papers illustrate the essence of some of these questions.
Although the Montreal Cognitive Assessment12 is considered to be useful
in monitoring cognitive function after ECT,13 on the other hand,
cognitive assessment after ECT is also presently thought to not be
comprehensive enough, especially if limited to bedside testing only.9 As
with many of the questions surrounding the clinical practice and
neuroscience of ECT, this is not an easy one to provide a definitive
answer to.

**Dr Rudi Coetzer** is a Consultant Neuropsychologist and Head of
Service with the North Wales Brain Injury Service, Betsi Cadwaladr
University Health Board NHS Wales, UK, and a Senior Lecturer in Clinical
Neuropsychology in the School of Psychology at Bangor University, Wales,
UK.

.. [1]
   See this issue.
