=====================================================================================
The forgotten foundations: in core mental health services, no one can hear you scream
=====================================================================================

Andrew MooreCorrespondence to Dr Andrew Moore (andrew.moore7@nhs.net)
:Date: 2018-12

:Abstract:
   The Five Year Forward View for Mental Health (FYFVMH) was a welcome
   development in the emerging ‘Parity of Esteem’ agenda, but focused
   mainly on a select few specialist services; much more limited
   attention was given to ‘core’ general adult and older age mental
   health services, such as community mental health teams, crisis teams
   and in-patient units. This relative policy vacuum, when combined with
   prolonged financial pressures and limited informatics, has left core
   services vulnerable and struggling to meet growing demands, with
   little sense of hope, in contrast to some of the newer, ‘shiny’
   specialist services growing around them. Policy makers need to
   recognise the growing crisis and take action, ensuring that any
   sequel to the FYFVMH redresses this imbalance by clearly prioritising
   core services as the vital foundations of the larger whole-system.
   The potential benefits are huge and wide-ranging, but the harms of a
   second missed opportunity are perhaps even greater.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   A.M. works in a National Health Service general adult community
   mental health team and is an elected member of the Royal College of
   Psychiatrists General Adult Faculty Executive Committee.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Five Year Forward View for Mental Health (FYFVMH)(n.d.a) is now
halfway through its lifespan, with policy makers assessing its early
effects and pondering the sequel. Perhaps the biggest effect was simply
having a specific mental health version of a Five Year Forward View. The
‘Parity of Esteem’ (for Mental Health) agenda is still relatively young,
with considerable gaps between rhetoric and action, but the existence of
a mental health version helped keep early momentum going. This must now
accelerate, but with new priorities much more explicitly focused on
‘core’ general adult and older age mental health services, especially
community mental health teams (CMHTs), crisis teams and acute in-patient
units. Historically, these central foundations of the wider system have
been vulnerable to ongoing, quiet erosion by chronic underfunding and
systemic structural disadvantages (e.g. block contracts). The FYFVMH,
despite enabling progress in some areas of its specific focus, was a
painfully missed opportunity to take a more whole-service approach; this
must not be repeated. There were some core service aspirations in the
FYFVMH, such as enhanced 24/7 crisis teams, elimination of acute
out-of-area placements and development of community pathways, but these
were weakened by a lack of clear targets and/or specific ring-fenced
funding. Despite early winners in the first FYFVMH, there are still some
long-neglected losers. Future service planning urgently needs to redress
this imbalance; systems are only as strong as their weakest parts,
especially if they are core foundational components.

Quantitative analysis is dogged by informatics challenges. Despite a
plethora of information sources, each has its limitations and none tell
the whole story on their own. The National Health Service (NHS) England
FYFVMH Dashboard(n.d.b) is good in principle, but is inevitably focused
on select areas of current policy, with minimal content on core
services. Other sources include NHS Mental Health Benchmarking Data,
‘Fingertips’ Public Mental Health Data(n.d.c) and a raft of *ad hoc*
reports such as the Commission on Acute Adult Psychiatric Care,(n.d.d)
the Carter Report on Mental Health Services(n.d.e) and Care Quality
Commission reports.(n.d.f) A 2017 Royal College of Psychiatrists survey
of front-line clinicians, regarding perceived progress on the Acute
Adult Psychiatric Care Commission recommendations, highlights deep and
widespread concerns (personal communication). Combining all these, along
with front-line experience, is not an easy task for dedicated
researchers and policy leaders, and is almost impossible for busy
clinicians. When attempted, an information bias emerges toward those
areas that already have a national focus, making it all the harder for
those services outside the current policy spotlight to make a coherent
case for inclusion. Key information on core services can be hard to
extract and harder still to interpret, giving a rather foggy, delayed
view of a complex, changing landscape, leaving them vulnerable to
institutional neglect, and easy prey for under-the-radar cost-savings.

Figures for total spending on mental health services vary depending on
source and definition, inevitably leading to confusion, claim and
counterclaim; although clearly of some importance, what matters more to
core services is the detail. Nevertheless, analysis by the Royal College
of Psychiatrists(n.d.g) suggests that, despite claims that spending ‘is
higher than ever’, total income (in today's prices) received by English
mental health trusts in 2016–2017 was 1% less than in 2011–2012
(Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland were 6, 0.3 and 1.3% less,
respectively). An analysis by the British Medical Association(n.d.h)
concluded that despite geographical variations, there appears to be no
obvious uplift in spending in recent years, noting concerns that
government commitments to increased funding are not reaching front-line
services, and a significant number of English Clinical Commissioning
Groups are not meeting the Mental Health Investment Standard set out by
NHS England. With the size of the overall cake barely changing, but
several new and specialist (‘non-core’) services significantly expanding
with ‘new’ investment, it seems likely that actual funding available to
core services has decreased. Regarding the detail, what numerical and
narrative features can be discerned within the core landscape, e.g. from
NHS Benchmarking and the various other reports?

Between 2012 and 2017 there was a 17% reduction in adult acute beds, a
36% reduction in older adult beds and a 10% decline in acute adult
admission rates.(n.d.i) Average length of stay decreased slightly in
adults and increased slightly in older adults. Adult bed occupancy
(excluding leave) rose from 91 to 95% and involuntary admissions rose
from 25 to 35%. In 2016–2017, delayed transfers of care increased to
5.4% of occupied bed days, up from 3.7% the year before. An analysis by
the British Medical Association found that during 2016–2017, there were
5876 acute adult out-of-area placements for mental health treatment, a
rise of 39% on 2014–2015.(n.d.j) In May 2018, around 600 acute adult
out-of-area placements, costing £9 million per month, were needed each
month (in England) because of local bed unavailability.(n.d.k)

FYFVMH did include crisis teams aspirations: by 2020–2021, NHS England
‘should ensure that a 24/7 community-based mental health crisis response
is available in all areas across England and that services are
adequately resourced to offer intensive home treatment as an alternative
to acute inpatient admission’.(n.d.a) The latest monitoring (2016–2017)
shows that only 23% of crisis resolution team services were able to meet
selected core functions.(n.d.l)

The NHS nursing workforce has grown between 2010 and 2017, but the
number of mental health nurses has declined by 12%,(n.d.m) mostly within
acute in-patient care as bed numbers have reduced, whereas the number of
(mental health) community nurses has increased slightly. In generic
CMHTs, overall staffing levels per population, perhaps surprisingly,
seem to have been relatively stable in 2014–2017, although with some
changes to the skill-mix. Before this, however, were at least 6 years of
austerity, during which an unknown quantity of ‘easy, low-hanging fruit’
workforce cost-savings were likely made. Community case-load figures per
population have declined slightly in the past 2 years: by 10% in older
age CMHTs and 5% in working age CMHTs. Current data shows that for every
100 patients in community teams, there are only two qualified community
psychiatric nurses. Generic CMHT referrals peaked in 2015–2016, but
waiting times vary considerably and seem to be growing. More data (due
October 2018) is needed to clarify trends, but the general sense is of
CMHTs struggling to hold back the rising tide of demand in all its
forms.

There are further complexities: many assertive outreach teams were
reabsorbed into generic CMHTs (only 25% of trusts still reported
assertive outreach teams/data in 2017), increasing CMHT clinical
case-load intensity; how many of the staff also transferred is simply
unclear. Vacancy rates are not benchmarked at all, whereas generic CMHT
‘cost improvement savings achieved’ are, remaining steady at 2–6% for
most trusts. These were likely achieved, at least in part, by holding
vacancies, which the King's Fund reports as currently about 10% across
all mental health services;(n.d.m) it also notes, ‘trusts must deliver
annual cost-savings, and a key area for achieving this is workforce
management’. Generic CMHTs, without any national policy priorities, no
targets to measure and no ‘safer staffing’ safeguards, will remain
highly vulnerable targets for ongoing cost-savings.

Looking ahead, the latest Health Education England mental health
workforce planning for FYFVMH(n.d.n) estimates that an additional 20 900
posts will be needed nationally (across all professions: qualified,
support and admin, including 700 medical staff). However, the only core
service mentioned is crisis teams (with no increase in medical staff);
there is no mention at all of in-patient or CMHT services.

Capacity, however, is a complex concept, depending not just on
workforce, but on a multitude of inter-related factors, including
demand, productivity and influences from other systems. The raw numbers
rarely tell the whole story; narrative is needed, and the clear message
from the range of commentators is of ever-increasing pressures within
core services that were already operating on, or at the margins of, full
capacity. The Care Quality Commission notes ‘an unprecedented set of
challenges – high demand, workforce shortages, unsuitable buildings and
poor clinical information systems’.(n.d.f) Other sources include 2017
NHS Mental Health Benchmarking, available via
`www.nhsbenchmarking.nhs.uk <www.nhsbenchmarking.nhs.uk>`__, which
reports, rather ominously, that: “‘In recent years, concerns have been
raised that the levels of community care have not risen as quickly as
may be required to match the reduction in acute inpatient beds, and that
provision may still not be at the levels needed…whilst safe staffing
level requirements have benefitted the inpatient environment,
unfortunately they have not helped staffing in the community whose
responsibilities have increased in terms of caseloads and having to care
for more unwell patients in community.’”

With that background, caveats and all, what would front-line clinicians
in core adult mental health services like the policy makers to hear, and
do?

.. _sec1:

Front-line messages
===================

One answer comes forcefully from a 2017 Royal College of Psychiatrists
survey of front-line clinicians, regarding perceived progress on the
Acute Adult Psychiatric Care Commission recommendations (personal
communication). It describes an ‘overwhelming consensus that the
provision and quality of care is declining’, highlighting deep and
widespread concerns over core services, including in-patient care,
crisis teams and particularly CMHTs. There is a clearly perceived
chronic and growing lack of service capacity, when matched to increasing
demands (clinical, operational and regulatory).

The issues are familiar by now: raised clinical thresholds to enter
services, and increasing severity and complexity within them; growing
waiting times for CMHT care coordination; bed shortages and increasing
use of the Mental Health Act 1983 (possibly linked to health
inequalities for Black and ethnic minority groups(n.d.o)); increased
acute out-of-area placements
(https://www.bma.org.uk/news/2016/october/plan-to-reduce-discharge-distances);
an increasingly stressed workforce and flagging morale.(n.d.p) System
changes compound the pressures, such as shrinking social care services
and expanding roles like safeguarding. Attempted mitigation measures
usually have a modest effect at best, whereas their unintended
consequences can sometimes make things worse. Creative service redesigns
have mostly confirmed that whatever the model, capacity (and probably
continuity(n.d.q)) trumps configuration. Quality and productivity
improvement activities, although clearly valuable, usually produce more
gradual, longer-term gains, but too slowly to turn the current tide.

The FYFVMH simply did not take a whole-systems view of mental health
services. Instead, it focused heavily on specialist areas such as
liaison psychiatry, perinatal mental health, early intervention in
psychosis services, child and adolescent mental health services,
forensics and primary care psychological therapy. To their credit, these
typically generated significant political attention through a clear and
up-to-date evidence base (especially health economics research) or
public attention via the media. In contrast, core severe mental health
services seemed less newsworthy, less politically appealing and had a
more limited, historical evidence research base (itself symbolic and
symptomatic of long-term relative neglect). Yet it is precisely these
core services where the vast majority of care for severe mental illness
is delivered, forming the backbone and foundation of the whole service;
if they are struggling, and overwhelming evidence and opinion suggests
that they are, then the whole system will inevitably struggle too
because sufficient capacity is needed in every part of the system.

Currently, the FYFVMH's blind-spot over core services risks a lack of
Parity of Esteem within mental health going undetected under the policy
radar. Furthermore, early progress in many of the more specialist areas
may become undermined because core and specialist services are
inevitably linked and interdependent. Child and adolescent mental health
services patients grow up, with many still needing care; acute hospital
liaison patients may be followed up in CMHTs; early intervention in
psychosis often becomes ongoing intervention within a generic CMHT;
perinatal care does not stay perinatal forever and acute mental health
in-patient units and forensic services transfer patients both ways. Each
recipient of specialist services should later be able to swiftly access
quality care within a core generalist service, when needed, as should
those who are referred straight from primary care, yet this is becoming
more and more challenging, given the growing core pressures.

Finally, it is worth reflecting on why the core services, particularly
CMHTs, currently feel so neglected. Historically (1990s), they were once
the new expanding services, following the shift from asylums to
community care, and they were considered progressive and attractive to
work in. Around 2000, new investment was linked to new services
(National Service Framework(n.d.r) teams: crisis teams, assertive
outreach and early intervention in psychosis), making these now the
exciting teams to work in, with attention, enthusiasm and talent
shifting away from the core CMHTs and in-patient wards.

Following the onset of austerity after 2008, alarm bells soon rang for
the already drifting core, with senior clinicians noting that
‘demographic trends ensure that demand will rise and harsh economic
realities dictate that resources will in real terms shrink’.(n.d.s) Cost
improvement plans inevitably followed, and rationalisation took place,
with many assertive outreach teams merging back with CMHTs.(n.d.t) The
search got underway for any new service configurations that might be
inherently more efficient; they were not especially (as noted
before(n.d.u)), at least not in the prevailing climate.

Finally came the paradoxical pairing of ongoing austerity and an
emerging Parity of Esteem agenda, both within a confusing commissioning
environment, hampered by immature information systems. Priority areas
grew, with commissioners and senior managers more focused on newer,
‘shiny’ services, whereas the older core, typified by CMHTs and
in-patient units, were quietly considered ‘fair game’ for ongoing
cost-savings (typically 3–6% each year), systematically slicing them to
part fund the newer services. This gradual shift of resources away from
core areas went largely unreported, hidden by limited informatics,
minimal relevant national core targets, a chronic accommodation to the
growing clinical risks and a lack of media appeal. Much like their
patients, most core services, and CMHTs especially, have quietly
remained out of sight and out of mind, a no-show in the FYFVMH calls for
evidence, and therefore not making the policy cut. Front-line core staff
were optimistically exhorted, ‘We've always made annual cost-savings
before, so we know we can do it again’. But as with most simplistic
rules of thumb, it only works for so long, and up to a point. Like
anorexia, there comes a time when further safe reduction is simply not
possible. For many core services, that point was probably reached some
time ago.

.. _sec2:

What to do?
===========

Policy makers now need to publicly recognise the burgeoning crisis in
core services. Any FYFVMH sequel must refocus policy more explicitly on
CMHTs, crisis teams and in-patient care, rescuing, resuscitating and
relaunching them all, along with improved information systems to support
and monitor their regeneration.

There are glimmers of hope: the National Collaborating Centre for Mental
Health ‘Mental Health Care Pathway: Community Mental Health Services’
project,(n.d.v) nearing completion, arose from an FYFVMH recommendation
to ‘establish comprehensive pathways and quality standards for the rest
of the mental health system’. But it came with worrying limitations:
they were last in line for development, waiting times were to be
informed by clinical evidence (not targets), and they can be implemented
as funding becomes available. Urgently addressing this wooliness would
be a welcome start.

The potential benefits of reinvestment (and the risks of not
reinvesting) are not limited to the core services, but extend to the
whole wider system, even beyond mental health into general
society.(n.d.w)

For too long now core services have been allowed to struggle along in a
relative policy, priority and informatics vacuum, through which only
muffled cries have so far travelled. Please, finally and quickly, will
someone see the signs, hear their voice and begin to restore the
foundations?

**Dr Andrew Moore** is a consultant psychiatrist with North Devon
Community Mental Health Services (Sector A Team), Devon Partnership NHS
Trust, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.w.
