==================================================================================================================================================================
Implementing National Institute for Health and Care Excellence smoke-free guidance in a secure facility: an evaluation of the prescribing costs in clozapine users
==================================================================================================================================================================

Stephen Noblett
Jane Beenstock
James Noblett
Joanne Ireland
Sarah OrmistonCorrespondence to Stephen Noblett
(steve.noblett@lancashirecare.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2018-4

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The increased rates of smoking in people with mental illness is well
   documented, and establishing smoke-free mental health environments
   has been emphasised over recent years. This article examines the
   financial costs of implementing smoke free guidance and assesses the
   cost associated with patients who were prescribed clozapine and who
   committed to stopping smoking cigarettes for the duration of the
   study period.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Patients (38) who were prescribed clozapine were included in the
   study. A moderate reduction in dose was noted with a moderate
   reduction in prescribing costs. The total increase in cost for the
   whole group, however, was £17 624, largely due to the use of nicotine
   replacement therapy and an increase in the number of clozapine assay
   tests.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Further studies on implementing this important policy change are
   needed. The positive effects must be balanced with increased
   financial pressure on Mental Health Trusts.

   .. rubric:: Declarations of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1-1:

Cost of smoking
===============

Smoking imposes a huge economic burden on society. Action on Smoking and
Health has concluded that the costs to society in England are
approximately £13.9 billion per year. Around £2 billion of this is the
cost to the National Health Service (NHS) of treating diseases caused by
smoking.(n.d.a) For adults with a common mental disorder such as
depression and anxiety, smoking rates are almost twice as high compared
to adults who are mentally well, and three times higher for those with
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder.(n.d.b) Smoking is thus a key
contributor to the health inequalities that exist between people with a
mental health disorder and the general population, which result in a
difference in life expectancy of 15–20 years.(n.d.c)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.d)
Nationally there has been a growing recognition that providers of mental
health services should be smoke free and support patients with nicotine
addictions to stop smoking.(n.d.e)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.f)

.. _sec1-2:

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidance
==========================================================

In particular, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
guidance(n.d.e) advocates that all NHS settings should be smoke free
because of the health benefits to the individual, the wider community
and healthcare providers. They emphasise that healthcare providers
should promote healthy environments for their staff and patients. In
this Trust the guidance was implemented through a nicotine management
policy as, learning from other Trusts, the focus was on supporting
people who have a nicotine addiction rather than banning smoking. The
policy contents are similar to smoke-free policies in other Trusts:
admitted smokers may no longer have smoking breaks and should manage
their nicotine addiction through the use of nicotine replacement therapy
(NRT) with behavioural support. Consequently, people admitted to
smoke-free mental health units need to be supported to cease smoking
tobacco cigarettes during their admission. Ideally, this would lead to
permanent smoking cessation. `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ summarises some of the
consequences in terms of cost or benefit to the individual and to the
wider organisation. Table 1Summary of the costs and benefit consequences
of smoking cessation following the introduction of a smoke-free policy
in a mental health provider unitConsequenceCost or benefit?Smoking
cessation aids such as nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) and
medications such as buproprionCostBehavioural support(n.d.g)CostIncrease
in number of clozapine assay tests requiredCostReduction in amount of
antipsychotic medication required, with opportunity for fewer side
effects from the medicationBenefitReduction in staff time spent
supervising smoking breaks(n.d.h)BenefitImprovement in mental
health(n.d.i)BenefitReduction in premature mortality and in levels of
morbidityBenefit(n.d.j)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.k)Potential lower costs of
prescribed antibiotics for lung infections or other smoking-related
physical health problemsBenefitPublic Health England estimates the
long-term quit rate for long-term patients is 40%, and 25% for
short-term patientsBenefit(n.d.l)Public Health England estimates that
the intervention could cost approximately £1430 per annum to the health
and care system on average over 10 yearsCost(n.d.l)Public Health England
estimates net savings of approximately £1460 per annum per person to the
health and care system on average over 10 yearsBenefit(n.d.l)

.. _sec1-3:

NRT and the associated costs and savings
========================================

NRT provides nicotine to the body without using cigarettes. The aromatic
hydrocarbons found in cigarette smoke are known to increase the
metabolism of some drugs due to induction of the cytochrome P450 enzyme
system.(n.d.m) NRT does not influence these metabolic enzymes.(n.d.n)
Plasma levels of clozapine are altered in the absence of tobacco smoke.
Therapeutic-drug monitoring of clozapine is therefore useful with a
recognised therapeutic range to regulate the required prescribing dose.
Failure to monitor plasma levels in the context of stopping smoking may
result in prescribing the incorrect dose. Following smoking cessation,
clozapine doses may be reduced, decreasing the medication cost for the
NHS in mental health. Smoking cessation could be financially beneficial
to the NHS because the resources used to supervise smoking could be used
elsewhere to improve health and well-being. This, however, may be offset
by increased requirements for therapeutic-drug monitoring and the cost
of NRT. Whereas there is extensive published literature demonstrating
the long-term benefits of smoking cessation, in both the general
population(n.d.o) and in the population of people with a mental health
disorder;(n.d.p) there is limited published work describing the
short-term costs and benefits.

.. _sec1-4:

Aim
===

This project aimed to review the costs of providing NRT, clozapine and
clozapine assay testing in the context of the new nicotine management
policy within a secure mental health population. In January 2015, the
secure mental health service implemented a nicotine management policy
(NMP) in response to the publication of the NICE public health guidance
48.(n.d.e) This evaluation focused on the costs and savings relating to
clozapine and NRT because these are the two most direct expenditures
from supporting people who smoke to manage their nicotine addiction
without smoking tobacco cigarettes. NRT is required to manage the
nicotine addiction and clozapine is commonly prescribed in the
specialist services. Patients on clozapine who stop smoking are likely
to have lower prescribing costs because of the need for lower dosages of
medication when stopping smoking.(n.d.q)

.. _sec2:

Method
======

.. _sec2-1:

Setting
-------

Guild Lodge is a secure mental health facility which provides care for
164 male and female patients within medium, low-secure and step-down
ward environments. It also provides regional medium and low-secure care
for males with acquired brain injury. The service provides a seamless
transition of care between different levels of security in preparation
for support in the community. The service is made up of 12 in-patient
wards, 3 of which care for a total of 24 women. Ethical approval was not
required as no patient information was identified. Advice was sought
through the audit department within the Trust.

.. _sec2-2:

Context
-------

The study looked at a cohort of patients who were prescribed clozapine
for a 12-month period at the time the NMP was implemented at Guild Lodge
in January 2015. These people stopped smoking cigarettes at this time
and maintained their smoke-free status for the duration of the study.
This was monitored in the context of the secure in-patient and hospital
grounds smoke-free environment. Prior to the implementation date, data
was collected in an effort to try to anticipate where there may be
particular risks due to elevated clozapine plasma levels for individual
patients. Data included clozapine dose, plasma level (with current dose)
and if any anticonvulsant medication was also prescribed.

The 6 month period prior to the implementation in January 2015 was
considered in terms of dosage of prescribed clozapine and the number of
clozapine assay tests undertaken. In the following 6 months, until July
2015, information relating to the dose of prescribed clozapine, number
of clozapine assays and prescribed NRT was collated.

The total financial cost for this group, in the 6 months before and
after implementation of the NMP, was calculated based on the cost to the
organisation of clozapine, clozapine assay tests and specific NRT,
including patches, lozenges and inhalators.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

A total of 38 patients were included in the study, representing 23% of
the total in-patient population. Of these, 8 were women (21%) and 30
were men (79%). Data was obtained from each of the 12 wards within the
service. In total, 48 out of 164 patients were prescribed clozapine in
the service at the time. Ten of these were non-smokers and were
therefore not included in the study. At the time of the study, the
hospital site became a smoke-free environment, although there was
occasional evidence of illicit smoking within the secure setting.

The results demonstrated a small reduction of 6.5% in mean clozapine
dose from 381 mg to 356 mg in the 6 month period following the NMP
implementation. However, the number of clozapine assays carried out in
this period increased by 200%, with the mean number of assays rising
from one to three. The increased number of clozapine assays had a
significant financial effect (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__), although the number
of required assays is likely to reduce as plasma levels stabilise
following smoking cessation. Table 2Total cost before and after
implementation of National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
smoke-free guidanceTotal cost of clozapine dose before intervention
(£)Total cost of clozapine dose after intervention (£)Total cost of
assays before intervention (£)Total cost of assays after intervention
(£)Total cost of nicotine replacement therapy (£)Total cost before
intervention (£)Total cost after intervention (£)Total difference in
cost after 6 months (£)Total cost for
service7489.416991.44878.75228016 818.96 **8368.16**
**26** **090.4017** **623.66**\ Mean cost per
patient197.09183.9923.1360442.60 **220.21** **686.59** **463.78** Range
of individual costs77.61–362.1877.61–362.180–71.2523.75–142.500–871.92
**101.36–385.93** **127.23–1184.25** **0–930.24**

`Table 2 <#tab02>`__ demonstrates the specific prescribing costs for
medication and for clozapine assays for the service, as advised by the
pharmacy department. These figures are based on the costs of clozapine
over the two 6 month periods for the organisation, costs for each assay
test and total cost of NRT. Costs did not include any additional
phlebotomy or laboratory costs.

A total of 5 out of the 38 patients had no clozapine assay tests taken
in the 6 month period prior to stopping smoking, which may have
represented clinical stability and consistent dose prescribing in this
group. A total of 28 patients (74%) were prescribed NRT throughout the 6
month period with the majority using patches (53%) and inhalators (45%).
This resulted in a cost of £16 819 for the 6 month period.

There was only a moderate reduction in the cost of prescribed clozapine
because of limited dosage change, but also due to the relative
in-expense of clozapine itself. For 18 out of the 38 patients, the cost
of clozapine remained the same, indicating that the dose was unchanged
during this period. Although the patients had committed to stopping
smoking, it is possible that they continued to smoke cigarettes at
times, leading to an increased cost of prescribed NRT, as this may have
had little clinical benefit for these individuals.

For 35 patients, representing 92% of the sample, there was an increased
cost in the 6 month period following the implementation of the NMP, with
a total cost of £18 641.66 for the whole group during this time.

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

This study showed that in the 6 months following the introduction of the
NMP in this unit there was a slight decrease in the costs from
prescribed clozapine, and increased costs generated by more assay tests
and the use of NRT.

These results will have been influenced by the take-up rate of NRT
patients, and the extent to which they were compliant with not smoking
cigarettes during the 6 month period. This will have affected the amount
of NRT prescribed and the consequent impact on clozapine plasma levels.
Current and future costs will also be affected by the number of patients
who use e-cigarettes.

The current culture and practice around smoking has been evolving since
the 6 months reviewed in this study. Recently, the use of e-cigarettes
has been piloted and a much more robust approach to implementing the NMP
has affected attitudes and behaviours in relation to the NMP. In
addition, patients have been given less time in the grounds where they
have been likely to smoke cigarettes, especially when they have access
to the community on leave. This may begin to change the culture of leave
within the grounds to be more therapeutic and less about gaining access
to cigarettes.

This study has not included all the financial costs that could be
affected by the introduction of the NMP, such as prescription costs for
physical health problems related to smoking, and staffing costs for
supervising patients who have smoking breaks.

Although there is good evidence that the overall benefits of smoking
cessation are greater than costs for both individuals and society in the
longer term, in the short term there are some immediate financial
pressures generated for Mental Health Trusts. Further work is needed to
understand if these results are likely to be the same for other Trusts
implementing this important policy change that is needed to improve the
mental and physical health of people using mental health services.
Smoke-free policies challenge the culture in mental health
units,(n.d.r)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.s) but the financial pressure involved
should not derail the ambition to be smoke free because it is consistent
with national policy and is of significant benefit to people with a
mental health disorder.(n.d.p)

Thank you to Cath Harris, Information Services Librarian, for her
support with the literature search.

**Stephen Noblett** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist and **Jane
Beenstock** is a consultant in public health at the Lancashire Care
National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust in Preston, UK. **James
Noblett** is a bachelor of arts student of economics at the University
of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. **Joanne Ireland** is a Deputy Lead
Pharmacist and **Sarah Ormiston** is a Clinical Audit Facilitator, both
in Specialist Services at the Lancashire Care NHS Foundation Trust in
Preston, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.s.
