---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  The aim of the study is to improve patient safety by identifying
  factors influencing gatekeeping decisions by crisis resolution and
  home treatment teams. A theoretical sampling method was used to
  recruit clinicians. Semi-structured interviews to elicit various
  aspects of clinical decision-making were carried out. The transcripts
  were thematically analysed using a grounded theory approach.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  Patient needs (safety and treatment) was the primary driver behind
  decisions. The research also revealed that information gathered was
  processed using heuristics. We identified five key themes (anxiety,
  weighting, agenda, resource and experience), which were constructed
  into an acronym 'AWARE'.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  AWARE provides a framework to make explicit drivers for
  decision-making that are often implicit. Incorporating these drivers
  into reflective practice will help staff be more mindful of undue
  influences and result in improved clinical decisions.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a4}

  None.
author:
- Chiara Lombardo
- Mónica Santos
- Tine Van Bortel
- Robert Croos
- Ella Arensman
- Manaan Kar RayCorrespondence to Dr Manaan Kar Ray
  (<manaan.karray@health.qld.gov.au>)
date: 2019-4
institute:
- 1Institute for Health and Human Development, University of East
  London, UK
- 2Research and Development, Mental Health Foundation, UK
- 3Adult Mental Health Services, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
  Foundation Trust, UK
- 4Cambridge Institute of Public Health, University of Cambridge, UK
- 5School of Public Health, National Suicide Research Foundation,
  University College Cork, National University of Ireland, Ireland
- 6Addictions and Mental Health Services, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
  Metro South, Australia
- 7Southside Clinical Unit, Princess Alexandra Hospital, University of
  Queensland, Australia
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
title: "Decision-making in crisis resolution and home treatment teams:
  The AWARE framework"
---

Crisis resolution and home treatment teams (CRHTTs) are the interface
between acute and community mental health services. Focused on
patients\' recovery and empowerment, they are an alternative to hospital
admission, providing treatment in a less restrictive environment. They
are the gatekeepers for in-patient admissions and enable early
discharge, reducing hospital bed use.^1^^,^^2^ Patients experiencing
mental health crisis are assessed by CRHTT practitioners. Outcomes may
include home treatment, admission to hospital, back to referrer in
secondary or primary care or signposting to other appropriate
services.^3^^,^^4^

Now an integral part of mental health services in the UK,^5^ they were
introduced in 1999^2^ through the National Service Framework for mental
health in England. Similar teams have been implemented in other European
countries.^6^ Research has primarily focused on their value as admission
prevention service. Some,^7^^--^^9^ but not all,^10^ studies indicate
reduction in bed use. National guidance^11^ on acute service provision
recommends CRHTTs. A systematic review of 69 studies^12^ identified
elements influencing CRHTT service quality through models of care and
implementation guidelines. Hunt *et al*^13^ has noted that suicide rates
in crisis teams are higher than in in-patient settings. CRHTT decisions
are at a critical juncture in the care pathway and have a major impact
on patient outcomes, but research is scarce and needs development.

Clinical decision-making is a contextual, continuous, evolving process,
where data is gathered, interpreted and evaluated to select
evidence-based actions.^14^ Understanding the rationale behind CRHTT
assessment outcomes, such as whether to admit a patient, is pivotal to
improving patient safety. We conducted a qualitative study with the aim
of identifying intuitive factors influencing clinical decision-making
following CRHTT assessments, as a service improvement project.

# Method {#sec1}

## Setting and participants {#sec1-1}

A theoretical sampling method was used to identify qualified
multidisciplinary team members in a CRHTT of working-age adults in East
Anglia. Eighteen interviews were carried out across 12 multidisciplinary
team staff (10 nurses, 2 social workers; post-qualification experience:
10--25 years; 6 men, 6 women), who were primary assessors. Six
participants were interviewed once and six participants were interviewed
twice.

Psychiatrist were not included as their involvement in clinical
decision-making in the initial assessment was not routine in this team.
Participants volunteered after being informed of project objectives and
procedures and provided verbal informed consent. It was only after the
conclusion of the clinical interaction that assessors participated in
the study, thus there was no direct or indirect influence on patient
care. As part of the consent process, interviewees were given specific
instructions not to use any patient-identifiable information. This was
in keeping with the organisation\'s confidentiality policy.

Ethical approval was not deemed necessary and the study was registered
within the trust as a service improvement project.

## Interviews {#sec1-2}

Semi-structured, face-to-face interviews (supplementary interview
schedule available at <https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2018.94>) with
open-ended questions to elicit various aspects of clinical
decision-making were carried out separately by two psychiatrists working
in the CRHTT (M.S. and R.C.). Participants were asked to discuss an
assessment from the past 24 h. The interview schedule provided general
structure but the discussion was fluid based on the responses, which
were probed to gain a deeper understanding of the themes and theories
being generated. Each interview lasted about 1 hour. Interviews were
audio-typed, transcribed and conducted until saturation of themes was
reached.

## Data analysis {#sec1-3}

A grounded theory approach was taken.^15^^,^^16^ Data was thematically
analysed by the researchers (M.S. and R.C.) working independently,
following recommendations by Ritchie *et al*.^17^ Initial transcripts
were coded manually to support development of a coding framework that
was subsequently refined by additional interviews. Codes included purely
descriptive ones arising directly from the transcript and more
interpretive codes. Then, to ensure trustworthiness of the data, the
authors met and agreed themes. Any differences in interpretation of
statements was resolved by discussion with the wider research team until
consensus was reached. The coded data was synthesised into the final
framework. Further confirmation of themes took place through team
discussion, with themes validated by an independent researcher (C.L.)
and the principal investigator (M.K.R.).

# Results {#sec2}

Of the 18 assessments, low mood and suicidality appeared to be the
primary cause of referral to CHRTT. Information gathered relating to
symptom severity and risk appeared to be the primary basis for
decision-making. Information from the referrer was supplemented by
electronic patient records or past knowledge about known patients. The
principal source was the face-to-face assessment with the person and
their carer/s. Patient need (actual or perceived) appeared to be the
primary driver behind decisions. This was evidenced in statements such
as: 'For her own safety, she was unpredictable, it would have been
difficult to manage that in the community at that time...Admission was
the right decision' (01). (For all quotations, the numeral refers to the
interview serial number.)

However, interviews revealed that the extensive information gathered was
not processed in a uniform manner, but often by heuristics (common
sense, rule of thumb, stereotyping, educated guess, intuitive
judgement). These were noted to be part of the decision-making toolbox
for all practitioners and were related to more than just patient
presentation (symptoms, risk, aetiology). Below, we describe the most
commonly expressed heuristic themes that influenced decision-making
([Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}). Table 1Heuristic themes (with
subthemes) that influenced information processingThemeSubthemeAnxiety
(generated/diffused
in)PatientFriends/family/carerReferrerTriaging/assessing
practitionerWeighting (of symptoms elicited)Diagnosis (comorbidity --
personality disorder/alcohol or substance misuse)Course of illness
(acute/chronic/acute on chronic)Factors considered outside core remit
(relationship/finances/accommodation/employment/family -- carer
availability)Agenda (elicited
in)ReferrerPatientFamilyPractitionerTeamResources (identified or
not)BedsHome treatment capacityExperience (of)Same patientOther patients
from same diagnostic groupOther patients from different diagnostic group

## Anxiety {#sec2-1}

Interviews clearly showed the dual role of practitioners. First, to
assess and plan the next steps, and second, to diffuse anxiety relating
to the crisis under assessment. For the patient and family the anxiety
settled when they felt that they got the right support, the referrer
felt less anxious knowing someone else was dealing with the crisis and
the assessor\'s anxieties settled if they felt they had brought matters
to a safe conclusion either through capturing hope or blanket safety
reassurances. In the case of a young, agitated suicidal male with
limited protective factors who was referred back to locality team, the
practitioner stated, 'Well it was straightforward, he was able to engage
in it (the assessment) despite the difficulties with his anxiety' (03).
The patient\'s willingness to engage was indicative of a safe
conclusion. It diffused everyone\'s anxiety and trumped symptoms of
agitated depression and the rationale for the decision not to provide
additional support. A similar presentation with an ambiguous commitment
resulted in higher anxiety all around, bringing forward the
diametrically opposite decision to admit: '...There was obviously some
urgency to it (admit). He had strong thoughts of taking an overdose the
previous day...and his wife had to take time off work because she was
concerned about his help-seeking' (15).

Practitioners were consciously eliciting predisposing, precipitating and
perpetuating factors as part of exploring risk (increases anxiety), as
well as protective factors and the potential willingness to safety plan
(decreases anxiety). It was noted that in patients with similar
presentations and risk profiles. there could be diametrically opposite
clinical decisions. For risk-averse decisions, the focus was on anxiety
increasing perpetuating factors. In contrast, anxiety decreasing
protective factors were emphasised by the assessor. where they had taken
positive risks: '...He was staying with his parents, they were quite
supportive, ... housing was a big concern.... but he\'s got a good job,
and his employer had been really supportive. He also identified his
daughter and his father as protective factors' (14).

## Weighting {#sec2-2}

In the decision-making process, weighting of symptoms and risk was
influenced by pre-existing diagnosis (personality disorder/substance
misuse), course of illness (acute, acute on chronic, chronic) and
presence or absence of social factors that were considered to be outside
the core remit of CRHTT work. For example, in a suicidal patient who was
not taken on, the practitioner stated: 'Not much had changed. He had
previously been referred to the \[...\] service and the \[...\]
service...he\'d already been signposted, nothing had changed' (12).

Patients with alcohol and/or substance misuse fell into a similar
bracket, with the understanding that these issues needed to be addressed
first by other agencies: 'He\'s a heavy cannabis user, which he uses to
self-medicate with his anger difficulties. We gave him advice on alcohol
making him impulsive, what else can we do' (02). Nevertheless, substance
misuse issues were consistently assessed for, and when identified,
appropriate onward referral/signposting took place. In the presence of
clear-cut major psychiatric illness, comorbid substance misuse was taken
very seriously as it is a factor that significantly contributed to
increased risks: '...She has been abstinent for \[...\] years now but
with all the stress going on in the family she had turned to drink,
it\'s only when she drinks she takes an overdose. It makes her feel
lower and more impulsive, we had to do something to break the spiral'
(05).

The course of the illness also strongly influenced the outcome.
Generally, an acute presentation appeared to trump an acute on chronic
presentation, which was higher on the pecking order to a chronic
deterioration irrespective of the presentation and risk being quite
similar; the expectation in the latter being that more should be done by
the referrer. "Acute: '...She was presenting as quite labile... was
quite unsettled, agitated, disinhibited...we have to do something'
(01).Acute on chronic: '...She\'s got chronic thoughts of ending her
life by an Insulin overdose. There\'s a change to wanting to put herself
in front of a train...previously what stopped her acting was her sons,
however this had changed. The intensity had changed and a change in
nature. Her protective factors have reduced' (15).Chronic: 'I didn\'t
think it was an appropriate referral because this was a guy who\'d only
been seen in an out-patient appointment with long-term ongoing problems
and I felt more could have been done by the locality team, before
referring' (03)."Although practitioners fully recognised the impact on
risk of social factors (accommodation, finances, relationships,
employment, carer/family support and availability), those presenting
primarily with these issues were often not taken on for acute care
interventions. In these circumstances, often the social aetiology behind
the crisis was given more weighting than the risk: '...Social support
impacted the decision-making...no significant friends or family. She
receives no support from care services with regard to her son...She is
single, financially lacking and on benefits, lacking social support. She
has physical illnesses with a lot of symptoms...but not for us
really...' (16).

## Agenda {#sec2-3}

Agendas (desire to achieve a particular outcome), both stated and
perceived, influenced information processing. If an agenda was picked up
in a referrer/patient/carer by a practitioner, they often responded to
it. This was most obvious when judgement calls were being made about the
appropriateness of the referral: '...I felt that the reasons for the
referral weren\'t really appropriate. He was someone that they\'d
(Locality Team) only seen twice, the reason for referral was that he was
being actively suicidal. But I felt the risk was kind of raised so we\'d
go and see him...' (06).

Sometimes agendas were picked up in patients and carers. There was
evidence to suggest that practitioners responded (taking seriously or
dismissing) with their gut instinct to the agenda that they perceived:
'...Suicidal ideation, in the context of depression...because she has a
child, so I think it\'s always worth having a look when there\'s a
child, I got the clear sense that she was downplaying it as she did not
want social services involved, we needed to do something...' (13).
Generally carer concerns particularly relating to burnout were taken
quite seriously, as delivering successful home treatment is often quite
difficult without their support: 'I think her husband felt that she
needed to come into hospital...he was quite distressed by what she had
done again. He felt it was a heavy load to carry at the moment. Too much
to cope with...' (01).

## Resources {#sec2-4}

The research revealed that most practitioners were conscious about the
impact of resources on decision-making. Most took the stance that they
tried their level best to carry out the assessment independently of the
bed state. When directly asked about bed pressures influencing
decisions, most practitioners said no; however, most would be aware of
it when doing the assessment. Practitioners indicated that if a patient
was very unwell they would ensure that they get a bed, but it was also
apparent that the threshold for admission dropped if more beds were
available: 'We knew there was a bed, actually we knew there were plenty
of beds on the ward, so we kind of thought, you know what this lady
could just do with a break and some more assessment of her depression'
(04).

There were similar findings relating to home treatment capacity, where
practitioners denied the effect of resource limitation: 'It had no
bearing on the decision (not to take a suicidal patient on for home
treatment). What does that mean if we were short staffed we wouldn\'t
have taken him? No it had no bearing on it whatsoever' (03). However,
thresholds were noted to fluctuate in a similar fashion to beds when the
home treatment team was less busy.

## Experience {#sec2-5}

Past experience of unsuccessful home treatment or an admission that did
not benefit the recovery journey of the patient influenced the
practitioners reading of current risk. The rationale for not taking a
suicidal patient on to home treatment was as '...There were no changes
in his social situation from when I\'d last seen him \[...\] years
ago...if he feels that the situation is not validated then he will
increase his risk behaviours... I felt that we needed to validate his
level of distress over that and try and keep it compact (not get another
team involved)' (17). It was also apparent that the team put a far
higher premium on knowledge held within the team from previously working
with a patient than what was being handed over to them in the here and
now by the referrer.

# Discussion {#sec3}

MacNeela *et al*^18^ concluded that nurses strive to 'know the patient',
while having to 'work the system', with implications for patient care
and decision-making quality. Interviews revealed that assessing
practitioners are often put in very difficult scenarios and need to
respond to multiple pressures. It would be unrealistic to expect that
they will not be influenced by this. It could lead to formulation of an
opinion about what a good outcome would look like early in the process.
They try to remain in a rational space and make decisions based on
information that they have collated. However, the pressures set up a
rationalising environment in which facts get highlighted selectively to
rationalise the decision that has been already formulated. This is often
an unconscious process and the purpose of the study was to identify and
make explicit drivers for decision-making that are often implicit and
are captured in hard-to-define terms like 'gut' or 'instinct'. To help
assessing staff become more mindful and stay in a rational space rather
than rationalising (we see what we want to see to help us deal with our
cognitive dissonance^19^), we have framed the findings from our
qualitative study in an easy-to-remember acronym, AWARE (Anxiety,
Weighting, Agenda, Resources, Experience).

If a practitioner is anxious about adversely affecting the balance of
hope versus risk and decides not to tease out triggers extensively, this
decision should be a conscious choice (rather than unconscious). One can
then document the same and handover to the next person, making it clear
that there is an outstanding piece of work. The assessor can then
mindfully safety plan and systematically attend to warning signs^20^
that may rise until the next appointment. Further work relating to
fluctuating risk can then be taken up when the crisis is more contained
at the follow-up. Seeking blanket reassurance by asking patients 'Can
you keep yourself safe?' only decreases anxiety in the practitioner and
does very little to enhance safety.

Embedding reflective practice will keep clinicians mindful about these
heuristics. Bhugra *et al*^21^ found in a qualitative study that expert
psychiatrists relied upon intuitions and novices took a more analytical
approach in making clinical decisions. CRHTTs are multidisciplinary in
nature: front-line assessments are done by team members from different
backgrounds with different levels of experience. Given the variation,
decision-making standardisation becomes a key service issue. Bhugra *et
al*^21^ found that uncontrollable factors (time pressures, cost,
resources) influenced decisions. This is highly relevant as CRHTTs are
often managing bed pressures. It is a highly dynamic setting, and
thorough conscious deliberation on findings may not be possible.^22^
Hunt *et al*^23^ reported suicide rates of 14.6 per 10 000 CRHTT
episodes compared with 8.8 for in-patient episodes. The national
reduction of 17% in mental health bed numbers from 2012 to 2015^24^ has
meant that CRHTTs have an ever-increasing importance in care delivery of
acutely unwell patients. Therefore the higher suicide rate in CRHTTs
compared with in-patients needs urgent attention. The AWARE framework
may provide the foundation for safer care as it seeks to keep assessors
in a mindful and reflective space.

Hunt *et al*^13^ found that 49% of CRHTT patients who took their own
life had adverse live events, and a further 44% were living alone.
Preconceived notions about what is core CRHTT work could be taken up in
case-based discussions in a supportive fashion. This could also help
reframe the CRHTT gatekeeping agenda. Assessments are about admitting at
the appropriate time so that the shortest in-patient stay may be
followed up by prompt home treatment. It is not about keeping everyone
out. Resource-led decisions^21^^,^^25^ are never ideal but are
inevitable in the real world. Naming the decision for what it is will
ensure that practitioners then consciously work toward mitigating the
risk the resource-led decision has created, rather than justify (deal
with cognitive dissonance^19^) their action by selectively highlighting
aspects of the presentation.

Given that suicide is a rare outcome, assessors often feel that their
judgement calls are safe, and so the threshold for admission/home
treatment unconsciously creeps up. Reflective practice could keep staff
mindful about small increments in risk-taking. Serious untoward
incidents have a considerable detrimental impact on the confidence of
practitioners to take positive risks. Threshold awareness supports
safety and patients' recovery journeys in the long run, as without risk
there is no recovery.

## Limitations {#sec3-1}

The study findings, particularly in relation to anxiety, are limited to
the CRHTT setting as crisis referrals often have an urgency and acuity
that might not be present in routine assessments. As an improvement
project, the findings are relevant to the service. Before generalising
findings to all assessments, AWARE as a framework needs further
research. It is also important to acknowledge that, for practical
reasons, study participants were recruited from a single team. Although
not unusual for CRHTTs, there were no front-line assessors working who
had less than 10 years post-qualification experience. Research into
decision-making shows that experience level has a bearing.^21^ Also, in
most crisis services, initial assessments are carried out by nurses and
social workers; however, there are teams where psychiatrists might have
oversight. Inter-team variability of this nature limits the
generalisability of this study. Another limitation is that interviews
were carried out by CRHTT psychiatrists, introducing a potential bias in
responses. This was mitigated by assuring participants that this was not
an assessment of their decision-making skills and that their
participation was voluntary and they could withdraw consent at any
point.

Clinical decisions not only affect patient outcomes but also have
significant medicolegal implications. Mulder *et al* point out the
futility of risk categorisation and how it may confuse clinical
thinking.^26^ This study proposes AWARE as a theoretical framework that
supports safer clinical decision-making. To substantiate this claim,
research across various contexts and different CRHTT settings is needed
in which AWARE is empirically tested and refined.

In conclusion, there is a subjective element to clinical
decision-making, as it involves clinical judgement and interpretation of
information. However, there needs to be a balance between fact and
intuition, and dissecting out intuitive processes might help eliminate
certain unhelpful biases. AWARE provides a framework to make explicit
some of the drivers for decision-making that are often implicit. This
can be used in reflective practice groups as well as for a quick,
internal crosscheck post-assessment. It may reduce bias and
inter-assessor variability, improve consistency, lead to a more
systematic approach and help staff be more mindful of how they could be
subject to undue influences, and therefore result in improved clinical
decisions and patient safety.

We thank the home treatment staff who were interviewed for this study,
and Mrs Mary Henniker for transcribing the interviews. We acknowledge
scholarly contributions from Dr Golam Khandaker and Dr Claire Dibben.

# Supplementary material {#sec4}

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2018.94.

::: {.caption}
###### 

click here to view supplementary material
:::

**Chiara Lombardo,** Research Fellow in Global Mental Health, Institute
for Health and Human Development, University of East London Senior
Research Officer, Research and Development, Mental Health Foundation;
and Research Associate, Adult Mental Health Services, Cambridgeshire and
Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, UK; **Mónica Santos,** Locum
Consultant Psychiatrist, Adult Mental Health Services, Cambridgeshire
and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, UK; **Tine Van Bortel,**
Professor of Global Mental Health, Institute for Health and Human
Development, University of East London; and Principal Investigator,
Cambridge Institute of Public Health, University of Cambridge, UK;
**Robert Croos,** Fixed Term Specialty Doctor, Adult Mental Health
Services, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, UK;
**Ella Arensman,** Professor and Director of Research, School of Public
Health, National Suicide Research Foundation, University College Cork,
National University of Ireland, Ireland; **Manaan Kar Ray,** Consultant
Psychiatrist, Adult Mental Health Services, Cambridgeshire and
Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Medical Director, Mental Health,
Addictions and Mental Health Services, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
Metro South; and Senior Lecturer, Southside Clinical Unit, Princess
Alexandra Hospital, University of Queensland, Australia.
