---
author:
- Annie Bartlett
date: 2018-12
institute:
- "Professor of Offender Healthcare, St. George\\'s, University of
  London, UK; email: <abartlet@sgul.ac.uk>"
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
title: "Conversion therapy and the LGBT community: the role of the
  College now?"
---

The history of the relationship between the LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual
and transgender) community and psychiatry has not been a happy one,
reflecting but also at times reinforcing hostile social attitudes. More
recently, both psychiatry and psychological therapies have been at pains
to distance themselves from previous discriminatory practice and align
themselves with more contemporary understandings of diverse sexual
identities and behaviour. The College and other bodies such as the UK
Council for Psychotherapy have developed clear statements on sexual
orientation and the issue of conversion therapy in particular, pointing
out that it does not work, can create distress and should not be
undertaken.^1^

This position on conversion therapy is echoed in the raft of 75 measures
announced recently by Women and Equalities Minister Penny Mordant, based
on the results of the largest survey of LGBT people ever undertaken. The
measures are designed to create a more inclusive society in which, among
other things, individuals of any sexual persuasion may feel able to hold
hands in public without fear of ridicule or attack (Hansard HC Deb, 3
July 2018, cWS). That a Conservative government has launched such an
initiative seems remarkable to those of us able to remember Section 28,
brought in by the Thatcher government 30 years ago (Local Government Act
1988).

However, we should be mindful as a profession that some practitioners
may not be so sympathetic to this direction of travel. Not so long ago,
a significant proportion of psychiatrists and therapists, 4%, were still
prepared to treat individuals for their gay and lesbian identities.^2^
It is not clear how much this has changed, if at all, on the ground.
Equally, it is still very easy to locate reparative therapy options on
the internet, a common port of call for those wanting some help
negotiating same sex sexual preferences. A quick search picks up, among
others, Nicolosi\'s website, which continues to say 'If gay doesn\'t
define you you don\'t have to be gay,' accompanied by claims of
treatment efficacy, in line with the views he so publicly expressed
until his death in 2017 (<https://www.josephnicolosi.com>). He
recommended reparative therapy, saying that it worked and should be
offered as a psychological therapy. The number of individuals currently
involved with reparative therapy is unclear and seems likely to be
difficult to establish, as recent medical and political pronouncements
may well drive it underground.

The College has an international reach. Many countries are still much
more punitive to LGBT individuals than the UK; some have the death
penalty on their statute books. Major world religions are internally
divided on LGBT issues and can legitimise not only adverse social
attitudes but also attempts at religious rather than medical cures. It
remains to be seen how energetic the College feels it should be in
sharing its liberal understanding of sexual preference. Its position on
change-oriented treatments of any kind has international applicability.
There may well be many individuals overseas who would thank psychiatry
for taking part in this ongoing debate.
