=================================================
Maintenance doses for clozapine: past and present
=================================================



Avneet Sharma

:date: 2018-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We recently completed a quality improvement project for patients on
long-term clozapine treatment, with the main aim of assessing the
side-effect burden with a view to optimising the treatment. We compared
our current clinical practice with one described in a publication 20
years ago in the *BJPsych Bulletin* in 1998 on maintenance doses for
clozapine.1

Murphy *et al*\ 1 presented findings on 44 patients who had been on
clozapine for 6 months or more. Our patient number was 41, and the
information was retrieved from electronic case records, although this
did not make the job easier as the relevant information was scattered
across time and in different sections of the record system.

The patient group in Murphy's study had a mean age of 38 years (21–62
years) with 35 males and nine females, the majority being Caucasian,
with a mean duration of clozapine treatment of 38 months (7–69 months).
The highest treatment dose prescribed ranged from 300 to 900 mg per day
(mean 568 mg), with 50% patients on 500 mg per day or less; only one
patient received the maximum dose of 900 mg. The current or maintenance
doses of clozapine ranged from 150 to 750 mg per day (mean 460 mg), with
eight patients on doses of 150 and 300 mg per day. This was within the
British National Formulary (BNF) guidelines at the time (BNF: number 33,
March 1997), which clearly differentiated between the higher doses
(200–450 mg daily, maximum 900 mg) required initially to stabilise the
mental state, and the lower doses (150–300 mg daily) required
subsequently for maintenance treatment. The authors found that dosage
reductions had been achieved in 29 cases, while there was no attempt to
reduce the dose in the majority of the rest of the patients, owing to
partial response or less-than-expected symptom control.

Our group included older patients with a mean age of 44 years (29–70
years), who were predominantly Caucasian, with 30 males and 11 females.
The mean duration of treatment with clozapine was more than 10 years
(range 1–30 years). The dose ranged from 200 to 900 mg per day, with a
mean dose of 405 mg per day; 25 patients were on doses between 300 and
500 mg per day, which would have been deemed higher by the BNF
guidelines of 1997.

We found that that 80% of patients reported significant side-effects
including drooling, sedation/tiredness, gastrointestinal symptoms,
weight gain, urinary incontinence, and constipation. Also, a significant
proportion (50%) were on medication for side-effects, generally in
combination. There were significant metabolic problems, with an average
body mass index (BMI) of 29.40 and most of the patients (apart from
five) having a BMI above 23; two cases were diagnosed with diabetes and
on treatment.

We also found that there had been no reduction in clozapine doses in any
of the cases over the past 7 years including more recent cases. Of
course, one big difference is that there are no current BNF guidelines
for maintenance doses for clozapine; BNF (September 2016–March 2017)
mentions a usual dose range for clozapine of 200–450 mg per day that one
needs to titrate to when starting clozapine.

The side-effect burden on its own should be enough to make clinicians
keep dose review on the agenda on a regular basis. Owing to large
variations in metabolism, it is hard to predict the optimum dose and
plasma level in an individual patient; the manufacturers2 advise that
once maximum therapeutic benefit has been established, many patients can
be maintained effectively on lower doses with careful downward
titration. The past BNF guidelines regarding maintenance doses were
thought to be not based on evidence,1 but empirical; it may be time to
revisit the past, as patients appeared to be getting a better deal.
