===============================================================
Accurate recording of personality disorder in clinical practice
===============================================================

Peter TyrerCorrespondence to Peter Tyrer (p.tyrer@imperial.ac.uk)
:Date: 2018-8

:Abstract:
   Disturbances of personality are recorded very poorly in official
   statistics, but there are signs that this is changing. For many
   years, personality disorder has been either regarded as a secondary
   diagnosis that can be forgotten in the presence of another mental
   disorder, or avoided as the diagnosis gives the impression of
   untreatability or stigma. What is now abundantly clear is that
   under-diagnosis of personality disorder represents a disservice to
   patients and practitioners. It prevents a proper understanding of the
   longitudinal course of psychiatric disorder and an appreciation of
   some of the positive aspects of abnormal personality that can be used
   in treatment. We must no longer bury personality disorder,
   ostrich-like, in the diagnostic sand. It is there for the asking and
   needs to be embraced honestly and without fear if we are to improve
   the management of psychiatric patients.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The paper by Hossain *et al*\ (n.d.a) in this issue is noteworthy for
two reasons: it records ethnic variation in a sensitive subject and
provides a rare longitudinal record of personality disorder diagnosis.
This type of research, based in clinical practice, should help to
destigmatise the diagnosis of personality disorder, which for many years
has been under-recorded in formal statistics. There is something bizarre
in the contradiction between the research data, showing prevalence
figures of up to 40% in psychiatric
in-patients(n.d.b)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.c) (and much higher for those in
tertiary services)(n.d.d) and the official national diagnostic figures,
which rarely exceed 8%.(n.d.e) This difference can only be explained by
either (a) failure of detection; (b) diagnostic avoidance for a number
of reasons; or (c) observance of a separate axis for personality
disorder, one of the advantages of the DSM system that has now been
lost.(n.d.f) I would like to think that the fourth option, a complete
rejection of the diagnosis of personality disorder, is not currently
embraced.

It is likely that all three may be relevant in under-diagnosis and
readers might ask themselves how they normally avoid this diagnosis in
practice. One of the reasons may be the perceived lack of utility of the
diagnosis. Does it help clinical practice? Many feel it does not as it
is felt to confer an unfair label of untreatability; but this is
mistaken. Three-quarters of those with personality disorder admitted to
UK psychiatric hospitals are given the diagnosis of emotionally unstable
(borderline) personality disorder,(n.d.e) and this has the best evidence
base for treatment.(n.d.g) Lack of treatment options may be a reason for
the low diagnosis rates of other personality disorders – anankastic
personality disorder only accounts for 0.18% of all diagnoses in the
group(n.d.e) – but this does not mean diagnoses of personality disorders
other than borderline are of no therapeutic value.(n.d.h)

Personality dysfunction may also be an advantage in aiding the
effectiveness of certain forms of treatment(n.d.i)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.j)
and such findings, if confirmed in other settings, would help greatly in
destigmatising the disorder. Hossain *et al*\ (n.d.a) also report a high
rate of diagnosis in adolescence. The new ICD-11 diagnostic
classification of personality disorder, to be introduced later in 2018,
includes the diagnostic option of ‘personality disorder in
development’,(n.d.k) and this will allow clinicians to make this
diagnosis in younger people. This does not mean that a diagnosis made at
this time becomes an indelible stain on a person's mental health; it
merely states that, at that particular time, the individual concerned
has significant personality dysfunction and this should be acknowledged
instead of reducing every form of pathology to symptoms or behaviour.

The low rate of diagnosis in Black and minority ethnic
populations(n.d.a) can probably be explained by what could be called
‘compensatory stigma’. Of the three prevalence studies of personality
disorder in ethnic minorities, two have shown reduced prevalence
compared with White comparators(n.d.a)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.l) but the other,
assessed as part of a national survey, showed an increase.(n.d.m) My
view is that the national survey is nearer to the truth. There is a
concern that a psychiatric diagnosis of personality disorder in certain
ethnic minority groups might be construed as racist and so is avoided. I
have certainly behaved like this in my own diagnostic practice in the
past.

The increased prevalence of personality disorder over time shown by
Hossain *et al*\ (n.d.a) should not be regarded as necessarily a true
reflection of increase; rather it shows that clinicians may be less wary
about making the diagnosis that they previously did. This may well be
good for practice, as assessment of personality as well as mental health
status makes for better understanding and broader predictive value. The
ICD-11 classification may increase prevalence rates of personality
disorder(n.d.c) as it allows for the diagnosis to be made for the first
time both earlier and later in life.(n.d.k)

Further studies along the same lines as Hossain *et al*\ (n.d.a) should
also examine the proportion of people admitted with personality disorder
under the Mental Health Act. Those with personality disorder are
sectioned less often after formal assessment than those with other
diagnoses, but at 41% the proportion is still substantial(n.d.n) and may
be increasing. This certainly appears to be the case in those with
personality dysfunction and intellectual disability(n.d.o) and is a
matter of some concern, as in this population the diagnosis of
personality disorder is more contentious. It should also help to have a
simpler diagnostic system that clarifies the difference between severe
and milder forms of personality disorder; the severe level is actually
rare.

**Peter Tyrer** is Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry at the Centre for
Psychiatry, Imperial College, London. He was the Chair of the World
Health Organization ICD-11 Revision Group for Personality Disorders
between 2010 and 2017.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.
