---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  Community treatment orders (CTOs) have been in used in England and
  Wales since November 2008; however, their effectiveness has been
  debated widely, as has the question of which methodology is
  appropriate to investigate them. This paper uses national data to
  explore the use of CTOs in England.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  About 5500 patients are subject to CTOs at any one time. Each year,
  \~4500 patients are made subject to a CTO each year and \~2500 are
  fully discharged, usually by the responsible clinician; fewer than
  half of CTO patients are recalled, and two-thirds of recalls end in
  revocation. The low rate of CTO discharges by mental health tribunals
  (below 5%) suggests that they are not used inappropriately.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  The introduction of CTOs in England has coincided with a reduction in
  psychiatric service provision due to the economic downturn. Pressures
  on services might be even more severe if patients currently subject to
  CTOs instead needed to be detained as in-patients.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a4}

  None.
author:
- Susham Gupta
- Elvan U. Akyuz
- Toby Baldwin
- David CurtisCorrespondence to Susham Gupta
  (<susham.gupta@elft.nhs.uk>)
date: 2018-6
institute:
- 1East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 2North and East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 3University College London Genetics Institute, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
title: "Community treatment orders in England: review of usage from
  national data"
---

# Background {#sec1}

Community treatment orders (CTOs) were introduced into legislation for
England and Wales by the Mental Health Act (MHA) 2007. They can be
applied to a patient who is already subject to a section of the MHA
which makes them liable to detention for treatment. The patient is
discharged from the treatment section on to a CTO, which broadly means
that they need to comply with a set of specified conditions that may
include accepting prescribed treatment. The responsible clinician has
the power to recall a patient to hospital. If the CTO is revoked, the
treatment section is reinstated. CTOs are initially valid for 6 months
but can be extended indefinitely. They are subject to scrutiny by
independent first-tier mental tribunals (Mental Health), or MHTs, which
can discharge the patient from the CTO if the grounds for its use, as
laid out in the MHA, are deemed not to be met. Following the
introduction of CTOs, uptake was initially higher than some had
predicted, and over the past few years usage seems to be fairly
stable.^1^^--^^3^ The attitude of many clinicians to CTOs has been
favourable,^4^ but they have also been the subject of
controversy.^4^^,^^5^ The power to coerce patients to accept treatment
in the community clearly represents a conflict between the principles of
respecting autonomy and of preventing harm to the patient and/or others,
and thus between providing the 'least restrictive' treatment option
balanced against 'preventive' principles.^6^ The difficulties in
resolving this conflict satisfactorily have resulted in significant
variations in the nature and implementation of these orders in different
countries. Factors which could reduce the usage of CTOs may include a
reluctance to use coercive measures, objections from patients\'
advocates, concerns about liability, operational aspects and the lack of
a strong evidence base.^7^

CTOs are typically indicated for psychiatric patients, usually with a
diagnosis of psychosis, presenting with a 'revolving door' pattern of
admissions secondary to poor treatment adherence and poor engagement
with psychiatric services.^8^ Although a main aim of CTOs is to reduce
readmissions by preventing relapse, another motivation might be to
attempt to improve quality of life for patients and their careers. The
responsible clinician devises a set of conditions appropriate to the
individual patient in the CTO. The responsible clinician has the
discretion to recall the patient, initially for a 72-h period, for
further treatment if deemed necessary. During this recall period, a
clinical decision has to be made as to whether the CTO should be
revoked, which leads to the patient returning to being subject to the
original hospital treatment section from which they were discharged on
to the CTO. Alternatively, they may receive some brief intervention and
be allowed to return to the community, or they may be informally
admitted while continuing to be subject to the CTO. The responsible
clinician has considerable discretion as to when to exercise the power
of recall. Some clinicians may aim to recall patients promptly, with the
aim of quickly re-establishing treatment and preventing further
deterioration, possibly without needing to revoke the CTO. Others may
prefer to wait longer, in the hope that things will improve without
having to subject the patient to a measure which may seem overly
coercive or even punitive. A recent follow-up study found that fewer
than half the patients subject to CTOs are recalled, with about a fifth
being recalled multiple times.^9^ In that study, half of these recalls
were due to deterioration in clinical condition and about 70% of recalls
resulted in revocation.

# Effectiveness of CTOs {#sec2}

If CTOs were effective and were used effectively, they might lead to an
overall reduction in requirement for in-patient treatment and a decline
in the number of patients detained on treatment sections.^10^ Two older
American randomised controlled studies (RCTs) of similar measures failed
to find clinical benefits, but it has been argued that they had
significant methodological drawbacks, for example, in that they excluded
high-risk patients.^11^^,^^12^ Subsequent American studies have claimed
to demonstrate benefits, especially when considered as part of a wider
public health system involving the criminal justice system.^7^ Given the
difference in psychiatric service provision, these studies may have
limited applicability to the UK. The OCTET study, a RCT which was
carried out soon after the introduction of CTOs, did not find clinical
benefits.^13^ However, this study has been criticised as having
significant methodological problems, such as again excluding high-risk
patients and the fact that the CTOs were only used for a brief period of
time.^14^^,^^15^ Small naturalistic UK clinical studies using before and
after methodologies have reported positive outcomes.^16^^--^^18^ Swartz
and Swanson (2015)^15^ suggested that RCTs may not be the best way to
study these complex tools, and that larger, naturalistic studies may be
more appropriate. A Care Quality Commission (CQC) 2009/10 report claimed
that a third of CTO patients in England did not have a reported history
of non-adherence or disengagement.^19^

Figures from the Mental Health Minimum Data Set show that the majority
of people on CTOs are of working age, and more than twice as many are
male than female; however, in the 65 and over age group, more women than
men are on CTOs.^20^ The descriptive data indicate that patients are
typically male and around 40 years of age, with a long history of
schizophrenia-like or serious affective illness, previous admissions,
poor medication adherence, aftercare needs, the potential for violence
and displaying psychotic symptoms, especially delusions, at the time of
the CTO.^6^ CTO usage is more prevalent in urban areas.^21^

# Method {#sec3}

We examined national data on aspects of CTO usage alongside that of
other provisions of the MHA and information on psychiatric service
provision. National data from the annual reports of Digital NHS
(previously the Health and Social Care Information Centre) and Mental
Health Reports of the CQC (the independent regulator of health and
social care in England since 2009/10) were studied to look at the trends
in implementation of CTOs. Thus, although CTOs are used in both England
and Wales, the results we report are only for England.

# Results {#sec4}

All the figures quoted in the results below and accompanying tables were
extracted from the NHS Digital report: *In-Patients Formally Detained in
Hospitals Under the Mental Health Act 1983, and Patients Subject to
Supervised Community Treatment: 2015/16, Annual Figures*.^21^

As shown in [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}, the annual rate of new
CTOs is fairly stable at around 4500, with the number of patients
subject to CTOs at any one time being around 5400. The annual number of
discharges from CTOs has steadily increased over 5 years from 1712
(2011/12) to 2575 (2015/16), and each year somewhat fewer than half of
all patients subject to a CTO are discharged. Table 1Annual numbers of
patients in England who are subject to CTOs at any one time, along with
the number of new CTOs initiated and numbers and percentages of patients
discharged from CTOsYear2011/122012/132013/142014/152015/16Number of
patients subject to CTOs47645218536554615426Number of new
CTOs42204647443445644361Number of CTO
discharges17122162223024912575Number of discharges as percentage of
number of patients subject to CTO, %35.941.441.645.647.5

As shown in [Table 2](#tab02){ref-type="table"}, there are about 45
recalls per year for every 100 patients subject to a CTO (HSCIC
2015/16). Over the past 5 years, the average rate of revocation
following such recalls is 65%, albeit with a fair degree of variation
between years, with absolute numbers fluctuating between 1000 and 1500.
[Table 3](#tab03){ref-type="table"} shows that, including these
revocations, around 9000 patients are detained under Section 3 each
year. Given that about 4500 patients are discharged on a CTO annually,
it seems that about half of patients detained under Section 3 will be
discharged on a CTO. Table 2Annual number of recalls and numbers of
recalls per 100 patients subject to a
CTOYear2011/122012/132013/142014/152015/16Number of recalls from
CTO20822272231623692294Recalls per 100 CTO patients4844434342Number of
revocations14691509140114271557Percentage of recalls resulting in
revocation, %70.666.460.560.267.9[^1] Table 3Annual number of patients
newly detained under Section 3 (S3) of the MHA, number of CTO
revocations and the sum of these two
numbersYear2011/122012/132013/142014/15Non-CTO Section
37701777674817690Revocations from
CTO1469150914011427Total9170928588829117

[Table 4](#tab04){ref-type="table"} shows that each year patients make
3000--4000 applications to MHTs to be discharged from CTOs. Most
applications proceed to a hearing, and the proportion of MHT hearings
resulting in discharge was running at 4--5%, falling to 3.3% in 2015/16
(CQC 2012/13, CQC 2013/14, CQC 2014/15, CQC 2015/16). These rates are
not dissimilar to the rates for discharge from hospital treatment
sections (Section 3 and Section 37) of 4.4% in 2013/14, and less than
that for all sections, which was 8.9% (CQC 2013/14). The application may
not proceed to a hearing if it is withdrawn by the patient or if the
responsible clinician themselves discharges the CTO. Of all patients
subject to a CTO in a given year, the percentage discharged by a MHT is
around 2.5--3.5%. The low rates could partly be explained by the higher
proportions of automatic referrals made to the tribunal by hospital
managers, as opposed to applications made by patients. Table 4Annual
numbers of applications to MHTs for discharge from CTO, numbers of
hearings, and numbers and percentages of hearings resulting in discharge
by the MHTYear2011/122012/132013/142014/152015/16Patients subject to a
CTO47645218536554615426Applications to MHT39014211443143494317MHT
hearings32723169355036293942MHT discharges161132185165132Percentage of
hearings resulting in discharge, %4.94.25.24.53.3Percentage of all CTO
patients discharged by MHT, %3.42.53.43.02.4[^2]

The past few years have seen a 17% reduction in the number of in-patient
beds for people needing care for mental health problems: from 26 448 in
2008/09 to 21 949 in 2012/13.^22^ HSCIC data (2015) show that annual
patient contact numbers have fallen significantly, while patient numbers
are increasing.^23^ The same report also shows that the greatest fall
has been for assertive outreach services (more than 20%) and general
psychiatric, substance misuse and forensic services (around 15% each).
By contrast, contact with criminal justice liaison and diversion
services saw the greatest increase in contacts (36.2%), while contact
with psychiatric liaison increased by almost 28%.

# Discussion {#sec5}

The rate of CTO use is about 10 per 100 000 of the population, which
puts it in the low to moderate range by international comparison with
similar provisions for compulsory treatment in the community. Australia
and New Zealand and some parts of the USA have much higher rates,
whereas rates are much lower in Canada and New York.^24^

The pattern of usage of CTOs seems to be fairly stable in the context of
ongoing reductions in psychiatric service provision. A CQC report
claimed that the powers were being applied 'preventatively beyond those
for whom they were primarily designed'.^19^ However, we note that the
rate of discharge by MHTs is low and possibly falling, indicating that
these independent tribunals do not seem to regard CTOs as being used
inappropriately.

The number of recalls is nearly half the total number of CTOs, and
somewhat fewer than a third of CTOs are ended by revocation. Again, the
fact that such a large proportion of patients subject to CTOs end up
requiring readmission might be taken as an indicator that CTOs are
largely being used appropriately, in an attempt to provide treatment in
the community to patients who would otherwise remain in hospital. It is
not possible to tell whether the number of revocations could be reduced
if patients were recalled more promptly, at an earlier stage in their
relapse, or whether the revocations represent a group of patients who
are intrinsically difficult to maintain in the community. It would be
helpful to investigate this aspect of clinical practice.

It is difficult to know the extent to which the use of CTOs has allowed
psychiatric services to continue to function with reduced bed provision.
Of course, many would argue that psychiatric services are in fact not
functioning at an acceptable level, and the rise in contacts with the
criminal justice system could be taken as evidence of this. The MHT will
uphold a CTO only if it feels that the CTO is required for the patient
to continue to accept treatment. Clinically, adherence to treatment is
aimed at preventing relapse and hospital admission among 'revolving
door' patients, and has wider significance for psychiatric in-patient
service provision.

Overall, the success or failure of CTOs hinges on their appropriate
application and implementation. There may well be large differences in
practice between services and individuals; it would be helpful to
explore these systematically and, if possible, relate them to outcome
measures. Large numbers of patients are subjected to this provision, so
it would seem sensible to take whatever steps possible to see that it is
used effectively.

We thank Dr Jennifer Gant, Dr George Mikellides and Dr Peter MacRae.

**Susham Gupta** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at East London NHS
Foundation Trust, UK; **Elvan U. Akyuz** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at
North and East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK; **Toby Baldwin** is a
Specialty Doctor at East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK; and **David
Curtis** is Honorary Professor of Psychiatry at University College
London Genetics Institute and the Centre for Psychiatry, Barts and the
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

[^1]: (Note that some patients may be recalled more than once.) Also
    shown are the number of revocations and the percentage of recalls
    that result in revocation.

[^2]: Also shown is the percentage of discharges by MHT of all patients
    subject to a CTO.
