==========================================================================================
The prevalence of constant supportive observations in high, medium and low secure services
==========================================================================================



Katie Lambert
Simon Chu
Chris Duffy
Victoria Hartley
Alison Baker
Jane L. Ireland

:Correspondence: Simon Chu (SChu@uclan.ac.uk)

:date: 2018-4

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   We explored the prevalence and use of constant supportive
   observations (CSO) in high, medium and low secure in-patient services
   in a single National Health Service (NHS) mental health trust. From
   clinical records, we extracted data on the length of time of CSO, the
   reason for the initiation of CSO and associated adverse incidents for
   all individuals who were placed on CSO between July 2013 and June
   2014.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   A small number of individuals accounted for a disproportionately
   large proportion of CSO hours in each setting. Adverse incident rates
   were higher on CSO than when not on CSO. There was considerable
   variation between different settings in terms of CSO use and the
   reasons for commencing CSO.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The study describes the prevalence and nature of CSO in secure
   forensic mental health services and the associated organisational
   costs. The marked variation in CSO use between settings suggests that
   mental health services continue to face challenges in balancing risk
   management with minimising restrictive interventions.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   A.B. and J.L.I. are both directly employed by the NHS trust in which
   the study was conducted.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Supportive observations involve the increased monitoring of mental
health in-patients who are at an increased risk of harming themselves,
harming others or absconding.1 The practice involves clinical staff
being assigned to an unsettled patient to engage with them
therapeutically2 and monitor their well-being.3 The National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance on the short-term
management of violent behaviour in in-patient settings4 outlines four
distinct levels of observations, with the highest two levels (3 and 4)
involving constant observation of the patient. Observations may also
vary in terms of the number of staff assigned to conduct them – constant
supportive observations (CSO) are commonly conducted on a one-to-one
basis, but in more extreme cases multiple staff may be assigned to
observations of the same patient (the most recent NICE guideline on the
management of aggression has formalised observations involving multiple
staff as a distinct category5).

Observations are the recommended approach for managing individuals
deemed to be at risk,6 reflecting the competing demands of a mental
health service – the provision of compassionate care while managing risk
– but the rationale and efficacy of CSO is debated in the
literature.7\ :sup:`–`\ 9 However, there are no reports of the
prevalence of supportive observations in mental health services, and so
the extent to which supportive observations are being utilised in mental
health services, and in what context, is unclear. This research
therefore explored the prevalence and nature of CSO in a single National
Health Service (NHS) mental health trust, comparing data from high,
medium and low secure forensic mental health services within that trust.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

The data were gathered from a single NHS mental health trust in England
for the 12-month period between 1 July 2013 and 30 June 2014. The secure
division within this trust comprises a high secure service (HSS; 228
male in-patient beds), a medium secure unit (MSU; 58 male in-patient
beds and eight female in-patient beds) and a low secure unit (LSU; 32
male in-patient beds). During the period of study, the mean daily
occupancy levels were at 84% of capacity for high secure, 88% for male
medium secure, 93% for female medium secure and 90% for low secure (not
including beds assigned to patients on trial leave).

From clinical records, we identified all individuals who were resident
on 1 July 2013 or admitted between 1 July 2013 and 30 June 2014 in each
service. The clinical information for each individual was manually
searched, and we extracted and collated data on all episodes of level 3
or 4 observations that took place within the review period. For each
episode, the data recorded were: the level of observations (level 3 or
4), the start and end time/date of each episode of observation, the
number of staff involved in each episode, and the reason for initiation
of the episode. An episode of CSO was only recorded when there was a
defined start and stop time recorded in clinical notes. Thus, where the
CSO arrangement was flexible dependent on circumstances (e.g. level 2 in
communal areas but level 3 when in their bedroom) and no start/stop time
was recorded in the notes for the changing levels of CSO, it was not
possible to record the data for those episodes. Data on all adverse
incidents involving the individuals on CSO were collated and manually
searched to establish the number of incidents that occurred while that
individual was on CSO and not on CSO.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

| During the review period, 239 individuals were resident in the HSS at
  different periods and 56 of these were placed on CSO at some stage
  during the year. In the female MSU ward, nine different individuals
  were resident during the year and eight of these were placed on CSO.
  There were 84 individual residents during the year on the male MSU
  wards, with 31 of these being placed on CSO. Eighteen of the 38
  residents in the LSU during the year were placed on CSO. There were
  only a very small number of episodes of level 4 observations across
  the data-set (seven episodes in HSS, two episodes in MSU, and four
  episodes in LSU) and so for the purposes of analysis, these were
  combined with the level 3 episodes. A summary of the data extracted
  for each unit is shown in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Table 1The prevalence
  of constant supportive observations in low, medium and high secure
  services between July 2013 and June 2014Medium secureLow secureMale
  wardsFemale wardHigh secureOBD for the period10 45418 626272669 776No.
  of patients on CSO (no. of patients resident during the period)18
  (38)31 (84)8 (9)56 (239)Total patient hours spent on
  CSO14 96015 77014 02541 192Total staff hours spent on
  CSO16 53718 66216 46847 628Patient hours per 100
  OBD143.1084.67514.4959.03Staff hours per 100
  OBD158.18100.19604.1168.26Estimated cost per 100 OBD, £ (estimated
  total cost for unit, £)\ `a <#tfn1_2>`__\ 3734 (390 370)1811
  (337 269)10 802 (294 471)1221 (851 636)Reasons for initiating CSO, %
  staff hoursAggression 47
| Self-harm 14
| Deterioration 0
| Env. change 2
| Other 37Aggression 45
| Self-harm 34
| Deterioration 6
| Env. change 14
| Other 1Aggression 8
| Self-harm 88
| Deterioration 1
| Env. change 3
| Other 0Aggression 8
| Self-harm 52
| Deterioration 18
| Env. change 21
| Other [1]_ [2]_

.. _sec2-1:

Prevalence of constant observations
-----------------------------------

Across the secure division, patients were placed on CSO for a total of
85 947 h in the 12-month period of study. `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ shows the
prevalence of CSO in the three different units, both in terms of the
number of hours that patients spent on CSO and the number of staff hours
devoted to CSO. To allow comparison between units, occupied bed days
(OBD; the sum of the daily number of occupied beds for the entire
period) was used as the common denominator. `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ shows
the total number of hours of CSO per 100 OBD in each unit. The HSS
recorded the lowest CSO levels (59 h per 100 OBD), while the highest
level of CSO was in the female MSU (514 h per 100 OBD). Staff hours
devoted to CSO were consistently higher than patient hours, owing to
episodes of 2:1 or 3:1 observation, and the magnitude of increase in
staff hours varied between 10 and 18% of patient hours (low secure: 10%
higher; male medium secure: 18% higher; female medium secure: 17%
higher; high secure: 15% higher).

.. _sec2-2:

Distribution of CSO hours across patients
-----------------------------------------

CSO was not evenly distributed across the in-patient population; in all
units, a small number of individuals accounted for a substantial
proportion of staff time on CSO. In the HSS, five out of 56 individuals
on CSO accounted for 54% of all CSO hours in the unit (one individual
was on CSO for the entire 12-month period). On the female MSU ward, two
out of eight individuals on CSO accounted for 57% of the CSO hours,
while on the male MSU wards, four out of 31 individuals on CSO accounted
for 56% of the CSO hours. Similarly, in the LSU, two out of 18
individuals accounted for 46% of the CSO hours.

.. _sec2-3:

Reason for commencing CSO
-------------------------

To aggregate the reasons for commencing CSO, the circumstance of each
episode of CSO was extracted from clinical notes and placed in one of
five categories. Reasons were categorised as ‘Aggression’ if the
individual was placed on CSO because of an act of aggression (including
violence) or threats of aggression, including verbal abuse. ‘Self-harm’
included actual self-harm as well as threatened self-harm and requests
from the individual for extra support because they feared harming
themselves in the near future. CSO was categorised as ‘Deterioration’
when individuals were placed on CSO because of a general agitation or
deterioration in mental state that warranted additional support for
them. CSO was categorised as ‘Environment Change’ when a specific change
in environment preceded CSO and was the main reason for it, e.g. new
admission, termination of a period of seclusion, ward change. CSO was
categorised as ‘Other’ when there was a specific reason for placing an
individual on CSO that did not fit the other categories, e.g. for
safeguarding purposes in a situation where there was a high likelihood
of exploitation, or for physical health purposes when an individual had
recently returned from hospital after an operation and required support.

The proportion of staff hours devoted to CSO in each of the different
categories in each unit is shown in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__, where it can
be seen that the reasons for initiation of CSO varied between services.
In HSS and the female MSU, self-harm (actual or risk of) was the main
reason for CSO, while aggression was not often a reason to initiate CSO.
In both the male MSU and the LSU, however, aggression was the
predominant reason for initiating CSO. CSO to provide support in
self-harm was also a frequent motive in the male MSU, while a large
proportion of CSO hours were devoted to a specific other reason in the
LSU. Further exploration of the LSU reasons indicated that a single
individual was placed on CSO for a 6-month period for safeguarding
reasons, leading to the unusually high proportion of CSO hours in the
‘other’ category.

.. _sec2-4:

Adverse incidents
-----------------

To examine the effect of CSO on adverse incidents, we extracted data on
the date/time of each incident and the incident category for every
incident involving any individual on CSO during the period of study. By
examining the date/time and circumstances of the incident, it was
possible to categorise each incident as having occurred while the
individual was either on CSO or not on CSO. Using data on the number of
hours that all individuals spent on CSO within a unit, and also the
number of hours for those same individuals during the 12-month period
that were not spent on CSO, we computed the incident rates relative to a
common denominator (per 100 h on CSO and not on CSO) to enable
comparisons between incident rates.

Incidents are categorised in terms of nature and severity into four
categories, A–D. Category A incidents are very serious incidents that
may involve a death, serious sexual assault or hostage-taking. No
individuals on CSO during the period of study were involved in any
category A incidents. Examples of category B incidents include attempted
hostage-taking, serious assault and attempted suicide; typical category
C incidents may involve assault, moderate self-harm and threats; and
examples of Category D incidents may include verbal abuse, minor
self-harm and property damage. `Table 2 <#tab02>`__ shows the number of
adverse incidents (in each category) per 100 h of residence while those
individuals were on CSO and not on CSO. Table 2Adverse incidents in each
category and in total for each unit for patients involved in constant
supportive observations (CSO)Incidents while on
CSO\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ Incidents while not on
CSO\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ CategoryCategoryUnitBCDTotalBCDTotalLow
secure0.010.050.350.410.010.020.160.20Medium secure –
male0.020.080.180.270.010.030.070.10Medium secure –
Female0.010.070.530.610.000.040.120.16High
secure0.00.430.621.060.010.120.220.35High secure (without atypical
patient)\ `b <#tfn2_2>`__\ 0.010.210.360.58 [3]_ [4]_

In all units, figures indicate that adverse incidents were more common
for individuals on CSO than when those same individuals were not on CSO,
with the highest overall incident rate for patients on CSO in the HSS
(1.06 incidents per 100 h). Further examination of the records from HSS
revealed that one individual was responsible for 251 incidents while on
observations; because he was on CSO for the entire 12-month period,
there were no instances of incidents while not on observations. When
this atypical individual was removed from the incident figures, the
incident rate for HSS patients while on CSO reduced to 0.58 incidents
per 100 h.

The data in `Table 2 <#tab02>`__ indicate that across all units,
individuals were at least twice as likely to engage in an incident while
on CSO compared with when they were not on CSO, and, in the case of the
female MSU ward, almost four times as likely. Closer examination of the
figures revealed that this was driven largely by an increase in category
D incidents when on CSO.

.. _sec2-5:

Organisational costs of observations
------------------------------------

The exact cost to the organisation of conducting CSO depends on the
hourly rate of pay for the staff that conduct the observations. The
identity of the staff who contributed to conducting each episode of CSO
was not available in the clinical notes, and so the true costs could not
be calculated. However, we estimated staff costs by using the 2013/2014
hourly rates for NHS band 3 (£16.07) and band 5 (£21.51), based on the
informal estimate from hospital managers that one-third of CSO was
carried out by clinical staff in band 5 and two-thirds by clinical staff
in band 3. On this basis, we estimated the cost of CSO to be £851 636
for the HSS, £631 740 for the MSU and £390 370 for the LSU, noting that
the female ward accounted for 47% of the total cost of CSO in the MSU
(£294 471 for the female ward). When OBD is used as a common
denominator, the relative costs of CSO in each service may be compared;
the estimated figures in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ show that the cost of CSO
in the HSS was £1221 per 100 OBD, compared with £10 802 in the female
MSU.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

This paper represents the first published study of the prevalence of
supportive observations in a UK mental health trust, reporting data from
low, medium and high secure services.

In the literature, the organisational cost of observations is reported
to be high. One economic analysis in 2008 estimated the annual cost of
observations to the NHS at £80 m10 with £35 m spent on providing CSO. In
the present data-set, our findings estimate that the cost to the
organisation of constant observations alone was £1.8 m in 2013–14.
Estimates suggest that between 3 and 20% of people admitted into mental
health services will be subject to some form of intensive observation,
and that up to 20% of the nursing budget for a hospital may be used in
the provision of constant observations.7 In the current economic
climate, where cost, value and effectiveness are increasingly important,
it is appropriate to consider the use of finite staffing resources.
Although constant observations remain fundamental to mental health
nursing care, some researchers question the efficacy of the practice,8
particularly against the more contemporary background of reducing
restrictive practices in mental healthcare, and clinical decisions on
the issue of CSO remain a policy matter for individual mental health
trusts.

A small number of individuals in each unit accounted for a
disproportionately large amount of the time devoted to conducting CSO
and thus a large proportion of the CSO costs to the organisation. In the
MSU, for example, two patients out of 93 individuals who were resident
on that unit accounted for 27% of the total CSO hours in the whole unit.
Similarly, in the HSS, two patients out of the 239 individuals who were
resident that year accounted for 31% of the CSO hours in that unit. In
secure mental health services, it is not unusual for some patients to
have high dependency needs, and assessing the balance between pro-active
and defensive approaches to managing risk can be a challenge. As a
result, some patients are subjected to constant observations for
sustained periods of time; as all mental health trusts are motivated to
employ the least restrictive interventions while maintaining safety,
this is a difficult balance to strike, with some trusts potentially
erring on the side of caution.

The finding that patients were involved in adverse incidents more
frequently when on observations than when not on observations could
reflect closer surveillance of behaviour, but is more likely explained
by different baseline presentations in the two contexts. Individuals are
more disturbed and unwell when they are on observations than when they
are not, and it is unsurprising that individuals engage in more adverse
incidents when they are more labile and agitated than when they are
stable and settled. What is not known from these data is what specific
effect CSO had on adverse incidents; it is probable that had those
patients not been on constant observations, the level of adverse
incidents in such an unsettled group would have been much higher. One
motivation for CSO is to manage risk with patients at risk of harming
themselves or others, but assessing the extent to which CSO is
successful in doing that can be problematic. One explanation of
perpetrators' decisions to engage in aggression involves a calculation
of the effect/danger ratio,11 where an individual judges the costs and
benefits of using aggression in any given situation, opting to use
aggression only when the costs to them in terms of detection and
reprimand are limited relative to the potential outcome. As such, less
serious forms of challenging behaviour can occur as a result of this
cost–benefit analysis, and, for individuals unable to manage their use
of challenging behaviour, being on observations could encourage the
behaviour least likely to elicit reprimand (e.g. more minor incidents
such as verbal abuse and property damage). This may explain why the
increase in incidents while on CSO was largely due to an increase in
category D incidents, and a rational assumption is that the effect of
constant observations may have been to deflect what was a potentially
serious situation into a more minor incident.

Across the different units, specific concerns about aggression and
self-harm were the reasons for initiating most of the CSO hours, but the
balance between these reasons was markedly different in different
settings. Aggression was most frequently the reason for constant
observations in the male medium and low secure settings, but self-harm
was the most prevalent reason for constant observations in the female
MSU ward and in the HSS. In fact, nearly all instances of CSO on the
female ward were motivated by actual, or risk of, self-harm. The
dominance of self-harm as a driver of CSO in this setting may be partly
related to diagnosis. The present data-set did not drill down into the
specific diagnoses of patients in each unit, but a recent large-scale
survey of forensic psychiatric in-patients in The Netherlands12 found
that, while around 75% of both male and female patients were diagnosed
with both axis I and axis II disorders, 61% of female patients had a
diagnosis of borderline personality disorder (BPD) and a further 21%
presented with borderline traits. BPD diagnoses were much less prevalent
in the male patients in their sample. A separate and equally valid
explanation relates to clinician perception and response. There is
recognition in secure psychiatric services that clinicians' responses to
aggression frequently differ depending on whether the patient is male or
female; aggression by men leads to more discussion by clinicians than
aggression by women, and aggression generally is viewed as a male
phenomenon in spite of the evidence that women may be equally
aggressive.13\ :sup:`,`\ 14 Similarly, the prevalent clinical view is
that self-harm is more common in women than men, in spite of more
equivocal evidence in the literature.15\ :sup:`,`\ 16 Further
exploration of this issue falls outside the scope of the current
research, but the present data may support the view that a potential
gender bias exists in clinical responses to challenging behaviours.

Although findings from these data should be viewed in the context of a
single mental health trust (and a single female ward), they nevertheless
present a picture of the prevalence and use of a cornerstone of clinical
practice in mental healthcare.

Romi Eden, Leah Greenwood, and Rebecca Ozanne gave invaluable assistance
in extracting data from clinical notes.

**Katie Lambert**, Research Assistant, Mersey Care NHS Foundation Trust;
**Simon Chu**, Senior Lecturer in Psychology, University of Central
Lancashire and Research Fellow, Ashworth Research Centre, Mersey Care
NHS Foundation Trust; **Chris Duffy**, Assistant Psychologist,
**Victoria Hartley**, Research Assistant, and **Alison Baker**, Senior
Clinical Nurse, all at Mersey Care NHS Foundation Trust; **Jane L.
Ireland**, Professor of Forensic Psychology, University of Central
Lancashire and Consultant Forensic Psychologist, Mersey Care NHS
Foundation Trust.

.. [1]
   OBD, occupied bed days; CSO, constant supportive observations; Env.
   change, environment change.

.. [2]
   Estimates based on one-third of CSO conducted by staff in band 5,
   two-thirds conducted by staff in band 3.

.. [3]
   Incidents are presented per 100 h of residence.

.. [4]
   Atypical patient was on CSO for the entire 12-month period. Category
   B: serious incident (e.g. attempted hostage taking, serious assault,
   attempted suicide); category C: less serious incident (e.g. assault,
   moderate self-harm, threats); category D: minor incident (e.g. verbal
   abuse, minor self-harm, property damage).
