---
author:
- Joanna Moncrieff
date: 2018-6
institute:
- "University College London; email: <j.moncrieff@ucl.ac.uk>"
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
title: Author\'s reply
---

In response to Dr Jauhar and Professor Young, I am used to being accused
of using ideology, of being selective, of not being balanced or of being
polemical. I take no personal offence, but it is important to point out
that this is a useful tactic if you want to shut down debate. It
harnesses the authority of science to present one view as neutral,
objective and credible, and the other as self-interested and unreliable.
In truth, we all bring assumptions and biases to our work. I am
obviously unable to describe every study ever done on antidepressants in
a short article, but I have written books and papers that address all
the evidence I could find that supports the disease-centred model of
drug action in relation to antidepressants and other psychiatric
drugs.^1^

Indeed, one of the most important points I am making in relation to drug
action is that existing psychopharmacological research is based on
unexamined assumptions about how drugs work. These consist of the idea
that drugs target the neurological mechanisms underlying symptoms,
whether the latest theory about mechanisms concerns abnormalities of
neurotransmitters, neural networks or neuro-plasticity. This idea has
allowed psychopharmacology research to ignore the alterations to normal
functioning that psychiatric drugs produce, and that will affect mental
states including mental disorders, regardless of the underlying
mechanisms.

Jauhar and Young point out that the latest meta-analysis of
antidepressant trials finds impressive odds ratios for effects of
antidepressants, but it analyses categorical outcomes derived from
continuous data, which has been shown to inflate drug--placebo
differences.^2^ Network analysis is also likely to exaggerate
differences, since the degree of improvement in comparative trials is
higher than in placebo-controlled trials.^3^ The continuous data, which
showed a standardised mean difference (SMD) of 0.3, is in line with
other meta-analyses in showing small and almost certainly clinically
insignificant differences between antidepressants and placebo,
equivalent to around two points difference on the Hamilton Rating Scale
for Depression (HRSD).^4^^,^^5^

Jauhar and Young make a good point about the validity of the HRSD, but
it is nevertheless used as the primary outcome of most trials. Analyses
of the subjective mood item are thus more likely to be influenced by
selective reporting of positive findings. However, they are wrong about
the Medical Research Council trial, where the dose of imipramine was
200 mg and that of phenelzine was 60 mg. There is indeed evidence either
way on the association between severity and antidepressant response, but
even in studies with positive findings, effect sizes in those with
severe depression are small and unlikely to be clinically significant,
and the association may be accounted for by differing expectations in
people with more or less severe symptoms.^6^

I agree with the gist of Dr Dunleavy\'s response. Recommending
antidepressants because they produce emotion-blunting effects, or other
useful mental alterations (sedation with tricyclics, for example), is a
drug-centred model of prescribing. I don\'t have a problem with this as
long as the patient is properly informed that placebo-controlled trials
suggest little if any superiority of antidepressants, that they have
full knowledge of all the potential adverse effects, and that they are
quite clear that the idea that antidepressants correct an underlying
chemical imbalance is not supported by evidence. Then they can make
their own informed decision.
