============================================================================
An evaluation of sleep disturbance on in-patient psychiatric units in the UK
============================================================================

Sam Horne
Katherine Hay
Stuart Watson
Kirstie N. AndersonCorrespondence to Dr Kirstie N. Anderson
(kirstie.anderson@nuth.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2018-10

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Sleep disturbance is common on in-patient psychiatry wards. This
   study explored subjective and objective patterns of sleep disturbance
   and contributory environmental factors. Participants were recruited
   from mental health acute admission wards and had a range of
   subjective and objective assessments of sleep. Light intensity and
   noise levels were measured to characterise potential environmental
   causes for poor sleep.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   We recruited 20 patients; 15% were high risk for obstructive sleep
   apnoea. Nineteen participants reported poor sleep quality on the
   Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, and 90% had significant sleep
   fragmentation with objective measures. Inside light levels were low
   (day <200 lux and night <10 lux). Night sound levels were 40–90 db.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Sleep disturbance was highly prevalent. Increased awareness of sleep
   disorders is needed. Modifiable environmental factors on the ward
   were implicated, therefore increased awareness and a change of
   approach to sleep disturbance in in-patient psychiatry is
   recommended.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec4-1:

Sleep disturbance in psychiatric disease
========================================

The normal timing and duration of sleep is vital for normal mental
health.(n.d.a) Poor sleep is a core symptom of many psychiatric
conditions. However, sleep disorders such as insomnia, obstructive sleep
apnoea, REM sleep behaviour disorder and circadian rhythm disorder are
also common and remain underdiagnosed.(n.d.b) The frequent comorbidity
of disrupted sleep and psychiatric disorder,(n.d.c) and the negative
prognostic effect of disrupted sleep, including on suicide
risk,(n.d.d)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.e) all demonstrate the challenge and
importance for mental health professionals of assessing and protecting
sleep when patients require admission.

Admission to a psychiatric unit represents both a particular need and
opportunity to identify and manage disturbed sleep, including sleep
disorders. However, it has been noted that sleep enhancement does not
appear to be a priority on acute admission wards. In many trusts, for
instance, hourly overnight monitoring of patients remains routine and is
paradoxically used because of the risk of harm to the patient.

.. _sec4-2:

Overnight monitoring on psychiatry wards
========================================

Concerns about the risk of suicide(n.d.f) place a perceived burden on
staff in in-patient units to regularly monitor patients overnight. This
monitoring can in itself further disrupt sleep and may therefore affect
recovery. The standards for the safe care of patients on psychiatric
wards by the Royal College of Psychiatrists(n.d.g) do not include or
specify protected sleep time, and current National Institute of Health
and Care Excellence recommended in-patient pathways(n.d.h) in acute
hospitals make no mention of sleep beyond a single survey question about
night-time disruption by staff. The best way to monitor, measure and
enhance sleep on in-patient wards is unclear. We aimed to objectively
assess sleep and the ward environment, and attempted to characterise
patterns and causes of sleep disturbance on in-patient psychiatric
wards.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

Participants were sequentially recruited from four acute psychiatric
wards, two male and two female, in two separate in-patient units within
Newcastle, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust. Recruitment was
opportunistic, with all patients meeting the inclusion criteria being
considered for the study. Inclusion criteria required that participants
were aged 18–70 years, able to provide written informed consent and were
fluent in English. All participants had capacity to consent and written
consent was obtained after a period of at least 24 hours to consider the
details of the study. Patients were approached after 72 h on the ward
and were included in the study if they were expected to be staying on
the ward for at least a 1-week period.

Sleep quality was then assessed with the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index
(PSQI)(n.d.i) and the risk of sleep apnoea was assessed with the
STOP-BANG questionnaire.(n.d.j) Using the PSQI, participants were
categorised as having normal sleep (score <5), some level of sleep
disturbance (score ≤10) or severe sleep disturbance (score >10). The
STOP-BANG questionnaire is a validated screening tool for sleep apnoea.
Participants scoring ≥5 were considered high risk for obstructive sleep
apnoea. If a participant was found to be high risk for obstructive sleep
apnoea, this was communicated by letter to their general practitioner.

Objective sleep quality was assessed with a wrist accelerometer with a
light monitor (GENEactiv original). Participants were asked to wear the
watch continuously for a week. Participants who continuously wore the
wrist accelerometer for five or more continuous days and nights were
included in the study (20 out of 32). The algorithm for analysis has
been published and used to assess sleep–wake disturbance in those with
and without mental health problems.(n.d.k)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.l) Total
sleep time, daytime naps and sleep fragmentation were all measured.
Twelve participants were excluded because of incomplete data: patients
were discharged sooner than expected, and for two participants, wearing
the watch itself caused agitation and was not tolerated.

Participant medical records were accessed for basic demographics,
current and past psychiatric history and any reference to sleep
difficulties.

Sound level and light level were identified as potential environmental
factors that could affect sleep quality. Monitoring of sound level was
carried out with a decibel-metre (Extech 407760). The night-time noise
level between 21.00 and 09.00 was analysed over three consecutive nights
on two separate wards. Data was measured continuously to allow both
baseline average to be calculated and spikes of higher decibel levels to
be seen. An unused bedroom was used to avoid disturbing patients with
the monitoring equipment itself.

Daytime and night-time light levels were measured with a portable lux
meter (MINOLTA chroma meter cs-100). For daytime measurements, the lux
level within the bedrooms, communal areas and dining areas across all
the wards was measured. Once selected, the same areas were used for
repeated measurements. Measurements were averaged over two separate days
to account for any differences in inside light level attributable to
outside light level. Light measurements were also taken at night-time
after 22.00. Night-time measurements focused entirely on the patient
bedrooms and were taken on two separate occasions on each ward.

Ethical approval was granted for the study by the East of England –
Cambridge East Research Ethics Committee (approval number IRAS 222122).

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

Over the study period (April 2017–July 2017), there were 150 admissions
to the four study wards. Of these, only 40 met the inclusion criteria,
mostly because of lack of capacity to consent or short duration of stay.
Thirty-two patients agreed to participate and completed both the PSQI
and STOP-BANG questionnaire. Twenty participants then provided five or
more continuous days of accelerometry recording, and this group were
analysed in more detail and the results are presented below. The median
age of participants was 49 years (range 30–70 years). Female
participants outnumbered male participants by a factor of just over 2:1,
(13 women and 7 men). Depression was the most common primary diagnosis,
followed by bipolar affective disorder and schizophrenia. Only a single
patient had a diagnosis of mania during the admission.

All participants completed the STOP-BANG questionnaire, and three (15%)
scored ≥5 and were therefore at high risk for having obstructive sleep
apnoea. All three were male, aged 48, 51 and 57 years, respectively, and
all had objectively abnormal sleep as measured by accelerometry, with
prolonged sleep period and fragmented night sleep.

Nineteen participants had a global PSQI score ≥5, representing poor
sleep quality, and 12 scored >10 in the more severe range. The single
patient with mania self-rated sleep as normal, with a PSQI score of 4,
but had objectively abnormal sleep on actigraphy, with irregular, short
sleep periods. The range of PSQI scores was between 4 and 18. Fourteen
participants scored ≥10 (severe sleep disturbance). The separate domains
of the PSQI were also assessed with previously published subscales
looking at sleep efficiency, daily disturbances and perceived sleep
quality to see if there was one domain more likely to cause sleep
disturbance.(n.d.m) Patients all had multiple causes of sleep
disturbance including, but not exclusive to, the ward environment. All
participants were prescribed some form of psychotropic medication, with
18 participants receiving multiple medications and 8 participants
prescribed zopiclone for sleep disturbance.

.. _sec2-1:

Actigraphy
----------

Twenty out of 32 participants wore the accelerometers continuously for
five or more days. Representative actograms from six participants are
shown in `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__. Variable patterns of sleep and physical
activity were easily visualised over 5–7 days of accelerometry.
Participants were categorised as long (average duration of >10 h sleep
in a 24 h period), short (<6 h within a 24 h period) or normal sleepers,
with regards to the total amount of sleep achieved in 24 h. Eighteen
participants had fragmented sleep during their main sleep period, with
frequent night wakening. No patient had an average sleep period of less
than 6 h when on the ward, although three self-rated their sleep as
short. Three were (15%) long sleepers and seven (35%) had sleep duration
between 6 and 10 h. Fig. 1Accelerometry data from six patients showing
variable sleep–wake patterns. For all participants, wrist accelerometry
data is shown plotted over sequential days from 12.00 to 12.00 over a
48 h period to show the overnight sleep period. Periods of sleep can
clearly be seen, as well as sleep fragmentation and night-time
awakenings. (a) Female, 70 years of age with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia. A pattern of prolonged sleep with occasional night-time
awakenings is seen and daytime naps. (b) Female, 59 years of age with
depression. There is reduced daytime activity with naps, and also a very
fragmented and prolonged total sleep time. (c) Male, 44 years of age
with schizophrenia. There is a shorter sleep time, higher levels of
daytime activity and a less fragmented sleep period. (d) Male, 53 years
of age with depression. There is a pattern of prolonged sleep,
fragmented night-time sleep and prolonged daytime naps. (e) Male, 39
years of age with schizoaffective disorder. There is a more delayed
sleep onset between 00.00 and 02.00, with a wake time at 12.00. (f)
Male, 48 years of age with depression, alcohol dependence and
post-traumatic stress disorder. A striking pattern of delayed sleep
phase is seen, with the sleep period during the day and high levels of
activity at night.

Actigraphy results showed marked sleep fragmentation and night-time
awakenings. It was apparent that light levels were intermittently
increased during the night within the patient rooms, consistent with a
disturbed night and often coinciding with night-time observations. Many
of the long sleepers had fragmented nights with frequent awakenings.
Prolonged daytime naps were also seen.

.. _sec2-2:

Light and noise levels across the wards
---------------------------------------

The sound level data showed that the wards maintained an overnight
decibel level within a range of 38–70 db, between 21.00 and 05.00, with
occasional spikes that reached 90 db. There was variation across the
wards and a gradual rise in noise level between 03.00 and 07.00 across
the wards to 45 db as an average background. Some causes of the brief
spikes in noise included equipment alarms and safety doors closing.

Light intensity was measured across the entire unit and the data is
summarised in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Throughout the in-patient areas,
there was a very low level of light intensity across all communal areas.
None of the indoor areas had a light intensity similar to that outdoors,
however the light levels within the bedroom were very low. Table 1Mean
light levels in different locationsLocationMean light levels (lux)Ward
AWard BWard CWard DDaytime (approximate time)11.1515.3515.0011.15Bedroom
– door closed23671138Bedroom – door open22881044Bedroom – light
on231464752Communal area37326164221Dining
room745012058Outside11 528Night-time (approximate
time)23.1522.4022.4023.30Bedroom – door closed0000Bedroom – door
open0.30.10.80Bedroom – side light on3.73.654.1 [1]_

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

Subjective assessment of sleep quality showed disturbed sleep for almost
all participants (19 out of 20), with marked sleep disturbance reported
by 60%. The PSQI was tolerated well and completed by all patients,
suggesting a variety of factors affecting sleep quality. Objective
measures of sleep also showed significant sleep disturbance, and in
particular sleep fragmentation, when measured with accelerometry. One
potential cause was the hourly nightly observations, as fragmentation
appeared regular and consistent in many participants along with brief
periods of increased light levels, and all participants were subject to
these hourly checks. We accept that this is simply one potential cause
of sleep disturbance, as that it was not possible to correlate
actigraphy at all times with the light and noise measurements, given the
prolonged period of actigraphy over a 4-month period. However, if
patient sleep is being disturbed by these checks, the implication is
that this process could be counterproductive, slowing recovery because
of the effect of sleep disturbance on mental health. The importance of
regular observations is acknowledged in those at high risk of harm
(accounting for a number of patients on the study wards); however, the
most recent review from the National Confidential Enquiry into
Suicide(n.d.f) emphasised the need for a personalised care plan and the
avoidance of routine checklists. Reports from this group have suggested
that routine observations are not helpful and yet they remain widespread
across acute mental health trusts throughout the UK.

There are clearly a number of potential reasons for sleep disturbance
within an in-patient psychiatric population, including the mental health
symptoms themselves and the medication used to treat symptoms; however,
primary sleep disorders such as obstructive sleep apnoea are common in
those with severe and enduring mental health problems, and will affect
sleep quality and contribute to nocturnal
hypertension.(n.d.n)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.o) Risk factors include male
gender, body mass index and obesity and age >50 years. It is notable
that 15% of patients were high risk for sleep apnoea based on sleep
questionnaire screening and all were male. Any in-patient admission
offers an opportunity for physical health assessment, with increasing
recognition of the poor cardiometabolic health of many with psychiatric
disease.(n.d.p)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.q) Obstructive sleep apnoea may be
ameliorated by rationalising medication that may contribute to obesity
and snoring (e.g. benzodiazepines) and via the effective,
evidenced-based therapy of continuous positive airways pressure.

The ward environment may also be a modifiable part of sleep disturbance.
It seems likely that sound levels were a contributory factor to sleep
fragmentation. The sound level for both wards exceeded the recommended
night-time noise level for a hospital ward of 30 db.(n.d.r) They
remained between 40 db (equivalent to the sound in a library) and 70 db
(equivalent to the noise produced by a vacuum cleaner) during the
overnight period. The occasional spikes of a much louder noise, which
reached up to 90 db (equivalent to the noise produced by a food blender
or a lawn mower), are likely to disrupt sleep. There have been previous
reports highlighting concerns about noise pollution affecting health in
hospitals. This seems an important and potentially modifiable part of
night-time sleep disruption.(n.d.s)

The light levels recorded at night with the bedroom door shut did not
exceed 1 lux. This implies that the night-time light environment of
patient bedrooms is conducive for sleep when the doors are not opened
for observations. At night, with the side light, the light levels
recorded were <10 lux in the bedrooms. Daytime light levels, however,
were also low, never exceeding 200 lux across the unit and <50 lux in
the bedrooms. The retinohypothalamic tract controls circadian rhythm and
is dependent on light intensity for normal function.(n.d.t) Lack of
exposure to adequate light intensities may contribute to the
dysregulation of circadian rhythms, which is increasingly recognised in
psychiatric disorders and may, in turn, contribute to the tendency
toward daytime napping and irregular sleep patterns, and may affect the
ability of the patient to engage with psychological or occupational
therapies.(n.d.u) These data suggest that the light environment of
psychiatric wards should be improved and highlight the importance of
time off of the ward in outside spaces with natural light.

.. _sec3-1:

Limitations of the study
------------------------

It was not possible to time-lock sound measurement to accelerometry
data, as two different methods of recording were used. For future
studies, more detailed in-patient assessments, such as video
polysomnography, could be used or time-locked continuous video
monitoring; however, this detail of recording may in itself cause
patient agitation if symptoms such as paranoia and delusional ideation
are present. Accelerometry was reasonably well tolerated but still only
worn continuously for 20 out of 32 participants. Therefore, non-invasive
methods of recording sleep–wake patterns are needed for this population
to avoid distress. There has been only a single, smaller study that
compared nursing observations, patient sleep diaries and 3 days of wrist
actigraphy in eight patients in their initial 3 days on a psychiatry
ward. This showed that nursing staff tended to overestimate sleep and
that patient sleep improved from the first to the third night.(n.d.v)
This was one reason that we assessed all patients at least 72 h after
admission.

The sample size was relatively small, and the study was not powered to
look for significant differences across, for example, different diseases
or those on or off of different psychotropic medication. A lack of
capacity to give informed consent and short stay duration was a reason
for many on an acute ward being unable to participate in the study.
Therefore future studies may need to recruit over a longer time period
to increase the sample size. This remains the first UK study to date to
study sleep within acute psychiatry wards.

In summary, the results of this small study demonstrate high levels of
sleep disturbance on in-patient psychiatric wards and variable patterns
of sleep–wake disturbance. Sleep disturbance affects mental health and
so should be a factor when developing care pathways; however, to date,
there has been very little qualitative or quantitative research in this
area. Some level of sleep disturbance may relate to ward environment and
some may relate to an undiagnosed primary sleep disorder. Therefore,
further studies that evaluate a sleep care plan as part of standard
in-patient care are recommended.

**Sam Horne,** Medical Student, Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle
University, UK; **Katherine Hay,** Speciality Trainee Psychiatrist,
Northumberland Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK; **Stuart
Watson,** Consultant Psychiatrist, Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle
University, UK and Northumberland Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust,
UK; **Kirstie N. Anderson,** Consultant Neurologist and Sleep
Specialist, Stuart Watson Consultant Psychiatrist, Katherine Speciality
Trainee Psychiatry, Sam Horne Medical Student, The Regional Sleep
Service, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, UK

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.v.

.. [1]
   On each ward, measures were taken at approximately the same time on
   one cloudy day and one sunny day and the mean was calculated (May
   2017). At night-time, measures were also taken on two separate days
   and a mean calculated.
