---
author:
- Parthasarathi Nandi
date: 2018-12
references:
- id: ref1
title: Dhirendra Nath Nandi, FRCP (Edin.) FRCPsych
---

Formerly Psychologist, Psychoanalyst and Psychiatrist

![](S205646941800058X_inline1.jpg)

Dhirendra Nath Nandi, who passed away quietly aged 98 on 26 March 2017,
was Head of the Department of Psychological Medicine at the University
of Kolkata and a prominent leader of Indian psychiatry. Assisted by a
team of several postgraduate students, he carried out significant
epidemiological research in different tribal groups in villages of West
Bengal. His research findings, which included important longitudinal
data, were published not in just Indian but several British and US
journals. One important finding related to a dramatic fall in hysterical
and anxiety disorders with an equal rise in affective illnesses.^1^ His
papers were used as standard texts in several educational programmes.

Professor Nandi had a strong interest in raising public awareness of
mental health problems. He organised several public awareness programmes
on his own and with the Indian Red Cross Society in different parts of
Kolkata and other districts of West Bengal. He was frequently invited to
be a speaker on various television shows and radio programmes to talk
about mental health. In 1990 he wrote a book in Bengali on psychiatry,
*MonerBikar o Pratikar*, which was very popular with the general public,
and postgraduate students in psychology and psychiatry. In the later
years of his life, he founded the Girindra Sekhar Institute of
Psychological Education and Research, where he started a counselling
course affiliated with a recognised university of West Bengal for
graduates in basic and social sciences. He also established a popular
quarterly journal in Bengali, *Moner Katha*, as well as running an
out-patient clinic for the poor and underprivileged mentally ill, which
retains its reputation to this day.

Born on 13 August 1918, in a remote village of a district of West Bengal
to a poor family and losing his mother in his early childhood, Dr Nandi
showed early promise in his studies. He struggled considerably in early
life but showed indomitable energy in the pursuit of knowledge in
medicine and psychology. After graduation from Carmichael Medical
School, then the R. G. Kar Medical College and Hospital, Kolkata, in
1945, he obtained an MSc in psychology in 1950, and a PhD in psychology
in 1958 from the University of Calcutta. He trained in clinical
psychiatry and psychoanalysis with Professor Girindra Sekhar Bose, the
eminent psychiatrist and founder of psychoanalysis and psychiatry in
India, and with Professor N. N. Dey, his own maternal uncle and first
editor of the *Indian Journal of Psychiatry*. He began his career in
1948 as a teacher, examiner and researcher in physiology at NRS Medical
College and Hospital, Kolkata, where he worked for nearly 10 years.

Marrying in 1949 into a business family, he went abroad in 1960, leaving
his wife and three children in Kolkata with his in-laws. He obtained his
Scottish Diploma in Psychological Medicine in 1961 and became a Member
of Royal College of Physicians (Edinburgh) with a special paper in
psychiatry in 1963. In those days, there was no postgraduate training in
psychiatry available in India. Returning to Kolkata he was appointed
Associate Professor of Psychiatry at R. G. Kar Medical College and
Hospital, Kolkata. In 1970 he became Head of the Department of
Psychological Medicine at the University of Calcutta. He retired in 1979
as Professor of Psychiatry from R. G. Kar Medical College and Hospital,
Kolkata. During his professional life he held a number of important
positions in Indian psychiatry, including being President of the Indian
Psycho-analytical Society for more than 20 years, and President of the
Indian Psychiatric Society and Indian Association of Social Psychiatry.
His contributions to the advancement of the fields of psychiatry and
psychoanalysis were recognised by numerous awards and prizes.

Professor Nandi had an active interest in cooking, fishing and hunting,
and travelled widely with his family and friends. It is noteworthy that
his two sons are consultant psychiatrists, his daughter and younger
daughter in-law are psychoanalysts, one grandson is undertaking a
post-graduate degree in psychiatry, a second grandson is a graduate in
medicine, and a third is a final-year medical student.
