===============================================================
The assertive approach to clozapine: nasogastric administration
===============================================================



Alex Till
James Selwood
Edward Silva

:Correspondence: Dr Edward Silva
(ed.silva@merseycare.nhs.uk)

:date: 2019-2

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   An ‘assertive approach’ to clozapine, where nasogastric
   administration is approved, is assessed through a case-load analysis
   to provide the first systematic description of its use and outcomes
   worldwide.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Five of the most extremely ill patients with treatment-resistant
   schizophrenia were established and/or maintained on clozapine,
   resulting in improvements to their mental state; incidents were
   reduced, segregation was terminated and progression to less
   restrictive environments was achieved.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Despite being underutilised and rarely enforced, in extreme
   circumstances, an assertive approach to clozapine can be justified.
   Nasogastric clozapine can be safely delivered and the approach
   itself, rather than actual nasogastric administration, may be enough
   to help establish and maintain patients with treatment-resistant
   schizophrenia on the most effective treatment.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   E.S. has received speaker fees from Jansen Pharmaceuticals and
   Novartis.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The efficacy of clozapine in treatment-resistant schizophrenia is well
established.1 Compared with alternative antipsychotics, clozapine
provides superior symptom control, longer duration of treatment, shorter
lengths of stay and reduces violence.2 Although enforced antipsychotic
treatment is generally widespread, clozapine is both underutilised3 and
rarely enforced, with only a handful of case reports worldwide reporting
the use of nasogastric4\ :sup:`–`\ 6 and intramuscular7\ :sup:`–`\ 9
clozapine.

With injectable clozapine unavailable in the UK until very recently,
when presented with a crisis,10 nasogastric clozapine was successfully
used for the first time at Ashworth high-security hospital in 2010 and
has been used subsequently to help establish and maintain treatment with
clozapine. We now present the first systematic description of the
‘assertive approach’ to clozapine via nasogastric clozapine, which
commences not on the first administration of nasogastric clozapine, but
on its approval for use; this in itself is often enough.

.. _sec1:

Methods
=======

A retrospective case-load analysis of E.S.'s patients was conducted on
an intent-to-treat basis, defined by the presence of a Second Opinion
Appointed Doctor (SOAD) request for the authorisation of nasogastric
clozapine, from the first case in 2010 through to 2016. This provided a
minimum 12-month follow-up period. Clinical records were reviewed to
identify patient demographics and clinical details including medication
compliance and response to treatment, which was determined by Clinical
Global Impression (CGI) scores11 combined with segregation use and
incident frequency for 12 months before and after SOAD approval for
nasogastric clozapine.

The method used to deliver nasogastric clozapine is outlined within `Box
1 <#box1>`__. Box 1How to deliver nasogastric clozapine.Clozapine
preparationAlthough several brands of clozapine are available and
unlicensed ‘special’ oral suspensions can be prepared (including crushed
tablets), we advocate the use of Denzapine as this is currently the only
licensed oral suspension in the UK. If an alternate clozapine provider
is currently in operation, then registration of the hospital and
prescribing psychiatrist with a second supplier are necessary before
transferring the patient's registration. This risks using two clozapine
monitoring systems in one hospital, with possible confusion regarding
dispensing medication and liaising with different clozapine-monitoring
services as well as the potential of having to switch providers once the
patient is established on tablet medication.RestraintA thorough risk
assessment is required to ensure adequate numbers of trained, competent
and resilient staff are present and it is essential they are well
supported by the leadership team; consultant presence was initially
provided, being replaced by more junior medical staff when confidence
grew. At least one member of Resus Council (UK) ‘Immediate Life Support’
trained member of staff must be present. Throughout every intervention,
patients should be repeatedly given the option of taking oral clozapine.
Mechanical restraint was considered as an option but, even with our most
difficult patients, was neither planned nor used. Manual restraint was
sufficient with between two and six members of staff; in the most
extreme cases one member of staff was allocated to each limb, with two
controlling the head. Patients were usually seated upright on the edge
of their bed, with their neck in line with their back. Precautions may
be required to mitigate risks of spitting and biting, including
lightweight disposable face visors and gloves.Nasogastric tube
placementAppropriate training for both medical and nursing staff can be
arranged with a general hospital clinical skills team. Fine bore feeding
tubes should be used. The first-line, gold-standard method of confirming
placement in the stomach is by demonstrating a gastric pH of ≤5.5.14
Acid-inhibiting medication reduces the sensitivity but does not alter
the specificity or render the method unsafe14; actions to reduce this
risk should be considered. Radiological confirmation is not required.14
Once placement is confirmed, nursing staff can administer the clozapine,
which varies in volume (50 mg/ml) throughout titration. Unless safe to
leave *in situ*, the nasogastric tube should be removed immediately
after clozapine administration.Legal authorityIn England and Wales,
incapacitous or non-consenting patients detained under the Mental Health
Act 1983 may be administered drug treatments for mental disorders for
longer than 3 months only if a Second Opinion Appointed Doctor (SOAD)
approves the treatment, including the route of administration. Personal
communication from the principal SOAD has indicated that the oral and
nasogastric routes are equivalent: both are enteral.Ethical
dilemmasExplored by Silva *et al*\ 10, there are ethical dilemmas with
administering nasogastric clozapine. These involve balancing the risks
and benefits of an unacceptable status quo against the uncertainties of
the possible risks and benefits of intervention, alongside containing
and resolving the emotions of the team when using a novel, restrictive
and coercive treatment on a vulnerable and incapacitous patient.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

E.S. had cared for five patients, whose demographics can be seen in
`Table 1 <#tab01>`__, where a SOAD approved the administration of
clozapine via a nasogastric tube. All were diagnosed with
treatment-resistant schizophrenia (ICD-10 code F2012), all were confined
in their rooms because of risk to others (long-term segregation13) and
all were considered to be among the most extremely ill patients
encountered within this particular population (CGI score of 7 for
severity of illness). Table 1Patient demographicsPatientAge at first
episode of psychosisAge at admission to high-security servicesAge at
SOAD approval of nasogastric clozapineDuration of illness at SOAD
approval of nasogastric clozapineLength of stay in high-security
services at SOAD approval of nasogastric clozapinePrimary
diagnosisAdmission sourceMental Health Act section on
admission11943432498 daysF20.3Medium-security hospital322127432216
yearsF20.0Prison47/493213335142 yearsF20.0Prison47/494193945265
yearsF20.0Medium-security hospital37/415152533188
yearsF20.3Medium-security hospital3 [1]_

For all patients, their families, advocates and/or legal team were
consulted. None objected.

At the time the assertive approach to clozapine was initiated (i.e. SOAD
approval for its use was gained), two patients had not started clozapine
and three patients had started clozapine but were not reliably compliant
(median duration of 31 days); ultimately, only three patients received
nasogastric clozapine and other than the use of restraint, no adverse
incidents occurred.

Patient 1 commenced clozapine after SOAD approval and received four
doses of nasogastric clozapine on non-consecutive occasions over a
period of 3 weeks, before being established on oral clozapine. Patient 2
only commenced oral clozapine after SOAD approval for nasogastric
clozapine, but nasogastric administration itself was never required.
Patient 3 commenced oral clozapine after persuasion, but threatened to
stop and SOAD approval was enough to maintain compliance without
nasogastric administration being necessary. Patient 4 took oral
clozapine for 1 month but then repeatedly threatened to refuse. SOAD
approval was sought and nasogastric clozapine was administered once,
which was enough to maintain compliance thereafter. Patient 5 maintained
erratic compliance with oral clozapine and despite taking it for 617
days, was approved for nasogastric clozapine because of life-threatening
clozapine withdrawal catatonia that had previously been unresponsive to
benzodiazepines or electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). In the 12 months
after SOAD approval for nasogastric clozapine, he received it four times
on non-consecutive occasions over the first 6 months.

All five patients were considered to have shown a global improvement on
CGI scores after the initiation of an assertive approach to clozapine,
with the drug efficacy index showing that, for the majority of patients,
clozapine had resulted in a ‘vast’ or ‘decided’ improvement in their
condition (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). Across all five patients, incidents
reduced from an average of 72 over the 12 months before SOAD approval to
29 in the 12 months after SOAD approval. No patients were unchanged or
worse, and only patient 5 remained in segregation beyond 12 months
(terminated on the 476th day). Therefore, despite a significant
reduction in incidents (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__), they were registered as
having only minimally improved according to their CGI score. Fig.
1Incident frequency in the 12 months pre- and post-SOAD approval for an
assertive approach to clozapine. SOAD, Second Opinion Appointed
Doctor.a. Incident data for patient 1 was unavailable beyond 3 months
before SOAD approval as they had not been admitted. Table 2Patient
outcomes, including Clinical Global Impression scores, time in
segregation and referral/transfer statusPatientClinical Global
Impression scores (>12 months post-SOAD)Days in segregation (total
pre-SOAD)Days in segregation (12 months pre-SOAD)Days in segregation (12
months post-SOAD)Transfer out of high-security services high dependency
unitReferral out of high-security servicesTransfer out of high-security
servicesSeverity of illnessGlobal improvementEfficacy
index172069898133NoYesYes27102104628094YesYesYes37206373798\ `a <#tfn2_1>`__\ YesNoNo472062094365287NoYesYes573092492365365NoYesNo [2]_

Our most recent data (with a minimum follow-up of 2 years after SOAD
approval for nasogastric clozapine) demonstrates that none of the five
patients required clozapine re-titration, and that all are now compliant
with clozapine (although patient 5 did require a nasogastric tube to be
passed on one occasion before accepting clozapine orally nearly 2 years
(626 days) after it was last administered nasogastrically).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The majority of patients are transferred to high-security hospitals in
the UK because the severity of their psychotically driven violence is
considered to be uncontainable elsewhere, and a large proportion of the
patient population already complies with clozapine without using what we
can only describe as a highly assertive approach.15 This is reserved for
those with the most severe and debilitating conditions. They have often
been detained for decades, with some spending years in segregation
despite persistent attempts at engagement in psychological work and/or
numerous trials of both evidence-based and/or other none or weakly
evidence-based treatments (including failed attempts on clozapine
secondary to poor compliance), commonly including treatment with
high-dose and/or multiple antipsychotics, which are both unlikely to
work and hazardous to the individual.16\ :sup:`,`\ 17

Although all health professionals prefer to initiate treatments with
patients who fully understand and actively consent and cooperate, in
these rare cases, the status quo is clearly unacceptable and the ethical
argument for this very assertive approach to clozapine, once conceived
of, is not hard to make to establish and maintain patients on
clozapine.10

However, a survey of psychiatrists working in psychiatric intensive care
units in the UK found that even restraint to take bloods for clozapine
was very rarely reported and attitudes towards it were variable, with a
significant minority describing it as never appropriate.18 The same
author's description of an approach to enforcing clozapine, including
taking bloods in restraint,19 resulted in critical responses: one
expressing dismay that the article was published at all,20 and the other
setting out why it would not work.21

Our results demonstrate that simply accepting refusal of clozapine from
a patient with treatment-resistant schizophrenia can deprive them of the
benefits that this significantly superior (compared with all other
antipsychotics22) and recommended treatment of choice provides, and how
an assertive approach to clozapine, rather than actual nasogastric
administration, can help initiate and maintain treatment leading to
improvements in mental state, reductions in incidents, terminations of
seclusion and transfers to less restrictive environments.

These results were not unexpected, given the unique properties of
clozapine on treatment-resistant schizophrenia and violence.2 Neither
was the sometimes significant period of decompression before segregation
was stopped, as despite some patients having a rapid improvement and
almost immediate cessation of incidents of aggression or violence, they
had significant histories of being involved in dramatic and disabling
assaults against staff and therefore extreme caution was exercised.

What was clinically unexpected, given the individual patient histories,
was the surprising level of cooperation. There were fewer restraints and
enforced nasogastric clozapine administrations than had been expected,
and one patient who had repeatedly refused oral clozapine for years
cooperated without nasogastric administration at all, although this was
also a finding when intramuscular clozapine was enforced in the
Netherlands.23

It is possible that teams redoubled their efforts, that patients were
aware of the possibility of restraint and were coerced by the prospect
alone or that patients regained a level of insight, or even a
combination of the three; it is difficult to tell.

As Silva *et al*\ 10 discuss, teams that embark on this approach are
faced with very difficult decision-making, such as how long to persist
with one attempt at passing a nasogastric tube? When is a patient's
distress at the procedure too great? And how many times should clozapine
be administered via a nasogastric tube before accepting that oral
compliance will not be maintained? These questions are not easy to
answer, and the judgements can only be made by individual teams and will
vary on their own capacity to maintain treatment and a relationship with
a patient in very difficult circumstances.

For some patients their previous refusals will be based on psychotic
motivations and it is hoped that these patients may quite rapidly
respond. Others may have a combination of psychotic, personal and
possibly comorbid motivations that may not be remedied by either
clozapine or this assertive approach. For these patients, we would not
advocate the regular use of nasogastric administration of clozapine as a
long-term solution. We know, particularly when huge effort and resources
are expended on initiatives, that there can be a tendency to get stuck
in a persisting course of action or to fail to consider alternative
approaches24 (although in this case many of these are less likely to
work22), and teams must be careful not to fall into this trap.

One good alternative, with local guidelines emerging,25 is the option of
trying to establish patients on clozapine by an assertive approach with
intramuscular injections. Having recently become available again,
intramuscular clozapine may be preferred to nasogastric clozapine, given
the less intrusive and unpleasant method of administration. However,
unlike nasogastric clozapine, intramuscular clozapine is limited by the
deliverable dose and therefore duration of treatment, with large volumes
required (25 mg/ml) as the titration increases toward the average UK
dosage of around 450 mg/day.26 Intramuscular clozapine also remains an
unlicensed product, with an increased likelihood of prone restraint and
a theoretical risk of accidental intravenous administration. Therefore,
although intramuscular clozapine provides an additional treatment
option, nasogastric clozapine can continue to have an important role to
prevent re-titration and administer clozapine when the maximum
deliverable dose of intramuscular clozapine is insufficient.

Another alternative, where an assertive approach to clozapine fails or
for the significant number of patients who do not respond to clozapine
monotherapy or clozapine augmentation strategies, is the more
restrictive treatment of ECT, which may well be the most appropriate
next step.27 However, for the cohort we describe, this intervention is
particularly difficult to deliver and maintain the safety of both staff
and patients.

Ethically, what remains is a real argument about the wrongs of a failure
to treat the most severely ill patients with treatment-resistant
schizophrenia against the perceived wrongs of nasogastric clozapine.
Clearly, this approach can never be a panacea: clozapine can often not
be used (because of adverse effects) and nearly 50% of patients fail to
achieve a satisfactory therapeutic response.28 However, for those who
have suffered with the most debilitating conditions imaginable,
clozapine can result in dramatic and seemingly unexpected improvements
in mental state and function. Accepting a patient's refusal of treatment
and failing to offer them that chance of improvement via an assertive
approach to clozapine through nasogastric administration seems, in our
opinion, cruel and unnecessary.

Conclusion
----------

Our case series shows that nasogastric clozapine can be safely delivered
and that the approach itself, rather than actual nasogastric
administration, may be enough to establish and maintain treatment with
clozapine.

An assertive approach to clozapine can therefore play an important role
in managing patients with treatment-resistant schizophrenia. It can be
justified to help reduce patients’ extreme suffering and distress as a
result of their psychosis, can be expanded in a variety of psychiatric
in-patient settings and can help reduce the usually disappointing
outcomes seen with other drugs or drug combinations.

This is the first systematic description of the assertive approach to
clozapine and helps counter likely objections regarding the efficacy and
risk of administering nasogastric clozapine that might otherwise prevent
or delay patients with treatment-resistant schizophrenia receiving the
recommended treatment of choice.

**Alex Till** is a psychiatric trainee in the School of Psychiatry at
Health Education North West (Mersey), UK. **James Selwood** is a
clinical research Fellow in the School of Clinical Sciences at the
University of Bristol, UK. **Edward Silva** is a consultant forensic
psychiatrist at Ashworth Hospital, Mersey Care NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

.. [1]
   Age and duration of illness is presented in years. Primary diagnosis
   is given by ICD-10 code (see ICD-10 for full definitions). SOAD,
   Second Opinion Appointed Doctor.

.. [2]
   Fourteen additional episodes of seclusion totalling 80 days.
