---
author:
- Jack C. Lennon
date: 2018-8
institute:
- "Department of Clinical Neuropsychology, Illinois School of
  Professional Psychology, USA; email: <jlennon11@live.com>"
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
title: Revisiting neuropsychiatry as a psychiatric discipline
---

There has been a long-standing debate around the merging of disciplines,
owing not to a lack of necessity in multidisciplinary approaches, but
the increase in specialisation and fear of each field losing its
perceived uniqueness. Fitzgerald^1^ made this clear in his remarks
regarding how neuropsychiatry can possess that which is both neurology
and psychiatry. In a strong refutation, Datta^2^ stated with vigour that
while psychiatry could be improved with greater knowledge of behavioural
neurology and neurosciences, it is unique in its approach. This rebuttal
seems to have touched on a view of the psyche that may be one specific
to psychiatry and psychology, but it cannot escape the organ from which
these cognitions spontaneously arise.

It is clear that behavioural neuroscience is the foundation of
psychiatry, an unassailable statement with which Datta^2^ agreed.
Fitzgerald\'s editorial,^1^ however, does not necessarily minimise or
underappreciate the importance of psychiatry in managing presentations
such as suicidality from psychosocial perspectives, which a neurologist,
for example, would not have the training to assess and treat. Instead,
this editorial seems to serve an explicit purpose -- to identify how
specialisation in these specific circumstances may actually harm the
field of psychiatry. It can be seen in the present day that psychiatry
is stigmatised as much as the disorders it treats -- it has been viewed
as an intentional deviation from neurology, which is well known to treat
organic disorders of the brain. A lack of merger, then, serves to
ostracise psychiatry insofar that it becomes less about the brain. To
state that discussions about psychotherapy and other psychological
interventions are not rooted in neuroscience would be demonstrably
fallacious. Even cognitive--behavioural therapy, one of the most studied
psychotherapeutic interventions, was developed by a neurologist and
recognises that the brain undergoes significant changes due to
cognitions, ultimately leading to maladaptive behaviours beyond
conscious awareness or personal agency.^3^ One cannot speak of
psychiatric disorders without recognising and appreciating the organ
responsible for behaviour and cognition.

The formulation of diagnoses and treatments for psychiatric conditions
certainly differs from that of 'neurological' conditions such as mild
traumatic brain injury, stroke and epilepsy. However, significant
evidence suggests that psychiatric research is on the brink of
discovering quantitative measures of its disorders, including but not
limited to neuroimaging techniques,^4^^,^^5^ neuropsychological
evaluations,^6^^--^^8^ and psychological tests such as those related to
implicit associations.^9^^,^^10^ If one is to believe that psychiatry
will remain entirely distinct from neurology and that the field need not
merge with the professionals who also treat the central nervous system
manifestations of brain dysfunction, regardless of aetiology, then
psychiatry is destined to lose its footing when technology catches up to
the incessantly changing brain that falls prey to inter- and
intrapersonal events.
