=========================================================================================================================
Evaluating the effects of a peer-led suturing and wound management workshop for doctors working in a psychiatric hospital
=========================================================================================================================

T. A. Buick
D. Hamilton
G. Weatherdon
C. I. O'Shea
G. McAlpineCorrespondence to T.A. Buick (tbuick@nhs.net)
:Date: 2018-10

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Background
      :name: sec_a1

   Psychiatric in-patients are often transferred to an emergency
   department for care of minor wounds, incurring significant distress
   to the patient and cost to the service.

   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a2

   To improve superficial wound management in psychiatric in-patients
   and reduce transfers to the emergency department.

   .. rubric:: Method
      :name: sec_a3

   Thirty-four trainees attended two peer-led suturing and wound
   management teaching sessions, and a suturing kit box was compiled and
   stored at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital. Teaching was evaluated using
   Kirkpatrick's model, and patient transfer numbers were acquired by
   reviewing in-patient Datix reports and emergency department case
   notes for 6 months before and after teaching.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a5

   The proportion of patients transferred to the emergency department
   decreased significantly from 90% 6 months before the workshop to 30%
   6 months after (*P* < 0.05). Trainees engaged positively and there
   was a significant increase in self-confidence rating following the
   workshop (*P* < 0.05). The estimated cost saving per transfer was
   £183.76.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion
      :name: sec_a6

   The combination of a peer-led workshop and on-site suturing kit box
   was effective in reducing transfers to the emergency department and
   provided a substantial cost saving.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a7

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Junior doctors working within in-patient mental health settings are
often required to assess self-harm injuries and wounds sustained from
unintentional accidents. Such superficial wounds are encountered
frequently by trainees in surgery and emergency medicine, but less
commonly by junior trainees in psychiatry. National clinical guidelines
advise that all clinical staff involved in the treatment of self-harm
should have appropriate training in the treatment and management of
superficial uncomplicated injuries.(n.d.a) However, we noted that there
was no provision in our department for this kind of tailored teaching.
In our methods, we describe a retrospective audit which revealed 18
episodes in 6 months where a patient was transferred to the emergency
department for simple wound management. As a result, it was hypothesised
that significant savings could be made by training junior doctors in
psychiatry in the recognition of wounds that could be treated without
transfer to the emergency department. Furthermore, this could reduce the
stress and perceived stigma that patients experience when attending the
emergency department for self-inflicted wounds. We identified two key
interventions that could be made: first, compiling a suturing kit box to
be kept available on site; and, second, providing a suturing and wound
management workshop for trainees. In this paper, we describe the process
of designing a workshop, compiling a kit box and evaluating the effect
of this teaching programme using Kirkpatrick's Hierarchy of
Learning.(n.d.b)

.. _sec1:

Methods
=======

.. _sec1-1:

Wound management workshop design
--------------------------------

| A 1-h workshop was designed by two psychiatry trainees, a surgical
  trainee and a consultant in emergency medicine. This was offered to
  all trainees working in adult, intellectual disabilities, adolescent
  and elderly care psychiatry at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital (REH). It
  was advertised by email at the time of trainee induction, and an
  emphasis was placed on making the workshop accessible to all (it was
  run in two separate time-slots in an afternoon session reserved for
  trainee teaching). Our learning objectives were to: manage common
  wounds, safely use local anaesthetic, select an appropriate treatment
  for a wound, demonstrate correct handling of suture and instruments,
  and perform interrupted sutures. An example lesson plan is outlined in
  `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Table 1The structure of our workshop, showing
  topics covered and the time takenTopicTime allocated (min)Introduction
  and learning objectives2Common types of wound10Principles of wound
  management5Safe use of local anaesthetic2Choice of closure technique
| – dressing, steri-strip, glue and suture.5Post-closure
  care2Demonstration
| – local anaesthetic and interrupted suturing2Practice20Discuss four
  images5Summary2

.. _sec1-2:

Suturing kit box design
-----------------------

We compiled a list of equipment required for closing wounds with either
sutures or steri-strips. The equipment was stored in a portable plastic
box and kept on site at REH. In order to keep track of stock, all items
were photographed and displayed along with their order codes on the lid
of the box (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). We purposefully included only the
equipment required for simple suturing. This included 3-0 or 4-0
non-absorbable suture, a basic instrument pack, a sterile dressing pack,
lidocaine without adrenaline, and needles for drawing up and injecting.
In choosing this limited range we hoped that trainees would not treat
wounds beyond their level of competence. Fig. 1Suturing kit box.

.. _sec1-3:

Evaluation of teaching
----------------------

To assess engagement in teaching (Kirkpatrick level 1), attendees
completed an online questionnaire with Likert-rated statements. This was
emailed to attendees 1 week following the workshop, and a certificate of
attendance was provided on completion of the questionnaire. These
statements were: ‘I enjoyed the wound management workshop’, ‘The content
was relevant to me as a trainee’ and ‘I feel confident to suture wounds
independently’.

To assess knowledge and confidence acquisition (Kirkpatrick level 2),
attendees completed a questionnaire prior to and following the workshop.
In this questionnaire, they viewed two images of deep wounds (e.g. wrist
laceration with tendon visible and deep laceration through muscle) and
two images of superficial wounds (i.e. only through skin with
subcutaneous fat showing). Trainees were blinded to whether a wound was
deemed superficial or deep – they had to assess it by appearance alone
with no other history provided. They were asked to view the images and
respond on a Likert scale to the statement ‘I could manage this wound
without referral to the emergency department’. An example of the wound
images used is shown in Supplementary Appendix 1, available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2018.41.

.. _sec1-4:

Collecting transfer data
------------------------

In order to assess whether trainees displayed a behavioural change
(Kirkpatrick level 3), we collected Datix (an online incident reporting
system) reports from all in-patient psychiatric wards at REH. These are
completed by nursing staff whenever there is a self-harm or wound
incident. Datix reports were in an electronic SBAR (situation,
background, assessment and recommendation) format which allowed
free-text search. Incidents which mentioned ‘laceration’, ‘wound’,
‘doctor’ and ‘suture’ were identified and the individual entries
reviewed. This allowed us to ascertain how many patients were treated on
site with first aid or simple wound management (steri-strips, sutures
and dressings).

To assess the effect on service delivery (Kirkpatrick level 4), we
identified the number of patients transferred for superficial wound
management to the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh (RIE) emergency
department over a 6 month period before and after the workshop. These
data were collected retrospectively from August 2016 to August 2017. All
patients transferred from REH to RIE were identified using the ‘Trak’
electronic healthcare record system, and the case notes for each patient
were reviewed. In each case the documented presenting complaint was
noted, along with any treatment provided. This allowed us to identify a
subset of patients with superficial wounds which could have been managed
without specialist input. Inclusion criteria were: (a) wounds documented
as subcutaneous or superficial; (b) wounds closed by either a junior
trainee or emergency nurse practitioner; (c) wounds which needed no
treatment. Episodes where the wound was significant enough to be
referred to a senior emergency department clinician or specialty doctor
were excluded.

.. _sec1-5:

Calculating cost savings
------------------------

We itemised the steps involved in patient transfer and requested a
breakdown of cost from our hospital finance department. This included an
estimate of the time an emergency department clinician spent assessing
and treating the patient. The cost of treating a patient on site was
estimated by summing the cost of raw materials required to close a wound
(i.e. suture, local anaesthetic and dressings) and 30 min of clinician
time. The cost of running the workshop in terms of materials, room
booking and clinician time were also outlined.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Evaluation of teaching
----------------------

A total of 34 trainees attended two workshops in February (*N* = 14) and
August 2017 (*N* = 20). Attendees were foundation year 2 (*N* = 17),
general practice (*N* = 12) or core psychiatry (*N* = 5) trainees.

.. _sec2-2:

Level 1 – Engagement in teaching
--------------------------------

Of the 34 trainees, 24 rated the statements in `Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__ – 91%
of responses were ‘agree’ or ‘strongly agree’. Fig. 2Agreement of
trainees attending the workshop to the statements illustrated.

.. _sec2-3:

Level 2 – Knowledge acquisition
-------------------------------

Self-confidence rating was completed by 32 of the 34 attendees (94%)
prior to the workshop and by 26 of the 34 attendees (76%) following the
workshop. `Figure 3 <#fig03>`__ shows the Likert responses for wounds
that could be managed by a novice trainee and those that should be
referred. Responses of ‘agree’ and ‘disagree’ pre and post workshop were
analysed with a chi-squared test in a 2 × 2 contingency table. Fig.
3Self-confidence rating of trainees before and after the workshop for
(a) superficial wounds and (b) deep wounds which should be referred.

For simple superficial wounds, there was a significant increase
(*P* = 0.001) in post-workshop confidence, with a reduction in
‘disagree’ responses and an increase in ‘agree’ responses (to the
statement ‘I could manage this wound without referral to the emergency
department’).

For complex deep wounds (which should be referred), there was an
unexpected, significant increase in confidence. Following the workshop,
several attendees changed their response, with 23% stating that they
would be confident to manage these wounds without referral to the
emergency department.

.. _sec2-4:

Levels 3 and 4 – Assessing behavioural change and effects on service
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Combining data collected from emergency department referrals and review
of Datix reports of in-patient self-harm, `Fig. 4 <#fig04>`__ outlines
locations of treatment before and after the teaching workshop.
Chi-squared analysis showed a significant difference between patients
treated on site and those transferred to the emergency department
(*P* = 0.0001). Fig. 4Data from Datix incident reports and emergency
department case notes showing the number of wounds treated on site
compared with those transferred in the 6 months before the workshop and
6 months after.

.. _sec2-5:

Calculating cost savings
------------------------

`Table 2 <#tab02>`__ compares the itemised cost of transfer to the
emergency department with treatment on site. Table 2Itemised costs
involved in transferring a patient to the emergency department compared
with the cost of raw materials required to treat on site and the cost of
the teaching interventionTransfer to the emergency departmentTreatment
on siteTeaching costItemCostItemCostItemCostPatient transport return
trip£28Suture instrument pack£1.901 h room booking£16Nurse escort
(minimum estimate of 4 h)£823-0 non-absorbable suture£0.881 h clinician
time (two middle-grade trainees and one consultant)£91.20Attendance at
emergency department (including triage, review by doctor and treatment
materials)£901× 10 mL vial lidocaine with syringe and
needle£0.35Artificial skin pad x 12 (£16 each)£192Adhesive wound
dressing£0.06Suture instrument pack x 12 (£1.90 each)£22.80Clinician
time (estimated 30 min)£13.05Suture x
20£17.60Total£200Total£16.24Total£339.60

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study aiming to reduce
the number of psychiatric in-patients transferred to the emergency
department for treatment of minor wounds. Specifically, we were
interested to know whether simple superficial wounds could be treated on
site, negating the need for transfer and reducing the psychological
distress to the patient.(n.d.c) Several studies have described the
effects and cost to the emergency department of self-harm in general,
but these primarily involve self-presentation rather than transfer from
an in-patient setting.(n.d.d)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.e) One study did describe
psychiatric in-patient self-harm episodes and reported that 8% of these
resulted in emergency department attendance, although the nature of
treatment in the emergency department was not outlined.(n.d.e)

One possible reason for transferring such superficial wounds to the
emergency department could be that our junior trainees lacked confidence
and skills in managing simple wounds. This may be representative of
national challenges in the UK: a recent national survey of undergraduate
medical students suggested that most leave medical school lacking in
confidence in basic suturing skills and knowledge of which suturing
technique to deploy.(n.d.f) This is despite ‘skin suturing’ and ‘wound
care and basic wound dressing’ being stipulated as expected outcomes for
medical undergraduates by the end of their medical training within the
UK.(n.d.g) While junior doctors working in psychiatry may be expected to
be less knowledgeable in wound management compared with those in
surgical or emergency specialties, the Royal College of Psychiatrists
expects core psychiatry trainees to be able to ‘Know the principles
underlying management and prevention of … self harm’.(n.d.h)

Therefore, the first challenge of this study was to engage junior
doctors working in psychiatry and empower them to manage simple wounds
without transfer to the emergency department. We accomplished this by
adopting a peer-led, multi-specialty approach. The workshop described
above (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__) was facilitated by junior psychiatry
trainees who had invited attendees via email. It was then taught by a
surgical trainee who demonstrated practical suturing skills and an
emergency medicine consultant who outlined general wound management
principles. With this combined range of expertise, we found that most
participants engaged positively (91%), agreeing that they enjoyed the
workshop, felt more confident and that the teaching was relevant to
their skill level (level 1 outcome, `Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__). Having input
from a senior emergency department clinician was a crucial factor in
this, as trainees often enquired as to what complexity of wound they
should treat and what should be referred. This does raise the question
of what level of wound management should be expected of a junior doctor
in psychiatry. With reference to National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence guidance for self-harm,(n.d.a) we suggest that skin
lacerations greater than 5 cm in length which are deep enough to reveal
underlying structures (not just subcutaneous fat) should always be
discussed with the emergency department. We believe it is reasonable to
expect a junior doctor working in psychiatry to manage a wound which is
superficial and less than 5 cm in length, given the correct training.
This was one of the key learning objectives in the workshop and was the
rationale behind our evaluation of confidence change (level 2 outcome).

Assessing the competency of trainees in differentiating deep from
superficial wounds was beyond the scope of this workshop. Equally,
formally assessing the acquisition of technical suturing skills was not
required, as this is an expected outcome of undergraduate medical
education.(n.d.g) Instead, in our level 2 outcome, we sought to measure
the change in self-confidence rating following the workshop (`Fig.
3 <#fig03>`__). Confidence ratings are commonly used when evaluating
surgical skill workshops. There is no relationship between confidence
and competence prior to surgical skill teaching, but confidence does
increase when a competency is gained.(n.d.i) Since all attendees at our
workshop had been taught suturing as undergraduates, we sought to
enhance their confidence by focusing on re-teaching wound management and
refreshing technical skills, rather than formally assessing technical
competence. Trainees responded to an online questionnaire presenting
them with a series of wound images. They were asked to rate the
statement ‘I could manage this wound without referral to the emergency
department’ on a five-point Likert scale. Prior to teaching, only 42% of
trainees agreed with this statement, suggesting that they would be
confident to treat the wound with their current skill set. Following
teaching, this confidence was increased, with 71% of trainees agreeing
with the statement. This increase was only true for wounds which were
visibly superficial. When rating images of deep wounds (including those
with visible tendon damage), there was an unexpected significant
increase in trainee confidence (`Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__). Responses stating
they would manage the wound without referral rose from 1.6 to 22.9%,
suggesting that there is potential for trainees to treat wounds beyond
their level of competence. Encouragingly, during the study period, there
were no reported complications from the increased number of patients
having their wounds managed at our psychiatric hospital, and no reports
of inappropriate suturing attempts. We suggest that the change in
confidence may reflect the challenge novice trainees encountered in
determining the depth of deep wounds based only on a two-dimensional
photograph.

As an objective measure of knowledge application (level 3), we collected
Datix reports of in-patient self-harm episodes. Unfortunately, this is a
free-text system based around an SBAR template; as a result, some
incidents mentioned a laceration but did not outline how it was treated.
In the remaining entries (where a treatment was recorded), we found a
statistically significant increase in the number of wounds treated on
site following our workshop. There was a corresponding decrease in the
number of transfers to the emergency department in those same 6 months,
as outlined in our level 4 outcome (`Fig. 4 <#fig04>`__).

The cost saving per patient is outlined in `Table 2 <#tab02>`__. This
shows that a single transfer to the emergency department can cost a
minimum of £200. To the best of our knowledge, no other study has
investigated the costs of in-patient transfer to the emergency
department for superficial wound management. One study estimated the
cumulative cost from admission to discharge of a patient with self-harm
presenting at the emergency department to be £425.24 per patient.(n.d.j)
Another more recent study suggested the mean immediate cost to the
hospital for each episode of self-harm to be £809.(n.d.d) The latter
estimate includes an average of £254 for psychosocial assessment. It
also includes the costs of in-patient admission and medical treatment
that would be required for certain types of self-harm, such as
poisoning, trauma (e.g. fall from height, asphyxiation, jumping in front
of a moving object) and drowning. These studies discuss self-harm which
results in a superficial wound; however, the cost of treating this is
not expanded on as a subcategory of self-harm. In our paper, we identify
a very specific subset of self-harm patients that could benefit from
on-site treatment. Such self-injury represents only 22% of emergency
department presentations,(n.d.d) and so it is likely that our estimated
costs are considerably lower because they represent only the treatment
of simple, superficial wounds.

There is a substantial difference in cost between treating the patient
on site and transferring to the emergency department. `Table
2 <#tab02>`__ outlines the costs of treating on site, of treatment at
the emergency department and of running the teaching workshop. A single,
hour-long teaching workshop for 12 trainees cost an estimated £339.60.
This included an hour of clinician time (two middle-grade trainees and a
consultant), although in reality clinicians volunteered to teach in
their spare time. Equally, we included an estimate of room booking cost,
although this was provided to us free of charge as a departmental
seminar room. Considering a single transfer costs £200 and treatment on
site costs £16.24, it becomes cost-effective to run the workshop when
the outcome is two or more patients being treated on site (this
represents a potential £183.76 saving every time a patient is treated on
site instead of being transferred to the emergency department).

This study was limited by being a small, single-centre study across two
cohorts of junior doctors working in psychiatry. Data were collected
retrospectively, and wounds documented in the emergency department notes
were observer dependent. Equally, follow-up was limited to 6 months
after teaching. A larger-scale study could more fully assess the effects
of peer-led teaching interventions and could account for seasonal
variation in patient transfer numbers. Additionally, future qualitative
work should focus on the perspectives of patients and staff following
such training.

This teaching evaluation showed that a peer-led workshop improves
trainee self-confidence in managing superficial wounds. We have shown
there was a significant reduction in transfers and considerable cost
saving from two key interventions: providing training on wound
management and making resources available on site. Combining these
interventions had an effect on service delivery, and as a result more
patients were treated without transfer to the emergency department. We
hope that our findings illustrate a small but important improvement in
the care we give to our patients, which could easily be replicated in
other centres.

We would like to thank Andy Johnston from eHealth analysis and our
self-harm nurse Merrick Pope for their contributions to data acquisition
in this study.

**T. A. Buick** is a Core Surgical Trainee at NHS Lothian, UK; **D.
Hamilton** and **G. Weatherdon** are Core Psychiatry Trainees at the
Royal Edinburgh Hospital, UK; **C. I. O'Shea** is a Clinical Teaching
Fellow at NHS Lothian, UK; and **G. McAlpine** is an Emergency Medicine
Consultant at the Royal Infirmary Edinburgh, UK.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2018.41.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

We used the Health Research Authority ethics decision tool to confirm
that this study did not require ethical approval.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.j.
