=============================================================
The alignment of law, practice and need in suicide prevention
=============================================================



Helen M. Stallman
Jeneva L. OhanCorrespondence to Dr Helen Stallman
(helen.stallman@unisa.edu.au)
:Date: 2018-4

:Abstract:
   Help-seeking is important for patients with suicidal ideation.
   Currently, a risk management paradigm is used with patients who
   express suicidality; however, this may limit support and increase
   stigma, reducing future help-seeking. Coping planning is proposed as
   a paradigm shift that overcomes these problems by focusing on patient
   needs and strengths.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

There has been a plethora of research related to help-seeking and mental
illness; for example, a Google Scholar search for ‘help-seeking and
mental health’ provided 2.17 million results. Perhaps this is not
surprising in light of the considerable efforts that have been
undertaken to raise awareness of mental illness and promote
help-seeking. But an important question is: why would someone with a
mental illness seek professional assistance to begin with, and what is
the need when he/she asks for help? Although help-seeking is an
important first step in accessing all treatment, here we will focus on
help-seeking from the perspective of the patient disclosing suicidality.

Suicidal ideation can be seen as a coping strategy, occurring when the
person has inadequate healthy and other unhealthy strategies to cope and
starts to wonder whether suicide is a solution for his/her
distress.1\ :sup:`,`\ 2 Disclosing suicidal ideation – rather than
acting on it or ruminating about it – is a healthy coping strategy. The
main message that a person who is confiding suicidality is saying is,
‘I'm having trouble coping right now. I need you to help me.’ Seen in
this way, the need from help-seeking is immediate support. The
disclosure comes with trust that the confidante can and will help,
providing minimally-sufficient support – that supports coping, but does
not undermine a person's strengths and autonomy – until the person can
cope independently again.3

However, this message is not always what the health professional may
hear, or is trained to hear. Rather, what may be interpreted instead
when a person discloses suicidality is, ‘I am at risk of harming myself
– now that I have disclosed this risk, you are responsible to stop that
from happening.’ Managing this risk is the dominant paradigm in
responding to suicidality.4\ :sup:`,`\ 5 Its focus is on ensuring the
patient's safety and preventing death. A risk perspective reflects a
society that is motivated by a commonality of anxiety about the future,
rather than a commonality of need in the present.4 Legally, this is
reflected in mental health acts, which allow the detention of people who
are judged to be at risk of harm to themselves, including suicide. The
risk-focused response of the clinician, then, is to assess symptoms and
manage or mitigate risk, which includes assessment of suicidal thoughts
and other risk factors and safety planning (e.g.6\ :sup:`–`\ 8). Within
an emergency department setting, disclosure of suicidal ideation is met
with a triage system that prioritises externalising behaviours and the
severity of suicidality to determine the risk of harm and the urgency of
treatment.9 Assessment of risk relates to the potential for harm without
treatment, not the needs for support. Thus, the law and clinical
practice are aligned.

In this common scenario, however, the needs of the patient, as expressed
through seeking help and disclosure, have been neglected. Moreover, a
risk management approach to assessing suicide risk actively harms the
patient through stigma. Stigma is a mark of disgrace – one that reduces
a person in their social status to being tainted and now shamed by
society – such as through presumed dangerousness or contagion of
disease.10 Stigma affects people with mental illness broadly, including
those with suicidality; for example, people who have attempted suicide
describe experiencing a range of stigmas, including being seen as
contagious, attention-seeking ‘drama queens’, manipulative, incompetent,
weak, dangerous and hopeless.11 By responding to a disclosure of
suicidality with an assessment of an individual's dangerousness to
himself/herself and considering coercive and isolative treatment,
professionals who use the risk management approach are making efforts to
keep the individual safe. However, in so doing they risk begetting or
promoting these stigmas, as setting these individuals apart from others
implies social unacceptability. Consistent with this concern, people who
have attempted suicide in the past describe being stigmatised by health
professionals. By reacting to disclosures using a risk management
approach, health professionals were seen to lack empathy for and dismiss
their distress, and instead overreact to the potential for danger.11 Not
surprisingly, these individuals describe feeling mistrusted and full of
shame after disclosing suicide, and are often motivated to hide any
future suicidality from professionals.11\ :sup:`,`\ 12 Thus, patients
who disclose and feel stigmatised through being dismissed, labelled as
hopeless or considered dangerous may be likely to conceal future
suicidality.

Clinicians in all professions often report feeling ill-prepared to work
with people who are experiencing suicidality (e.g.13). The cause of this
anxiety and fear may be the futility of the task – risk and protective
factors that clinicians have long based their assessments on have been
shown to be poor predictors of death by suicide.14 Additionally, risk is
only associated with the probability of negative outcomes and with
assigning blame,15 which creates additional fear in many clinicians.
Through the concept of ‘otherness,’ that is, conceptualising another
person as substantially different from the self,16 the risk approach
also discourages clinicians who may be feeling distressed or suicidal
from seeking help, as doing so might mean that they are seen as no
longer capable of being the professional. Thus, the risk management
approach has the potential to harm the clinician as well as the patient.

It is time to make a change to how we approach suicidality. An
alternative paradigm that has been proposed is coping planning.1 This is
a paradigm shift from a future-focused, risk approach to a
present-focused, needs approach. Coping is a universal human behaviour.
Feeling suicidal ideation is a normal human coping strategy to
overwhelming distress. Rather than trying to determine the incalculable
risk of a single endpoint (suicide), coping planning focuses the
clinician's attention on the needs of the patient (i.e., helping them
cope with their distress). This involves: (1) caring; (2) collaborating;
and (3) connecting.3 The first step involves just listening and
attending to the person's distress. The second step is to
collaboratively identify the person's existing coping strategies and
help them strengthen their coping plan by including additional
strategies or professional support. The final step is connecting the
person with higher intensity support, if needed. The needs assessment
could show that the patient has: (1) low needs, being able to cope
independently after talking about their problems; (2) moderate needs for
additional professional support that may include having *ad hoc*
supports in their coping plan, such as telephone helplines or their
general practitioner; or (3) high needs, requiring immediate more
intensive supports.1 The triage system for suicidality cannot be based
on the same criteria as physical illnesses.17 The response received at
disclosure can affect the progression of the distress. Attending to
distress at this point needs to be a priority to meet the needs of
patients presenting for problems with coping to prevent subsequent harm.

Responding to disclosures of suicidality with coping planning has real
potential to overcome some of the stigmas towards people who experience
suicidality. Coping is a universal experience, including for those who
experience suicidality.1 Attending to distress, rather than moving to
the practitioner task of risk assessment, can be a minimally sufficient
intervention for many people.3 Unlike assessments of risk for danger and
the potential need for coercive treatment, viewing disclosure of
suicidality as an invitation to support a patient sends a socially
inclusive message that the person is capable and cared about, and that
they should not feel ashamed. With the focus on caring, listening and
supporting, and away from assessment of future danger, there is the
potential for professionals to feel competent, rather than ill-equipped
and fearful. Moreover, collaborating with the patient using the coping
planning approach eliminates the ‘otherness’ that is endemic to risk
management, which may also improve the help-seeking of the helpers when
needed.18

In summary, although current practices align with the risk assessment
and management work of mental health acts, neither meet the needs of
patients. Practice needs to focus on meeting the needs of patients when
they disclose distress to promote help-seeking and prevent stigma and
suicide. Consistent with our current health practices that aim to be
patient-centred, coping planning provides a strengths-focused framework
to respond to patients in distress who are seeking professional support.
Mental health legislation needs updating to reflect current knowledge
about risk and to place patient needs at their core.

**Dr Helen Stallman** is a Clinical Psychologist and Senior Lecturer at
the University of South Australia. **Dr Jeneva Ohan** is a Registered
Psychologist and Senior Lecturer at The University of Western Australia.
