======================================================================================================
What leads to innovation in mental healthcare? Reflections on clinical expertise in a bureaucratic age
======================================================================================================



Neil ArmstrongCorrespondence to Neil Armstrong
(neil.armstrong@anthro.ox.ac.uk)
:Date: 2018-10

:Abstract:
   This paper considers a witness seminar in which healthcare
   professionals discussed working on an acute admissions ward run along
   therapeutic community lines from the 1960s to the 1980s. Participants
   remarked that older styles of working are ‘unimaginable’ today. This
   paper discusses why. Literature from the humanities and social
   sciences suggest healthcare is reactive, reflecting wider cultural
   changes, including a preference for a more bureaucratic,
   standardised, explicit style of reasoning and a high valuation of
   personal autonomy. Such a reflection prompts questions about the
   nature of professional expertise, the role of evidence and the
   importance of the humanities and social sciences.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Professional autonomy as a source of authority
==============================================

It is tempting to think of clinical expertise as autonomous. Indeed, it
appears to be an essential part of the role of mental healthcare
clinicians that they do not merely reflect or reproduce everyday ideas
and assumptions about mental disorders and their treatment, but bring
something distinctive to the table. This distinctive contribution is the
result of intensive training, painstaking clinical experience and robust
scientific research. Understood in this way, collective professional
sovereignty seems to be a critical ingredient in differentiating experts
from the lay public. It is on the basis of this differentiation that
expert opinion may be seen as deserving more weight than the views of a
non-specialist. This might suggest that a contrast between expert
knowledge and lay knowledge is both necessary and desirable. Educating
patients, their family and friends, and the wider public typically means
challenging lay assumptions and replacing them with clinically
authorised knowledge. This has been the way that campaigns against
stigma have been conceived.1 Similarly, ‘psychoeducation’, which is
deemed to be a possibly beneficial adjunct to care for people receiving
treatment for mental disorders, is designed by clinicians and intended
for the patients, and not the other way round.

There a number of reasons that disciplinary autonomy might be a useful
and attractive notion. Autonomy contributes to authority in a setting
where authority is both justified and necessary. However, these
considerations might encourage a lack of attention to the real status of
mental healthcare expertise. This autonomy may not be quite as it
appears. I do not want to suggest here that the collective professional
sovereignty of mental healthcare clinicians is entirely false, illusory
or illegitimate. Instead, I want to make a more cautious argument that,
in practice, professional expertise is deeply reactive. Rather than
being the sole active agent, mental healthcare professionals as a group
are acted upon by wider social and cultural forces. Factors external to
professional bodies can shape expertise and practice in ways that are
critical and yet difficult to detect.

The views of the general public about, say, what might count as a
pathological personal trait and how this might be differentiated from
what might better be thought of as eccentric, shape clinical judgement.
In practice, any other relationship would be rather odd: mental
healthcare professionals are in a position to develop common-sense
thinking about distress and madness, but if it were to diverge too far
from public opinion, it would be likely to lose its claim to authority.
A concrete example might be homosexuality. In the 1960s and 1970s, this
was first modified and then dropped as a diagnostic category, not
because of research findings, but because of wider shifts in public
opinion.2\ :sup:`,`\ 3 This is instructive. However much it is
predicated on science, the authority of mental healthcare practitioners
also rests on popular consent. A widespread loss of confidence in mental
healthcare would mean an existential challenge for the discipline as a
whole. This complex and two-way relationship between expert knowledge
and common sense is not unique to mental healthcare. In a major study of
scientific and folk thinking about biology, Atran found continuity
between ‘ordinary thinking’ categories describing vegetation and those
of the biological sciences, such that each can learn from the other.4

.. _sec2:

Healthcare and its cultural surround
====================================

An important point for this discussion is that the external factors that
shape clinical work are not always as simple as popular views about
sexuality, or the acceptability of unusual character traits. More subtle
influences are at work. Basic clinical categories and practices that
clinicians might typically think of as arising out of autonomous
clinical expertise seem to resonate with widely discussed social and
cultural processes. These processes are moral as much as scientific,
dealing with values, commitments and orientations. We might wonder
whether the cart is pulling the horse or, indeed, which is which.

Take, for example, the notions of risk, accountability, responsibility
and anxiety. All figure large in clinical practice. Drawing on the work
of Beck, Giddens argues that accountability is linked to risk and
anxiety, forming part of what he calls the ‘contours of high modernity’
in which personhood is being ‘reshaped’.5\ :sup:`,`\ 6 It appears that
this high modernity shapes medicine as much as medicine shapes high
modernity. Giddens notes how individuals increasingly see life as
containing risks, and that dealing with risk and controlling the future
is one of the ‘core aspects of modernity’. Critically, according to him,
dealing with risk is now an individual challenge. The modern individual
seeks to personally equip himself or herself by means of gaining
knowledge to enable autonomous decision-making. These ideas seem to be
reflected in the way that patient-centred care or patient empowerment is
conceptualised. We might conclude that the personalisation of care and
the goal of patient empowerment are part of modernity rather than
arising out of autonomous clinical reason.

In a similar way, for many commentators, what knowledge is and what
might count as good reasons for a decision are changing. For example, it
is increasingly the case that a good decision is one that might be
defended in an impersonal way. In *Trust in Numbers*, Porter makes a
distinction between what he calls ‘disciplinary objectivity’ and
‘mechanical objectivity’.7 The former arises out of a consensus of
experts. As it consists of expert judgement, it demands trust. By
contrast, mechanical objectivity is derived from the use of quantified
data and the following of rules. This appears impartial, rigorous and
unbiased.

Porter suggests that much of the appeal of quantitative, mechanical
objectivity is ‘mythical’ and confused. It is nonetheless very
attractive. Part of the reason for this is that it appears impersonal,
in that data and algorithms replace personal judgement. According to
Porter, underlying mechanical objectivity is an ethic that ‘rules should
rule’, rather than people ruling. He puts it like this: ‘Scientific
objectivity thus provides an answer to a moral demand for impartiality
and fairness. Quantification is a way of making decisions without
seeming to decide’7 (p. 8). These epistemic preferences shape our sense
of what expertise consists of. Expertise is taken to be a capacity for
explicit and auditable decision-making. Good decisions are impartial and
fair, which is signalled by the erasure of the decision maker.

These trends are widely recognised. A great deal of professional work
today is being reconfigured. Whether it is education, banking, the
military or international development, expertise is becoming formalised
and ‘managerialised’, reinterpreted as a sequence of explicit decisions,
capable of being scrutinised externally, and underwritten by the
mechanical objectivity of evidence and policy. Graeber talks of the ‘era
of total bureaucratization’ in which standardised forms of knowledge are
reductive and yet dominant, unsatisfactory and yet overpowering.8 The
effects of this are ubiquitous, but particularly found in medicine.
Porter7 comments that: “In public even more than in private affairs,
expertise has more and more become inseparable from objectivity. Indeed,
to recur to the previous example, it is in part because the relation of
physician to patient is no longer a private one – due to the threat that
it might be opened up in a courtroom – that instruments have become
central to almost every aspect of medical practice (p. 7).”

Harrison argues that the rise of evidence-based medicine and the
introduction of market mechanisms in the National Health Service has led
to a change in the way that clinical knowledge and expertise are
conceived of, a transition away from instinct or personal judgement, and
towards propositional knowledge and instrumental rationality.9

.. _sec3:

Clinical memory as a source of knowledge
========================================

One way of thinking through these issues is to attend to the experiences
of staff whose careers span different working styles. The Phoenix Unit
was an acute admissions ward run according to the therapeutic community
concept at the Littlemore Hospital in Oxford. It was set up by Bertram
Mandelbrote in 1959 and closed in 1996. The ethos of the Phoenix was to
explore the behaviours and feelings of residents through community life
and, in particular, in group settings. Daily community groups formed the
centre of care and were supplemented by working groups, occupational
therapy, crisis groups and relatives’ groups. Over time, the ward became
well known and attracted considerable interest.

A reunion of Phoenix Unit staff members took place on 19 October 2016 in
the Barns Conference Centre, part of the Planned Environment Therapy
Trust (PETT), near Cheltenham in Gloucestershire. There were 23
participants, including psychiatrists, nurses, a psychologist, a social
worker, an occupational therapist and an art therapist. The reunion
consisted of six recorded sessions. After a 30-min introductory session,
the group split in two, with each subgroup talking for about 80 min.
There followed three sessions involving all participants, totalling
almost 2.5 h. So, the total record is a little short of 6 h discussion.
All the recordings were transcribed, and both the recordings and the
transcriptions are archived by the PETT. There was a lot of mutual
recognition among the participants. Many were happy to be reunited with
former colleagues. Some participants were longstanding friends, others
less known. Participants were mostly confident about speaking in a large
group. In fact, participating in group discussion might be understood as
a facet of clinical skill. No formal methodology was adopted to analyse
the material. As might be appropriate, given the themes of the paper,
the author relies on his own judgement about the discussions, rather
than seeking authority through algorithm or quantification.

Staff remember the Phoenix as ‘very 60s’ and ‘very permissive’. A
culture of openness extended to patients, ex-patients, families and
staff. ‘We were all part of it’, said one. The atmosphere on the ward
was described as ‘apparent chaos’ or ‘chaos’, and by one person as ‘the
maddest place I've ever seen’. Hierarchies were flattened, professional
roles blurred, and staff understood themselves to work ‘alongside’
patients as equals. Interaction was relaxed and informal. Patients were
encouraged to express themselves. One participant said people ‘came to
be mad’. Another remarked that staff ‘allowed behaviour’. Expertise was
not located solely with the professionals. Patients helped other
patients, and staff learned from patients. It was said that ‘Everyone
was a therapist, including the patients’.

The unit gave staff huge amounts of freedom. Discretion and professional
judgement were favoured over routines and standardised rationales. Care
seemed to rest on spontaneous creative decisions. A spate of broken
windows led to patients being paid to break windows. As one participant
put it: ‘there was no plan … no structured response’ to events. There
was a stress on ‘carrying the culture’ but less emphasis on note-taking.
Written documentation was minimal. It is telling that key therapeutic
events took a form that, to the bureaucratised imagination, sounds like
an oxymoron: ‘agendaless’ meetings.

Diagnosis and targeted medications seem to have played a small part. The
flexible, non-medicalised culture of the unit was described as helping
staff to understand patients as people, rather than carriers of
impersonal disorders. It helped one participant to see ‘the person
behind the patient’, and another to see that ‘we're all human beings’.
In addition, a less medical approach to distress reduced the
superordination of doctors and meant all the staff members had a part to
play. The opinions of cleaners, for example, were frequently sought.
However, patients had to commit to the process. Group attendance was
compulsory, and patients who didn't engage might be considered for
discharge. And when drugs were prescribed, even if it was to ‘contain’
excessive mania or anxiety, rather than to treat a disorder, they were
in what one psychiatrist dubbed the ‘monster doses’ typical of the
period.

.. _sec4:

Understanding the Phoenix from the perspective of the present
=============================================================

The witness seminars are remarkable because they show how profoundly and
how rapidly care has changed. My suggestion is that this change reflects
wider cultural processes. It isn't that accurate forms of measurement
showed that the unit was less effective, or less safe or more expensive
than contemporary arrangements (although it may have been some or all of
those things). Rather, the cultural surround changed such that less
patterned practice seems less professional. In Porter's terms,
improvised, intuitive exchanges between staff and patients are not
constitutive of mechanical authority.

Several participants remarked that problems with the production of
paperwork are why such a unit could not be imagined today. People on the
Phoenix ‘were bad at taking notes’, which made it ‘the opposite of what
is going on now’. It is hard to see how the kinds of activities
described by the participants could be recorded in an economical and
standardised way. Unpatterned, improvised and complex activity is
difficult to document. In highly bureaucratised times, care that can't
be documented is not professional. Personal judgement and the ‘culture’
of the institution are weak justifications for treatment.

Moreover, care was more organised around personal development than
patient empowerment. As a permissive setting in which individual
preference trumped rules, the unit might be seen as the vanguard of
individualism. Yet care in the Phoenix was modelled around goals that
reflected a more social and less individualistic conception of
personhood and human flourishing. The reunion suggests something
further: that seeing people as social beings might be difficult to
square with bureaucratic culture. This social dimension of mental health
might fall somewhere beyond what we might expect an accountable
bureaucracy to successfully address. To use Giddens's phrase, the
Phoenix shared few of the contours of high modernity.

The influence of all of this on staff members appears mixed.
Routinisation can protect staff members from the pressures of
deliberation and personal responsibility. Rule-following requires less
of a staff member than thinking problems through afresh. In Porter's
terms, impersonal ‘mechanical objectivity’ erases the individual
clinician. By contrast, spontaneity is hard work. As a result, staff
seem to have found it extremely taxing to work at the Phoenix, but also
enormously educative and influential. More was expected of them, and
more was gained by them. Staff could flourish, but they could also burn
out. Working at the Phoenix led to self-exploration that was at once
therapeutic and intensely stressful. The impression created by the
seminar participants is that standardisation and mechanical objectivity
protect clinicians. It appears that this comes at a cost: clinicians who
are shielded by rules have reduced opportunities for learning.

.. _sec5:

Conclusion
==========

The recollections of the Phoenix staff resemble in striking ways
widespread changes in professional culture discussed in the humanities
and social science literature. A trend towards more bureaucratic working
practices, and for expertise to consist of a capacity to adopt a
standardised, explicit style of reasoning, are widely observed in the
literature and were widely remarked upon by the Phoenix staff. This
suggests that innovations in clinical practice are, to a degree at
least, determined by cultural factors external to the mental healthcare
professions. This is not to claim that the only source of innovation is
the cultural surround. However, clinical practice, styles of service
delivery and planning, and even notions of professional expertise and
patient health are being reconfigured in ways that appear to be part of
a wider transformation of professional lives. Whether we like it or not,
we live in bureaucratic times. Bureaucratic values increasingly enter
professional domains, blurring distinctions between formerly separate
bodies of expertise. Clinical sensibilities about risk, for example,
resemble those of a policy maker or bureaucrat.10 It is telling that
good mental health is increasingly framed in terms of personal autonomy
and social and economic independence. There is nothing specifically
clinical about these categories. Instead, they are rather open and
flexible notions, which may be transferred across professional
frontiers. They seem to naturally belong to Giddens's high modernity.

This might seem an unappealing state of affairs. As I tried to suggest
in the first part of the paper, one reason for unease might be that
admissions of cultural influence can be seen to undermine clinical
authority. I suggest that this need not be the case. Further, I argue
that such influence is anyway inevitable. The relatively unstructured
and hard-to-document working practices in the Phoenix unit would be
unthinkable today not for reasons of evidence of effectiveness, safety
or value for money. Instead, they look unprofessional. They would be
difficult to audit. We might imagine they would stick out in
documentation presented to the Care Quality Commission, or to the local
clinical commissioning group.

This has a number of implications, not least regarding how to understand
innovation in medical practice. If a cultural impetus as identified by
Porter, for ‘rules to rule’ and not people to rule, leads to shifts in
clinical practice such as those described by the Phoenix staff members,
what are we to make of other accounts of innovation, such as those that
refer to accumulating evidence? If the old style of working is just out
of epistemic fashion, where does that leave the rise of evidence-based
medicine? Perhaps Grimley Evans is right when he comments, acerbically,
that part of the appeal of evidence-based medicine is that it offers
‘total managerial control’ of healthcare.11

These reflections also prompt questions regarding the status of
‘expertise by experience’. We might suspect that the kind of expertise
that patients have by virtue of first-person experiences of health and
healthcare more closely resembles the expertise of the Phoenix Ward
staff than that of contemporary clinicians. Do current epistemic
sensibilities prejudice us against expertise by experience? Do we
undervalue expertise by experience because of quite recent changes in
how we understand the nature of expertise itself?

These questions are of significant clinical weight. Yet they are more
the province of the humanities and social science disciplines, not least
anthropology and philosophy, than the disciplines that make up
mainstream mental healthcare research. Mental healthcare is increasingly
the subject of investigation by disciplines whose starting assumptions
and methods are not those of medicine. This appears to be an
opportunity, not a threat. If the reunion attendees tell us anything, it
is of the potential value of the contribution of the humanities and
social sciences to the investigation of biomedicine.

**Neil Armstrong** is a Lecturer in Anthropology at Magdalen College,
University of Oxford, UK.
