---
author:
- Gary Cooney
date: 2018-12
institute:
- "ST5 in General Adult Psychiatry, The Kershaw Unit, Gartnavel Royal
  Hospital, 1055 Great Western Road, Glasgow G120XH, Scotland. Email:
  <garycooney@nhs.net>"
---

We are called, as citizens and as professionals, to sit down and examine
the facts. We must somehow assimilate the bewildering array of
information, as it hurtles towards us, through our screens and across
our airwaves, to get to the truth of the matter.

In our clinical lives, this becomes a responsibility and the challenge
here is considerable. The public perception of mental illness, its
fixation with 'madness,' is fertile ground for the development of
half-truths, fallacies, myths and speculations. Publicly and privately
propagated, we amass a compendium of 'alternative facts,' harmful to our
patients as well as to our professions.

Psychologists Arkowitz and Lilienfeld are having none of it. They have
subjected our day-to-day assumptions to a rigorous interrogation,
pitching them against the most current evidence, to separate fact from
fiction. Their book is presented neatly into sections by diagnostic
category, each comprising a collection of bite-size chapters, asking
questions such as: *What is a psychopath? How violent are people with
mental illness? Can herbs ease anxiety and depression? Is divorce bad
for children?* The questions they select feel current, the sort
frequently encountered in the public domain, making the book highly
suitable for a general readership. It is also probably quite helpful for
mental health professionals, who may read the pages with the occasional
blush, when they find a long-held position ruthlessly upended.

At times the book feels a little political, particularly in its service
to psychological therapies; there is a sense that the authors feel a
duty to redress the pharmaceutical dominance in mental health
treatments. Though perhaps a worthy pursuit, this sits a little uneasily
as a potential source of bias in a book that sets itself up on a
truth-seeking mission.

Nevertheless, the book is a steadying force in a world where we now take
a rather relaxed attitude to accuracy. Where the truth is often obscured
by a more marketable headline, it is important as professionals that we
anchor ourselves as far as we can in the facts. Arkowitz and Lilienfeld
are to be thanked for doing a lot of the hard work for us.
