===================================================================================================================================
Completed audit cycle to explore the use of the STOPP/START toolkit to optimise medication in psychiatric in-patients with dementia
===================================================================================================================================



Victor M. Aziz
Natalie Hill
Sugandha Kumar

:Correspondence: Dr V. M. Aziz
(victoraziz@doctors.org.uk)

:date: 2018-2

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To explore the use of the STOPP/START toolkit in older psychiatric
   in-patients with dementia. Clinical records and current drug charts
   were reviewed against STOPP/START criteria for all in-patients (*n* =
   86) on six specialist dementia wards.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Benzodiazepines, antipsychotics and opiates were most commonly
   prescribed inappropriately. The most common unprescribed medication
   groups were statins, calcium supplements and vitamin D supplements.
   There was an overall reduction of 7% in comorbidities and 8% in the
   number of prescriptions. *t*-test showed a significant drop in
   average comorbidities between both audits, *t*\ (1) = 23.920, *P* =
   0.027, and in average prescriptions per patient, *t*\ (1) = 28.808,
   *P* = 0.022. There was no difference in the number of patients
   receiving polypharmacy, *t*\ (1) = 7.500, *P* = 0.084, or receiving
   medication with a high risk of adverse drug reactions, *t*\ (1) =
   6.857, *P* = 0.092.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The STOPP/START toolkit highlighted the importance of collaborative
   working between doctors, clinical pharmacists and nursing staff, and
   could provide old age psychiatrists with a structured tool to
   identify inappropriate prescribing of non-psychiatric medications.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interests
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

There are 10 million people in the UK over the age of 65. The latest
projections suggest there will be an additional 5.5 million older people
by 2036, and that the current number will have nearly doubled to around
19 million by 2050. Older people have a high prevalence of chronic and
multiple illnesses and are likely to be prescribed multiple medications.
Potentially inappropriate prescribing (PIP) is reported to be highly
prevalent in this age group, and has been associated with adverse drug
events (ADEs) leading to admission to hospital and death.1 Inappropriate
prescribing occurs when the risks associated with prescribing a
medication outweigh the potential benefits of the medication in a
particular patient. PIP may also occur when a patient does not receive a
medication indicated for the treatment or prevention of a disease or
condition.2 Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics may be altered by
ageing or disease. This puts older people at a high risk of adverse drug
reactions (ADRs), ADEs and drug–drug interactions.

Some of the drugs that are considered a high risk with respect to
hospital admissions include: non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs, including aspirin), diuretics, warfarin, angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs)/angiotensin-II receptor antagonists (A2RAs),
antidepressants, lithium, beta-blockers, opiates, digoxin, prednisolone
and clopidogrel.3

The National Service Framework (NSF) for older people recommends that an
older patient should have medication reviews to reduce medicine-related
problems. Studies in general practices and care homes have demonstrated
that pharmacists undertaking medication reviews can improve the quality
of care, optimise the use of medicines and produce cost-effective
savings.4\ :sup:`,`\ 5

The aim of the audit was to review all prescribed medication in
psychiatric in-patients over the age of 65 with a diagnosis of dementia
in the Cwm Taf University Health Board (UHB) area covering a population
of 300,000, to determine the degree of inappropriate prescribing and to
optimise medication.

.. _sec1:

Methodology
===========

Cwm Taf UHB is responsible for providing healthcare services (hospital-
and community-based services) to the population of Merthyr Tydfil and
Rhondda Cynon Taf, estimated to be around 289 400 people. The Health
Board is divided geographically into four sectors.

The audit included all mental health patients with a diagnosis of
dementia who were in-patients on 1 December 2015. All psychiatric
assessment wards (for those over the age of 65) and specialist dementia
wards in Cwm Taf UHB were audited. We identified 47 patients in December
2015 and 39 patients in the re-audit in May 2016. A thorough past
medical history and current medication history were established for each
patient using the clinical records. All diagnoses were made using
internationally agreed standard criteria, such as the National Institute
of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the
Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria, by the
consultant psychiatrist and their teams in either the community or
in-patient settings. The dementia ranged from moderate to severe for all
specialist dementia wards. For the purpose of this audit, polypharmacy
was defined as more than five medications. The audit used the second
version of the toolkit;6 the tool itself takes about 30 min to complete.

Some tools have been developed to identify older people at risk from
adverse effects and to reduce the risk of initiating drugs likely to
cause adverse events. These include the screening tool of older persons’
potentially inappropriate prescriptions (STOPP) and the screening tool
to alert doctors to the right treatment (START). The toolkit was not
designed for mental health patients. However, the STOPP–START tool has
been validated in patients aged 65 and over by a consensus panel of 18
experts in geriatric pharmacotherapy in Ireland and the
UK.7\ :sup:`,`\ 8\ :sup:`,`\ 9 The panel included experts in geriatric
medicine, clinical pharmacology, old age psychiatry, clinical pharmacy
and primary care medicine. Interrater reliability of the STOPP
(K = 0.75) and START (K = 0.68) criteria was tested in six different
European countries.8 A further study10 found higher interrater
reliability of STOPP (K = 0.97) and START (K = 0.92).

All prescribed medication was checked against the STOPP/START criteria.
In the STOPP/START tool, STOPP comprises 65 clinically significant
criteria for PIP in older people. Each criterion is accompanied by a
concise explanation as to why the prescribing practice is potentially
inappropriate. It emphasises potential adverse drug–drug interactions
and duplicate drug class prescriptions. An example is the advice to stop
NSAIDs in patients with a history of peptic ulcer disease or
gastrointestinal bleeding because of the risk of peptic ulcer relapse.
In addition, NSAIDs should be stopped with moderate to severe
hypertension (moderate: 160/100–179/109 mmHg; severe: ≥180/110 mmHg)
because of the risk of exacerbation of hypertension.

START consists of 22 evidence-based criteria and identifies potential
prescribing omissions (PPOs), e.g. start levodopa in idiopathic
Parkinson's disease with definite functional impairment and resultant
disability.

A *t*-test was conducted to compare the means between the initial audit
and the re-audit. Following the initial data analysis, the audit was
presented to all involved teams and action plans were introduced.

.. _sec1-1:

Agreed action plan following the first audit
--------------------------------------------

It was agreed that all teams would regularly review the medication
charts along with the clinical pharmacist to optimise prescribing. Small
pocket-sized smartcards/leaflets showing the drugs commonly meeting the
STOPP/START criteria were also produced. Smartcards were placed
alongside all medication charts on the wards. Training regarding the use
of the STOPP/START toolkit was also incorporated into team inductions
for junior doctors and nursing staff. A re-audit was completed on 1 May
2016 to determine the impact of these changes.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

| `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ shows a summary of the demographics across both
  audit cycles. There was no significant difference in age between the
  two audits. According to the Mann–Whitney U test, the distribution of
  the female gender was the same across both audits, *P* = 1.000. There
  was no significant difference in the proportion of patients on
  specialist dementia wards in the two audits. There was no reduction of
  medications prescribed in the community for patients on the acute
  wards before those patients came into hospital. Table 1Demographic for
  all sectorsFirst auditRe-auditNumber of patients5847Age, years
  (mean ± s.d.)78.33 ± 2.7478.72 ± 3.11Female gender (%)31 (53.5)29
  (63)Diagnosis (*n*):
|  AD
|  VAD
|  Dementia with Lewy bodies
|  Parkinson's disease/dementia
|  Head injury
|  Mixed
|  Unspecified
| 18
| 21
| 5
| –
| 1
| 7
| 6
| 20
| 15
| 6
| 1
| –
| 3
| 2Average comorbidities per patient
  (mean ± s.d.)6.23 ± 1.525.73 ± 1.02\ *t*\ (1) = 23.920, *P* = 0.02795%
  CI = 2.803–9.157Average number of prescriptions per patient
  (mean ± s.d.)10.88 ± 1.2710.15 ± 0.58\ *t*\ (1) = 28.808,
  *P* = 0.02295% CI = 5.877–15.153Number of patients receiving
  polypharmacy (%)51 (88)39 (85)\ *t*\ (1) = 7.500, *P* = 0.08495%
  CI = −31.237–121.237Number of patients receiving medication with high
  risk of  adverse drug reactions (%)55 (95)41 (89)\ *t*\ (1) = 6.857,
  *P* = 0.092 95% CI = −40.943–136.943Number of patients on specialist
  dementia wards (%)48 (83)39 (83)\ *t*\ (1) = 9.667, *P* = 0.06695%
  CI = −13.678–100.678

There was an overall 7% reduction in the number of comorbidities and an
8% reduction in the number of prescriptions. The *t*-test showed a
significant drop in the average number of comorbidities between the two
audits, *t*\ (1) = 23.920, *P* = 0.027, and a drop in the average number
of prescriptions per patient, *t*\ (1) = 28.808, *P* = 0.022. The
overall improvement in prescribing contributed to a 19% reduction in bed
occupancy for specialist dementia beds.

However, there was no difference in the number of patients receiving
polypharmacy, *t*\ (1) = 7.500, *P* = 0.084, or the number of patients
receiving medication with a high risk of ADRs, *t*\ (1) = 6.857,
*P* = 0.092. There was also no significant difference in the number of
patients in specialist dementia wards, *t*\ (1) = 9.667, *P* = 0.066.

`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__ represents the STOPP part of the toolkit, while
`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__ represents the START component. Fig. 1Inappropriate
drugs prescribed according to STOPP. Fig. 2Drugs that should have been
prescribed according to START.

According to the STOPP toolkit, 164 drugs were prescribed; of those, 118
(72%) drugs were prescribed for longer than a year. Forty-one (25%)
drugs were considered to have been inappropriately prescribed and could
be stopped according to STOPP (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). The four main types
of inappropriateness were long-term use, lack of clear indication,
symptoms no longer present, and lack of clear documentation. The most
common drugs inappropriately prescribed were benzodiazepines,
antipsychotics and opiates.

According to the START toolkit, 145 drugs were prescribed; of those, 129
(89%) drugs were prescribed for longer than a year. Twenty-six drugs
should have been prescribed according to the toolkit but were not (`Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

When reviewing all geographical sectors, an improvement in the
prescribing pattern was found between the audits. All teams were more
conscious of inappropriate prescribing in older people. In some of the
cases, we had little information on who prescribed the medications, why
they were prescribed and when they were reviewed. Nevertheless, it is
important to remember that the STOPP/START criteria were designed to
highlight inappropriate prescriptions and prevent ADEs, especially those
involving medications with a high risk of ADRs.

The audit showed an observed overall 24% reduction in polypharmacy and a
25% reduction in prescribing of medications with a high risk of ADRs.
However, the difference between the audits was not statistically
significant. The non-significance may be related to the reduction in
number of patients from 58 to 47, or the reduction in drugs per patient
may have been due to them having fewer illnesses.

According to the STOPP Toolkit, 164 drugs were prescribed in the 2016
audit. *This was a 25% reduction in prescribing since the first audit.*
Seventy-five central nervous system (CNS) drugs were prescribed
according to STOPP, a 40% reduction in prescribing since the first
audit. According to the START toolkit, 145 drugs were prescribed at the
time of the re-audit. *This was an 8% reduction in prescribing since the
first audit.* There was no change in the total number of CNS drugs
prescribed, according to the START toolkit. However, *there was less
antidepressant prescribing across all sectors.* These results are also a
proxy measure for improving care by optimising medicines in the elderly,
i.e. reduced exposure to polypharmacy improves care and quality of life.

According to the toolkit, our CNS drugs will be mainly inappropriately
prescribed because of long-term use (longer than a month). However, the
nature of mental disorder and its associated behavioural and
psychological symptoms will mean that it is appropriate for our patient
groups to be on longer-term medication. The multiple comorbidities will
also add to the complexity of those patients and their management.

Another important observation is that adequate documentation is very
much needed to clarify the target symptoms and the rationale for
prescribing. It is important for all the teams to review medications and
their appropriateness as part of the weekly ward round and monthly
clinical pharmacist input. It is important to continue to raise
awareness of the STOPP/START tool and to encourage its use by doctors
and pharmacists, in order to promote safe prescribing among older
patients.

Prescribers should not feel overwhelmed when reviewing multiple
medications prescribed for older people. The STOPP/START tool has been
proven to be a useful framework.

The audit has provided the foundations of a good multidisciplinary
relationship between medical, nursing and pharmacy staff, which has not
only benefited the in-patients but also demonstrated how a
multidisciplinary team can stop inappropriate prescribing in older
patients. It is clear that we can improve the care and safety of such
patients by optimising their medicines. This will also have a secondary
economic impact by producing an annual cost saving. The additional cost
benefits in preventing adverse effects and associated medical treatment
should be included in any basic financial evaluation. These additional
benefits are likely to be substantial in economic and human terms. The
benefits of the medical and pharmaceutical perspectives working together
as a team were both additive and synergistic.

The audit also highlighted the need to facilitate greater collaboration
with a clinical pharmacist and the older person's physician/general
practitioner to provide better care for older psychiatric patients. As
the toolkit looked at the prescribing pattern, it does not include the
patients’ views or their families’ opinion about drugs. However, shared
decision-making should be always a priority for clinical teams. As the
audit reflects a cross-section of old age psychiatry, we believe that
the results are generalisable. It will be useful in the future for a
well-designed research study to be conducted in old age psychiatry
covering multiple areas or larger community and in-patient settings to
test that assumption.

The small pocket-sized smartcards/leaflets showing the drugs commonly
meeting the STOPP/START criteria proved useful on all wards. Introducing
the toolkit at junior doctor induction has also been beneficial.

.. _sec4:

Conclusion
==========

Inappropriate prescribing occurs when the risks associated with
prescribing a medication outweigh the potential benefits of the
medication in a particular patient. PIP may also occur when a patient
does not receive a medication indicated for the treatment or prevention
of a disease or condition. The STOPP/START criteria have been used to
review the medication profiles in various settings worldwide.
STOPP/START criteria are validated, reliable systems-based criteria for
PIP. The STOPP criteria significantly predict ADEs, and the application
of the STOPP/START toolkit improves medication appropriateness and
probably reduces/prevents adverse events. The STOPP/START criteria are
*not* the complete answer to preventing medication errors, but they help
to optimise pharmacotherapy at the point of initiation and at routine
medication review. The use of the STOPP/START toolkit can also have a
positive impact by reducing prescribing errors. Sustaining these changes
will require continued efforts to maintain prescriber awareness of the
STOPP/START toolkit.

**Dr Victor M. Aziz**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Cwm Taf UHB, Wales, UK;
**Dr Natalie Hill**, ST6 in Old Age Psychiatry, Wales Deanery, UK; **Dr
Sugandha Kumar**, ST6 in Old Age Psychiatry, Wales Deanery, UK.
