---
author:
- Lena Jawad
date: 2018-8
institute:
- "ST5 in General Psychiatry, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS
  Foundation Trust, London, UK; email: <lenajawad@doctors.org.uk>"
---

*Still Down* by Dean F. MacKinnon, a US-based psychiatrist, is a
patient-centred guide written primarily for patients -- and their
families -- seeking effective management for treatment-resistant
depression.

The book begins with a revision of the symptoms of major depressive
disorder and a summary of how treatment has developed to include a wide
range of antidepressant medications that allow patients to be trialled
on alternative treatments when any one agent is unsuccessful. The author
explains treatment-resistant depression -- where patients fail to
respond to antidepressant therapy -- using nine case studies that
suggest reasons for treatment failures, starting with relatively
straightforward cases and ending with more complex scenarios. Scenarios
include patients who have been inadequately treated or misdiagnosed as
well as patients who are 'treatment resistant.' Strategies, both
biological and psychological, based on the author\'s own clinical
experiences are suggested as ways to overcome antidepressant failure.
These are summarised in a table towards the end of the publication.

MacKinnon presents cases concisely, in an engaging and conversational
style. Each presentation ends with a summary of the key (general)
clinical points and case notes which highlight diagnostic features
specific to the patient\'s individual presentation.

The main strength of this work is its clarity of information.
Easy-to-read prose, bullet-points and tables help break up the text in
ways that aid comprehension. Explanation of medical jargon where used
and the relative absence of jargon ensures suitability to the target
audience. Limitations include its focus on treatments approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which may be less relevant in
countries other than the USA. Furthermore, the book does not include
novel evidence on pharmacological or psychological treatments.
Irrespective of this, it remains a valuable commodity for healthcare
professionals, offering a general revision of the topic and inspiring an
individualised approach to managing patients.

In summary, this is a well-written and helpful resource for patients and
relatives seeking to gain a better understanding of depression and its
management.
