==============================================================================================================================
Vitamin D in patients with intellectual and developmental disability in secure in-patient services in the North of England, UK
==============================================================================================================================



Iain McKinnon
Thomas Lewis
Naomi Mehta
Shahed Imrit
Julie Thorp
Chris Ince

:Correspondence: Iain McKinnon
(iain.mckinnon@newcastle.ac.uk)

:date: 2018-2

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To assess the benefits of the introduction of routine vitamin D serum
   sampling for all patients admitted to a secure in-patient hospital in
   the North of England providing medium security, low security and
   rehabilitation services for offenders with intellectual and
   developmental disability. The vitamin D levels of 100 patients were
   analysed at baseline. Those with insufficient or deficient levels
   were offered treatment and retested after 1 year. Vitamin D levels
   were analysed in the context of level of security, seasonality of
   test and co-prescription of psychotropic medications.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Eighty-three per cent of patients had suboptimal vitamin D levels at
   initial test (41% deficient and 42% insufficient). This was seen
   among established patients and new admissions. Regression analysis of
   baseline vitamin D levels revealed no differences for levels of
   security, seasonality, whether patients were taking antipsychotic or
   anticonvulsant medication, or length of stay. Patients with
   deficiency or insufficiency were all offered supplementation. Those
   who opted in had significantly higher vitamin D levels at follow-up,
   compared with those who declined treatment.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Established and newly admitted patients in our secure mental health
   services had substantial levels of vitamin D insufficiency. In the
   light of the morbidities that are associated with deficient vitamin D
   levels, routine screening and the offer of supplementation is
   advisable.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Background
==========

Suboptimal levels of plasma 25-hydroxy vitamin D (25OHD) have been
implicated in a number of morbidities, including musculoskeletal and
cardiorespiratory diseases, diabetes and depression.1\ :sup:`,`\ 2 A
substantial proportion of vitamin D is obtained from ultraviolet-B light
acting on the skin1, although the relative amounts obtained from solar
and food sources vary from study to study.3 There is, therefore, a
greater potential for impaired vitamin D levels during the autumn and
winter months.4 Public Health England currently advise a minimum of
10 µg of vitamin D per day for the general population, but give no
separate advice for those at risk of minimal sunlight exposure, such as
institutionalised individuals.5

It is estimated that approximately 50% of the population of Northern
England have insufficient or deficient vitamin D levels.6 Based on
National Health Service guidelines, in January 2013, a decision was made
by the clinicians at Northgate Hospital, Northumberland, UK, to
routinely screen for vitamin D deficiency and treat as necessary.7
Northgate Hospital has a range of levels of secure care facilities for
people with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD) who
offend, as well as providing specialised services for people with severe
autism spectrum disorders.

This paper describes an evaluation of the results of screening for 25OHD
at Northgate Hospital. It was hypothesised that patients in secure
services would have suboptimal levels of 25OHD due to less exposure to
sunlight, and as a possible consequence of medications prescribed for
mental disorders. We were also interested in the effect of season of
testing, and whether the decision to routinely screen for and treat
25OHD deficiency would lead to improvement in any such deficiencies.

.. _sec2:

Aims
====

1To describe vitamin D levels in an ‘at risk’ population of offenders
with IDD in secure care, across a range of levels of security;2To assess
the effectiveness of screening for and treating any vitamin D
deficiencies.

.. _sec3:

Method
======

.. _sec3-1:

Cohort 1
--------

Between January 2013 and February 2014, all patients at Northgate
Hospital were screened for vitamin D deficiency. These existing
patients, who were having blood tests taken as part of their annual
health checks over the year, had a serum vitamin D level added to the
standard biochemistry request form with no additional venepuncture over
and above routine testing.

.. _sec3-2:

Cohort 2
--------

While existing patients were having their vitamin D levels checked as
part of annual health checks, new admissions to the secure services were
also being screened. Because we judged that there may be differences
between the established patient group and new admissions (higher levels
of sun exposure, dietary intake differences), new admissions from
January 2013 onwards were considered as a separate cohort for the
purpose of assessing baseline vitamin D levels.

Data were collected for the first 100 patients screened, from both
cohorts. The results were classified according to standard biochemical
reference ranges for total 25OHD (the sum of 25OHD\ :sub:`2` and
25OHD\ :sub:`3`): •deficient (<25 nmol/L)•insufficient
(25–49 nmol/L)•sufficient (50–75 nmol/L)•optimal (>75 nmol/L) vitamin D
levels.Each result was stored with anonymised data about the patient's
age, length of stay prior to the initial test, co-prescribed
psychotropic medications, level of in-patient security and the season
the test was performed.

Following the initial test, all patients were offered appropriate
treatment by the hospital's physical health service if required,
although not all patients accepted it. At Northgate Hospital, the
supplementation protocol for vitamin D is based on guidance provided by
the National Health Service Specialist Pharmacy Service.8 Those patients
found to be deficient were treated with 20 000 units of oral
colecalciferol twice weekly for 8 weeks and then maintained on 800 units
daily. Those found to have insufficient levels were treated with a
maintenance dose of 800–1600 units of oral colecalciferol daily.
Patients' 25OHD levels were then re-tested a year later as part of the
next year's annual health checks.

.. _sec3-3:

Data analysis
-------------

.. _sec3-3-1:

Baseline 25OHD data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mean baseline 25OHD levels were analysed using a single multiple
regression analysis. The regression model assessed the effects of the
following categorical predictors on baseline 25OHD levels: season of
testing, levels of security, prescription of antipsychotic or
anticonvulsant medication, and the cohort tested. Data that were not
normally distributed were transformed appropriately (using a
log\ :sub:`10` transformation for 25OHD values).

.. _sec3-4:

Effect of treatment
-------------------

Patient records were scrutinised to ascertain whether, following
baseline testing, treatment to correct any deficiency was offered and/or
taken. Follow-up testing data were collected, and the McNemar test of
marginal homogeneity was applied to the pairs of non-adjusted 25OHD
levels to assess differences in patients’ 25OHD levels between baseline
and follow-up.

Data were analysed using SPSS version 22.9 This service evaluation was
registered with the Research and Development department of
Northumberland, Tyne and Wear National Health Service Foundation Trust,
in November 2013 (Registration number SER-13-018).

.. _sec4:

Results
=======

.. _sec4-1:

Study population
----------------

| Seventy-three established patents at Northgate Hospital had baseline
  25OHD screening between January 2013 and February 2014 (cohort 1).
  Between January 2013 and July 2016, a further 27 patients had been
  admitted to the hospital and received baseline 25OHD screening on
  admission (cohort 2). The two cohorts are described in `Tables
  1 <#tab01>`__ and `2 <#tab02>`__. As expected, the median length of
  stay at baseline test was significantly greater in cohort 1 than in
  cohort 2 (36 months *vs.* 1 month; Mann–Whitney U: 34.5, *P* < 0.001)
  as new patients were tested soon after admission. There were no
  patients of Black and minority ethnic (BAME) origin among the patient
  group. Table 1Description of cohort 1\ *N*\ Mean ageSexAntipsychotics
| *n* (%)Anticonvulsants
| *n* (%)Season of test (*n*)MFWinterSpringSummerAutumnMedium
  security2026.52009 (45)8 (40)5663Low security3938.230915 (38)10
  (26)97167Rehabilitation934.0814 (44)2 (22)0153Autism service533.4502
  (40)2 (40)2120TOTAL7334.1302216152913 Table 2Description of cohort
  2\ *N*\ Mean ageSexAntipsychotics
| *n* (%)Anticonvulsants
| *n* (%)Season of test (*n*)MFWinterSpringSummerAutumnMedium
  security1425.81403 (21)2 (14)2462Low security1135.7924 (36)5
  (45)4124Rehabilitation150.0011 (100)00100Autism service119.0101
  (100)00010TOTAL2730.5976696

.. _sec4-2:

Baseline vitamin D levels
-------------------------

The mean 25OHD level of the whole study population was 35.1 nmol/L (s.d.
28.1), and the median was 27.0 nmol/L, representing positively skewed
values (Shapiro–Wilk: 0.699, *P* < 0.001). The regression analysis was
therefore conducted using log\ :sub:`10`-transformed values. The
statuses of 100 patients at baseline are represented in `Fig
1 <#fig01>`__, showing that the vast majority had either deficient or
insufficient 25OHD levels. Fig. 1Vitamin D status of 100 patients at
baseline testing.

| The regression analysis demonstrated no effect of season or level of
  security on the vitamin D status of the patient at baseline `Table
  3 <#tab03>`__). Furthermore, there were no differences between the two
  cohorts, or between those prescribed antipsychotic or anticonvulsant
  medication. Table 3Single multiple regression analysis of
  between-subject effects on log\ :sub:`10` 25OHD levels at
  baselineFactorLog\ :sub:`10` 25OHD
| type III sum of squaresd.f.Mean
  squareF\ *P*-valueSeason0.46330.1542.3540.077Security0.14730.0490.7460.527Antipsychotics0.17110.1712.6000.110Anticonvulsants0.17510.1752.6730.106Cohort0.08910.0891.3500.248

There was a trend for lower 25OHD levels among patients already
prescribed antipsychotic medication, and marginally higher levels in
those on anticonvulsant medication, although four of the 29 patients in
the latter group had already been prescribed vitamin D supplements.
Furthermore, 25OHD levels were statistically non-significantly higher in
the summer compared with winter (median 25OHD 33 nmol/L *vs.*
20 nmol/L), and in the rehabilitation service compared with the medium
secure wards (median 25OHD 33.5 nmol/L *vs.* 27.5 nmol/L).

.. _sec4-3:

Follow-up and treatment effects
-------------------------------

Follow-up data were available for 89 patients who were retested around
12 months after baseline screening. The mean 25OHD level was 66.3 nmol/L
(s.d. 33.6) and the median was 62.0 nmol/L, which represented a less
extreme but still significant positive skew (Shapiro-Wilk: 0.914,
*P* = 0.035). The numbers of patients with sufficient and optimal 25OHD
had improved substantially (see `Fig 2 <#fig02>`__). Fig. 2Vitamin D
status of 89 patients at follow-up.

Not all patients who received baseline 25OHD screening and/or treatment
were tested a second time. Some patients were discharged from hospital
in the interim, or their 25OHD level was not requested by the physical
treatment service. A flowchart of all 100 patients is provided in `Fig
3 <#fig03>`__. Fig. 3Flowchart of 100 patients who underwent baseline
screening. Mean (s.d.) 25OHD levels are reported.

The regression analysis was repeated for log\ :sub:`10`-transformed
25OHD levels at follow-up testing. As in the baseline data, there were
no effects for seasonality, security level, or the prescription of
antipsychotic or anticonvulsant medication.

.. _sec5:

Discussion
==========

This is the first study to report data from a specialist hospital for
patients with IDD who offend, and those with severe autism spectrum
disorders, with a number of levels of secure and non-secure wards and
units. This paper describes routinely collected data on serum 25OHD
levels obtained at baseline prior to clinical decisions to treat any
vitamin D deficiency, along with follow-up serum levels after a year.
The rationale for the implementation of this protocol was based on
concerns that low levels of sun exposure, the secure environment and the
prescription of psychotropic medication put in-patients in a ‘high risk’
category, with potentially serious long-term health sequelae.7

The data suggest considerable vitamin deficiency among this patient
group. Furthermore, there were no clear differences in 25OHD levels
between patients already in hospital when baseline screening took place
and newly admitted patients. This might be attributed to deficiencies in
the community, but, in a tertiary service, new admissions frequently
transfer from other in-patient services. Limitations in the data
available mean that further scrutiny is outside the scope of this paper.
There appeared to be a trend for marginally lower 25OHD levels in secure
wards compared with rehabilitation services, but there was no
statistically significant variation.

Although no significant differences were found between patients taking
psychotropic medication and those who were not, these factors remain of
clinical concern with respect to bone health. A recent small-scale
prospective study found that antipsychotics may inhibit vitamin
D-metabolising enzymes, thereby causing a reduction in both calcium and
25OHD levels.10 This association is of particular concern given the
known link between antipsychotics and osteoporosis risk via raised
prolactin levels.11

Patients with normal 25OHD levels at baseline who were already on
supplements all opted to continue with treatment. Those with normal
levels at baseline who were not already receiving treatment were advised
by their general practitioner based on the clinical scenario. Neither
the supplemented nor the non-supplemented group had significant changes
in their 25OHD status at follow-up, but numbers here were small.

Patients with suboptimal 25OHD levels were all offered supplementation
using a standard protocol. Those who opted for supplementation had
significantly higher 25OHD levels at follow-up, whereas those who opted
out experienced non-significant changes. As the data here reported are
routinely collected, it is not possible to make any systematic inference
as to what lay behind a patient's decision to accept or decline
supplementation.

Although vitamin D deficiency was widespread among this group, it was
not present among all patients. There is some evidence from genome-wide
association studies that genetic factors also have a significant role in
identifying those at increased risk, but this is beyond the scope of
this evaluation.12

Our data are commensurate with a study of psychiatric in-patients in a
Scottish high-secure hospital at a similar geographical latitude to
Northgate Hospital. That study concluded that all patients in secure
settings should be screened and offered supplementation based on
‘significant and serious’ deficiency of 25OHD associated with bone
demineralisation.13 Furthermore, such deficiencies do not appear to be
limited to secure care. One study of people with IDD in
institutionalised nursing care in Finland demonstrated significant 25OHD
insufficiency, which was addressed by oral or intramuscular
supplementation.14

The data in this study were routinely collected and not prospectively
planned, leading to limitations in their interpretation. Serum
parathyroid hormone and calcium levels were not routinely collected, nor
were any bone mineralisation tests performed. No data on the content or
vitamin D qualities of patients’ diets were collected. It is also not
possible to comment on the longer-term health risks such as fractures
without a larger, more specialised study. The patient group at Northgate
is not ethnically diverse; all patients in this cohort were of white
ethnicity. One study of a long-stay psychiatric in-patient facility
found an association between low vitamin D levels and being of a BAME
background, with improvements in 25OHD levels after treatment.15 Another
recent study in Tier 4 adolescent psychiatric services showed similar
numbers of white and BAME patients with 25OHD deficiency (46 vs. 53%).16

This raises the question as to whether all patients who are ‘high risk’
should be offered treatment. The long stays of patients within secure
services, along with concomitant medication, would put these patients
within this category. Current guidance by Public Health England
recommends a minimum of 10 µg per day for the general population aged
four and above, where diet alone is insufficient.5 However, the choice
between simple supplementation or a deficiency protocol for patients
such as these has not been fully established. Furthermore, it has not
been established whether supplementation should be offered without
suitable baseline screening. It should also be considered that the more
general effects of vitamin D supplementation are far from certain. A
meta-analysis of 18 randomised controlled trials (RCTs) suggested that
there was a modest reduction in overall mortality for people taking
standard doses of 25OHD supplementation,17 but a more recent umbrella
review of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of observational studies
and RCTs found little convincing evidence of a clear role for vitamin D
in health outcomes.18

Nevertheless, this study has shown that in-patients with IDD appear to
have deficiencies in vitamin D and that these are amenable to correction
by oral supplementation in many cases. We recommend further research in
this area, including prospective studies of the longer-term health
sequelae.

Thanks to Dr Andreas Finkelmeyer, Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle
University, who assisted with the statistical analysis.

**Iain McKinnon**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Northumberland, Tyne and
Wear NHS Foundation Trust, and Honorary Senior Lecturer in Psychiatry,
Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, UK; **Thomas Lewis**,
Specialist Registrar in Psychiatry, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS
Foundation Trust, UK; **Naomi Mehta**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Tees,
Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust, UK; **Shahed Imrit**,
Specialty Doctor, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust,
UK; **Julie Thorp**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Northumberland, Tyne and
Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK; **Chris Ince**, Consultant Psychiatrist,
Specialist Services, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust,
UK.
