---
abstract: |
  In 2012, the coalition government introduced the legal right for
  National Health Service (NHS) patients in England to choose their
  mental healthcare provider for out-patient treatment. This was a
  significant step towards parity of care between mental and physical
  ill health, and NHS Improvement and NHS England have provided sensible
  guidance on its implementation. However, several factors prevent the
  system from working as it was intended: lack of awareness of the
  principle of patient choice for out-patient treatment; complacency
  from some trusts and commissioners; mental health trusts operating
  outside the e-referrals system; misuse of care pathways; lack of
  direct access by many general practitioners for out-of-area referrals;
  and delays in authorisation for funding. I describe how I have come to
  this conclusion and suggest some solutions.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a1}

  The author is employed by a trust that potentially benefits from
  'patient choice'.
author:
- David VealeCorrespondence to Professor David Veale
  (<david.veale@kcl.ac.uk>)
date: 2018-4
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley National Health Service Trust, UK
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
title: Choice of provider for out-patient treatment is not working
---

The Royal College of Psychiatrists has campaigned for parity of care
between mental and physical ill health and has secured some notable
success in raising awareness and pushing mental health up the political
agenda. One issue in parity of care, which remains problematic, is the
right of patients to choose their out-patient provider in defined
circumstances. Thus, if you visit your general practitioner (GP) with a
cancer, you can choose your treatment provider, using a variety of
criteria such as reputation, outcomes, waiting times and location.
Paradoxically, choice is not often a priority in physical healthcare.^1^
When surveyed, people most value proximity, a short waiting list and
ease of transport to healthcare. This is perhaps because the quality of
physical healthcare is more similar across providers compared with, say,
the delivery of a protocol in cognitive--behavioural therapy (CBT) for a
particular disorder.

# Background {#sec1}

In 2012, the Rt Hon. Norman Lamb and the coalition government introduced
the legal right for National Health Service (NHS) patients in England to
choose their mental healthcare provider for out-patient treatment.^2^
This was a significant step towards parity of care and allowed patients
suffering mental disorder to choose their *out-patient* provider, in the
same way as they could if suffering from a physical condition, without
the need for discussion at a funding committee. Older readers will
remember that choice for mental health out-patient treatment used to be
available on the NHS up until the early 1990s.

The way the change in law is interpreted is outlined in the document
*Choice in Mental Health*, published by NHS Improvement, who are now
responsible for the regulation of patient choice.^3^ NHS England have
also published some helpful documents and guides on patient choice, from
which some of this article is drawn.^4^^--^^6^

The guidance by NHS Improvement and NHS England is clear. Nevertheless,
introduction of the change is being hampered by several factors: lack of
awareness on the part of both professionals and the community; poor
commitment by trusts and commissioners; and various loopholes that I
will go on to describe. As it remains cheaper for a patient to be
treated by a block contract with a local provider, some of the apparent
lack of compliance may flow from an effort to contain costs. To follow
the guidance for patient choice, out-patient treatment needs to follow a
typical package of care at a service that has a standard NHS contract.
This can be at two levels of stepped care.

## Primary care -- Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) {#sec1-1}

This consists of a psychological therapy with no consultant involvement.
Thus, legally the GP and patient may decide they wish to go to a
different provider even if a clinical commissioning group (CCG) has a
block contract with a local IAPT service.

## Secondary care -- consultant-led service {#sec1-2}

Where a patient with moderate to severe symptoms requires a more
experienced therapist and medication advice in a consultant-led service,
this can also be accessed under patient choice by a GP. The treatment
must be *clinically appropriate*, without the need for local community
mental health team (CMHT) involvement or integrated social care. Here,
the service acts as the secondary care provider. Again, under patient
choice, the existence of a care pathway with a block contract for a
local CMHT or psychological therapy service is irrelevant if the GP and
patient decide they wish to go to a different provider. Clarity over the
right of patients to choose may be particularly important where there is
a need for assessment or treatment in one of the many 'Cinderella'
services in psychiatry, such as anxiety disorders and trauma,
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), chronic fatigue or
medically unexplained symptoms, where local services may not be well
developed. It might involve out-patient child and adolescent services if
other local services are not required. However, there is no obligation
on the provider of a CMHT to travel to the patient; in effect, choice
depends on the patient traveling to an out-patient provider.^5^

In brief, NHS England^5^ state that a patient is *not* entitled to
choose where to be referred in the following cases. 1The patient\'s
needs cannot be addressed by a typical package of care that lies outside
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance or is
not routinely commissioned on an ongoing basis through a NHS standard
contract. An example for which choice of provider does not exist might
be repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation for depression, because
it is not routinely commissioned. An example of where choice would exist
is CBT for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which would be
commissioned to be treated at a local IAPT or secondary care
service.2The patient\'s needs mean that an outside referral is *not*
clinically appropriate. For example, urgent care for a patient with
significant risk factors (such as self-neglect or a risk of suicide),
which are best served by local CMHT involvement. Patients cannot choose
their level of care (such as residential or in-patient over out-patient
care) unless it is clinically appropriate (for example, intensive CBT on
a residential unit for severe obsessive--compulsive disorder). Nor are
patients entitled to choose a non-local provider if treatment is likely
to need integrated care with social services or a CMHT because of the
level of risk. These are examples of where it is not clinically
appropriate for a GP to refer that patient to an out-patient service.If
patients need a local CMHT, then the GP cannot refer to a specialist
service. If appropriate, the CMHT will make an individual funding
request to a CCG for assessment or treatment at a national specialist
service as part of tertiary care.

The principles developed by NHS Improvement and the Patient Choice
department of NHS England5 are sensible, but parity of care is not
working in practice. I highlight some of the key problems and possible
solutions below.

# Lack of awareness of patient choice on the part of patients and GPs {#sec2}

Patients and GPs remain broadly unaware of patient choice. It seems very
strongly embedded in the culture that mental healthcare is differently
regarded from physical care and that only in exceptional cases can
patients be referred out of area. I have read refusals for funding from
commissioners in mental health, which cite unapologetic expectation that
routine patients be treated in a locally commissioned service. I have
lost count of the patients who report that their GP swiftly dismissed
any suggestion that an out-of-area referral is possible other than in
exceptional circumstances (i.e. a tertiary care option) or where 'local
resources have been exhausted'. On the NHS Choices website, psychiatric
hospitals are commonly listed as providing a service for their local
population. There is no listing of, say, a clinic for anxiety disorders,
ADHD or eating disorders that will accept referrals from GPs all over
England.

Linked to this problem, the NHS Choices website specifies no waiting
times, or details of outcomes, awards or patient feedback for any
individual clinic. Neither do hospital or IAPT websites make clear when
a service can receive a direct referral from a GP from around the
country or when it requires a CMHT to make the referral. Where
patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) are available, presentation is
very patchy (and tends to refer to an IAPT service in one borough,
rather than a service like our own at the Centre for Anxiety Disorders
and Trauma which accepts a selection of patients across different IAPT
services). There appears to be little desire by trusts to develop
special interests, and so trusts that do provide a 'specialist' service
appear to regard them still as only available in complex cases or for
tertiary care, for which patient choice does not apply. This is not the
case. Services such as our own not only have funding streams for
treating patients with severe cases in tertiary care but also treat
patients within primary care (IAPT) and secondary care as described
above. NHS Improvement published further guidance earlier this year in
user-friendly language. The leaflets^5^ were sent directly to all
CCGs.^2^ Although Mind and other mental health charities also publicised
the initiative, the message is still not getting through to GPs or
patients who would like the option of choice for out-patient treatment
where it is clinically appropriate.

It would undoubtedly help if NHS Digital and providers were to publicise
on their websites those services that are directly available to GPs,
accompanied by clear data. At present, NHS Choices tends to describe the
hospital but not individual clinics, although I acknowledge they are
dependent on the information provided. NHS Choices does, however,
provide a list of private therapists, which seems odd on an NHS website.
'Specialist' services on hospital websites appear to be solely relevant
for tertiary care rather than open for GP referrals. The NHS Choices and
individual hospital websites need to encourage the reporting of standard
PROMs and other meaningful information such as waiting lists for
individual clinics. Patients find it difficult to make choices
unassisted and currently seem to rely mainly on reputation and charity
helplines. This is not good enough.

# Mental health foundation trusts are not part of 'e-referral' systems on GPs' computers {#sec3}

Only a small number of mental health providers have joined e-referral
(or the old 'Choose and Book' system) in the same way as physical care
providers do. This prevents GPs from using the system as intended, while
feeding the misperception that they are obliged to use the local
service. Thus, if you have a physical health problem, your GP can book
you into a clinic of your choice on his/her computer. Waiting times are
generally known for competing hospitals providing physical healthcare.
Mental health trusts appear to prioritise their CMHT services over
implementation of e-referrals and other mechanisms to assist with the
guidance.

# Misuse of care pathways {#sec4}

A 'care pathway' is a way of describing *how* a patient is assessed and
treated for a specific problem. Many hospital trusts and CCGs have care
pathways which are helpful. They are generally based on NICE guidance,
although there are often areas in which there is not sufficient evidence
and a pathway is based on other evidence and expert opinion. Care
pathways are sensibly used for long-term physical conditions such as
diabetes, which require local joined-up solutions. However, care
pathways in mental healthcare are often misused; they may state *the
location* of a local service without highlighting the need to discuss
patient choice when there are no significant risk factors or any need
for local social services or a CMHT (as required by NHS Improvement).
Other misuses of care pathways include referrals for a patient with a
certain condition (e.g. chronic fatigue) being directed to a specific
care provider that has a block contract, with no discussion about
choice.

My view is that NHS Improvement needs to ensure that, when a patient
does not have significant risk factors (e.g. suicide, neglect) or any
need for integrated social services, a local care pathway includes a
discussion of choice and relevant documents are easily available on a
local website (rather than, for example, obtained under the Freedom of
Information Act). Here, NICE could highlight the role of choice in
out-patient treatment for problems that do not require local CMHT or
social services.

# Lack of direct access by GPs to IAPT providers out of their area {#sec5}

Increasingly, CCGs prevent their GPs from directly referring to a
non-local IAPT provider. GPs may refer to a local IAPT service, but
anything else is directed to a local triage assessment or to a funding
panel. In other words, not all providers are treated equally, and delays
are created for patients referred to triage or a funding panel. Triage
can be helpful when a patient is likely to need a local CMHT (for
example, if a patient has significant risk factors or is likely to need
mental healthcare integrated with social services). An IAPT patient by
definition does not have significant risk, so this is an example of
inherent bias (or lack of parity). Triage is not required for referral
to a local IAPT level of service, but it may be required to determine
whether the patient needs to be referred to a CMHT. Indeed, people are
entitled to self-refer without even needing to involve a GP, yet if they
have the temerity to go out of area, they have to be triaged to discuss
the benefits of the local IAPT service, thus delaying treatment.

At present, NHS Improvement allows CCGs to set up care pathways as they
see fit. They believe that a triage assessment can be used to determine
whether the referral is clinically appropriate, so long as choice is
discussed. However, local triage services do not collect the relevant
PROMs or waiting times, or keep a current list of specialised clinics of
other IAPT providers around the country. Sample documents have shown
that it is not normally part of the policy to discuss choice of provider
(and certainly choice of IAPT provider). Many CCGs just ban their GPs
from referring out of area, and such requests have to go to a funding
panel where the GP is required to request special circumstances, which
is inconsistent with patient choice. In practice, patients conduct their
own research and discuss it with their GP or hope that the GP has
specialist knowledge and can advise them. IAPT services are perfectly
capable of saying when treatment with them is not appropriate, without
local CMHT involvement. Patients do not need another triage assessment
-- otherwise they would not be allowed to refer themselves directly to a
local IAPT provider.

In summary, IAPT represents the lowest level of stepped care. Patients
are often entitled to self-refer. The principle of a triage service for
IAPT patients who wish to be referred to an out-of-area provider is
therefore nonsense. In my view, NHS Improvement needs to ensure that
IAPT patients can be assessed at the provider of their choice. Referrals
to non-local providers need to state clearly which service is sought
(for example, IAPT rather than secondary care).

# Lack of direct access by the GP to a secondary care provider {#sec6}

By secondary care provider we mean a consultant-led service which deals
with more complex problems than IAPT does or where medication advice may
be required. Again, GPs are often prevented from directly referring
outside the area or are restricted in doing so until after triage by
their local provider. Local triage services are appropriate when local
CMHT or social services involvement is likely to be required. Again, NHS
Improvement does not define how referrals should be managed *so long as
choice is discussed* at a triage service. As we have seen above in
discussing IAPT services, this is naïve: triage services do not have
regular access to information about other services, relevant PROMs and
care pathways. In practice, despite the guidelines, triage services do
not discuss the importance of patient choice in their policy documents,
and not all providers are treated equally. Alternatively, such referrals
are just blocked at funding panels, and the patients and GPs are unaware
of their rights.

In my view, NHS Improvement needs to ensure that all triage services
include a full discussion of choice in their policy documents or care
pathways, and that they can provide details of other relevant services.
In addition, such cases should not be discussed at funding panels.
Referrals to providers need to state clearly that they are seeking a
secondary care service rather than IAPT, and that they require
assessment and treatment by a consultant\'s team.

# Delays in authorisation of funding for assessment {#sec7}

When a patient is finally referred, there must be pre-authorisation for
funding by the CCG. Referrals for mental disorders out of area are still
widely treated as something unusual, and the funding panels question why
the patient cannot be treated locally or use a care pathway that states
where a patient must be referred (because that is where there is a block
contract). There are many examples at my own service of patients
referred by their GP who wait several months, even a year, for
applications to be ignored, and then find that funding is never
authorised. About 50 patients who have been referred by their GPs to my
department at the Centre for Anxiety Disorders and Trauma are waiting
for authorisation for funding from CCGs, either for an assessment or,
when they have been assessed, for treatment. Of the 50 I recently
audited, seven have been waiting more than a year, 13 for more than 36
weeks, 25 for more than 24 weeks, 38 for more than 12 weeks, and the
rest for more than 4 weeks. The picture has been similar in previous
years. We recently reviewed our list and found that some patients had
given up: some accept local treatment; some seek private care they
can\'t afford. The people who can choose the location of their treatment
are either lucky (depending on their postcode), or extremely persistent
and articulate, or helped by an advocate. Once a patient has been
assessed by a provider and treatment is recommended, there may then be
delays obtaining funding for treatment. This is wrong, because the
guidelines direct that in such cases, the CCG concerned cannot then
require the patient to switch to its own provider for treatment.
Although the NHS Improvement guidance on this does appear clear, the
message is still not getting through to CCGs. My own trust has hundreds
of outstanding requests for authorisation of GP referrals for assessment
or treatment (not just for our department). Much time is wasted by the
trust and by patient advocates in chasing CCGs, and patients experience
delays in treatment, resulting in avoidable distress to patients and
their families. If these same patients were suffering a physical health
problem and required out-patient treatment, no authorisation for funding
would have to be made: an invoice for activity would just be presented
at the end of a treatment episode. Funding should only be refused if the
treatment is not clinically appropriate (and not, for example, because
the applicant should be treated in the local care pathway), and any such
process should not unduly delay assessment or treatment. GPs and
patients can complain directly to the regulator at NHS Improvement
(<https://improvement.nhs.uk/contact-us/>) if they feel they are being
denied their rights.

# Conclusions {#sec8}

Some patients want to be able to choose their treatment provider for
out-patient treatment. This will mainly affect more 'specialist'
services such as anxiety disorders, chronic fatigue and ADHD, where a
local service may be less well developed. They have a legal framework
and guidelines from the regulator to support them. However, more than 4
years after the system was introduced, it is not working effectively to
deliver the care intended.

I acknowledge salary support from the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health at the
South London and Maudsley National Health Service Foundation Trust and
the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neurosciences, King\'s
College London.

**David Veale** is a Consultant Psychiatrist at the Centre for Anxiety
Disorders and Trauma, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust,
UK, and Visiting Professor in Cognitive Behavioural Psychotherapies at
the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King\'s
College London, UK.
