---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  This study used data collected to describe the activity, case-load
  characteristics and outcome measures for all patients seen during a
  6-year period.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  The service reviewed 2153 patients over 6 years with referral rates
  and case-load characteristics comparable to those described in a
  previous study period. The team saw 82% of patients on the day they
  were referred. Data and outcome measures collected showed significant
  complexity in the cases seen and statistically significant improvement
  in Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS) scores following
  service input.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  The outcome measures used were limited, but the study supports the
  need for specialist liaison psychiatry for older adults (LPOA)
  services in the general hospital. The Framework of Outcome Measures --
  Liaison Psychiatry has now been introduced, but it remains unclear how
  valid this is in LPOA. It is of note that cost-effectiveness secondary
  to service input and training activities are not adequately monitored.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a4}

  None.
author:
- Fedza Mujic
- Ruth Cairns
- Vivienne Mak
- Clare Squire
- Andrew Wells
- Ahmed Al-Harrasi
- Martin PrinceCorrespondence to Fedza Mujic (<fedza.mujic@slam.nhs.uk>)
date: 2018-2
institute:
- 1South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 2Institute of Psychiatry, London
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
title: "Liaison psychiatry for older adults in the general hospital:
  service activity, development and outcomes"
---

Around two-thirds of National Health Service (NHS) in-patient beds are
occupied by older people, with up to 60% having an existing mental
disorder or developing one during their admission.^1^ Medical
in-patients are three to four times more likely to develop a mental
illness than the healthy population, with high prevalence rates of
depression in patients with diabetes and coronary heart disease.^2^ High
rates of dementia, delirium and depression have been reported in older
in-patients.^3^ It is important to identify and treat these conditions,
as mental illness has been shown to increase the risk of poor health
outcomes, including loss of independence, reduced life expectancy and
increased mortality.^3^^--^^5^

Early studies showed that around 30% of all liaison psychiatry referrals
were for people over the age of 65.^6^ Despite an ageing population and
strong arguments for specialist liaison old age psychiatry input in
general hospitals, a report in 2003 showed that 73% of UK services were
provided through a traditional sector-based model,^7^ and it is not
clear to what extent this has changed. Recently, the rapid assessment
and integrated discharge (RAID) liaison psychiatry service led to
significant savings by reducing readmissions and length of stay.^8^
Notably, elderly people represented about a third of the sample but
accounted for around 90% of savings through reduced bed use.

The aim of this study was to provide an in-depth analysis of a
well-established liaison psychiatry for older adults (LPOA) service,
regarding its activity, case-load characteristics and use of outcome
measures.

# Method {#sec1}

## Setting and team development {#sec1-1}

King\'s College Hospital is a 950-bed London teaching hospital covering
a large inner-city catchment area. The LPOA service was restructured in
2000, moving from an *ad hoc* off-site service to a dedicated specialist
service with staff based in the hospital. Also, the old consultation
model of service delivery was changed to a true liaison model in
December 2000 as previously described,^9^ but has been focused on
in-patients over the age of 65 years. No older adult specialist cover
had been provided to the emergency department until early 2016, owing to
the small team size and insufficient resources.

The staffing level of the service had been unchanged for around 10 years
from 2000 to 2010, with limited (approximately two sessions) honorary
consultant psychiatrist input, a full-time staff grade/associate
specialist doctor, a full-time junior doctor, and no or very poor
administrative support. Attempts to improve the staff skill mix of this
strongly doctor-led service failed for a long time, owing to resource
issues and cuts within the mental health trust. However, with the help
of the acute trust providing funding for 18 months initially, the
service employed a clinical nurse specialist (CNS) in late 2010. This
post has continued and is now funded by the mental health trust. Funding
was also secured for a half-time administrator in 2015 and, as the team
has expanded, the CNS role has been extended and now also operates as
the team manager.

Between October 2013 and September 2015, consultant cover for the
service was provided by the substantive consultant from another older
adult liaison service within the trust. Funding for a half-time
substantive consultant psychiatrist was finally agreed and commenced in
September 2015. Since then, and owing to increased demands on the
service, there have been further developments to the team skill mix,
including fixed-term funding (now made recurrent) for a band 6
psychiatric liaison nurse (PLN) to cover in-patients and Core-24 NHS
England (NHSE) funding
(<https://www.england.nhs.uk/mental-health/adults/crisis-and-acute-care/transformation-funding/>)
for a CNS to provide specialist old age psychiatry input to the
emergency department, and a part-time trainee psychologist has joined
the team. The most recent developments are further NHSE Core-24 funding
for a clinical psychologist and occupational therapist within the
liaison psychiatry department; both posts will work across the general
adult and older adult teams. The team has now become much more
integrated with the general adult psychiatry team, with a single point
of access and closer collaboration.

## Service activity {#sec1-2}

The activity of the service has been monitored extensively since its
inception in December 2000. This has included descriptive data about the
source of and reason for referrals, characteristics of the case-load,
outcome of the team\'s assessment, outcomes and follow-up arrangements.
The rationale for this has been to gather information to support further
service development and to identify any problems that needed addressing.
The data collection has been anonymised throughout, with no patient
identifiers recorded on the electronic database used for further
analysis.

## Sample and data collection {#sec1-3}

The study included all patients seen by the King\'s College Hospital
LPOA service between January 2010 and December 2015.

A two-page form was filled in by the assessing clinician for each
patient, containing demographics, reason for referral, response time,
outcome of the psychiatric assessment, discharge destination and
follow-up arrangements. Data about mental capacity assessment were also
collected, and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores^10^ were
recorded where possible. The main performance and outcome data collected
included response time (and whether target times were met) and Health of
the Nation Outcome Scales for Elderly People (HoNOS 65+) © Royal College
of Psychiatrists 1999.^11^ The response time standards set for the
service were assessment of all urgent referrals within 24 h,
medium-urgency referrals within 3 days, and low-urgency referrals within
5 days. A second HoNOS 65+ rating was completed for patients under the
care of the service for 2 weeks or longer. A record was also kept of new
diagnoses of dementia and antipsychotic medication reviews in patients
with dementia. The information from each form was anonymised and
transferred on to the electronic database by F.M.

## Statistical analysis {#sec1-4}

Data were analysed using SPSS version 21.0. Descriptive statistics were
used to analyse the main demographic characteristics of the case-load
(age, gender, ethnicity), clinical characteristics, cognitive status
(MMSE score) and outcome data of the patients in the sample. We also
used paired *t*-tests to test the difference between paired HoNOS 65+
ratings.

# Results {#sec2}

## Case-load {#sec2-1}

The service reviewed 2153 patients during the studied period, amounting
to approximately 360 patients seen on an annual basis. This did not
include referred patients where the liaison service provided advice and
information only, or where the referral was deemed more appropriate for
another team.

The majority of patients were admitted from their homes (*n* = 1940;
90.1%), while only a minority were either admitted from care homes or
transferred from another hospital. Apart from medical and surgical
issues, 435 (20.2%) patients in this sample were admitted to hospital
owing to falls, with 124 (28.5%) of these sustaining various fractures.
Suicide attempts, overdose or other self-harm incidents were the reason
for admission for 68 (3.1%) patients. The main characteristics of
patients and referrals are outlined in [Table
1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}. Table 1Main characteristics of the
referralsAge, mean years (s.d.)78.6 (7.93); min 60, max
106GenderFemale1141 (53%)Male1011 (47%)EthnicityWhite European1603
(74.5%)Caribbean313 (14.5%)African99 (4.6%)Asian68 (3.2%)White other46
(2.1)Other24 (1.1)Referred byGeriatrics598 (27.5%)Acute medicine564
(26.2%)Acute medical unit378 (17.6%)Orthopaedics94 (4.4%)Other
surgeons152 (7.1%)Other367 (17.0%)Referral urgencyHigh758
(35.2%)Medium1292 (60.0%)Low103 (4.8%)

## Referral requests and assessment {#sec2-2}

The vast majority of referrals were for advice on issues affecting the
patient\'s stay in the hospital, including mental health diagnosis
(82.5%) and management (90.5%). Advice on mental capacity assessment was
requested in 8.5% of the referrals, which is lower than when the service
was first established and before the Mental Capacity Act 2005 was
introduced.^12^ Other requests were mainly related to patients\'
discharge arrangements and made a smaller contribution to the total
number of referrals, e.g. advice on placement (1%) and mental health
follow-up (5.1%).

The main presenting problems that triggered referral were low mood
(65.8%), impaired cognition and confusion (36.2%), behavioural
disturbance (21.7%), and abnormal beliefs and experiences (15.4%). The
most specific referral questions asked were related to mental state
(92.5%) and medication (52%), while other questions included issues with
cognition (8.2%) and suicidality (11%).

The majority of patients were diagnosed with one or more psychiatric
disorders. Only a small number of patients did not have any psychiatric
diagnosis following the assessment (4.3%). The diagnoses are outlined in
[Table 2](#tab02){ref-type="table"}. Table 2Case-loadDiagnosisMain
(*n* = 2153)Second (*n* = 559)Overall frequency of diagnosis
(*n* = 2016)Delirium473 (22.0%)187 (33.5%)660 (32.7%)Dementia438
(20.3%)113 (20.2%)551 (27.3%)Adjustment disorder483 (22.4%)46 (8.2%)529
(26.2%)Depression307 (14.3%)57 (10.2%)364 (18.1%)Psychotic illness125
(5.8%)29 (5.2%)154 (7.6%)Alcohol35 (1.6%)26 (4.7%)61 (3.0%)Bipolar
affective disorder17 (0.8%)8 (1.4%)25 (1.2%)Other183 (8.6%)93 (16.6%)276
(13.7%)No diagnosis92 (4.3%)n/an/a

## Interventions and outcomes {#sec2-3}

In most cases, the referring team received advice on the patient\'s
ongoing management and medication ([Fig. 1a](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}).
No further intervention was provided in 546 (25.4%) of cases, while
others received some further interventions from the service. These
included transfers to a mental health unit (*n* = 98, 4.6%); referral
for community mental health team (CMHT) follow-up (*n* = 249, 11.6%);
referral to the Mental Health for Older Adults home treatment team (HTT;
*n* = 45, 2.1%); and referral for psychological intervention or
assessment (*n* = 21, 1.0%). Mental capacity was assessed in a total of
12.2% of patients (as the main intervention in 7% and as an additional
intervention in the remaining 5.2% of cases). Fig. 1The main
interventions and discharge arrangement. (a) Main intervention. (b)
Discharge arrangements.

Following discharge from hospital, most patients returned to their homes
(62.3%) and were followed up by their general practitioner (GP; 48.7%)
([Fig. 1b](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}). Of the total number of patients,
112 (5.2%) were discharged into an EMI (elderly mentally infirm) care
home.

## Service activity and outcome measures {#sec2-4}

As shown in [Table 3](#tab03){ref-type="table"}, the service was highly
responsive, particularly for urgent referrals, for which almost all
patients were seen on the same day and many within 4 h. The achievement
was lower for medium-urgency referrals (95.2% seen within 3 days) and
low-urgency referrals (93.2% seen within 5 days). Table 3Service
responsiveness, contacts and HoNOS ratingReferrals (*n* = 2153)Seen
within 1 daySeen within 4 hHigh754 (99.5%)754 (99.5%)Medium969
(75.1%)493 (38.3%)Low36 (35.0%)19 (18.4%)All referrals1759 (81.7%)1097
(50.9%)ContactsAll patients (*n* = 2153) Single assessment1141
(53.0%) Mean time under care (days)9.7 (s.d. 15.23) Average number of
contacts2.6 (s.d. 3.269) Mean time spent with patient152.3 min. (s.d.
170.894)Follow-up patients (*n* = 1012) Mean time under care (days)17.06
(s.d. 19.550) Mean number of contacts4.4 (s.d. 4.070) Mean time spent
with patient228.84 min (s.d. 221.971)HoNOS 65+ ratingMean initial HoNOS
65+ rating (*N* = 1081)12.53 (s.d. 4.125); min 1, max 32Mean paired
HoNOS 65+ ratings (*N* = 230) Initial14.65 (s.d. 3.919) On
discharge11.80 (s.d. 4.599) Difference -- paired *t*-test:10.035 (d.f.
229); *P* \< 0.001 Difference -- 95% CI2.296--3.418

[Table 3](#tab03){ref-type="table"} shows that for those patients who
were seen on more than one occasion, the service had a substantial
number of contacts, and significant time was spent on their mental
healthcare during their stays in the hospital.

The HoNOS 65+ rating scale was introduced in January 2013 as one of the
outcome measures for the service. Analysis of this data ([Table
3](#tab03){ref-type="table"}) indicates a significant degree of
complexity of the cases seen by the service and a statistically
significant improvement in HoNOS scores following input from the
service.

## Good clinical practice {#sec2-5}

New diagnoses of dementia made by the service were included in data
collection from January 2013, and a record of antipsychotic reviews in
people with dementia started in May 2013. Between January 2013 and
December 2015, 273 patients with no existing dementia diagnosis (21.6%
of all referrals) were identified with probable dementia that needed
further assessment, and 51 patients (4.0% of all referrals) were
diagnosed with a new diagnosis of dementia by the liaison service. Of 50
patients with dementia who were on antipsychotic medication at the time
of referral, only one patient (2%) did not have his medication reviewed
by the service.

# Discussion {#sec3}

The results of this study indicate that the LPOA service at King\'s
College Hospital, London, has continued to play an important part in
mental health provision to adults aged 65 and over admitted to general
hospital beds since its initial description.^9^ The total numbers of
patients seen per year, their demographic characteristics and case mix
have all remained comparable to those described in 2000/2001. The
service has also maintained a good responsiveness, particularly for
urgent referrals which, although not described in this data set, the
service has extended into the emergency department and clinical
decisions unit during this study period.

There are two significant points that have changed in service activity
since the last review. First, there has been a marked increase in the
number of patients with delirium seen by the service; second, there has
been a significant decrease in the number of referrals for assessment of
mental capacity. The first point is likely to be explained by new
developments within the general hospital and the close relationship of
the liaison service with the King\'s delirium and dementia team that was
established in January 2013. This may have led to better recognition of
delirium and targeted involvement of liaison psychiatry in management of
complex cases for which there is diagnostic uncertainty requiring
expertise in recognition, or where pharmacological management is
required owing to risks to patients and others. The second point is
likely to reflect increased awareness and improved skills of medical and
surgical teams in assessing mental capacity following the introduction
of the Mental Capacity Act 2005 and the increased training that followed
this legislation. Our service has retained an important role in
providing a second opinion in complex capacity assessments.

The results presented suggest that the service has played a part in
discharge facilitation, with the majority of patients returning home and
being followed up by their GP. Relatively small numbers of patients
required referral to the CMHT, and for those already under CMHT care
there was good liaison between respective mental health services. Only a
small percentage of patients required transfer to psychiatric units, but
this may have also been influenced by the development of an older
adults\' HTT in the last 3 years of the study period.

The National Dementia Strategy has included good quality of care within
general hospitals as one of its key objectives for patients with
dementia.^13^ Around 27.3% of patients seen had a diagnosis of dementia
during the study period. This is in line with previous estimates that,
at any time, up to a quarter of older patients in general acute
hospitals will have dementia.^14^ Fifty-one patients were diagnosed with
a new diagnosis of definitive dementia from January 2013 and included in
the total number of cases. A further 20% of patients seen during the
3-year study period were suspected to suffer from dementia, with a
discharge recommendation for further assessment. These data, and the
fact that all but one patient with dementia and on antipsychotic
medication had this reviewed by the service, suggest that the service
engaged in important local and national initiatives for dementia
diagnosis and care.

Until the recent introduction of the Framework for Routine Outcome
Measurement in Liaison Psychiatry (FROM-LP), there had been no consensus
on how to best capture the diverse activities, outcomes and performance
of liaison psychiatry services.^15^ In addition, as was the case with
this team, teams have often had small numbers of staff and limited
administrative support, also limiting their capacity for routine outcome
measure collection. Despite this, we have recognised the importance of
monitoring activity in relation to further team development and during
the study period have recorded referral response times and
clinician-rated HoNOS 65+ outcome scores for all patients seen. Average
HoNOS 65+ scores indicated that the patients seen had conditions of
moderate severity and complexity, and a statistically significant
improvement was seen in the patients for whom paired ratings were done.
Although these are positive data, the extent to which the physical
health domains and improvements contributed to positive outcomes is
unclear, and this itself does not fully reflect all aspects of the
service\'s activities and roles within the general hospital.

A recent review suggested that the FROM-LP is a very useful tool to
measure service quality and clinical effectiveness, and represents a
significant step towards developing nationally unified outcome
measures.^16^ There is also an increasing expectation that outcome
measures are available to secure funding and support liaison psychiatry
service growth. In response to this, we have been collecting outcome
measures as suggested by FROM-LP,^17^ as well as HoNOS 65+, since
January 2016. However, from the outcome data collected so far, we have
some concerns about the validity of the measures and also that they do
not measure the aspects of LPOA services that have previously been shown
to make them cost-effective. Economic analysis of the Birmingham RAID
service suggested that elderly people in their sample accounted for
around 90% of total savings with reduced bed usage. We therefore suggest
that this is of particular importance for older adult liaison services,
and that there is a strong economic case for targeting increased
resources for this patient group. This would also support the case for
developing specialist LPOA teams as a part of the national strategy for
improved liaison psychiatry services within the general hospital.

## Strengths and limitations of the study {#sec3-1}

The strength of this study is that it provides a large data-set and
reflects the everyday practice of a busy inner-city LPOA service. There
is very little missing data, as collection was overseen and coordinated
by a single practitioner who ensured that data were collected for all
patients seen. As such, the study included a large number of patients,
ensuring an adequate statistical power. It also gives a clear indication
of the need for specific older adults\' liaison teams, and indicates the
scope for further development and analysis of outcome measures to
support this and the cost-effectiveness of services.

This is a descriptive study and does not intend to compare the King\'s
College liaison service for older people with other liaison service
provision models for older adults. It is possible that an awareness of
service monitoring by team members who were also responsible for data
collection might have had an impact on the care provided, but arguably
this is less likely as data collection is now a routine part of clinical
practice within the team, and there is increasing emphasis on outcome
measures and quality improvement activities. Another possible limitation
is that the activities and outcomes of the team described in this paper
may not be generalisable to other LPOA teams in the UK where the team
structure or patient demographics differ.

## Clinical implications {#sec3-2}

The results of this study support the need for specialist LPOA services
for older people admitted to general hospitals. However, finding easily
measurable outcomes of liaison psychiatry services remains a challenge
if we are to find valid measures that also support the services in terms
of identifying necessary developments and growth. The King\'s College
Hospital LPOA team is now using the FROM-LP and will pilot the use of
these outcome measures. However, we suggest that there are other aspects
of service activity in older adult liaison that are not adequately
monitored or audited using this framework. For this reason, we continue
to use HoNOS 65+, as we feel that this provides a measure of complexity
and also indicates improvement over time with paired scores. In terms of
further development of outcome indicators for LPOA, we feel it is
important to consider whether length of time from admission to referral
to liaison affects overall length of stay, as this could help to provide
information about cost-effectiveness of older adult liaison services.
Similarly, we feel it will be important to measure the impact of
training activities for general hospital staff in terms of raised
awareness and timely referrals to the service.

**Fedza Mujic** is an associate specialist in liaison psychiatry for
older people, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; **Ruth
Cairns** is a consultant in liaison psychiatry for older people, South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; **Vivienne Mak** is a
consultant in liaison psychiatry for older people, South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; **Clare Squire** is a clinical nurse
specialist in liaison psychiatry for older people, South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; **Andrew Wells** is a psychiatric liaison
nurse, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; **Ahmed
Al-Harrasi** is an ST5 in South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust; **Martin Prince** is a professor of epidemiological psychiatry
and head of the Department of Health Service and Population Research at
the Institute of Psychiatry.
