===========================================================================================================================
The clinical utility of the IRAC component of the Framework for Routine Outcome Measurement in Liaison Psychiatry (FROM-LP)
===========================================================================================================================



Caroline Guest
Stephen Crockett
Patrick Little
Anish Patel

:Correspondence: Anish Patel (anishpatel@nhs.net)

:date: 2018-8

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The clinical utility of the multidimensional Framework for Routine
   Outcome Measurement in Liaison Psychiatry (FROM-LP) has not
   previously been examined. We sought to establish whether referral
   accuracy and ability to achieve the reason(s) for referral to our
   liaison service improved after incorporating the Identify and Rate
   the Aim of the Contact (IRAC) scale of this tool into our referral
   process. We carried out a retrospective analysis of electronic case
   notes of all appropriate referrals to the team before and after this
   adaption.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Accuracy of referrals to our team improved from 73.8 to 93.7%
   following intervention. Referral requests that were fully achieved
   improved from 57.4 to 77.8%, and referral requests that were not
   achieved decreased from 26.2 to 6.4%.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The IRAC component of the FROM-LP measures what it was developed for,
   and thus has clinical utility supporting its widespread adoption
   across liaison services in the National Health Service.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The value and cost-effectiveness of an adequately funded and organised
mental health liaison team (MHLT) have been demonstrated and promoted in
national policy documents and economic analyses over the past 5
years.1\ :sup:`–`\ 4 Although the economic benefits of a MHLT have been
established, there is a lack of evidence relating to clinical (and
other) outcomes.5 Measurement of clinical outcomes is essential for
clinical teams to evaluate their work and enable ongoing service
development. A Centre for Mental Health (CMH) report highlighted the
challenges associated with measurement of outcome across MHLTs, which
are operating in a number of different settings and carrying out a wide
range of clinical activities in support of patients with many different
types of clinical problems.5 A systematic review on the effectiveness of
liaison psychiatry found that many studies had disparate results and
were methodologically flawed.6 The CMH report proposed the use of a
framework for measurements based on a logic model approach which took
into account structure (inputs), process (activities) and outcomes
(outputs) and suggested using a combination from each, ‘the so-called
Scorecard approach’.5

.. _sec1-1:

Development of the FROM-LP
==========================

In response to these recommendations, in 2015 the Faculty of Liaison
Psychiatry of the Royal College of Psychiatrists produced the Framework
for Routine Outcome Measurements in Liaison Psychiatry (FROM-LP).7 The
authors, after further describing its development, proposed that it was
adopted across all MHLT's in the National Health service (NHS).8 Their
aim was to enable consistency of data collection and effective reporting
of outcomes such that patients, referrers, the NHS Trust providing the
service and commissioners could all understand and have confidence in
the beneficial effects of their MHLT. The authors acknowledged that
rolling out this tool quickly across MHLT's nationwide meant that it was
potentially an imperfect tool; however, they recognised that it could be
refined over time.7

.. _sec1-2:

Implementation of the FROM-LP
=============================

| Until recently, our MHLT had been measuring a number of outcomes;
  however, these were not based on national guidelines and therefore
  could not be directly compared with other MHLTs across the NHS. In
  addition, our in-patient team were assessing patients and finding that
  the reason for referral documented on the e-referral form was not
  always accurate. In April 2017, we adapted our routine data collection
  to include the FROM-LP outcome measurements. As shown in `Table
  1 <#tab01>`__, there are three broad outcome categories. For the
  purposes of this evaluation, we focused on the *Process* section,
  which includes the ‘Identify and Rate the Aim of the Contact’ (IRAC)
  scale, comprising ten aims of contact (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). We
  replaced the four referral options on the e-referral form with the ten
  IRAC categories (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__) and then evaluated whether
  this: (a)improved the *accuracy* of reason for referral to our
  service(b)in turn, improved our *ability* to fully achieve those
  reasons for referral, i.e. with this analysis could we determine the
  construct validity and thus the clinical utility of this component of
  the FROM-LP? Table 1Framework for Routine Outcome Measurement in
  Liaison Psychiatry (FROM-LP) content. Adapted from Trigwell &
  Kustow.7FROM-LP summary tableMeasurementCase type 1: single
  contactCase type 2: series of contactsProcess1. Response time
| **2. IRAC**\ 1. Response time
| **2. IRAC**\ Outcomes (clinician-rated)3. CGI-I3. CGI-I (at beginning
  and end of series of contacts)Outcomes (patient-rated)4. CORE-10 (at
  beginning and end of series of contacts)Patient satisfaction4. Patient
  satisfaction scale
| 5. Friends and family test5. Patient satisfaction scale
| 6. Friends and family testReferrer satisfaction6. Referrer
  satisfaction scale (as a regular survey if frequent referrers)7.
  Referrer satisfaction scale (as a regular survey if frequent
  referrers) [1]_ Table 2Adaption of the e-referral form incorporating
  the ten IRAC categoriesReason for referral categories of original
  e-referral formIRAC (Identify and Rate the Aim of the Contact)
  categories incorporated into adapted e-referral formWas it achieved?1.
  Diagnosis1. Assessment & diagnosis
| 2. Medication management
| 3. Assessment & management of riskFully achieved
| 22. Management of disturbed behaviour4. Management of disturbed
  behaviour
| 5. Providing guidance and advice
| 6. Signposting & referring onPartially achieved
| 13. Medication advice7. Assessment of mental capacity
| 8. Mental Health Act
| 9. Brief psychological interventionNot achieved
| 04. Capacity assessment10. Treatments (other)

It would also provide more detailed data about the type of activities
our team were routinely carrying out.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

Our MHLT is adult ageless and is based in a large 800-bed teaching
hospital in Bristol. It is composed of doctors, nurses and social
workers, and is split into an emergency department team and an
in-patient team. This paper focuses on the in-patient, which received an
average of 106 referrals per month during the period October 2016 to
September 2017, often involving a series of patient contacts. The
referrer has to complete an e-referral form which consists of a
drop-down menu and free-text boxes. Once the referral form has been
accepted and opened by administrative staff, it is then triaged by the
shift coordinator. The clinical information provided by the referrer
enables the shift coordinator to determine the urgency of the referral,
and can also help facilitate decisions such as which member of staff
might be most appropriate to see the patient.

The e-referral form includes a ‘reason for referral’ section, which has
a drop-down menu from which the referrer can select more than one
option. `Table 2 <#tab02>`__ shows the original e-referral form, which
had four categories (left column), and the e-referral form adapted for
our team by the Trust IT department, which has ten categories based on
the IRAC scale. All the other information on the e-referral form
remained unchanged.

Following the launch of the modified e-referral form, when a clinical
member of our team closed a case, they were asked to record the reason
for referral (categories 1–10, `Table 2 <#tab02>`__) and whether the
reason for referral was fully achieved (2), partially achieved (1) or
not achieved (0) in accordance with FROM-LP guidance. As the in-patient
team did not collect these data prior to modification of the e-referral,
our researcher (S.C.) rated whether the team had met the reason(s) for
referral before and after the intervention so that a more direct
comparison could be made.

.. _sec2-1:

Data collection
---------------

Our researcher (S.C.) retrospectively reviewed the electronic healthcare
records of patients referred to the in-patient team before and after the
intervention. The initial group consisted of all appropriate referrals
to our team from 3 to 16 Oct and 24 Oct to 6 Nov 2016. The comparison
group consisted of all appropriate referrals to our service from 24 Apr
to 7 May and 15 May to 28 May (2017). The electronic records were
scrutinised for each patient referred to determine whether the reason
for referral on the e-referral form was accurate (i.e. by probing the
content of the assessments). If the reason for referral stated on the
e-referral form was established as accurate, the researcher then further
reviewed the electronic records to determine whether the in-patient MHLT
had fully achieved, partially achieved or not achieved the reason(s) for
referral. If the reason for referral on the e-referral form was not
accurate, it was recorded as ‘did not achieve the reason(s) for
referral’ (because it would not have been possible to meet the reason
for referral if we had been given inaccurate referral information from
the outset).

.. _sec2-2:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

The following outcomes before and after modification of the e-referral
form were compared using Fisher's exact test: (a)accuracy of the reason
for referral(b)referral outcome – did the in-patient MHLS fully achieve,
partially achieve or not achieve the referral request?

The effect estimates are reported as odds ratios with 95% confidence
intervals, and all the *P*-values reported are two-tailed.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

A total of 124 cases were analysed; 61 were referred prior to the
modification of the e-referral form and 63 were referred after.
Comparison of the accuracy of the reason for referral before and after
modification of the e-referral form (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__) demonstrated
a statistically significant difference. Referrals were assessed as
accurate in 73.8% of cases when using the previous referral system,
compared with 93.7% when using the new referral system (*P* = 0.0030).
Table 3Referral accuracyAccurateBefore (*n* = 61)After (*n* = 63)Odds
ratio (95% CI)\ *P*-valueYes, *n* (%)45 (73.8)59 (93.7)5.24
(1.53–22.76)0.0030No, *n* (%)16 (26.2)4 (6.4)

Comparison of whether the reason(s) for referral were met before and
after modification of the e-referral (`Table 4 <#tab04>`__) also
demonstrated a statistically significant difference. The referral
request was assessed as fully achieved for 57.4% of referrals when using
the previous referral system, and for 77.8% of referrals when using the
new referral system (*P* = 0.0210). There were no significant
differences identified between the two referral systems when the
referral request was assessed as partially achieved (16.4 *v.* 15.9%,
*P* = 1.0000). The percentage of referral requests assessed as not
achieved decreased significantly when using the new system, from 26.2 to
6.4% (*P* = 0.0030). Table 4Referral outcomesBefore (*n* = 61)After
(*n* = 63)OR (95% CI)\ *P*-valueFully achieved, *n* (%)35 (57.4)49
(77.8)2.60 (1.11–6.16)0.0210Partially achieved, *n* (%)10 (16.4)10
(15.9)0.96 (0.33–2.82)1.0000Not achieved, *n* (%)16 (26.2)4 (6.4)0.19
(0.04–0.65)0.0030

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

The adapted e-referral form went live in March 2017. A retrospective
analysis of the electronic healthcare records demonstrated that,
following this intervention the reason, for referral was five times more
likely to be accurate and the team was 2.6 times more likely to fully
achieve the reasons for referral. The results suggest that improving the
accuracy of the referrals improved the team's ability to achieve the
reasons for referral.

Following the intervention, 6.4% of the referrals (compared with 26.2%
before the intervention) were inaccurate. Periodic review of inaccurate
referrals may help to determine why they were inaccurate. One possible
explanation might be that the referrals to our team are generally made
by the most junior doctor on the team, and the reason for referral may
not have been made clear to them by the senior doctor asking for the
referral. Another possibility is that none of the ten referral options
adequately covered the reason for referral.

Following our intervention, the referral request was achieved (fully or
partially) in 93.7% of referrals. In liaison work, it is not unexpected
to partially achieve a referral request. Many patients might only be
seen briefly prior to discharge from hospital, requiring handover to
community teams or health professionals to complete the work. Despite
this, further in-depth exploration as to the reasons would be useful.

An accurate referral to the MHLT is important because it enhances
triage, so that patients can be prioritised accordingly and assigned to
an appropriate member of staff (i.e. doctor or nurse, consultant or
trainee doctor). It also potentially enables a more focused assessment
based on the referrer's expectation; this could improve time efficiency,
which in itself is important for a variety of reasons, such as when the
patient is very unwell, or to facilitate financial savings and flow
through the acute hospital. In addition, by outlining very specifically
the referral categories to the referrers, it highlights exactly what
type of work the MHLT can do and encourages referrers to consider the
objectives of their referral, which in turn improves general efficiency.

We are aware that our evaluation, by embedding the IRAC scale into the
referral form and asking the referrer to select the aim of contact, is
in contrast to many other MHLT around the country, who tend to complete
both the aim of the contact and achievement of the contact themselves.
However, there were several reasons behind this process variance: (a) it
was in alignment with the way many other specialties designed and
operated their e-referral pathways in our trust, and so was not too
dissimilar when making a referral to, e.g. respiratory or cardiology;
(b) based on our experience, we felt that referrers often have a
reasonably good idea of what they want assistance with in managing their
patient, and it is then for us to be able to achieve that as providers
of the service; and (c) it made data collection and measuring a much
more reliable, more consistent and simpler process.

A number of limitations with this evaluation are worth commenting on.
The number of patients involved in the retrospective analysis was small,
and the confidence intervals were relatively wide as a consequence. A
single researcher examined the electronic healthcare records for each
referral, determining the accuracy of a referral based on the available
clinical information and whether the reason for referral had been fully
achieved, partially achieved or not achieved. This introduces the
possibility of observer bias. If the researcher found the reason for
referral to be inaccurate, then it was recorded as ‘not meeting the
reason for referral’; this may have introduced exclusion bias.

In this evaluation, we did not measure or comment on referrer
satisfaction, but we can predict that if there was an improvement in the
team's ability to fully meet the reasons for referral, there would also
be an associated improvement in referrer satisfaction. Using all the
FROM-LP outcome measurements, our MHLT will be able to capture this
information in the future. Our MHLT now routinely measures the IRACs for
all referrals made to our service. Our results show that the main
reasons for referral were: (a)assessment & diagnosis
(37.5%)(b)medication management (11.8%)(c)assessment and management of
risk (12.5%)(d)providing guidance and advice (16.5%).

This type of information can be used (alongside the structure and
outcomes measurements in FROM-LP) to gain a clearer understanding of the
work that the in-patient team are routinely carrying out, as described
in the paper by Guthrie *et al*.9 This can then guide service
development; for example, do our staff have all the necessary skills to
manage the referrals, or do they require training in specific areas?

In the future, our team plan to incorporate the structure, process and
outcomes data into a mental health dashboard on the Trust IT system,
which will provide live up-to-date performance data, allowing our MHLT
to anticipate trends quickly and respond in a timely fashion. This
information will also be made available to our various ‘customers’
(commissioners, patients, carers, and referring staff).

.. _sec4-1:

Conclusion
----------

Since the launch of FROM-LP, there has been encouraging feedback based
on opinion and observation, and numerous MHLT's have already implemented
it.8 However, the developers acknowledged that rolling out this tool
quickly across MHLTs nationwide meant that it was potentially
imperfect.7 Tadros's commentary10 further encouraged MHLTs to develop a
positive approach integrating the collection of outcome measures into
everyday clinical practice, and found the FROM-LP a very useful tool to
measure service quality and clinical effectiveness. To date, however,
there has not been an actual appraisal of the tool or any part of it.

Through our evaluation of the IRAC scale of the FROM-LP, we have
demonstrated an improvement in the accuracy of the referrals to our
service. In turn, this has helped our team's ability to achieve the
referral request and we have therefore been able to establish the
instrument's construct validity. We conclude that the IRAC composition
of FROM-LP does indeed measure what it was intended for, and we thus
have demonstrated the clinical utility of the IRAC scale, which
hopefully has reinforced its recommended incorporation into MHLTs across
the NHS.

**Dr Caroline Guest** is a specialty doctor in Liaison Psychiatry in the
North Bristol NHS Trust Mental Health Liaison Team, Bristol, UK; **Dr
Stephen Crockett** and **Dr Patrick Little** are both Foundation Year 2
doctors in Liaison Psychiatry in the North Bristol NHS Trust Mental
Health Liaison Team, Bristol, UK; and **Dr Anish Patel** is a Consultant
Liaison Psychiatrist in the North Bristol NHS Trust Mental Health
Liaison Team, Bristol, UK, and part of Avon and Wiltshire Mental Health
Partnership NHS Trust, Chippenham, UK.

.. [1]
   CGI, Clinical Global Impression – Improvement scale; CORE-10,
   Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation (10-item version); IRAC,
   Identify and Rate the Aim of the Contact.
