=====================
Profile: André Tomlin
=====================



Julia Bland

:date: 2018-4


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

**Julia Bland meets André of the Elves**, arch communicator and
pretension buster, man with a mission: to get healthcare workers better
informed so that they can provide higher quality care to patients

.. image:: S2056469417000237_inline1.jpg

The Mental Elf is a charming woodland creature, smiling, intelligent,
sensitive, balanced, with no beard, pointy ears, or a cap with a bell on
the top.

In fact, he is André Tomlin, 45, information scientist, health blogger,
educator, evidence-based practice guru, businessman with a genuine
vision of improving the quality of healthcare, and father of three
children under 8 years of age. He has over 50 000 followers of his
Twitter account, and claims that the twitter community's outrage at Asda
for selling mental patient costumes complete with axe and blood for
Halloween, led to the removal of the offending items. He sees himself as
embedded into an online community of people trying to make sense of
their experience (he also has personal experience of anxiety and
depression).

If you haven't heard of the National Elf Service
(`www.nationalelfservice.net <www.nationalelfservice.net>`__), launched
in May 2015, you may need an explanation.

This is an online subscription service that provides digests of the
latest research in mental health, tailored to your interests, plus a
host of interactive opportunities, like webchats, videos, and continuing
professional development certificates, all ‘gamified’ with levels to
achieve and gnomic cartoons dancing about. Actually, much less
irritating than you might have expected.

Tomlin explained to me the genesis of the National Elf Service. He and
his business partner Douglas Badenoch, worked for years at the digital
end of evidence-based medicine, believing in the importance of the
translation of research into practice, but were frustrated by the
unappealing lumpiness of the website delivery vehicles.

They wanted to develop a user-friendly, highly accessible, but accurate
and reliable online resource for the time-constrained front-line mental
health worker.

Have they done this? And what else do they do? And how does it work as a
business versus a piece of philanthropy?

I went to meet André Tomlin with an open mind, but holding a comment
from a colleague with a key question: ‘He seems to be dominating the
social media side of mental health. Why has he become so successful with
this and what are his credentials in dictating the agenda?’

The unique selling point of the Mental Elf is the combination of the
serious with the playful. The antithesis of pompous. I was convinced of
the underlying seriousness, even idealism, of the intentions:
‘Accessibility, Usability, Reliability ….. No bias, no misinformation,
no spin’, with a view to improving standards of mental health provision
with a personalised feed of information to the smartphones of mental
health professionals, (especially nurses) and of course, some of his
subscribers are patients. His anti-silo, deliberate, democratising
intention is to open up the debate around mental health. He thinks that
not only should patients and their families be listened to, but also
non-health professionals; for example, schools, in relation to child
mental health. Social media in the mental health field has a supportive
and welcoming rather than aggressive tone, he claims. For example, when
the Daily Mirror outed the Everton footballer Aaron Lennon as having
been sectioned, there were over a hundred tweets supporting him and
criticising the Daily Mirror.

The benign aspect of the Mental Elf is also illustrated by their work
with charities like Rethink, Mind, and the Mental Health Foundation. He
sees the work as partly public service, running tweet chats offering
peer support on topics like suicide and severe mental illness with
‘twitter buddies’, usually clinical psychologists, who can take
distressed individuals aside for a private ‘direct message
conversation’, and can suggest appropriate action, for example,
contacting the crisis team or going to an Accident & Emergency
Department.

Of course, this is also a business, and he freely admits that the line
between business and altruism is a ‘blurred boundary’. He and Badenoch,
another ‘information scientist’, run Minervation (an evidence-based
healthcare consultancy) plus the Elves empire. They conveniently believe
in ‘coproduction’. As one expert invited to write for the Mental Elf put
it bluntly, ‘We don't get paid. We do the work, and he gets the money.’
Tomlin is frank: ‘Sometimes I help people, sometimes I push people
towards my product, and sometimes I just have to do something to make
money.’

Minervation, which ‘spun out of the university’ (i.e. the Oxford Centre
for Evidence-Based Mental Health), also provides consultancy to big
health players: the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence,
Cochrane, and Bupa amongst them. They also specialise in building
accessible websites for charities and other public sector organisations.

One of his favourite projects was for the General Medical Council. Five
years ago, he developed a programme to help general practitioners
provide better care for people with learning difficulties. They included
a ‘forum theatre’ approach, where a play scenario is set up: a woman
with Down's syndrome and her sister present at Accident & Emergency. She
has stopped eating and drinking. As the play evolves, the audience can
challenge and participate, ‘why is the doctor talking to her sister and
not to her?’. This can then be digitally broadcast and helps promote
Mencap's priority to improve communication by professionals with people
with intellectual disabilities.

The Elves are accessed via subscription, and it's the institutional
subscriptions that are most lucrative (over £1000 for a year for group
users v. £60 per year for individuals). He has signed up universities
including Oxford and Manchester, and Mental Health Trusts such as
University College London, hoping to include Kings and in particular,
the Masters course at the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and
Neuroscience soon. Institutions are provided with regular anonymised
reports on how their staff are using the Elf system, such as the most
popular blogs, the number of reflective practice entries and the
research impact.

Subscribers get access to digests of new research with comments on
clinical relevance by expert reviewers, connection to other experts via
online discussion and journal clubs, and a personalised ‘gamified’
continuing professional development record.

Minervation also run a digital conference service called Beyond the
Room, which prepares for, attends, live streams, blogs, and podcasts
from your conference for a fee. They see the slides in advance, speak to
the speakers, and then do live tweeting and blogging from the conference
floor, putting up podcasts afterwards. All this enables a small number
physical conference to reach a far larger potential audience.

They used to offer critical appraisal workshops, but have had greater
uptake for workshops teaching psychiatrists and others to use twitter
and blogs. He believes all this digital output needs to be researched
itself with ‘alt metrics’. He fully accepts that numbers of hits don't
reflect quality: 3 years ago, the most popular blog was about dolphin
semen, and he wants to improve the capacity of digital sites in
‘meaningful analytics’, which genuinely measure the effect of published
articles.

Another Tomlin initiative is a public discussion with experts, every
three months, linking Mental Elf, Lancet Psychiatry and University
College London psychiatry. They have covered subjects like dementia,
digital mental health, preventable harm and women's mental health.

They have developed the Social Care Elf, Learning Difficulties Elf,
Dental Elf, Lifestyle Elf and the Diabetes Elf, and are hoping to expand
into Elder Elf, Public Elf, Economist Elf, Sexual Elf and Stroke Elf.

Tomlin's background is interesting. His Dutch maternal grandfather, who
just escaped being shot by Nazis twice during the occupation of the
Netherlands, took young André round the red light district of Amsterdam
as a boy. His parents were active members of the Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament and he ‘hung around Greenham Common’, the extensive
antinuclear missile protest site, as a child.

His adult politics remain broadly left of centre but he is no dogmatist.

After philosophy and English at university he became assistant librarian
at the Institute of Health Sciences in Oxford in 1993. After a Masters
in Information Science at the University of West London, he returned to
Oxford to help psychiatrist Professor John Geddes establish the Centre
for Evidence-Based Mental Health.

Although remaining an ardent supporter of evidence-based medicine, he
describes his growing impatience with the inaccessibility of the main
health information websites. He and Badenoch could see how newer
technology can deliver much faster and more personalised information. He
also sees the speed of blogging reactions as contributing to dispelling
misinformation.

The example he gives is after a paper with negative findings,
determining whether exercise was useful in the treatment of depression,
was taken up by the newspaper headlines as ‘Exercise found to be no help
in depression’. Tomlin immediately wrote a blog publishing the actual
evidence, correcting the interpretation, pointing out that exercise may
still be preventative in depression, alerted the Twittersphere, and the
BBC. Later that day the newspaper headlines were changed.

The power of social media operating in the interest of accuracy (for
once).

Another mission is in myth busting, with evidence, of potentially
harmful treatments; for example, a recent review piece in Mental Elf by
Edel McGlanaghy on the subject of the potentially harmful effects of
psychological treatment, mainly online cognitive–behavioural therapy for
anxiety.1

We discussed the merits and demerits of ‘trans diagnostic’ approaches to
mental healthcare, recently written about in relation to Child and
Adolescent mental health by Miranda Wolpert and Peter Fonagy.2

They have looked at the limitations of diagnosis and evidence-based
research, proposing focusing on the person rather than the diagnosis.
They point to the long waits for Child and Adolescent Mental Health
Services (CAMHS), and the unsatisfactory outcomes for a significant
minority of patients. Wolpert recommends a practical, evidence-based
coproduction approach, developing apps for young people to prepare for
seeing psychiatrists.

In January 2017, the Mental Elf published a systematic review of digital
interventions for young people with mental health problems. They
concluded that evidence is uncertain for digital interventions and
should extend rather than replace offline services, with more
interdisciplinary research needed, designed with user input and
involving computer scientists, and engineers as well as psychologists
and psychiatrists.

This migration on Tomlin's part from traditional psychiatric research
towards the ‘groovy social science side’ is never going overboard, he
reassures me. ‘I'll stop in the safe middle ground’. He feels his
education about psychiatry has been extended beyond ICD-103 via twitter
contact with patients and nurses, reaching out into the wider waters of
social care and psychology. But writing from the user perspective can
become flaky, he admits, and although his personal philosophy is
transdiagnostic, he fully supports psychiatrists who must treat patients
on particular pathways determined by diagnosis.

He is also increasingly sceptical about the evidence-based medicine
world, which he sees as ‘quite insular’, and even research more broadly,
claiming that about half published research is methodologically unsound,
and another half never reaches publication because of the bias against
publishing negative findings. In fact, he goes even further in pointing
to the gap between evidence-based medicine and ordinary practitioners,
and states ‘we would have most impact if we just implemented what we
know now.’

So, is he a breath of fresh modernising air that we psychiatrists should
breathe in deeply, and are sorely in need of with our rushed lives, or
is the Mental Elf a bit gimmicky or presumptuous in setting the tone and
agenda for public debate?

You will need to visit the Mental Elf site (free month's trial) and
decide for yourself.

**Julia Bland** is an honorary consultant psychiatrist for South London
and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and a consultant medical
psychotherapist at DocHealth, British Medical Association, UK; email:
julia.bland@hotmail.co.uk
