==========================================================================================
Review and update of the Health of the Nation Outcome Scales for Elderly People (HoNOS65+)
==========================================================================================

Mick James
Bill Buckingham
Gary Cheung
Roderick McKay
Jon Painter
Malcom W. StewartCorrespondence to Mick James via
(Emma.George@rcpsych.ac.uk)
:Date: 2018-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The Health of the Nation Outcome Scales for Elderly People (HoNOS65+)
   has been used widely for 20 years, but has not been updated to
   reflect contemporary clinical practice. The Royal College of
   Psychiatrists convened an advisory board, with expertise from the UK,
   Australia and New Zealand, to propose amendments. The aim was to
   improve rater experience when using the HoNOS65+ glossary by removing
   ambiguity and inconsistency, rather than a more radical revision.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Views and experience from the countries involved were used to produce
   a series of amendments intended to improve intra- and interrater
   reliability and improve validity. This update will be called HoNOS
   Older Adults to reflect the changing nature of the population and
   services provided to meet their needs. These improvements are
   reported verbatim, together with the original HoNOS65+ to aid
   comparison.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Formal examination of the psychometric properties of the revised
   measure is needed. However, clinician training will remain crucial.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS) was originally developed
for use with working-age adults.(n.d.a) Subsequent testing found that,
in general, the scales also performed well with older people, but that
some adaptations (especially relating to ratings of physical health and
cognitive impairment) would be beneficial.(n.d.b) This resulted in the
development of the HoNOS65+,(n.d.c) which was validated against other
established mental health measures used with older people and shown to
have good interrater reliability.(n.d.c) As well as this standardised
version, a further version was developed with a tabulated
glossary.(n.d.d)

Like the HoNOS, the HoNOS65+ was intended to: •be short and simple for
routine use and acceptable to a range of mental health
professionals;•have adequate coverage of clinical and social
functions;•be sensitive to change over time;•have demonstrable and
acceptable reliability;•have known relationships with more established
scales.(n.d.e)

Since its development over 20 years ago, the HoNOS65+ has been
translated into several other languages, including Spanish, Dutch,
French, Greek and Italian, and is now routinely used in clinical
practice and research around the world.(n.d.f) Australia and New Zealand
have mandated use of the original format of the HoNOS65+ scales for
routine monitoring and outcome measurement across their mental health
services,(n.d.g)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.h) while across England both the
original version and the more recently developed tabulated version are
used to provide these nationally required
data.(n.d.c)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.d)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.i)

Experience of staff training and the evaluation of aggregated data-sets
over this period, together with considerable advances in mental
healthcare for older people, led to a recognition that the HoNOS 65+
required review and updating. As copyright holder for the HoNOS family
of measures, the Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych) elected to
undertake a limited review that aimed to use expert opinion to improve
the utility of the HoNOS65+ in contemporary older people's mental health
services (rather than a full redevelopment and revalidation), while
remaining true to its original aims and maintaining comparability with
existing data-sets. This paper outlines the scope and process of the
review, the issues identified and a revised set of scales (subsequently
renamed HoNOS Older Adults).

.. _sec1:

Method
======

In recognition of their nationally mandated use of
HoNOS65+,(n.d.g)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.i) and to ensure that each country's
interests were considered, an advisory board (chaired by the RCPsych's
National HoNOS Advisor) was convened with representatives from England,
Australia and New Zealand. Each government nominated individuals with
extensive experience in any of the following: HoNOS65+ staff training;
using HoNOS65+ in practice; using aggregated HoNOS65+ data; or service-,
professional- or governmental-level oversight. In addition to their own
views, board members canvased widely for clinicians' opinions regarding
which aspects of the HoNOS65+ required refinement.

To ensure consistency with the concurrent HoNOS review, the same
criteria were used to judge suggestions.(n.d.j) These criteria were that
for a change to be supported, it needed to result in a tangible
improvement (e.g. simplification/clarification/removal of anachronisms)
and: •maintain the original instrument's integrity as far as
possible;•maximise comparability with existing individual and aggregated
data;•support the use of HoNOS Older Adults as a summary of clinical
assessment(s);•adhere to the HoNOS65+ ‘core rules’ i.e. ○each item is a
behaviourally anchored five-point scale○items are sequentially rated
(1–12)○all available information is used to make a rating○information
already rated in an earlier item is disregarded○the most severe
problem/worst manifestation from the preceding 2 weeks is rated○problems
are rated according to the degree of distress caused and/or its effects
on behaviour○problems are rated by a mental health professional trained
in clinical assessment○problems are rated regardless of cause.

In addition to these original HoNOS terms of reference, the board was
keen to take this opportunity to consider whether there were
opportunities to optimise alignment between the newly updated adult and
older people's versions. The rationale for this was threefold. First,
some of the HoNOS updates had come from the original HoNOS65+.(n.d.j)
Second, anecdotal reports suggested that some electronic patient record
systems were unable to differentiate between the two versions and/or
make both glossaries available to clinicians. Third, since the
development of the HoNOS65+, the somewhat arbitrary age cut-off of 65
has become less justified given the increasing variation in functional
impairment with age across different populations.(n.d.k)

Using the collated feedback and the ensuing board discussions, a summary
paper was produced by a board member with extensive experience in old
age psychiatry. This highlighted some scales where alignment might be
considered a viable option and those where alignment was unlikely owing
to the nature of presenting needs in this population. This dictated the
sequence of the board's teleconferences and its approach to each scale.

For the scales where alignment was considered to be potentially feasible
and likely to improve utility, two questions were asked: first, does it
resolve the concerns or problems with the scale reported by old age
clinicians in the field; and, second, is the new HoNOS (2018) wording
appropriate for older people's mental healthcare? Two positive responses
resulted in the revised HoNOS scale being adopted for older people. A
negative response led to an iterative process to produce a revised
wording that was appropriate for the older people's version of the tool.
During this process, consideration was given to whether these proposed
changes could also be applied to the draft HoNOS (2018). Where
appropriate, to improve both, the draft HoNOS (2018) was aligned with
the HoNOS older adult. Where this was not possible, the scale was
grouped with items where full alignment had been deemed unfeasible.

For this second group of scales, the board considered both the new HoNOS
and the original HoNOS65+ wording in the context of the collated
feedback in order to produce a revised HoNOS65+ scale glossary.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

Upon completion of their discussions, the board was able to fully align
seven of the 12 scales, with the remaining five having a high degree of
similarity but also retaining some key differences. The revised tool
(ultimately renamed HoNOS Older Adults) can be seen in Supplementary
Table 1, available at https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2018.68. Each item's
original wording is also included (in greyed-out boxes) to aid
comparison.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

This publication follows the review of the original (working age)
HoNOS.(n.d.j) However, in reality, each review was informed by the other
prior to each version of the tool being finalised. As a result, issues
specific to older people will be discussed in full below, whereas those
common to both tools (and hence previously discussed) will be summarised
here purely for completeness. Readers are therefore advised to refer to
James *et al* (2018) to gain an understanding of these common issues.

.. _sec3-1:

Overarching rating guidelines
-----------------------------

After reviewing the HoNOS65+ introductory guidance, the board agreed
that the issues were identical to those identified with respect to the
HoNOS, i.e. that brevity had been prioritised at the expense of clarity.
The board also agreed that the newly amended HoNOS guidance was entirely
appropriate given that the two tools were intended to function in the
same way. Consequently, the same guidance was used, as it: •clarified
the severity threshold between subclinical (0–1) and clinical (2–4)
ratings;•made an overt statement regarding the need for cultural
competence on the part of assessors;•acknowledged the limitations of
continuing to use the term ‘patient’.

.. _sec3-1-1:

Scale 1: overactive or aggressive or disruptive or agitated behaviour
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was agreement that the issues with this scale were similar,
regardless of age, i.e. that: •raters should be encouraged to consider
all four concepts in the title (rather than just focusing on
aggression);•the issue of culturally sanctioned aggression was now
satisfactorily addressed in the preceding, over-arching guidance.

However, some of the original HoNOS65+ examples were felt to be of
continued value; hence, those pertaining to the following behaviours
were retained: •restlessness/wandering•uncooperativeness/resistiveness
and the need for persuasion•sexual disinhibition and deliberate
incontinence.

There was some discussion about whether to contextualise inappropriate
behaviours (i.e. in public *v.* in private); however, in keeping with
the underpinning principles of the scales, it was agreed to simply focus
on the behaviour itself. As a result, the two new versions of this scale
are broadly similar, but not identical.

.. _sec3-1-2:

Scale 2: non-accidental self-injury
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was agreement that the issues with this scale were the same
regardless of age, i.e. that the new scale should: •consider risks,
thoughts and behaviours•rely on the over-arching guidance to ensure
culturally competent ratings of some forms of ritualistic self-harm.

As a result, the newly revised HoNOS 2018 version of this scale was
adopted without amendment.

.. _sec3-1-3:

Scale 3: problem drinking or drug-taking
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was agreement that the issues with this scale were the same
regardless of age, i.e. that the new scale should: •include descriptors
of craving, dependency and behaviour that align with contemporary
ratings of severity(n.d.l) and which accommodate rating individuals
undergoing short-term, enforced abstinence;•omit the subjective concept
of ‘social norms’;•exclude tobacco use unless it has led to problems
over and above the detrimental effects traditionally associated with a
person's physical health.

As a result, the newly revised HoNOS 2018 version of this scale was
adopted without amendment.

.. _sec3-1-4:

Scale 4: cognitive problems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After an iterative process of revisions to both the original HoNOS 65+
and the draft HoNOS 2018 versions of this scale, a shared version of the
scale was produced. The main issues addressed were therefore: •the
unhelpfully narrow focus on dementia•the large step between the original
ratings of 2 and 3.

A final review, however, identified the need to retain one example from
a rating of 4 on the original HoNOS 65+, i.e. ‘consistently unable to
recognise or name close friends/family’. As a result, the two versions
of this scale are almost, but not absolutely, identical.

.. _sec3-1-5:

Scale 5: physical illness or disability problems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The new HoNOS 2018 version of this scale was not suitable for older
people, and alignment was not deemed viable owing to the effects of
age-associated complexities including spectacles and hearing aids, as
well as the differing clinical significance of minor falls for the two
age groups. Hence, while some text is shared between the new versions of
this scale, many of the original HoNOS65+ examples were retained to
reduce ambiguity. The two new versions of this scale are therefore
notably different.

.. _sec3-1-6:

Scale 6: problems associated with hallucinations and delusions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was agreement that the issues with this scale were the same
regardless of age. As a result, the newly revised HoNOS 2018 version of
this scale (i.e. limited to minor linguistic changes) was adopted
without amendment.

.. _sec3-1-7:

Scale 7: problems with depressed mood
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was agreement that the issues with this scale were the same
regardless of age, i.e. that: •descriptors should be aligned with the
scale's title to remove the current HoNOS65+ contradictions (helpfully,
focusing on mood and excluding the wider symptoms of depression also
avoided any need to accommodate the differing presentations of
depression between the two age groups);•ratings should include a more
balanced description of cognitive, affective and behavioural aspects of
low mood (e.g. loss of interest, guilt and low self-esteem) to avoid
unduly focusing on feelings of guilt.

As a result, the newly revised HoNOS 2018 version of this scale was
adopted without amendment.

.. _sec3-1-8:

Scale 8: other mental and behavioural problems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was agreement that the issues with this scale were the same
regardless of age, i.e. the need to: •recognise the dominance of anxiety
ratings in this scale, although the creation of a separate scale was
deemed to be outside the scope of this work;•recognise the possibility
that rating the most severe problem can lead to a failure to capture
less severe issues, while electing to retain this approach;•add ‘elated
mood’ to the list of options and re-code the options to accommodate
this;•provide additional explanations of each option to improve
consistency of ratings.

As a result, the newly revised HoNOS 2018 version of this scale was
adopted without amendment.

.. _sec3-1-9:

Scale 9: problems with relationships
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was agreement that the issues with this scale were the same
regardless of age. As a result, the newly revised HoNOS 2018 version of
this scale (limited to minor linguistic changes) was adopted without
amendment.

.. _sec3-1-10:

Scale 10: problems with activities of daily living
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As with Scale 4, after an iterative process of revisions to both the
original HoNOS 65+ and the draft revisions to the HoNOS 2018 version of
this scale, a shared version of the scale was produced. The main issue
addressed was therefore: •clarifying how to ‘manage’ the effects of any
existing support the person is receiving.

A final review, however, identified the need to retain two examples from
the original HoNOS 65+. ‘Occasional urinary incontinence or continent
only if toileted’ was therefore included as an example for a rating of
3, while ‘full supervision required with dressing and eating; frequent
incontinence’ was included to help illustrate a rating of 4. As a
result, the two versions of this scale are almost, but not absolutely,
identical.

.. _sec3-1-11:

Scale 11: problems with housing and living conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The new HoNOS 2018 version of this scale was found to be unsuitable for
older people, and complete alignment was not deemed viable owing to the
need to maintain references to the risks posed to older people by their
environment. Removing this feature from the HoNOS65+ was judged to
represent a major (and unhelpful) change. Therefore, much of the revised
HoNOS 2018 version was adopted, i.e.: •clarification that the scale is
intended to rate how well the person's current environment matches their
needs/abilities, not their abilities *per se*;•clarification that when
rating patients temporarily admitted to hospital their ‘usual’ place of
residence should be considered;•updates to some of the terminology used.

However, in addition: •the original HoNOS65+ references to risk were
maintained (and, for consistency, introduced to a rating of 1).•the
original HoNOS65+ concept of patient satisfaction was removed owing to
potential contradictions between suitability of and satisfaction with
housing and living conditions.

As a result, the two new versions of this scale are similar, but not
identical.

.. _sec3-1-12:

Scale 12: problems with occupation and activities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was agreement that the issues with this scale were the same
regardless of age, i.e. that there was a need to: •clarify that the
scale is intended to rate how well the person's current environment
optimises opportunities to meet their needs or develop their abilities,
not their abilities *per se*;•clarify that when rating patients
temporarily admitted to hospital their ‘usual’ place of residence should
be considered.•update some of the terminology used.

As a result, the newly revised HoNOS 2018 version of this scale was
adopted without amendment.

.. _sec3-2:

Other issues
------------

The advisory board was aware that since the publication of the HoNOS65+
there have been shifts in the well-being of older people, with frailty
and disability tending to occur later in life.(n.d.k) With this has also
come a shift in the focus of some services for this population. As a
result, the existing title, with its focus on the over-65s, was felt to
be unhelpful and slightly anachronistic. Increasing the age limit (e.g.
to HoNOS 70+) may be more reflective of the group of individuals for
whom the tool would be most appropriate in some countries, but still
somewhat arbitrary. As a result, it was agreed to rename the scales
HoNOS Older Adults, as this would allow clinicians and services to
exercise their judgement about when it was appropriate to use each new
version of the tool. This could allow the measures to be aligned with
variations in the cut-off age for service organisations and practice in
different countries and over time. While this variability may have some
effect on the comparability of data internationally, it could
significantly simplify utilisation of the measures in individual
countries.

As with the review of HoNOS,(n.d.j) additional areas for development
were identified that had merit, but these would have constituted
substantial changes and required the development of a completely new
instrument. These of course remain an option for future development,
pending sector agreement, as well as government interest and funding.

.. _sec4:

Summary
=======

The anticipated benefits of these changes should ideally be subject to
empirical testing through assessment of interrater reliability and
revalidation of the measure in the field. This type of study requires
funding and preferably involvement from countries that have heavily
invested in the HoNOS65+ to date. This issue is being actively pursued
by members of the advisory board

It is also acknowledged that the different jurisdictions involved in the
review (and others that have also invested in the use of HoNOS65+) may
encounter a range of differing implementation issues. Training
programmes in particular are likely to be affected, and while the
proposed changes are intended to improve the ease and accuracy of using
the scales, it must be stressed that these do not obviate the continued
need for training in the use of the scales.

Advisory Board membershipMick JamesNational HoNOS Advisor and MHCT
Project Manager, RCPsychProf Mike CrawfordDirector of the College Centre
for Quality Improvement, RCPsychAdrian WorrellHead of Centre for Quality
Improvement, RCPsychJon PainterJoint Clinical Lead, Care Pathways and
Packages Project, EnglandDr Gary CheungSenior Lecturer in Psychiatry,
Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Auckland, NZ.Dr
Clive BensemannDirector of Mental Health & Addictions HSG Auckland
District Health Board, NZDr Arran CulverDeputy Director Mental Health
Ministry of Health, NZDr Crawford DuncanConsultant Psychogeriatrician,
Capital and Coast District Health Board, New ZealandDr Mark
SmithClinical Lead, Te Pou, NZDr Rod McKayChair, National Mental Health
Information Development Expert Advisory Panel, AustraliaMr Tim
CoombsAustralian Mental Health Outcomes and Classification Network
(AMHOCN)), AustraliaMs Rosemary DicksonAMHOCN and NMHIDEAP Coordinator,
AustraliaAllen Morris-YatesDirector of the Centralised Data Management
Service (CDMS), AustraliaMr Bill BuckinghamAustralian Government
Department of Health Technical Advisor (Mental Health), AustraliaDr
Malcolm W. StewartConsultant Psychologist, New ZealandRichard
WoodcockService and Information Development Manager. Te Pou o te
Whakaaro Nui, New Zealand

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2018.68.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

**Mick James** is National HoNOS Advisor at the Centre for Advanced
Learning and Conferences, Royal College of Psychiatrists, London, UK;
**Bill Buckingham** is Technical Advisor (Mental Health) at the
Australian Government, Department of Health, Canberra, Australian
Capital Territory, Australia; **Gary Cheung** is Senior Lecturer in
Psychiatry at the Department of Psychological Medicine, University of
Auckland, New Zealand; **Roderick McKay**, Director Psychiatry and
Mental Health Programs, Higher Education and Training Institute, NSW
Health, New South Wales Government, Australia; **Jon Painter** is Senior
Lecturer in Mental Health at Sheffield Hallam University, UK; and
**Malcom W. Stewart** is a Consultant Psychologist at Thrive Psychology,
Psychology, Auckland, New Zealand.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.
