======================================================
Robert Spitzer's legacy: agreement is halfway to truth
======================================================



Peter Tyrer
:Correspondence: Peter Tyrer (p.tyrer@imperial.ac.uk)

:date: 2018-10

:Abstract:
   Bob Spitzer died in December 2015 but is not likely to be forgotten
   quickly. His Herculean task in reforming psychiatric diagnosis,
   mainly by the development of the third edition of the *Diagnostic and
   Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders* in 1980, has been
   acknowledged by many, but it remains unfinished. To complete the
   process, we need more than good diagnostic reliability, we need
   better veracity.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Most psychiatrists will have heard of Robert Spitzer, but outside the
USA he is essentially known for his association with DSM-III, the
defining third edition of the *Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders*.1 Even this association took some time to establish,
and in my lectures I used to explain that the rather unusual name of
Spitzer was only an acronym for ‘Structured Psychiatric Interviews To
Zealously Enhance Research’, until people started to believe he was not
a real person. Then I stopped.

Shortly after this, I was giving a lecture on the classification of
personality disorder in the USA. It was a fairly light-hearted event,
and I presented the talk as a debate between two protagonists, one
supporting a categorical classification and the other a dimensional one.
When I was criticising borderline personality disorder from the
dimensional perspective, I joked, ‘the classification of borderline
personality disorder in DSM-III was only approved after a dead heat on
the vote, so it was decided to include it by the casting vote of the
chairman. Is this the way to organise a classification system?’

A voice growled from the audience: ‘What's the matter with you? Don't
you believe in democracy?’ The voice came from Robert Spitzer. I have
thought about this event continually since and concluded that the single
word that summarises the work of Robert Spitzer is ‘agreement’. This
needs explanation.

Before 1980, international psychiatric classification was in a mess.
There can be no other word for it. There were large national differences
in the incidence of major mental disorders such as schizophrenia,2
fractured understanding because of conflict between psychodynamic and
organic schools, and a general cynical attitude towards diagnosis by
clinicians, who essentially picked a treatment first and gave the
nearest diagnosis afterwards.

Robert (Bob) Spitzer changed all this with his approach to DSM-III. He,
and the American Psychiatric Association, recognised that, without
substantial agreement in diagnostic assessment, psychiatry was going
nowhere. Robert had developed a system using operational criteria to
improve diagnosis in research, and now he was being asked to extend this
to clinical practice. This was a much taller order than might be
thought. Clinicians in busy practice do not take kindly to
research-based formats, and operational criteria had to be understood by
everybody if they were going to be accepted.

Once a rough set of criteria had been developed, it was necessary to
test them in practice. Nowadays, this would be carried out in the form
of field trials; Bob did not have the time, or the resources, for these.
So he organised a set of mass colloquia. All the experts in each given
field were invited to meet with him at the New York Psychiatric
Institute to sort out the new diagnostic prototypes. In this task, Bob
became the Great Persuader. As was noted by David Shaffer, one of the
experts brought in to examine diagnoses in child psychiatry, these
occasions were fairly chaotic, but Bob was clearly in charge and was
found everywhere arguing about detail; a key element of all these
meetings was that they continued until agreement was reached on all
essentials.3 Sometimes, fatigue became the defining factor in getting
this agreement; it can be a most effective enabler.

Within days of each meeting, Bob had produced a summary of each meeting
in which a new classification emerged with all the levels of agreement
listed. A few people scratched their heads – ‘did I really agree to
that’ – but they were persuaded by the stellar company of other experts
that this was indeed the right way forward. So, when Bob sent in his
list of revolutionary proposals to the American Psychiatric Association,
he had all the authorities in each field signed up to the new system,
and so it had to be accepted.

Views about the DSM-III since its publication in 1980 have oscillated
widely. The system of operational criteria worked well for some
diagnoses, but not for others such as personality
disorder,4\ :sup:`,`\ 5 and there is continued argument over the status
of the portmanteau diagnosis of ‘major depressive disorder’, which
covers too wide a range of pathology.6 Although Spitzer is credited with
the removal of homosexuality from psychiatric diagnosis in the 1970's,
it still appeared in DSM-III. There has also been criticism of the
expansion of diagnoses and suggestions, some warranted but others
unfair, that some of the new diagnoses were engineered to suit the
products of pharmaceutical companies.

With each successive version of DSM, the contribution of Bob Spitzer has
receded and the volume of dissent has increased, perhaps illustrated
most forcefully in the popular writings of Allen Frances.7 But Bob kept
an eye on these DSM revisions and was far from happy with many of them,
particularly when they deviated from his firm notions about agreement,
which he was not slow to express.8

Of course, agreement is not everything, and the search for validity has
to follow. Since DSM-III was published 38 years ago, we have made only
the slightest furtive steps towards the aim of independently verified
psychiatric diagnoses. Bob Spitzer showed the way, quite brilliantly,
but he left us halfway down the track, and it is now up to others to
finish the race.

**Peter Tyrer** is Emeritus Professor of Community Psychiatry at the
Centre for Psychiatry, Imperial College London, UK.
