===============================================================
Against the stream: drugs policy needs to be turned on its head
===============================================================



Baroness Molly Meacher

:Correspondence: Baroness Molly Meacher
(meachermc@parliament.uk)

:date: 2019-4

:Abstract:
   Humans have always used mind-altering drugs. However, in 1961 the
   United Nations approved the Single Convention, under which the
   production, sale or possession of a number of drugs, including
   heroin, cocaine, ecstasy and cannabis, became illegal. The
   prohibitionist regime was then introduced by most countries around
   the world and has substantially remained in place ever since. Some
   countries, particularly those in Latin America, have never
   criminalised the use of cannabis. A small number of countries have
   introduced more liberal policies. This article examines the evidence
   of the consequences of policy liberalisation and argues that there is
   now a clear case for every country to examine its drug policies and
   to introduce evidence-based policies with a public health focus.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Human beings have taken mind altering drugs since the Stone Age, but the
current global ‘war on drugs’ dates only from 1961. At that time, the
addictive qualities of drugs like heroin and cocaine led the United
Nations Member States to conclude that drastic action had to be taken as
they were ‘concerned with the health and welfare of mankind’1 – the
objective of the United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. The
assumption at the time was that a drug-free world could be created if
those who produce, sell, possess or use certain addictive drugs were
severely punished. Currently, in the UK, those arrested for possession
of a controlled drug (e.g. heroin, cocaine, ecstasy or cannabis) can
have a maximum prison sentence of 7 years under the UK Misuse of Drugs
Act 1971. Producers and suppliers can be put behind bars for a maximum
of 14 years.

A policy objective to advance the health and welfare of mankind is fine
if the policy makers know the consequences of their proposed policies.
In fact, instead of advancing the health and welfare of mankind, the
drug laws that followed the United Nations Convention have led to untold
violence and corruption in the producer countries, drug-related deaths,
the accumulation of wealth worth billions of dollars by terrorists and
violent criminals, the non-availability of essential pain-relieving
medicines in many developing countries and the emergence of an extremely
dangerous online market for synthetic psychoactive drugs. Of course,
none of these consequences was predicted in 1961. It is not that the
policy makers at that time were bad, they were simply ignorant of the
consequences of their policies.

For political reasons, two of the most dangerous drugs widely used
across the globe – alcohol and tobacco – were excluded from the
Convention. Although rated as less dangerous than heroin and cocaine on
a carefully devised scale of harm, both these drugs have been rated well
above cannabis and ecstasy in their potential danger to the individual.2
A Royal College of Psychiatrists Working Party report3 concluded that,
‘In the long run, society will only be at ease with its drug control
policies if they are based on a rational assessment of the risks
associated with the different psychoactive substances and an objective
appraisal of the consequences of previous policy changes, rather than on
moral postures, the mistaken assumptions of the past and the accidents
of history’ (p. 259).

This suggests we need an entirely new approach to controlled drugs. The
starting point must be a clear definition of the objectives of drug
policy. The All Parliamentary Group for Drug Policy Reform4 proposed the
following objectives to the United Nations: (a)to ensure the adequate
availability of essential controlled medicines to those who need them
(relevant to the many developing nations who have minimal or no access
to morphine);(b)in production and supply countries, to prioritise
education, community development, infrastructure development and
employment in vulnerable communities;(c)in user countries, to minimise
addiction and the harms associated with drug use.

In 1961 there was widespread consensus that a criminalising approach to
the sale and use of heroin, cocaine and cannabis was appropriate, but
this is no longer the case today. Now, even the Global Commission on
Drugs Policy reports that the prohibitionist approach has failed.5
Arguments for and against drug prohibition in relation to heroin and
cocaine may be more finely balanced, but there has been a major swing
both among scientists and politicians toward the view that the illegal
status of less harmful drugs, especially cannabis, does more harm than
good.

Considerable concern has been raised concerning the decriminalisation of
cannabis as a result of studies showing links between ‘skunk’
(high-potency cannabis) and the onset of psychosis. An influential study
has shown that people who use skunk daily are five times more likely to
develop psychosis than those who do not.6 However, the same study showed
that, when the effects of low-potency cannabis were examined, hash users
did ‘not have any increase in risk of psychotic disorders compared with
non-users, irrespective of their frequency of use’. Further, although it
is now widely accepted that there is a causal relationship between
regular high-potency cannabis users and psychosis, the possible
importance of the effect of confounding factors makes the significance
of even this finding for drugs policy unclear. It has been estimated,
for example, that 98% of regular cannabis users will not develop a
psychotic disorder.7 Further, decriminalisation would allow much more
effective control, especially of high-potency cannabis, than is the case
at the present time.

The uncertainty regarding the effects of decriminalisation can only be
resolved by examining the effect of decriminalising legislation where it
is occurring elsewhere in the world. There are now a number of studies
examining the effects of drug law liberalisation, especially, but not
only, in relation to cannabis. A recent review suggested that
liberalisation of cannabis laws is associated with a slight increase in
use of cannabis among the young.8 A cross-national study of 38 countries
confirmed this finding, noting that the increase was only detectable
after 5 years and then mainly in girls.9 Further, although adolescent
use remains criminalised in US states where marijuana use has been
legalised for adults, decriminalisation has led to decreases in
possession and felony arrests among adolescents as well as reduction of
associated juvenile-justice involvement.10 It has also been shown in a
20-country comparison that cannabis law liberalisation leads to
increased help-seeking behaviour for people with drug problems, an
encouraging finding suggesting that if some of the savings made as a
result of the discontinuation of prohibition policies were put into
increasing and improving drug services, any negative effects might be
significantly reduced.11

It has recently been suggested that positive experience from cannabis
law liberalisation might lead to some countries looking more critically
at their laws relating to other potentially more dangerous drugs.12
There is already some evidence to suggest this might have beneficial
effects. In 2001, Portugal changed its approach to the possession of all
drugs. The drugs remained illegal, so the policy did not resolve the
problem of illegal drug dealers enriching themselves by selling
contaminated drugs. However, children and young people who go through a
drug-taking phase do not end up with a criminal record and can much more
easily give up the habit and progress with their education and
employment – the best protections from addiction.

This policy is not ‘soft’ on drug users. If a police officer finds a
young person with drugs, they will be taken to the police station and
required to hand over the drugs, they are then referred to a Commission
for the Dissuasion of Drug Addiction or tribunal including a legal,
health and a social work professional. The tribunal will determine
whether the drug possessor is addicted to drugs. If so, they will be
referred for treatment. The treatment becomes the basis of a contractual
agreement between the drug user and the tribunal. If the drug user
breaks the contract, they could receive an administrative penalty,
although this rarely happens. Importantly this has no implications for
their future employment. A casual user is sent on their way by the
tribunal and strongly told not to continue using the drug. Portugal
invested heavily in prevention, treatment, harm reduction and social
integration services. The combination of decriminalisation with improved
health and social care services probably account for the good results.

Importantly the policy has been extensively evaluated.13 Portugal now
has levels of drug use well below the national European average. The
numbers sent to the criminal courts in Portugal fell from more than
14 000 to 5000–6000 a year after the policy was introduced. The
proportion of offenders for drug-related offences fell from 44 to 21%
between 1999 and 2012. The numbers of addicted children and young people
has decreased. All the same, critical analysis of studies of those who
claim that the Portuguese drug policy has been a resounding success or,
in contrast, a disastrous failure suggest that the evidence does not
support either extreme view.14

Switzerland has shown how to replace drug dealers with heroin treatment
services. The services largely cater for poly drug users. The service
has three parts: the drug consumption room (DCR), the heroin clinic and
the methadone clinic. The service providers have an agreement with the
police that anyone approaching the DCR will not be arrested for drug
possession. The DCR is a vital part of the service. A doctor spends time
there each week, treating ulcers and other health problems, and a social
worker is available to help with housing, financial and other social
issues. Addicted clients who come in off the street with their illegal
drugs are welcomed and cared for. Over about 3 weeks these two
professionals encourage the street drug users to come along to the
clinic and have clean heroin in exchange for agreeing to a demanding
contract. These chaotic individuals are required to hand over their
benefits in the early stages, to make sure their rent and bills are
paid. They are given back the money they need for food or other
essentials, but not enough for them to buy drugs.

The constraints are worth it in return for the clean heroin as well as
the psychological and social care. The Swiss heroin treatment programme
has been rigorously evaluated.15 The results are impressive. Until they
arrived at the clinic these individuals were committing an average of 80
crimes a month to feed their addiction. After 18 months in treatment,
one third are entirely drug-free and leading normal lives; a further
third are leading their lives within the law, but still taking some
heroin or methadone. The last third need more time to achieve their
objectives. The savings to the tax payer and the benefits to the
community from reduced crime levels are huge. The estimate is that for
every franc spent on this service, two francs are saved for the
taxpayer. The cost of the service per person is 15 000 euros. Not cheap
but well worth it.

In the meantime, in England, the Durham Police are beginning to use the
Swiss route for users of all narcotic drugs and even for low-level drug
dealers and traffickers.16 Their Check Point programme recognises that
many who are arrested for theft motivated by drugs and other less
serious crimes have underlying mental health and social problems. The
programme offers drug-related offenders and others a 4-month contract.
This requires them to engage with treatment and not to reoffend. If they
succeed on their contract then no further criminal justice action is
taken. If successful in rehabilitating drug users and cutting
reoffending, this will surely be an important policy across the country.
The government will be funding 10 pilots of Checkpoint and 25 police
forces are wanting to apply to be involved.

To conclude, an independent review of UK drug policies is urgently
needed. Each drug needs to be individually considered. Regulation of
heroin, for example, needs to be very different from the regulation of
cannabis or ecstasy. The objectives must be to reduce addiction and
limit as far as possible the harms associated with drug use. Drug policy
reform would also dramatically reduce the ill-gotten gains from the
drugs trade of terrorists and violent criminals.

In fact, we need to turn, not just policy about cannabis, but our whole
drugs policy in its head. Opponents of the legalisation of cannabis, who
suggest that this might well represent a slippery slope leading to the
legalisation of other, currently proscribed drugs are right. But that is
exactly what needs to happen.

**Baroness Molly Meacher** is formerly Chair of the East London and City
Mental Health Trust, UK.
