---
author:
- Sheila Hollins
date: 2018-2
title: Joan Bicknell
---

Dorothy Joan Bicknell, psychiatrist, born 10 April 1939; died 12 June
2017

Brilliant clinician who was appointed professor of psychiatry of
learning disability at St George\'s, University of London.

In 1980, Joan Bicknell, who has died aged 78 of cancer, was appointed
professor of psychiatry of learning disability -- the first British
female professor of psychiatry -- at what is now St George\'s,
University of London. A brilliant clinician, she put the disabled person
and their family at the centre of each consultation.

She was in constant demand to speak to trainees, parent groups and
learning disability services about her vision of what could be done, and
published dozens of papers for both clinicians and families. An article
drawn from her inaugural lecture as a professor in 1981, The
Psychopathology of Handicap, was published in the journal Psychological
Medicine, and remains inspirational today.

In it, she described the emotional effect on parents and siblings of the
diagnosis of learning disability in the family and also explored what it
is like for children and adults living with a learning disability in
terms of their own emotional inner world, their expectations for
adulthood and the extent to which they were included or excluded from
participating in daily life in the community. At the time, most people
with learning disabilities lived at home with their families -- unless
the family could no longer support the person -- and the alternative was
usually a hospital admission.

Joan demonstrated that with specialist advice, community services could
provide families with more support to care for longer, and the growing
number of community homes and hostels could be supported to provide
family-style care. This was unpopular with many medical superintendents
of "mental handicap" hospitals, and she was never accepted by the
medical establishment.

In 1978, a public inquiry into a scandal at Normansfield hospital in
Teddington, south-west London, found the medical leadership seriously at
fault. The nurses at Normansfield had gone on strike two years earlier
complaining about how dysfunctional the organisation was, and the
appalling conditions in which people with learning disabilities were
living. The South West Thames regional health authority accepted the
inquiry recommendations and appointed Joan to lead a taskforce to
transform the care provided. It brought staff and relatives together to
create an improvement plan, a new multidisciplinary management structure
was put in place and money was provided to build more accommodation to
reduce overcrowding.

It was against this background that Joan became professor, heading a new
NHS-funded academic department to launch the specialty of psychiatry of
learning disability at St George\'s, covering south-west London, Surrey,
Sussex and Hampshire. St George\'s remains a leader in teaching medical
students how to communicate effectively with people with learning
disabilities, work that began in 1982, when Joan started involving her
patients and their families in face-to-face teaching.

During her working day she met patients and families in the clinic or at
home, supervised trainees, advised NHS and social service managers and
fielded phone calls from people seeking advice. In the evenings and at
weekends she would be booked as a speaker or for consultations all over
Britain. She took early retirement in 1990 at the age of 50, having
suffered from mental illness and severe asthma for the final three years
of her career.

Perhaps the hardest thing for her to deal with had been the failure of
NHS managers and of politicians to respond with meaningful action when
she spoke up for the human rights of people with learning disabilities.
She wrote in the Personal View column for the British Medical Journal
about the men in a locked ward who were not allowed access to the
kitchen or to drinking water and resorted to filling their shoes with
water from the lavatory pan. Eventually a water fountain was installed
in the living room, only for it to be blocked up by staff using it to
dispose of their cigarette ash. Confronting cruelty in such hospitals
was yet another of the ways she contributed to the advance of
enlightened disability psychotherapy and psychiatry.

Born in Isleworth, south-west London, Joan lived in the capital for most
of the second world war with her mother, Dorothy (nee Smith), a
solicitor\'s secretary and later a foster parent, and her older brother,
Edward, who went on to become a teacher in Swaziland, where he later
died. Her father, Albert Bicknell, a foreman bricklayer in peacetime,
served with the Royal Engineers in bomb disposal.

From Twickenham County school for girls Joan went to Birmingham
University, graduating in medicine in 1962. A Methodist missionary
society needed a paediatrician urgently at the Ilesha Wesley Guild
hospital in Oyo, Nigeria, so Joan interrupted her paediatric training to
test her new medical skills in a very different setting. When the
Biafran war began in 1967, Joan was rounded up with others at bayonet
point and put on a plane to Sierra Leone. There she worked on the flying
doctor service before returning home.

She took a post at Queen Mary\'s hospital, Carshalton, in Surrey, where
her concern about the poor care given to severely disabled children was
strengthened by her own family experience, when her mother fostered two
brothers with learning disabilities. This was the new challenge she
needed and five more years of clinical training followed.

Joan obtained the diploma in psychological medicine in 1969, and in 1971
completed an MD on the causes and prevalence of lead poisoning in
institutionalised children. She was soon active in campaigning about the
restricted and poorly supported lives that people experienced in
long-stay hospitals.

In 1972 Joan became a consultant psychiatrist in mental handicap at
Botley\'s Park hospital, Chertsey, where she later met Diane Worsley, a
social worker. Their friendship and partnership stood the test of time,
and after Joan retired they moved to Holnest, Dorset, and ran a farm,
welcoming disabled children to work with the animals. Joan and Diane
also built up the Longburton Methodist chapel, where they were worship
leaders. In 2016 they sold the farm and moved to nearby Stalbridge.

The community team base at Springfield University hospital in Tooting,
south-west London, where Joan did much of her pioneering clinical work,
was named after her when she left. The Royal College of Psychiatrists
instituted an annual essay prize in her honour.

She is survived by Diane.

This article has been reproduced with kind permission from
[theguardian.com](theguardian.com).
