======================================================================
A review and update of the Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS)
======================================================================



Mick James
Jon Painter
Bill Buckingham
Malcolm W. Stewart

:Correspondence: Mick James via
(Emma.George@rcpsych.ac.uk)

:date: 2018-4

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   The Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS) and its older adults’
   version (HoNOS 65+) have been used widely for 20 years, but their
   glossaries have not been revised to reflect clinicians' experiences
   or changes in service delivery. The Royal College of Psychiatrists
   convened an international advisory board, with UK, Australian and New
   Zealand expertise, to identify desirable amendments. The aim was to
   improve rater experience by removing ambiguity and inconsistency in
   the glossary rather than more radical revision.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Changes proposed to the HoNOS are reported. HoNOS 65+ changes will be
   reported separately. Based on the views and experience of the
   countries involved, a series of amendments were identified.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   While effective clinician training remains critically important,
   these revisions aim to improve intra- and interrater reliability and
   improve validity. Next steps will depend on feedback from HoNOS
   users. Reliability and validity testing will depend on funding.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS)1 is a 12-scale
clinician-rated measure developed by the Royal College of Psychiatrists
to guide everyday clinical practice and measure health and social care
outcomes in secondary care mental health services for working-age adults
(18–65 years). The HoNOS was designed to: (1)be short and simple for
routine use and acceptable to a range of mental health
professionals(2)have adequate coverage of clinical and social
functions(3)be sensitive to improvement, deterioration or lack of change
over time(4)have demonstrable and acceptable reliability(5)have a known
relationship with more established scales.2Over its 20-year lifespan,
the HoNOS has demonstrated adequate reliability, validity, clinical
utility2\ :sup:`,`\ 3 and sensitivity to change.4\ :sup:`,`\ 5
Subsequent to its development, a family of related measures have been
developed for different age groups and clinical
populations.6\ :sup:`–`\ 8 The HoNOS has been translated into at least
12 other languages and is routinely used in clinical practice and
research around the world. England, Australia and New Zealand, have also
mandated the HoNOS for routine monitoring and outcome measurement across
their mental health services at a national level.9\ :sup:`–`\ 12

Although the basic soundness of the instrument is recognised, two
decades of training, routine use and analysis of the resultant data,
together with substantial advances in psychiatry and mental health
services, have shown that updates to the supporting documentation are
required to improve use of the HoNOS.3\ :sup:`,`\ 4\ :sup:`,`\ 13 As
copyright holder for the HoNOS family of measures, the Royal College of
Psychiatrists elected to undertake a limited review (rather than a full
redevelopment and revalidation) that aimed to use expert opinion to
improve the utility of the HoNOS in contemporary mental healthcare,
while remaining true to its original aims and maintaining comparability
with existing HoNOS data-sets. This paper outlines the review process,
its scope, the issues identified and the set of revised scales.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

In recognition of each country's mandated use of HoNOS at a national
level,9\ :sup:`–`\ 12 and to ensure their interests were incorporated,
an advisory board (chaired by the Royal College of Psychiatrists'
national HoNOS advisor) was drawn from representatives from England,
Australia and New Zealand. Nominations from the respective national
governments were made, with members being required to have extensive
experience in either: HoNOS staff training; using HoNOS in practice;
using HoNOS data at a macro level; or providing oversight at service,
professional or governmental level.

Advisory board members were asked to use their professional networks to
canvas widely for clinicians' opinions regarding aspects of the tool
that required refinement. To facilitate this, a standard recording form,
covering each scale (as well as the overall rating guidelines) was
provided, which, when collated, acted as a review template (`Table
1 <#tab01>`__). The board also considered the evidence and
recommendations previously prepared in the review by Trauer and
Buckingham3 commissioned by the Australian Government Department of
Health. Table 1Summary of issues raisedScale/SectionIssues recommended
for considerationOverall rating guidelines •Need additional guidance
about incorporating cultural factors into ratings•Improve clarity of the
scoring system in relation to clinical significance•Improve clarity
regarding what is to be rated (i.e., most severe problem or usual level
of difficulty in past 2 weeks)•Clarity about when the scales should be
usedScale 1. Overactive, aggressive, disruptive or agitated behaviour
•Ensure all four behaviours are considered and clarify how many need to
be present•Clarify to what extent behaviours here should be related to
mental health problems•Provide guidance about how to address relevant
cultural factors and context•Consider adding expansive mood as
underrepresented by Scale 8Scale 2. Non-Accidental self-injury •How to
address relevant cultural factors and context•Clarify that this is not
an assessment of risk•High-risk thoughts/intentions currently underrated
relative to overall severity•Increase consistency of dimensions of risk
considered at different levels.Scale 3. Problem drinking or drug-taking
•Provide clarity on the rating of tobacco use•Clarify how behaviours
associated with addiction are rated•Improve clarity of rating for binge
drinking and the reference to social norms that can lead to subjective
rating•Clarify how ratings should take into consideration people on
substitution programmes (e.g. methadone)Scale 4. Cognitive problems
•Clarify where formal thought disorder and a lack of insight should be
rated•Perceived to be a large gap in severity between rating 2 and
rating 3 anchor points•Descriptors focus primarily on dementias, not
other cognitive difficulties•Review problems associated with transient
versus enduring cognitive impairments within this scaleScale 5. Physical
illness or disability problems •Glossary descriptions reported by many
to be unclear and/or unhelpful, especially in comparison with the HoNOS
65+ descriptorsScale 6. Problems associated with hallucinations and
delusions •Clarify where body image disturbance related to eating
disorders should be rated•Improve description of ‘odd or eccentric
ideas’•Clarify where ‘lack of insight’ should be ratedScale 7. Problems
with depressed mood •Clarify that this scale is about depressed mood
rather than clinical depression, as other symptoms of clinical
depression cause confusion in the field•Change examples used to clarify
ratings, as these were not found to be helpful in the field (e.g. guilt
or self-accusation)Scale 8. Other mental and behavioural problems
•Consider whether any changes could be made that would retain the
current features of the scales while addressing the high levels of use
of labels A and D in this scale•Relatively poor reliability for this
scale•Consider the addition of an option for elated mood, as this is not
represented elsewhere in the scales•Clarify whether stress should relate
to general life stress or specifically acute stress reaction and
post-traumatic stress disorder•Clarify where body image disturbance
should be ratedScale 9. Problems with relationships •Improve clarity
about whether clinicians should score worst or usual level of
relationship difficulties•Improve glossary examples to better ensure
full range of relationship difficulties identified (e.g. destructive or
unhelpful relationships, active or passive withdrawal)Scale 10. Problems
with activities of daily living •Improve instructions on how to combine
assessment of deficits in basic and complex skills into a single
rating•Clarify how clinicians should determine the effects of existing
supports•Review and evaluate the perceived disproportionate jump in
severity from rating 2 to rating 3Scale 11. Problems with living
conditions, and Scale 12. Problems with occupation and activities •High
missing data rates from in-patient settings•Provide additional clarity
regarding the use of the 2-week rule for these scales•Review the
perceived inconsistencies between the descriptors for the different
levels of severity•Provide more formal clarification about how to rate
these scales for long-term in-patients and residential settingsOther
matters •Review the terms used for patients, staff and carers•Explore
the feasibility and desirability of trying to build consistency between
the HoNOS and the HoNOS 65+

This review template formed the basis of a scale-by-scale review. Some
suggestions for change were more radical than others; hence, the board
developed criteria with which to gauge their viability. For a change to
be supported, it needed to represent a tangible improvement (e.g.
removal of anachronisms or ambiguities, or simplifying the instrument's
use) whilst also: (1)maintaining the original instrument's integrity as
much as possible(2)ensuring that individual and aggregated outputs were
likely to remain comparable with existing data(3)supporting HoNOS as a
summary of clinical assessment(s)(4)adhering to the HoNOS ‘core rules’
i.e. •each item is a behaviourally anchored 5-point scale•rate items in
order (1–12)•use all available information to make a rating•do not
include information already rated in an earlier item•rate the most
severe problem/worst manifestation from the preceding 2 weeks•a problem
is rated according to the degree of distress caused and/or its effects
on behaviour•must be rated by a mental health professional trained in
clinical assessment•rate problems regardless of cause.2Some changes
identified had consequences/implications for other items, and hence an
iterative process of minuted teleconference and email discussions
evolved, between October 2014 and January 2016.

Following review of the HoNOS documentation, a review of HoNOS 65+ was
also undertaken through to October 2016. This presented an opportunity
to maximise alignment between the two versions of the instrument and
yielded a number of additional refinements to both measures.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

After working through the issues set out in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__, and
reviewing the HoNOS 65+, the advisory board produced a set of revised
HoNOS scales (supplementary Table 1 available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2017.17). Each item's original wording is
also included (in greyed-out boxes) to aid comparison.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec3-1:

Overarching HoNOS rating guidelines
-----------------------------------

Despite the agreed objective of keeping the instrument short and easy to
use, based on considerable experience of training and routine clinical
use, advisory board members universally agreed that the original rating
instructions erred on brevity at the expense of clarity. They also
recognised that the frequency, duration and quality of training varies
significantly.3\ :sup:`,`\ 14 Therefore, to improve interrater agreement
(but not to replace formal training), existing training materials and
protocols were reviewed and, in many cases, incorporated.

The first notable augmentation was to legitimise the informal training
advice that ratings of 0–1 should be viewed as subclinical, whereas
ratings of 2–4 indicate problems of a severity that would normally
warrant care/treatment planning and intervention.

Second, the original guidance stipulated that behaviours/problems should
be rated regardless of cause (i.e. irrespective of psychiatric disorder)
but was silent on the rating of issues deemed normal in an individual's
culture/subculture. Issues for which the ratings may be affected by
cultural and contextual factors have been previously identified3 and
include culturally sanctioned aggression (Scale 1), self-harm associated
with religious ceremonies or periods of mourning (Scale 2), paranormal
experiences associated with cultural beliefs or events (Scale 6), and
the expression of sadness associated with bereavement (Scale 7). None of
these are attributable to mental health problems and, if rated, would
produce a misleading clinical picture. Therefore, although cultural
competence remains a prerequisite to good-quality clinical assessment
(and thus accurate ratings), there is now an explicit expectation that
an individual's culture should be taken into account. This debate also
raised a wider question for the advisory board about how attributable to
mental ill health behaviours needed to be before they should be
included, an issue that was carried into amendments to several
individual scales.

Consideration was given to what terms should be used to describe people
who use mental health services, their significant others, and staff.
This, in part, reflected moves from the recovery perspective and the
mental health consumer movement to minimise the extent to which language
used is pathologising and pejorative.15 Discussion indicated that
terminology varied between countries, over time and between groups
within countries. Given the lack of consistency, the decision was made
to retain the term patient to denote a person who uses mental health
services, family for people who are significant others of that person,
and staff for people who are paid to provide mental health services.

.. _sec3-1-1:

Scale 1 Overactive or aggressive or disruptive or agitated behaviour
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It was recognised that while item 1 has a broader scope than most
others, clinicians focus primarily on the aggressive elements of the
scale.3 The case for creating a separate item for this aspect alone was
judged to be a more fundamental change than the current review's scope
could support. Instead, the item description was revised to emphasise
the need to consider all four aspects. The issue of culturally
sanctioned aggression in the context of ritual was felt to have been
addressed in the overarching rating guidance, hence the scale remaining
diagnosis-agnostic.

.. _sec3-1-2:

Scale 2 Non-accidental self-injury
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Revisions here were intended to provide consistency of examples across
the severity ratings (covering risks and thoughts as well as
behaviours). Cultural influences (e.g. ritual self-flagellation
commonplace in some religions16) continue to require a culturally
competent clinician and reference to the overarching guidance.

.. _sec3-1-3:

Scale 3 Problem drinking or drug-taking
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As with Scale 2, changes now provide consistent descriptions of key
elements of addictive behaviours, with each level describing aspects of
craving, dependency and behaviour that align to contemporary notions of
severity (e.g. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
guidance17). The more subjective aspects of the original scales (e.g.
‘within social norms’ and ‘loss of control’) have been removed, and
there is an increased emphasis on the psychological effects of drug and
alcohol use. This ensures that, during periods of enforced abstinence
(e.g. hospital admissions), the severity of addiction can still be
captured.

Finally, the advisory board, while fully acknowledging the harmful
effects of tobacco use,18 agreed to explicitly exclude smoking from this
scale – a significant decision that warrants further explanation. First,
as per the original text, the physiological consequences of smoking will
continue to be captured by Scale 5. Second, the prevalence of smoking in
people with mental health conditions is approximately twice the norm,19
creating a ‘shadowing effect’ that can detract from the scale's clinical
utility. There are, of course, more extreme scenarios where, for
example, individuals render themselves vulnerable to exploitation
through their attempts to obtain cigarettes. The new guidance therefore
excludes dependence on tobacco unless there are severe and adverse
consequences above and beyond the known detrimental effects to physical
health.

.. _sec3-1-4:

Scale 4 Cognitive problems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Feedback suggested that Scale 4 was too heavily orientated towards
dementia and, even then, some of the examples were deemed unhelpful.
Revisions were therefore undertaken in two stages. Initially, with
reference to other versions of HoNOS,8\ :sup:`,`\ 20 the narrow focus on
dementia was broadened to incorporate issues such as formal thought
disorder and the ability to learn. Through this process, the reported
‘excessive jump’ between ratings of 2 and 3 was also addressed. Then, in
parallel with the HoNOS 65+ review, the descriptions were adjusted
further. This led to improved alignment between the HoNOS and HoNOS 65+
cognitive scales, but complete alignment was regarded as too radical a
change.

.. _sec3-1-5:

Scale 5 Physical illness or disability problems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

No changes to this scale were deemed necessary.

.. _sec3-1-6:

Scale 6 Problems associated with hallucinations and delusions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This scale only required minor linguistic changes.

.. _sec3-1-7:

Scale 7 Problems with depressed mood
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The descriptors for ratings 2–4 are now consistent with the scale title
(i.e. depressed mood rather than depression), thus removing ambiguity
surrounding the inclusion/exclusion of other depressive symptoms. This
point has also been reiterated in the scale's initial bullet points.
Training experience has shown that the original descriptors led
clinicians to focus heavily on the concept of guilt at the expense of
other manifestations of low mood. Consequently, as for Scale 1, a more
consistent and balanced description of each severity rating (in this
case including loss of interest, guilt and loss of self-esteem) has been
created.

.. _sec3-1-8:

Scale 8 Other mental and behavioural problems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The frequency with which anxiety is rated within this
scale3\ :sup:`,`\ 10 has resulted in calls for its promotion to that of
a scale in its own right. While this proposal has merit, it was deemed a
substantial change and thus out of scope for inclusion in this work. The
possibility of rating multiple issues on this scale was also discussed,
but would again affect comparability with existing data, contradict the
‘rate the worst’ rule and overly complicate the rating guidance for
relatively little benefit. As a result, these two proposals were
reserved for a more extensive review should the opportunity arise.

HoNOS trainers reported frequently being asked where elated mood should
be rated. There was a suspicion that it was often captured under the
‘other’ option in this scale, or rated by proxy in Scale 1 (although no
empirical evidence was available). To improve consistency of rating, it
was introduced as a specific option (‘K’) in Scale 8. (N.B. The letter J
has not been reused to avoid potential confusion between data-sets
collated from the use of the original HoNOS and this revised version).

Based again on training experiences, while options A–I have been
retained, each has been supplemented with explanatory text. DSM-521 was
the genesis for these additions, but descriptors have been heavily
edited to ensure they described presenting needs/problems rather than
merely reflecting diagnostic criteria. This clearly challenged the core
principle of brevity but was felt to be outweighed by the benefits
arising from improved clarity.

.. _sec3-1-9:

Scale 9 Problems with relationships
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Changes to this scale were limited to modest rewording of descriptions,
again intended to increase clarity.

.. _sec3-1-10:

Scale 10 Problems with activities of daily living
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Additional introductory text has been added to reflect common training
advice regarding how to ‘manage’ the effects of any existing support the
patient is receiving. The considerably more complex and granular
approach that might be required to accommodate the occasional problems
experienced when rating patients whose complex skills are intact, but
whose self-care skills are not, was also considered. The approach used
by the tabulated version of the HoNOS 65+22 was suggested as a possible
model to accommodate this, but was deemed to represent a substantial
change and hence rejected.

.. _sec3-1-11:

Scale 11 Problems with housing and living conditions, and Scale 12 Problems with occupation and activities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The issues and solutions for the final two scales were very similar, and
hence their discussion has been combined. First, experience from the
field suggested that, without adequate training, Scales 11 and 12 are
often used to consider aspects of the patient's abilities (as in Scale
10) rather than to rate how well their current environment matches their
needs in terms of accommodation or occupation and activity.
Alternatively, these scales can be misused as global ratings of the
quality of accommodation and occupation/activity. Either way, the
conceptual complexity causes difficulty in routine use.23 An additional
bullet point now addresses these misconceptions.

Second, in recognition of the rating difficulties that can arise
at/around the point of hospital admission and discharge,24 a thorough
review of supplementary advice provided in each country was undertaken.
The option to vary the 2-week rating period for these scales was
considered, but the board was uncomfortable breaching this core rule.
Instead, a less radical solution was to highlight that ‘the patient's
usual ….’ was to be rated and provide clearer guidance about how this
should be dealt with in different living situations. Retaining this
degree of clinical discretion was deemed both tolerable and more likely
to result in clinically meaningful ratings.

Other revisions to these scales were less complex and primarily sought
to update some of the terminology used and ensure all terms were
acceptable to each participating country.

.. _sec3-2:

Other issues
------------

In addition to the changes discussed, the review highlighted further
areas for development that may be considered desirable. However, these
constitute substantial changes that fall outside the scope of the agreed
review. These would require the development of a new instrument but
remain an option for future development pending sector agreement, as
well as government interest and funding.

.. _sec3-3:

Implications
------------

The Council of the Royal College of Psychiatrists considered the
proposed changes to the HoNOS set out in this paper at its meeting on
the 14 July 2017 and agreed to these recommended changes proposed by the
advisory board. In doing so, the Council acknowledged that it is highly
desirable that the perceived benefits of the changes be subjected to
empirical testing through assessment of interrater reliability and
revalidation of the measure in the field. Such testing will require
funding and ideally the involvement of those countries that have heavily
invested in the HoNOS to date; this is being pursued by members of the
advisory board.

It is also acknowledged that there are likely to be issues that will
affect the implementation of a revised version in the different
jurisdictions involved in the review, as well as in other parts of the
mental health community worldwide that have invested in the use of the
HoNOS and translations of the original scales. One such effect might be
on the programmes of training for clinicians; while the proposed changes
are intended to improve the clinician experience of using the scales,
they do not obviate the need for training in the use of the scales.

We thank the following members of the advisory board: **Prof. Mike
Crawford**, Director of the College Centre for Quality Improvement,
Royal College of Psychiatrists; **Adrian Worrell**, Head of Centre for
Quality Improvement, Royal College of Psychiatrists; **Dr Clive
Bensemann**, Director of the Mental Health & Addictions Healthcare
Service Group, Auckland District Health Board, New Zealand; **Dr Arran
Culver**, Deputy Director, Mental Health Ministry of Health, New
Zealand; **Dr Mark Smith**, Clinical Lead, Te Pou, New Zealand; **Dr Rod
McKay**, Chair, National Mental Health Information Development Expert
Advisory Panel (NMHIDEAP), Australia; **Mr Tim Coombs**, Australian
Mental Health Outcomes and Classification Network (AMHOCN), Australia;
**Ms Rosemary Dickson**, AMHOCN and NMHIDEAP Coordinator, Australia;
**Allen Morris-Yates**, Director of the Centralised Data Management
Service, Australia.

**Mick James** is the National HoNOS Advisor and MHCT (Mental Health
Clustering Tool) Project Manager at the Royal College of Psychiatrists,
London, UK; **Jon Painter** is Joint Clinical Lead of the Care Pathways
and Packages Project, National Health Service England, and is a Mental
Health Nurse Lecturer at Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, UK;
**Bill Buckingham** is a Consultant and Mental Health Technical Advisor
to the Australian Government Department of Health, Canberra, Australia;
and **Malcolm W. Stewart** is a Consultant Clinical Psychologist at
Thrive Psychology, Auckland, New Zealand.

Supplementary material is available online at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2017.17.
