===================================
Doctors, suicide and mental illness
===================================



Clare Gerada
:Correspondence: Clare Gerada (clare.gerada@nhs.net)

:date: 2018-8

:Abstract:
   This article focuses on doctors and suicide. It provides real
   examples to illustrate why doctors die by their own hand. These
   reasons are replicated in the general population, but also include a
   host of additional risk factors related to being a doctor. In each
   case, information about the doctor is in the public domain or, as in
   one case, consent from the next of kin has been obtained for a detail
   not in the public domain. The author is a doctors' doctor, heading up
   a confidential health service for doctors with mental illness or
   addiction, the National Health Service Practitioner Health Programme.
   Mortality data from the programme (January 2008–January 2017) will
   also be included. For the sake of confidentiality, data is collated
   and details regarding age and gender have been approximated.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In most healthcare systems (whether privately or publicly funded), and
across all ages, genders, specialties and seniority, doctors have higher
rates of depression and anxiety compared with the general population and
other professional groups.1 This is counterintuitive given that doctors
have a host of apparently protective attributes, including career and
financial security, high status and a generally rewarding job. However,
doctors are as exposed as anyone else to risks associated with genetic
predisposition, early traumatic life events, later bereavements,
illnesses or relationship breakdowns. Doctors also have additional risk
factors. They are chosen for personality traits that predict good
doctoring – perfectionism, obsessiveness and even elements of martyrdom
– traits that can act against them. From an early age they are driven,
competitive, compulsive, individualistic and ambitious – features that
can go into overdrive when stressed. As doctors work harder, they blame
themselves for not being able to deliver the care required by their
patients, and feel guilty for events beyond their control. Consequently,
doctors can suffer from a triad of guilt, low self-esteem and a
persistent sense of failure.2 To survive a lifetime in medicine, doctors
also have to develop psychological defences that include
depersonalisation and dissociation. This can make it harder to create
attachments to others or to recognise when the emotional burden of their
work becomes too much, and thus contributes to the spiralling of
discontent and increased risk of suicide.

.. _sec1:

Doctors and suicide
===================

In the UK, around one in five adults has considered suicide and one in
15 have attempted it. Very few attempts result in death, estimated to be
about 1 in 10 000 per annum.3 The suicide rate for doctors have been
variably estimated at between two and five times the rate of the general
population.4\ :sup:`,`\ 5 In a systematic review, Lindeman *et al*.
estimated physicians' relative suicide risk at 1.1–3.4 for men and
2.5–5.7 for women compared with those for the general population, and at
1.5–3.8 for men and 3.7–4.5 for women compared with those for other
professionals.6 Anaesthetists, general practitioners and psychiatrists
appear to be associated with higher risk. In an Australian survey,
approximately a quarter of doctors reported having had thoughts of
suicide prior to the past 12 months (24.8%), and 10.4% reported having
had thoughts of suicide in the previous 12 months. Thoughts of suicide
are significantly higher in doctors compared with the general population
and other professionals (24.8 *v.* 13.3 *v.* 12.8%).7 In a 2008 study,
members of the American College of Surgeons were sent an anonymous
survey with questions on suicidal ideation and use of mental health
services, and questionnaires for depression, burnout and quality of
life.8 Of 7905 participating surgeons (a response rate of 31.7%), 501
(6.3%) reported suicidal ideation during the previous 12 months (more
common in older surgeons). These levels of suicidal thoughts were
between 1.5 and 3.0 times more common among surgeons than the general
population. Importantly, only 26.0% of the surgeons with suicidal
thoughts had sought help, whereas 60.1% (301) were reluctant to seek
help because of concern that it could affect their medical license. This
study shows the high rate of mental health distress accompanied by low
use of treatment services.

.. _sec2:

Suicide and mental illness
==========================

Major risk factors for completed suicide across all populations are
depression and substance misuse, both of which are also common in
doctors who take their own life. For example, Dr Louise Tebboth, a
gifted south London general practitioner, was only 40 years old when she
killed herself. Her husband Gary Marson, in his book *Carry on
Breathing*,9 describes in poignant detail the first year of his
bereavement, starting on Friday 23 January 2015 when he found her
hanging from the bannisters in their home. She fought a long battle
against bipolar disorder. She had survived a near fatal overdose in her
late 20s but decades later, despite the intervention of psychiatric
services and daily monitoring by her husband, and an intensive regime of
activity to keep her occupied and safe, she killed herself.

.. _sec3:

Deaths of doctors attending the National Health Service Practitioner Health Programme
=====================================================================================

As well as being a local general practitioner colleague, Louise was a
patient of the National Health Service Practitioner Health Programme
(PHP) when she died. Of the approximately 3500 doctors who have
presented between 2008 and 2017, 80% have done so with mental health
problems (mainly depression, anxiety and symptoms indistinguishable from
post-traumatic stress disorder). Another 15% have predominantly suffered
from alcohol or drug misuse (mostly alcohol dependence) or a mix
thereof; the service also has a number of doctors with personality
disorder, bipolar disorder, physical health problems affecting their
mental health and a small number with undiagnosed schizophrenia or
psychosis. During this period, 21 patients of the service have died;
approximately 6 times as many men died as women. The average age at
death was 44 years, ranging from under 30 to over 65 years old, and from
early on in training to senior consultants near retirement. General
practitioners accounted for 7 out of 21 (33%) of the deaths; the
remainder were drawn from different medical, surgical, anaesthetic and
emergency specialties in almost equal numbers. Six doctors died from
suicide. A further ten died from accidents where the cause of death was
not given as suicide, but which could be considered to be part of a
suicidal act or from fatal overdoses of drugs/alcohol (not classified as
suicide). Five were from either natural causes or the doctor died
overseas and we have been unable to find the cause of death.

.. _sec4:

Doctors, suicide and barriers to care
=====================================

It is not just mental illness that predisposes doctors to killing
themselves. Suicide is also linked to how doctors are treated, how they
treat themselves, unique issues related to their job and a system where
doctors with mental illness are handled through an adversarial rather
than treatment system. This equates to personal, professional and
institutional stigma, which doctors face when trying to access care and
also once in treatment. Stigma is one of the most important barriers for
doctors trying to be treated, illustrated by the next doctor. Daksha
Emson was a young psychiatrist. On 9 October 2000, when her first child,
Freya, was 3 months old, she stabbed her baby, poured accelerant on them
both and set it alight. Both died. Daksha had written in her diary, just
before her death, about her feelings of hopelessness. What follows is an
abridged extract from that diary entry:

‘\ *Feel useless as a mother as a wife as a woman.*

See no hope for the future.

sleep unrefreshing food forced down because my baby needs nourishment.
Focusing on my precious baby Freya – she means everything to me, I
desperately want to be a good mother to her but I'm starting to feel I'm
failing her in a big way, that everyone can see I'm a useless mother
that I'm no good.

… hits me in early hours of morning – thoughts churn round and round.

*Finding it difficult to hang on to reality - am I bad and wicked? I
don*'*t deserve good things, is there really hope for the future?*\ ’

Extract from the last diary entry of Dr Daksha Emson, published in
*Report of an Independent Inquiry into the Care and Treatment of Daksha
Emson and her Daughter Freya*.10

The subsequent inquiry identified stigma as a major factor in her and
her daughter's deaths. Daksha, like many doctors, felt that she had
failed by becoming mentally unwell. The study by Henderson *et al*.11 of
doctors out of work with mental illness found that most felt guilty,
shamed and fearful. Doctors feel a dreadful sense of personal failure
and inadequacy if they struggle to keep working and despair can be
sudden and overwhelming. The researchers describe an overwhelming
stigmatisation that mentally ill doctors were exposed to by friends,
family and peers, which left them isolated and sad. Some sick doctors
deliberately concealed their problems, and this resonates with doctors
attending PHP who will pretend to go to work each day rather than admit
to their families that they are unwell. In the Henderson *et al*. study,
doctors described a lack of support from colleagues and feared a
negative response when returning to work. Self-stigmatisation was
central to the participants' accounts and several doctors appeared to
have internalised the negative views of others. Stigma was also a key
feature of a survey conducted by Cohen *et al*. of almost 2000
doctors.12 Cohen *et al*.'s view is that fewer professions stigmatise
mental health disorders more prominently than medicine, a conclusion
supported by the finding that 41% of doctors with mental illness said
that they would not disclose it. Garelick *et al*.,13 reporting on the
service for doctors with mental health problems, also cites stigma as a
major barrier to receiving appropriate care.

Daksha was concerned about the stigma of her mental illness and its
effect on her career progression; she mentioned this fear to her best
friend several times. Even if, as with Daksha, doctors present for help,
it is difficult for caregivers to see beyond the professional to the
patient and treat the sick doctor as the frightened, vulnerable
individual they are. Doctors tend to treat sick doctors differently from
other patients. They engage in medical talk, discuss academic papers or
the latest research and go way beyond what the sick doctor really wants
or needs. The PHP discourages shared decision-making until the sick
health professional begins to improve. Daksha's untimely death led to
funding for PHP, with which thousands of doctors with mental illness
have been helped.

.. _sec5:

Doctors, suicide and complaints
===============================

Dr Wendy Potts was a 46-year-old mother of two and a general
practitioner in Derbyshire. She also suffered from bipolar disorder. Dr
Potts wrote about her experience with depression on an online blog. In
it, she wrote openly on how fluctuations in her mood affected her and
her life in general. It is reported that a patient complained after
reading her blog, questioning whether she should be able to practise as
a general practitioner. She was suspended by her practice and National
Health Service (NHS) England, and referred to the General Medical
Council (GMC). In November 2015, Dr Potts hung herself. Dr Potts' case
incorporates both stigma and mental illness, but also the additional
burden that weighs heavily on doctors and adds to their risk –
complaints and disciplinary processes. Bourne *et al*.14 conducted a
study of doctors comparing the mental health (using standardized tools)
of those who had and had not received a complaint. A total of 10 930 out
of 95 636 (11.4%) responded, and 7926 (8.3%) completed the full survey
and were included in the complete analysis. Of those who completed the
survey, 16.9% of doctors with current or recent complaints reported
moderate/severe depression (relative risk 1.77; 95% CI 1.48–2.13)
compared with doctors with no complaints (9.5%). A total of 15% reported
moderate/severe anxiety (relative risk 2.08; 95% CI 1.61–2.68) compared
with doctors with no complaints (7.3%). The authors found that distress
increased with complaint severity, with highest levels after a GMC
referral (26.3% depression, 22.3% anxiety). Doctors with current or
recent complaints were 2.08 (95% CI 1.61–2.68) times more likely to
report thoughts of self-harm or suicidal ideation. This analysis
illustrates how damaging complaints and regulatory processes are to
doctors’ health and job performance. Similar findings of the negative
effect of disciplinary processes on the mental health of doctors were
found in a study from the Netherlands.15 Analyses of the deaths of
doctors at PHP show a significant correlation between mortality and
involvement of the regulator. Among PHP patients who have not died, the
GMC is involved in around 10% of cases, compared with 11 out of 21 (52%)
of patients who have died and 9 out of 16 (56%) patients who died from
accidents, suicide or overdoses (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Table 1Analysis
of patients seen at the National Health Service Practitioner Health
Programme who have died, and their involvement with General Medical
Council (GMC) proceduresCause of deathNumber of patientsGMC
involvementAll deaths2111Overdose drugs/alcohol or accidents109Suicide6

In response to concerns about high numbers of deaths among doctors, the
GMC commissioned an independent study examining 28 deaths of doctors due
to suicide (or suspected suicide) where the doctor was also involved in
fitness-to-practise processes between 2005 and 2013.16 The case reviews
of doctors during this period showed that many of the doctors who died
by suicide suffered from a recognised mental health disorder or had drug
and/or alcohol addictions. Other factors that often followed from those
conditions may have also contributed to their deaths. These include
marriage breakdown, financial hardship and in some cases, police
involvement, as well as the stress of being investigated by the GMC. Of
course, correlation between death and regulatory involvement does not
equate to causation, as the GMC review found. The interaction between
complaints and mental illness is complex, with many possible issues to
take into account (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). Table 2Relationship between
regulatory processes and mental illness in doctorsRelationship between
suicide in doctors and complaints/regulatory or disciplinary processes
•A complaint may lead to a doctor becoming depressed or worsen a
pre-existing mental illness.•Mental illness can lead to cognitive
impairment, which can lead to a boundary transgression or inappropriate
behaviour such as bullying or acting inappropriately with a patient or
work colleague.•Mental illness might lead to out-of-character criminal
behaviour (such as shoplifting), which itself can lead to worsening of
the mental illness.•Mental illness might involve criminal activity; for
example, drug use.•Drug use can lead doctors transgressing good medical
practice, such as stealing drugs, self-prescribing or prescribing in a
patient's name for the doctor's own use.•Mental illness in itself might
be considered counter to fitness-to-practise; for example, bipolar
disorder, schizophrenia, personality disorder or schizoaffective
disorder.•The very act of trying to kill oneself might lead to criminal
or professional sanctions where the means of the suicide attempt
involves obtaining drugs illegally or via self-prescription.

At Dr Potts' inquest, the coroner commented that the system had lost
sight of the fact that there was a human being behind the complaint and
investigation.17 It is indeed common to underestimate the effect that
complaints can have on doctors, and to lose site of the severe pain this
causes to the doctor and how a complaint can threaten a doctor's sense
of self. A complaint challenges a doctor's values. It is a catastrophic
personal event, described by one doctor at PHP as akin to a diagnosis of
cancer. The overwhelming feeling (once the anger and shock as subsided)
is that of shame: shame of disclosure, of appearing in front of the
regulator, of having to face the gauntlet of the press and the shame
brought on their families, friends and colleagues. All too often, their
shame becomes exaggerated and they begin to feel responsible for the
entire profession's values and future.

.. _sec6:

Prevention
==========

Preventing a very rare event (completed suicide) and identifying those
who will go on to complete a suicide act from those who express suicidal
thoughts is extremely difficult, if not impossible. A systematic review
of risk assessment for suicide by Large *et al*.18 concluded that the
overwhelming majority of people who might be viewed as high risk for
suicide will not kill themselves, and about half of all suicides will
occur among people viewed as low risk. Carter *et al*.19 found similar
results in their systematic review of instruments aimed at predicting
high risk of suicide and concluded that no high-risk instrument was
clinically useful. This is what we have found among our doctors at PHP.
PHP risk-assesses all patients at first assessment and reviews
thereafter as required. Patients are risk-assessed depending on the
perceived risk to self, service/institution or their own patients. This
assessment forms part of the weekly multidisciplinary team meeting. Only
3 of the 21 doctors who died were assessed as being high risk (red)
(recent/current suicidal ideation, past attempt to take one's own life,
drug misuse, alcohol dependence or depression are all risk factors), and
most (16 out of 21) were considered by the service as low (green) risk.
Two doctors who killed themselves were rated red (the highest risk), and
the other doctor died from an overdose of drugs.

.. _sec7:

Conclusion
==========

It is important to remember that the vast majority of doctors do not
kill themselves. Most doctors thrive in their working environment.
However, each death is a tragedy which sends repercussions through the
system and poses the risk of creating contagion. Going forward, we have
to halt the decline in morale among doctors. This will mean addressing
many systemic issues that are creating unhappiness: tackling the culture
of naming, blaming and shaming and the constant denigration of NHS staff
by the press; allowing doctors to maintain a sensible work–life balance
and not ignoring the basic needs of staff who give their all to their
patients. We must restore doctors' collective self-esteem by treating
them as intelligent adults and not naughty schoolchildren, and by
creating a culture in which their skills can flourish. We need to ensure
doctors have access to early intervention and confidential support
services.20 Finally, we have to ensure that all NHS staff receive the
same compassion that they, rightly, are expected to give to their
patients.

**Dr Clare Gerada** is the Medical Director of the National Health
Service Practitioner Health Programme, London.
