===========================
Rational antidepressant use
===========================

Daniel Dunleavy
:Date: 2018-6


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

In her contribution to the ‘Against the Stream’ series,
Dr Moncrieff(n.d.a) articulates the case for the drug-centred model of
antidepressant action. She notes that antidepressants do not typically
outperform placebo in well-designed studies (particularly in rare
instances where an active placebo is used as a control(n.d.b)), have
little clinical effect and can cause serious adverse effects. Having
made the case that antidepressants are not ‘specific’ antidepressant
agents, she makes some comments about their use in clinical practice. I
would like to offer a few remarks about these issues, including some
musings about what ‘rational antidepressant use’ might look like.

Modern psychiatric practice has seen the rise and fall of several
promising antidepressant agents (the monoamine oxidase inhibitors, the
tricyclic antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs)). Recent efforts include testing the possible antidepressant
properties of ketamine. But are these efforts futile? Perhaps yes,
perhaps no. A truly specific antidepressant drug (if one is
ontologically possible) appears to be a pipedream, given current
diagnostic limitations. Our categorisation of major depressive disorder
is highly heterogeneous,(n.d.c) creating a disjunctive category of
cognitive, behavioural and biological symptoms that do not reliably
cluster together. Even if any of our current drugs had specificity for
‘depression’, this would be extremely difficult to uncover in clinical
practice or research settings. As a result, drug development will be
prone to ideological, as opposed to scientific, revolutions.(n.d.d)

Should we therefore abandon antidepressants as a treatment modality? As
long as we are honest with our patients about our current state of
knowledge, I think not. Drug use has always been an integral part of
human life,(n.d.e) helping to alleviate life's various physical,
emotional and existential pains. Antidepressants are no different in
this respect. While researchers continue the search for a discrete
condition called ‘depression’, drugs such as the SSRIs can be exploited
for particular patient complaints. Antidepressants can cause emotional
blunting, sedation, activation and decreased libido, among other things.
Some have a proclivity towards one effect more than others. These
effects can be exploited to relieve particular problems (e.g. sedation
to alleviate insomnia, or emotional numbing to transcend an episode of
intense anxiety or distress), without pretence towards a yet-to-be
discovered condition. A rational provider would match a drug's effects
to the patient's complaints, irrespective of diagnosis (or drug class);
and would remain vigilant to the development of any adverse effects or
deterioration of condition, start at the lowest recommended dose, and
withdraw the patient from the drug as soon as possible. Psychosocial
interventions can remain an important part of treatment, in many cases
being the first treatment of choice. Antidepressants, like all drugs,
are neither angels nor demons. They should be used selectively and
thoughtfully, when used at all.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.
