=================================================================
‘Prescribing’ psychotropic medication to our rivers and estuaries
=================================================================

Alex T. Ford
Helena HerreraCorrespondence to Alex T. Ford (alex.ford@port.ac.uk)
:Date: 2019-8

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Summary
      :name: sec_1

   The influence of pharmaceuticals on the environment is an increasing
   concern among environmental toxicologists. It is known that their
   growing use is leading to detectable levels in wastewater,
   conceivably causing harm to aquatic ecosystems. Psychotropic
   medication is one such group of substances, particularly affecting
   high-income countries. While these drugs have a clear place in
   therapy, there is debate around the risk/benefit ratio in patients
   with mild mental health problems. Therefore, it is necessary to
   evaluate the wider implications as risks could extend beyond the
   individual to non-target organisms, particularly those in rivers and
   estuaries.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1:

Psychotropic drug use patterns
==============================

Adequate psychiatric service provision is central to health and quality
of life, and the use of psychotropic medication can be invaluable in the
treatment and management of mental health problems. The uses of these
drugs have been evident since their introduction, and they have a
well-established place in clinical practice. However, within the medical
fields, there has been a debate in recent years about the over-reliance
on drugs such as antidepressants, antianxiety drugs and
antipsychotics.(n.d.a)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.b) Data from a number of
countries have indicated rapid rises in prescriptions, with as many as
10% of the population taking such medications, particularly in
high-income countries such as the UK.(n.d.c) Within the field of
environmental toxicology, the effects of these drugs have recently
started to generate some interest too.

.. _sec2:

Pharmaceuticals as emergent pollutants
======================================

Currently, pharmaceuticals mainly enter the environment through
wastewater after their excretion, either in their original form or as
metabolites. This has long been known,(n.d.d)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.e) with
the first reports of these substances entering the environment dating
back to the 1960s.(n.d.f) However, sewage treatment plant processes do
not adequately remove pharmaceuticals. With the sheer number of
different medications being prescribed and the inability of even quite
modern sewage treatment processes to fully break them down, it could be
argued that our aquatic life is bathing in a soup of multiple drugs.

Toxicity levels of pharmaceuticals in the environment do not necessarily
relate to high concentrations, but to their constant low-level
discharge, persistence in ecosystems and highly active biological
functions. In this way, pharmaceuticals that are found in relatively low
concentrations could be extremely potent and very persistent, and able
to significantly affect non-target organisms. For example, low
concentrations of antidepressants and other psychotropic drugs can cause
disruption to the normal functioning of aquatic organisms.(n.d.g)

The concept of environmental relevance, therefore, becomes important.
For example, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective
serotonin–noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, serotonin antagonist
reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants and benzodiazepines have
all been detected in urbanised waterways, mostly in the ng/L range, but
also in concentrations up to μg/L.(n.d.f) What is particularly starting
to interest scientists is that these antidepressants can cause
disruption to the normal functioning of aquatic life in laboratory
experiments at low concentrations. The uptake of these compounds appears
to be highly dependent on the organism's mode of feeding.(n.d.h) In
terms of presence in the environment, for example, diazepam has been
found in all matrices – wastewater, surface, ground and drinking water,
soils, bio-solids and tissues(n.d.i) – and in concentrations as high as
10 ng/L in rivers and potable water.(n.d.j)

Pharmaceuticals are not present in isolation in the environment, and the
widespread high use of a wide variety of drugs leads to multiple
substances being found together, in a situation where synergistic or
antagonistic effects can occur.(n.d.f) In addition, exposure of some
non-target organisms to these substances takes place for the entirety of
their life cycle.(n.d.k) Currently, pharmaceuticals and their active
metabolites are globally considered to be an important emergent group of
pollutants that are intrinsically bioactive, causing adverse drug
reactions and previously undocumented effects on non-target
organisms.(n.d.f)

.. _sec3:

The effects of psychotropic drugs on the aquatic environment
============================================================

The notion that drugs prescribed to humans might be affecting wildlife
first came to light in the 1990s, when scientists highlighted that
natural and synthetic oestrogens from contraceptive pills and hormone
replacement therapy in wastewater effluent could feminise fish at very
low concentrations.(n.d.l) Growing incidences of reproductive and other
abnormalities developed into an interdisciplinary field, linking human
and environmental toxicology to the study of endocrine-disrupting
chemicals. As improved analytical techniques become available and
interest in this field increases, the influence of pharmaceuticals on
the environment is increasingly being documented. Identified cases where
pharmaceuticals are causing detrimental effects are therefore becoming
more common. For example, the veterinary use of the non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug diclofenac has recently been linked to widespread
(over 90%) declines in vulture species in some countries(n.d.m) and
serves as a reminder that, sometimes, the effects of biologically active
drugs can have far-reaching consequences.

While the potential for pharmaceuticals to lead to toxicity in
non-target organisms exists across all therapeutic groups, the case of
psychotropic medication is particularly concerning. This is because
these drugs, which are among the most commonly detected in aquatic
environments, affect not only the central nervous system but are also
linked with reproduction, growth and immune
functions.(n.d.l)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.n) In this way, psychotropic drugs
such as antidepressants modulate neurotransmitters serotonin, dopamine
and noradrenaline, having multiple physiological effects in humans such
as weight gain, fatigue and sexual dysfunction.

The ability of psychotropic medication to disrupt the normal biological
systems of abundant and ecologically important groups of non-target
organisms in aquatic environments is extensive. Since reuptake
transporters and receptors evolved in invertebrates such as molluscs and
Crustacea, release of neurohormones would be expected to have multiple
biological effects on these invertebrates, in addition to vertebrates
such as fishes. Therefore, any compounds in the environment at a
sufficient concentration able to alter neurohormones have the capacity
to affect a wide range of biological processes,(n.d.o) leading to
salient effects on critical life cycle events. Processes affected
include reproduction, growth, maturation, metabolism, immunity, feeding,
locomotion, colour physiology and behaviour. Examples of adverse effects
that have been observed include photo- and geotactic behaviour, abnormal
activity patterns, aggressive behaviour, developmental and metabolic
abnormalities, and reproductive abnormalities. Interestingly, some of
these effects are only exhibited at low concentrations, rather than
being dose dependent as may have been expected.(n.d.o)

For example, Guler and Ford(n.d.p) studied the effects of a variety of
pharmaceuticals and the hormone serotonin on the preference for light
versus dark choice chambers in amphipods. They reported a significant
preference for light and response to gravity in terms of position in
amphipods exposed to fluoxetine and serotonin. The dose response was
linear for serotonin, whereas for fluoxetine the response was not dose
dependent and the behaviour was induced only at lower concentrations
(10–100 ng/L). Similarly, when crabs were injected with serotonin,
photonegative behaviour was reduced and they spent substantially less
time hidden.(n.d.o) This would have consequences for aquatic life, as
preference to light has been demonstrated to increase the likelihood of
predation.

Other studies found that while 1 ng/L fluoxetine influenced learning in
the cuttlefish, 100 ng/L did not, but did significantly influence the
retention of memory. Effects observed include fluoxetine influencing on
learning and memory in cuttlefishes at concentrations between 1 and
100 ng/L.(n.d.q) Swimming activity has been observed to be altered in
amphipod crustaceans at levels as low as 1–100 ng/L,(n.d.r) and gonadal
aberrations in zebra mussels have been induced in ranges as low as
20 ng/L. Moreover, fluvoxamine was found to induce egg deposition in
zebra mussels at ~318 ng/L,(n.d.s) and exposure to venlafaxine has
caused foot detachment (an inability to cling to the side of a tank) at
levels as low as 313 pg/L and 31.3 ng/L.(n.d.t)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.u)
Further effects on reproductive output in terms of frequency of broods,
offspring production, gamete release and gene expression have been
demonstrated in the ng/L concentrations.

Induction of hyperglycaemic responses in a variety of crustaceans has
also been observed. The regulation of blood glucose through crustacean
hyperglycaemic hormone is under the control of a variety of
neurohormones.(n.d.v) There have also been reports that dopamine,
serotonin, noradrenaline and adrenaline are all effective in inducing
hyperglycaemic responses in a variety of crustaceans.(n.d.w) The release
of crustacean hyperglycaemic hormone has been shown to be promoted by
injection with serotonin in a variety of species.(n.d.v) Interestingly,
studies with crabs have shown that both serotonin and fluoxetine can
stimulate crustacean hyperglycaemic hormone and suppress moulting
hormones.(n.d.x) In terms of pigmentation, serotonin has been shown to
influence red pigment-dispersing hormone, while dopamine influences red
and black pigment-concentrating hormones in shrimp. It has also been
found that noradrenaline triggers release of black pigment-dispersing
hormone.(n.d.v) Therefore, any drugs with the capability to modulate
these neurohormones can conceivably interfere with the camouflage
abilities of aquatic invertebrates.

Perhaps it is not surprising that fish exposed to antidepressants or
antianxiety medication display altered behaviours when one considers how
evolutionarily conserved the nervous system is among the vertebrates.
Furthermore, because of this conserved ancestry, fish are now more
commonly used in drug discovery, with behavioural tests commonly used in
rats and mice being translated to fish models.(n.d.y)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.z)
For example, the novel tank test measures the ‘normal’ reluctance of a
fish to venture in the open surroundings of a new tank, which can be
altered by antianxiety medication.(n.d.aa)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.ab) Other
studies within the field of environmental toxicology have observed a
wide range of altered behaviours in fish, including aggression towards
conspecifics,(n.d.ac)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.ad)
reproduction,(n.d.ae)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.af) predator avoidance(n.d.ag) and
feeding.(n.d.ah)

A body of evidence is therefore building which suggests that
antidepressants in particular, at concentrations found in surface, waste
and ground waters, can cause a wide variety of effects. Whether these
are occurring in the field downstream of wastewater treatment plants
(WWTPs) represents an important and challenging question to address, as
the ability to measure abnormal behaviour *in situ* remains a logistical
and technological challenge. Moreover, while the underlying role of
neurotransmitters has been described in vertebrates, there is
considerable paucity of data on their role in invertebrates.(n.d.o) The
non-monotonic dose responses shown by some
drugs,(n.d.p)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.q)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.ai)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.aj)
for which pharmacological effects are not dose dependent and a response
is triggered by a low concentration, with no response to higher
concentrations, poses questions which are difficult to ignore.(n.d.ak)
While some studies have been conducted on the toxicology of
antidepressants such as fluoxetine,(n.d.o) these are few and far
between. Given the evidence on the influence of pharmaceuticals,
particularly psychotropic drugs, on the environment, it can be argued
that greater emphasis should be placed on how they may be affecting
aquatic life.

.. _sec4:

The solutions
=============

The solutions to these problems, as might be expected, are
multifactorial and somewhat influenced by historical decisions. For
example, some WWTPs may have historically serviced small towns and
villages which later grew in population into large towns and cities. If
these WWTPs historically discarded their effluent into small (low flow)
rivers, then the effluent to river water ratios could change over time.
Changes in water usage upstream, for example, water extraction for
farming, could further confound the problem. Advanced treatment at
wastewater treatment facilities would reduce many of the potentially
harmful pharmaceuticals waste products and their breakdown metabolites.
Where technological improvements of sewage treatment have been
implemented, there have been reductions in intersex (feminised) fish
caused by steroid oestrogens and their mimics, as well as improvements
in river biodiversity.(n.d.al)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.am) These improvements,
however, are costly. Owen and Jobling (2012)(n.d.an) estimated that
upgrading all the WWTPs in England and Wales to comply with EU
regulation to bring synthetic oestrogens below an average of 0.035 pg/L
ethinylestradiol per annum would cost an estimated £26 billion.

Another solution to this complex problem is to change behaviours whereby
people would traditionally flush their unwanted medications down the
toilet or dispose of them in the bin. ‘Take back’ programmes vary in
their popularity across Europe, but serve as one means to prevent
unwanted medication entering aquatic systems directly following
wastewater treatment or indirectly through underground seepage from
landfills. The question of green pharmacy has also been raised, whereby
the pharmaceutical industry considers the cradle-to-grave approach of
their products and designs drugs which readily break down. However, this
is extremely difficult to achieve for most drugs, owing to the need to
produce pharmacologically active pharmaceuticals in suitable
formulations.(n.d.ao)

.. _sec5:

Reflections for policy and practice
===================================

Mental healthcare services are provided through complex systems, which
are generally based around the use of medication, with training in
psychiatry covering vast areas to enable the provision of quality care
to patients. However, there is no inclusion of aspects of pollution and
the effects of psychotropic medication, and how this could affect
aquatic environments. Could educating the medical profession help
improve the utility of take back programmes and patient behaviour with
regard to drug waste? These substances are not currently covered by
existing regulations with regards to sewage management, and analytical
methods for detection are just now becoming available. Adequate
resources for the diagnosis and management of mental health conditions
could help reduce the need for medication and the documented toxic
effects of the use of these drugs on non-target organisms. ‘Prescribing’
psychotropic medication for our rivers and estuaries poses a potential
risk to aquatic life. Further knowledge and education on adequate
therapeutic choices, and improved resources for diagnosis, could support
prescribers and practitioners to make environmentally sensible choices,
based on evidence of efficacy and safety.(n.d.ap)

**Alex T. Ford** is a professor of Biology in the Institute of Marine
Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, University of Portsmouth, UK;
**Helena Herrera** is a senior lecturer in Pharmacy Practice at the
School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, University of Portsmouth,
UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref28

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref31

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref32

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref35

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref39

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref40

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref41

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref42

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref43

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref44

      n.d.ap.
