---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  To identify temporal and demographic trends in referrals made to
  psychiatric liaison services. Routine clinical data from 16 105
  individual referrals from three central London accident and emergency
  (A&E) departments to psychiatric liaison services from 2012 to 2014
  were obtained and analysed using the Clinical Record Interactive
  Search (CRIS).

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  Referrals from A&E to psychiatric liaison services increased 16% over
  the 3-year study period. There were fewer referrals to psychiatric
  liaison services in winter months compared with other seasons. There
  were fewer referrals to psychiatric liaison services over the weekend
  compared with weekdays (average 15.4 daily weekday referrals *v*. 13.2
  weekend, *z* = 5.1, *P* \< 0.001), and weekend referrals were slightly
  less likely to result in admission to psychiatric hospital (11.3% *v*.
  12.8%, respectively, χ^2^ = 6.33, *P* = 0.01).

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  Psychiatric staffing in A&E and inpatient psychiatric wards requires
  planning to meet temporal and regional variations in the pattern of
  demand.

  # Declaration of interest {#sec_a4}

  None.
author:
- James Dove
- Amit Mistry
- Nomi Werbeloff
- David Osborn
- Nora TurjanskiCorrespondence to James Dove (<james.dove@nhs.net>)
date: 2018-2
institute:
- 1Camden & Islington NHS Foundation Trust, London
- 2Barnet, Enfield & Haringey Mental Health Trust, London
- 3Division of Psychiatry, UCL
- 4Division of Psychiatry, Faculty of Brain Sciences, UCL
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
title: Weekday and seasonal patterns in psychiatric referrals in three
  major London A&E departments, 2012--2014
---

Accident and emergency (A&E) departments in the UK are getting busier,
with an estimated 50% increase in demand over the past 10 years.^1^
Approximately 5% of A&E attendances are for treatment of a mental
disorder.^2^ An estimated 8% of all A&E attendances are by 'chronic
repeat attenders'; the most common reason for frequent attendance is an
untreated mental health problem.^1^

The increased demands on A&E and the consequent impact on bed
availability in acute trusts have been well studied, and a trend in peak
pressures on A&E departments over the winter months has been
established.^3^^,^^4^ Although it is acknowledged that A&E attendances
are generally lower in the winter months, patients are likely to be more
unwell, requiring admission that can lead to longer hospital stays and
long waiting times in A&E -- the 'winter pressures'.^5^ This phenomenon
has attracted injections of short-term funding of staff and resources in
an attempt to encourage flow through the system -- including to liaison
mental health teams.

Public awareness of these pressures has led to a number of developments
in recent years. These include the drive towards consultant-delivered
care and, more recently, the '7-day National Health Service (NHS)'
proposals made by Bruce Keogh initially in 2013.^6^^,^^7^ These
initiatives are now supported by government policy following suggestions
that, further to the pressures on NHS services, there may be a weekend
effect in terms of increased morbidity and mortality.^8^

A recent study by Patel *et al*^9^ investigated the mortality relating
to *psychiatric* weekend admissions and found no correlation between
weekend admission and increased mortality. However, the study identified
that those admitted at the weekend had shorter admissions and higher
readmission rates, leading to the suggestion that there is a different
population who are more likely to be admitted at weekends. There is
little or no work looking at the fluctuation in presentation at the
gateways to psychiatric admissions -- of which A&E attendance is a major
source.

Anecdotally, it is said that 'major' mental illness, i.e. bipolar
affective disorder and schizophreniform disorders, have bimodal peaks in
presentation of spring and autumn;^10^^,^^11^ it might be assumed,
therefore, that these would be peak admission times for psychiatric
patients.

Here, we describe a study that analyses 3 years of referral data from
three central London A&E departments to their psychiatric liaison teams,
looking at seasonal variation and variation in weekday/weekend
referrals, as well as some limited analysis of the demographics of those
patients referred.

# Aims {#sec1}

The aim of this study is to describe referral rates from three central
London A&E departments to their respective psychiatric liaison services,
to explore whether patterns of referral are similar to trends reported
regarding general attendance to A&E, including the weekend and 'winter
pressures' models reported nationally. The secondary aim was to compare
weekend *v*. weekday referral trends, and whether these referrals were
more or less likely to result in admission to inpatient services. The
tertiary aim was to assess those presenting frequently to A&E services
(≥3 times during the study period), and determine whether these patterns
were more pronounced in this group of patients.

# Method {#sec2}

Routine clinical data for this study was obtained from Camden &
Islington (C&I) NHS Foundation Trust using the Clinical Record
Interactive Search (CRIS) tool. CRIS is an application developed to
enable routinely collected electronic health records to be used in
research, using an explicit deidentification process.^12^ C&I is a large
mental health provider serving a geographic catchment area of two
inner-city London boroughs, and approximately 440 000 residents. The
database contains full but anonymised information from over 100 000
mental health patients.^13^ Studies using CRIS received ethical approval
from the National Research Ethics Service (NRES) Committee East of
England -- Cambridge Central (14/EE/0177).

We conducted a retrospective cohort study of all A&E referrals to
psychiatric liaison services across three London teaching hospitals
(Royal Free Hospital (RFH) and Whittington Hospital (WH) in North
London, and University College London Hospital (UCLH) in Central London)
over a 3-year period (2012--2014), deriving a complete data set of
16 105 individual psychiatric referrals. These 3 years were chosen since
complete electronic record data was available for all three sites.

Data collection on the 16 105 referrals was limited to fields that are
well recorded on CRIS and encompassed the following: •day and date of
referral from A&E to psychiatric liaison service•demographic details of
referee -- age, gender, ethnicity•discharge destination of referral,
i.e. admission or discharge•admission, i.e. informal or under a section
of the Mental Health Act.Data on diagnosis were not used for purposes of
this study, as the majority of the patients referred to liaison teams
are not allocated a recorded ICD-10 diagnosis, for instance, where no
mental disorder is present after assessment.

Discharge destination of liaison referral being admission to psychiatric
hospital was used as a 'proxy of severity' of presentation, in common
with other similar studies.^14^^--^^20^

Number of presentations of individual patients during the time period
was also recorded, and those presenting ≥3 times in the study period
were identified as 'frequent attenders' and analysed as a separate
cohort within the study in an attempt to identify any differences in
patterns of referral for this group.

# Statistical analysis {#sec3}

Number of referrals per year was expressed as a proportion of referrals
from the total population in the C&I catchment area (426 463 according
to the 2011 census). Z-tests were used to compare the proportion of
referrals between the different study years, seasons and days of the
week (weekday *v*. weekend).

Descriptive statistics of all patients referred over the study period
were examined.

The chi-square test of independence (χ^2^) was used to compare the
number of referrals across seasons and days of the week.

Multilevel logistic regressions were used to account for multiple
referrals of one patient and to examine the association between patient
characteristics (sex, age and ethnicity) and weekend referral.

Finally, frequent attenders were compared to non-frequent attenders
using the χ^2^ test for categorical variables and independent samples
*t*-test for continuous variables.

# Results {#sec4}

In the years 2012--2014, there were a total of 16 105 referrals from A&E
services to psychiatric liaison teams in the study area (RF: 4575, UCLH:
6440, WH: 5090). These referrals represent a total of 10 049 individual
patients referred. The total number of referrals per patient varied from
1 to 49.

## Description of cohort {#sec4-1}

The average age of patients referred was 38.8 years (SD = 15.6); 92.6%
were under 65 years of age. 51.2% of the cohort were male. Ethnicity
data were missing for 17% of the sample. Of those with complete data,
the majority of patients were of White ethnic origin (69.5%).

Frequent attenders (≥3 referrals over study period, *n* = 1108) did not
differ from the rest of the cohort with regard to gender and age
distribution, although there was a slightly higher proportion of people
of White ethnic origin.

## Trend in referrals year on year {#sec4-2}

As can be seen in [Table 1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}, there was an
increase of 16% (*z* = 7.764 *P* \< 0.001) in total referrals over the 3
years across the three sites (RF +36%, WH +7%, UCLH +12%). Table 1Total
referrals to psychiatric liaison service from A&E by hospital site by
yearSite201220132014Total % increase 2012--2014Royal Free
Hospital12291679166736%Whittington Hospital1606176917157%University
College London Hospital20762040232412%Total49115488570616%Referrals as
proportion of population in catchment area1.15%1.29%1.34%--

Over the 3 years, 12.4% of referrals led to an inpatient psychiatric
admission (*n* = 2003), 33.4% of those (*n* = 654) under a section of
the Mental Health Act.

## Seasonality of referrals {#sec4-3}

When the 16 105 referrals across the year were divided by season
(defined as: winter, December to February; spring, March to May; Summer,
June to August; Autumn, September to November) the only statistically
significant finding was that, compared with all other seasons, the
winter months saw fewer referrals (*z* = 4.8, *P* \< 0.001; see [Table
2](#tab02){ref-type="table"} and [Fig. 1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}). This
matched with the lowest percentage overall of admissions from all
seasons. Peak admissions were seen in the spring -- 13.1% or 546
admissions over the 3 years -- however, the percentage of referrals
resulting in admission did not differ significantly by season
(χ^2^ = 3.92, *P* = 0.27). Similarly, there was no statistically
significant difference between the percentage of referrals resulting in
admission under the Mental Health Act by season (χ^2^ = 0.30,
*P* = 0.96). Fig. 1All referrals to psychiatric liaison services from
A&E 2012--2014; comparison with subsequent admissions from those
referrals, 'informal' and under a section of the Mental Health Act;
grouped by season. Table 2Comparison of referrals to psychiatric liaison
service from A&E and subsequent admissions, by
seasonWinterSpringSummerAutumnTotalTotal no. of referrals (%)3715
(23.1)4160 (25.8)4162 (25.8)4068 (25.3)16 105Proportion of population
(%)0.87%0.98%0.98%0.95%Admissions from referrals (%)474 (12.8)546
(13.1)496 (11.9)487 (12.0)2003No. of admissions under section of the
Mental Health Act (%)157 (33.1)174 (31.8)165 (33.3)158 (32.4)654

## Weekend referrals {#sec4-4}

Of the 16 105 referrals, there were fewer referrals to psychiatric
liaison services at weekends compared with weekdays (0.48% *v*. 0.56% of
the population; *z* = 5.1 *P* \< 0.001).

Fewer weekend referrals resulted in inpatient admissions compared with
weekday referrals (11.3% *v*. 12.8%, respectively, χ^2^ = 6.33,
*P* = 0.01). Of the weekday referrals that resulted in admissions, 33.3%
were under a section of the Mental Health Act. Of the weekend referrals
that resulted in admissions, 30.6% were under a section. This difference
is not statistically significant (χ^2^ = 1.20, *P* = 0.27).

Multilevel logistic regressions suggested that patients referred on
weekends were more likely to be female, under the age of 65 and of White
ethnic origin ([Table 3](#tab03){ref-type="table"}). Table 3Comparison
of demographic data of all referrals to psychiatric liaison services;
weekend *v*. weekday attendersTotal no. of referralsWeekend referrals,
%Odds ratio (95% CI), *P*Total
referrals16 105GenderMale833024.8ReferenceFemale777526.61.11
(1.03--1.19), 0.006AgeAverage
(years)39.36\<6515 04926.2Reference\>65105623.70.87 (0.71--0.96),
0.015Ethnicity^a^White10 11626.7ReferenceAsian68621.60.75 (0.62--0.91),
0.004Black177824.20.86 (0.76--0.98), 0.02Other153525.70.95 (0.83--1.07),
0.40[^1]

# Discussion {#sec5}

Referrals to psychiatric liaison services between 2012 and 2014 within
three central London A&E departments echoed the national figures for A&E
attendances, with increased overall attendance year on year. Our results
also showed a seasonal trend similar to the A&E data, with decreased
absolute referrals in winter months. However, in contrast to the general
hospital population, these referrals appear to be for people with a
lower severity of illness in the winter months (using the proxy outcome
measure of an admission to inpatient psychiatric services resulting from
those referrals). Our data showed increased severity of presentations
(increased admissions) occurring outside the winter months, but there
was no statistically significant variation in number of patients
admitted informally or under the Mental Health Act throughout the year.

Weekdays were slightly busier in terms of average numbers of psychiatric
referrals and admissions than weekends, in terms of both numbers of
referrals and numbers of admissions to psychiatric inpatient beds (11.3%
*v*. 12.8%, respectively, χ^2^ = 6.33, *P* = 0.01).

There is only limited evidence from this data set to support the concept
of a defined seasonal variation in psychiatric presentation; despite the
academic position that 'major' mental illness -- bipolar affective
disorder and schizophreniform disorders -- have bimodal peaks in
presentation of spring and autumn.^1^ This phenomenon might, however, be
able to explain the trend seen in our data of a shift in severity of
illness when comparing the psychiatric population with the general acute
hospital intake, with a peak of admission rates from winter to spring;
however, there were no reliable data in this study on diagnosis.

This study demonstrates an increased presentation of mental health
problems to A&E, and increased severity of those presentations, during
the week rather than at the weekend.

Key points and implications for A&E and psychiatric liaison services
from this study are as follows. •There was a significant increase in
number of referrals from A&E to psychiatric liaison services year on
year.•Winter was significantly different from the three other seasons
(with lower referrals).•There were significantly fewer referrals per day
(on average) on weekend *v*. weekdays, but the absolute difference was
only 1--2%.

## Limitations {#sec5-1}

We looked at referrals to mental health liaison services, rather than
totals for A&E mental health presentations. It is anticipated that a far
higher proportion of patients with a primary psychiatric reason for
presentation are managed by A&E staff and discharged without referral to
mental health liaison services. It could be argued, therefore, that
referral itself could be used as a proxy for severity of presentation.

This study looks at only one route of psychiatric presentation --
through A&E -- and does not include other routes of presentation, i.e.
crisis teams, general practitioner, etc., and it is therefore not a
comprehensive picture of fluctuation in need throughout the year.

Diagnosis was not reliably recorded in the data set and therefore not
included in this study -- a major limitation in discussion around
seasonal variations in psychiatric illness presentation.

We have no data on timings of referrals and we are therefore unable to
comment on 'out of hours' attendance other than weekday/weekend
comparisons.

It is highly likely that there is a variety in threshold for referral
between sites and at different times of year. For example, higher
absolute summer referrals could possibly be accounted for by an influx
of new doctors with lower thresholds for referral, resulting in an
increase in summer referral rates but lower severity of presentation;
however, we have used statistical tests in the data set in an attempt to
mitigate the impact of these variables.

Use of psychiatric admission as a proxy for severity is not without its
limitations: decisions to admit, particularly informally, may well be
linked to bed pressures, abilities of home treatment teams locally, etc.
The admissions under a section of the Mental Health Act should be less
susceptible to these variables.

Although there are differences in the populations that the three
hospitals serve, they are of similar size and location with equally
diverse local populations, allowing for a good generalisability of the
data. The e-record (RiO) is the only records system used by the
psychiatric teams at all three sites and as such is a reliable
representation of all patients seen.

**James Dove** is an ST5 Psychiatric Trainee at Camden & Islington NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK. **Amit Mistry** is an ST5 Psychiatric
Trainee at Barnet Enfield & Harringey Mental Health Trust, London, UK.
**Nomi Werbeloff** is a PhD Research Associate at UCL, and Camden &
Islington NHS Foundation Trust. **David Osborn** is a Professor of
Psychiatric Epidemiology at Division of Psychiatry, Faculty of Brain
Sciences, UCL and a Consultant Psychiatrist at Camden & Islington NHS
Foundation Trust. **Nora Turjanski** is a Consultant Liaison
Psychiatrist at Camden & Islington NHS Foundation Trust.

[^1]: a\. Data on ethnicity missing for 1726 (17.2%) participants.
