---
author:
- J. Guy Edwards
date: 2018-4
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
title: Benjamin (Ben) Steinberg, MD FRCPsych
---

Formerly Consultant Psychiatrist, Knowle Hospital, Fareham and Royal
South Hants Hospital, Southampton, UK

![](S2056469417000249_inline1.jpg)

Ben Steinberg, who died recently at the age of 93 years, was regarded as
one of Hampshire\'s most popular and well-respected psychiatrists. He
had an encyclopaedic knowledge of many subjects, including psychiatry,
world affairs, history, literature and the theatre, and was a most
engaging conversationalist. He could debate controversies in a robust
but sensitive way, and was a great listener. He had an unrelenting
capacity to care. In his later years, he worked voluntarily for a
charity providing emotional, legal and financial support for refugees
and asylum seekers in Southampton and Winchester.

He served as chairman of the Medical Committee, was a member of the
Management Committee and chairman of the Psychiatric Rehabilitation
Committee at Knowle Hospital, was chairman of the Wessex Psychotherapy
Society, and was also a member of the Southampton and District Community
Health Council and chairman of its Mental Health Group. He taught under-
and post-graduate students and assisted in a number of research
projects.^1^^,^^2^

He was an active member of the Labour Party and was elected chairman of
the Romsey and Southampton North Branch and chairman of the Southampton
and District Fabian Society.

Ben was born into a Jewish family in Latvia. In 1925, his family moved
to Belfast where his father became an assistant Rabbi. He graduated in
medicine from Queen\'s University, Belfast, in 1946 and obtained his MD
in 1957. Following his preregistration training, he served in the Royal
Army Medical Corps for 2 years and then undertook his psychiatric
training (1949--1956). He was appointed Senior Hospital Medical Officer
in Cardiff in 1956 and consultant at Knowle Hospital in 1958. After
retiring he worked as clinical assistant in the Rehabilitation and
Long-Stay Units at Knowle and Southampton for a further 9 years.

He and his late wife, Phyllis (a nurse from the Republic of Ireland),
showered hospitality on his colleagues and many generations of trainees
and their partners. Many overseas trainees showed their appreciation
decades after returning to their native countries.

Ben remained youthful until near the end. His clinical skills,
intellectual prowess, sense of duty, concern for patients and loyalty to
friends and colleagues will remain as monuments to his memory. He will
be sadly missed by all who knew him, but most of all by his family, to
whom he was deeply devoted -- his three children (David, Judith and
Helen), ten grandchildren and two great grandchildren.
