================================================
The outcomes of home treatment for schizophrenia
================================================



Hannah Chu Han Huang
Mark Taylor
Alasdair Carmichael

:Correspondence: M. Taylor (marktaylor2@nhs.net)

:date: 2018-12

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   We examined whether intensive home treatment (IHTT) was beneficial
   for acute schizophrenia, using the Clinical Global Impression (CGI)
   scale as a measure of severity and change, between 2011–2015.
   Demographic and clinical details were collected.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   309 cases were referred to IHTT, comprising 245 separate individuals.
   This represented all severe acute psychotic episodes in Edinburgh
   during the study period. Three quarters of individuals had an
   improvement in CGI following IHTT and were safely managed at home.
   Thirty-nine per cent of all people received three or more regular
   medications. Comorbid drug and alcohol misuse was also frequently
   seen.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   IHTT can be beneficial to those suffering an acute episode of
   psychosis and has been shown to improve overall clinical outcome
   based on the CGI. Medication polypharmacy, as well as drug and
   alcohol use, are commonly seen in this population.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   M.T. worked in IHTT at the time of the study, and has received fees
   and/or hospitality from Janssen, Lundbeck and Otsuka in the past 3
   years.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

.. _sec1-1:

Background
==========

Crisis resolution and home treatment (CRHT) teams have been recommended
in mental health for many years,1 with intensive 24 h home treatment
being seen as an alternative to hospital admission. A randomised control
trial reported by Johnson *et al*\ 1 showed a reduction in the number of
hospital admissions as well as a decrease in the cost to the service2
with CRHT. There have been positive experiences for patients or
consumers of CRHT,3 although reports have also highlighted some
dissatisfaction, namely that too many staff members are involved and the
contacts are short-lived.4

The Edinburgh CRHT is called the Intensive Home Treatment Team (IHTT)3
and has two main points of entry into treatment – referral from the
community (either from primary or secondary care) and from in-patient
units to facilitate early discharge from hospital (but no
self-referral). Edinburgh has well developed community mental health
teams but no specific first episode or early intervention programme for
adult psychosis; therefore, as far as is known, all acutely relapsing
patients with schizophrenia and psychosis are referred to the IHTT.

Coping with schizophrenia and related psychoses remains a challenge, and
globally5 schizophrenia contributes 7.4% of all lost years of life to
all disabilities. Relapse of schizophrenia, sadly, is common, with only
about 20% of patients having only one episode of
psychosis.6\ :sup:`,`\ 7 Predictors of relapse include medication
non-adherence and comorbid substance misuse,6\ :sup:`,`\ 7 and relapse
is considered a time of increased risk of suicide in schizophrenia.8

.. _sec1-2:

Aims
====

Although there have been reports of patient satisfaction with CRHTs,
very few studies have examined how a CRHT affects patients’ clinical
outcomes. In this observational study, we examine whether intensive home
treatment was of benefit to people experiencing a relapse of
schizophrenia in terms of routine clinical outcome measures, and
identify the demographic and clinical characteristics of those who have
responded (or not) to this intervention.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

Data were collected retrospectively from medical records of patients
assessed and cared for by the IHTT between 2011 and 2015. Those with an
ICD-10 code diagnosis of schizophrenia (F20) and related disorders (F22
– delusional disorder, F23 – acute transient psychosis, F25 –
schizoaffective disorder, F28 – other psychotic disorder not due to
substance or known physiological condition, and F29 – unspecified
psychosis not due to a substance or known physiological condition) were
included. The validity of the diagnosis was established by consultant
psychiatrist review. Using unique identifying codes, the electronic
records of these patients were retrieved and reviewed using *a priori*
criteria. Ethical approval for the study was provided by the University
of Edinburgh, UK.

IHTT records the severity of the presenting mental disorder using the
Clinical Global Impression Scale9 (CGI) at the time of referral to IHTT.
The CGI objectively assesses the global severity of illness and change
in clinical condition over time.9 CGI-S is rated on the following
seven-point scale: 1, normal/not at all ill; 2, borderline mentally ill;
3, mildly ill; 4, moderately ill; 5, markedly ill; 6, severely ill; 7,
among the most extremely ill patients. CGI-I is similarly rated on a
seven-point scale: ‘compared with the patient's condition at admission,
this patient's condition is’ 1, very much improved: 2, much improved; 3,
minimally improved; 4, no change; 5, minimally worse; 6, much worse; 7,
very much worse. IHTT clinicians noted the improvement or lack thereof
in the presenting condition via the CGI-Improvement (CGI-I) score at the
point of discharge from IHTT. This was routinely rated for every patient
during his or her care with the team by an adequately trained clinician,
although the pattern of staff shift working meant that the CGI and CGI-I
for an individual patient were not always rated by the same clinician.

Other data collected for each patient included demographic details and
relevant clinical details (see Supplementary Appendix 1 available at
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2018.56 for full list), as well as data
about each patient's regular medication(s) (see Supplementary Appendix 2
for a list of categories).

.. _sec2-1:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

Unpaired *t*-tests were used (with the assumption of normality in CGI
distribution being satisfied) to test whether there was a statistically
significant change in CGI for patients who were discharged to the
community, compared with those who required hospital admission, as well
as to determine whether there was a statistically significant reduction
in CGI for all referrals treated by IHTT.

Pearson's χ\ :sup:`2`-test was used to test the hypothesis that people
who were not prescribed medication or were non-adherent with their
medication were more likely to be admitted to hospital than patients who
were taking prescribed medication.

Mixed model regression analysis was used to control for any confounders
that could be significantly associated with CGI difference. Variables
included as potential confounders were age, gender, treatment duration,
number of psychotropic medications prescribed, and drug and alcohol
status. Pearson's correlation was also conducted to see whether there
was a correlation between CGI and age or gender.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Demographics of patient population
----------------------------------

Over the 5-year period, there were 309 referrals to IHTT that met the
inclusion criteria, comprising 245 separate individuals with the
majority (82%) being new to IHTT and mental health services. Thirty-six
individuals were referred more than once, with 16 people being referred
to IHTT at least three times. One person was referred on five separate
occasions, and another individual was referred seven different times.
The patients referred had a mean age of 41 years, and 162 (52%) were men
(`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). Table 1Demographics of individual
referrals\ *N* = 309Age, mean (range), S.D40.4 (18–66), 12.0Male gender,
*n* (%)158 (51)Number of psychotropic medications prescribed, mean
(range), S.D1.6 (0–4), 1.0Treatment duration in days, mean (range),
S.D22.3 (1–167), 23.2Drug use: *n* (%)23 (7.4)Alcohol use: *n* (%)46
(14.9)Both drug and alcohol use: *n* (%)26 (8.4)

.. _sec3-2:

Referrals and outcomes
----------------------

The majority of the 309 referrals to IHTT over the 5-year period (56%,
*n* = 173) were from the community. The remaining 44% of referrals were
from in-patient units, in order to facilitate early discharge from
hospital.

In terms of outcomes at discharge from IHTT, a total of 221 referrals
(76%) were discharged to the community, and 70 referrals (24%) required
transfer into hospital owing to their risk status or severity of
illness. Twenty-seven per cent of repeat referrals were discharged to
hospital, compared with 23% of ‘one-off’ referrals (*P*-value = 0.6).

There were five deaths (2%) within the 5-year period, including one
suicide, from the total group of 255 people. None of those who died were
under the care of IHTT at the time of death. Two of the deceased had a
history of extensive alcohol and drug misuse. All five of those who died
had a history of repeated hospital admissions. The suicide occurred in
December 2013, after an urgent referral to hospital, but the person was
not deemed unwell enough for admission at that time.

Fifty-two per cent (14 referrals) of the 27 referrals who were on no
regular medications, or who were non-adherent with their medications,
went on to require hospital admission, in comparison with 20% of
patients who were taking at least one medication, and 24% of all
referrals.

Eighteen referral outcomes were missing from records throughout the
5-year period.

.. _sec3-3:

CGI
---

The mean value of CGI of all patients at admission to IHTT was 4.1. The
mean value of CGI of all patients at discharge was 3.05, an improvement
of 1.05 (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__), which was a significant change
(*P* < 0.05). Patients who were later admitted to hospital from IHTT had
a higher mean value of CGI at 4.2 on admission to IHTT compared with the
mean value of CGI of all patients. The mean value of CGI on discharge to
hospital in this population was 4.6, i.e. they were more unwell,
according to CGI. Table 2Severity of illness and any subsequent
improvement or not with IHTT, as measured by CGIYear2011 (*n* = 42)2012
(*n* = 33)2013 (*n* = 60)2014 (*n* = 80)2015 (*n* = 94)Total
(*n* = 309)Average CGI at referral – all
patients3.84.24.34.04.14.1Average CGI on discharge – all
patients3.33.02.93.32.83.1Average CGI at referral, those later
discharged to the community3.84.24.23.94.14.0Average CGI on discharge to
the community3.02.92.52.72.22.6Average CGI at referral, later
transferred to hospital3.84.34.64.34.14.2Average CGI on transfer to
hospital3.53.254.25.05.04.6

Patients whose clinical outcome was discharge back to their usual carers
had a mean value of CGI of 4.04 on admission to IHTT and a mean value of
CGI on discharge from IHTT of 2.57.This was a decrease of mean CGI (i.e.
improvement in health) of 1.47.

The difference in average CGI between the mean discharge CGI of all
referrals and the mean discharge value of patients admitted to hospital
was non-significant (1.55, *P* < 0.15). The difference in average CGI,
on discharge, between referrals admitted to hospital and referrals
discharged to the community was 2.03, a statistically significant change
(*P* < 0.05).

The average CGI of all repeat referrals at the beginning of treatment
with IHTT was 3.94, 0.11 lower than the average CGI of all referrals.
The CGI on discharge for repeat referrals was 3.22, an average decrease
in CGI of 0.72. These differences were not significant.

Age, gender, number of medications prescribed and drug/alcohol status
were found not to be significant confounders in the regression analysis
(see Supplementary Appendix 3). Only treatment duration was found to be
a significant confounder, with patients having a longer treatment
duration demonstrating a greater difference in CGI.

.. _sec3-4:

Medication
----------

`Table 3 <#tab03>`__ illustrates the different medications and number of
patients taking them: 2.8% of patients were on no medications, 31% were
prescribed one medication, 27% were prescribed two medications, 18% were
prescribed three medications and 21% were prescribed four or more
medications. The mean number of any medications, including
non-psychotropic medications, taken by an average patient across the 5
years was 2.1. A total of 27 referrals (9%) refused medication, did not
require medication or were judged as non-adherent. Table 3Medications
prescribedYear2011 (*n* = 42)2012 (*n* = 33)2013 (*n* = 60)2014
(*n* = 80)2015 (*n* = 94)Total
(*n* = 309)FGA2432323526149SGA1518455857193Benzodiazepines or other
hypnotic810263927110Antidepressants6413122156Mood
stabilisers/anticonvulsants4256219Other medications6810203074No
medication2–1238No information7213720Mean number of
medications2.01.61.92.22.02.1 [1]_

Pearson's χ\ :sup:`2`-test showed that patients who were taking no
medications, or were non-concordant with their medication, were more
likely to be admitted to hospital from IHTT compared with patients who
were taking at least one medication (χ\ :sup:`2` = 43.3)

.. _sec3-5:

Drug and alcohol use
--------------------

In total, 122 (39.5%) referrals were misusing either alcohol or drugs
(`Table 4 <#tab04>`__) as rated by the IHTT clinician. The drug use was
varied and often involved poly-substance misuse. Cannabis had the
highest frequency of use, followed by amphetamines. Table 4Comorbid drug
and alcohol misuseYear2011 (*n* = 42)2012 (*n* = 33)2013 (*n* = 60)2014
(*n* = 80)2015 (*n* = 94)Total (*n* = 309)Drugs7 (17%)8 (24%)19 (32%)27
(34%)22 (23%)83 (27%)Excess alcohol8 (19%)9 (27%)19 (32%)24 (30%)13
(14%)73 (24%) [2]_

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

Crisis resolution and home treatment teams, such as IHTT, are designed
to manage acute mental health problems in the individual's home
environment, minimising the risk of hospital admission while promoting
autonomy and self-efficacy. It is incumbent on health services to
demonstrate the effectiveness of their interventions, and IHTT from
inception chose the CGI as an observer-rated measure of illness severity
and subsequent improvement (or deterioration).

Our results show that 76% of people were discharged back to their usual
care after IHTT involvement following an acute episode of psychotic
illness, supporting the conclusion that IHTT can help people manage an
acute psychotic episode, and avoid hospital admission. This belies a
negative therapeutic outlook for schizophrenia, with the majority of
people with schizophrenia in crisis or relapse avoiding the need for
hospital care.

The total CGI score diminished by 1.05 for the whole sample, and a
one-point shift in CGI is usually regarded as a clinically significant
change.9 Since CGI has been shown10 to be an effective method of mapping
illness severity, with reliability equivalent to that of more complex
scales such as Positive and Negative Symptom Scale (PANSS), we can
conclude from our results that the Edinburgh IHTT service, on average,
can help reduce the severity of schizophrenia and related disorders. The
CGI score of those people discharged home from IHTT improved by 2.03
compared with those being transferred to hospital from IHTT, implying an
association between hospital admission and a worsening CGI score, and
adding to the face validity of this measure. A study from Taiwan11 also
showed that patients with schizophrenia treated with community home care
case management had a significant reduction in the frequency of hospital
admission, and a systematic review12 from 2017 showed that home-based
intervention improves patients’ quality of life and autonomy.

Twenty-four per cent of patients were admitted to hospital from IHTT,
and the average CGI score at entry to IHTT of those who were eventually
admitted to hospital was 0.16 higher than those who were eventually
discharged home. This implies that those with a more severe psychotic
relapse were more likely to require hospital admission, although
non-illness-related factors such as accommodation were not taken into
account in this study.

Of note, the gender ratio of the patient population in our study was
almost 1:1, whereas usually one would expect a ratio of 1.4:1 in a
population of patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia.5 This may have
been due to our inclusion criteria being not just schizophrenia but also
its related disorders. Additionally, amongst the five deaths in our
patient population over the 5-year period there was only one suicide,
which is theoretically lower than expected for this city-wide
population.8 Beyond this, however, we have no reason to regard our study
population as unrepresentative, given the lack of local alternative
acute care pathways.

The mean number of medications a patient was taking was 2.1, with 21% of
patients prescribed four or more medications. This replicates work
elsewhere in the UK,13 indicating that polypharmacy in this complex
disorder is often the ‘real world’ norm, despite a paucity of supportive
evidence on added efficacy.14\ :sup:`,`\ 15 Polypharmacy is also
generally associated with an increased burden of adverse side-effects.16
Our results show that people who were taking no medication, or were
non-adherent with their medications, were more likely to be admitted to
hospital than those taking medication. Interestingly, patients taking
four or more medications demonstrated the most improvement, as measured
by CGI-I.

Our results showed that 9% of the patient population in this study were
taking no medication or were non-adherent with medication according to
recorded clinician ratings, although medication non-adherence rates in
wider community samples are closer to 50%.17 This discrepancy may have
been due to many factors, including simple forgetfulness, a reluctance
of the patient to acknowledge non-adherence, and a failure to enquire
about it in a consistent manner.

Drug and alcohol misuse are common in people with schizophrenia,18 and
our results show a higher proportion of people with schizophrenia
misusing drugs than alcohol (`Table 4 <#tab04>`__), suggesting a
correlation between drug use, rather than alcohol misuse, and
schizophrenia. Menezes *et al*\ 19 analysed drug and alcohol problems
among 171 individuals with severe mental illness in South London,
finding that 36% had a 1-year prevalence rate for any substance problem,
compared with alcohol at 32% and drugs at 16%, contrary to our findings.
This comorbidity has been shown previously to contribute to the
premature mortality of those with schizophrenia.20

.. _sec4-1:

Limitations
-----------

There were various limitations to this study. First, the patient
population was from one IHTT only; therefore, the results may not be
applicable to all IHTTs or CRHTs. Furthermore, this was an observational
study, so comparative conclusions should not be made. Although CGI has
been shown to be a good measure of observer rated clinical outcomes,10
it remains open to potential bias. Finally, data collection errors may
possibly have occurred without our knowledge.

.. _sec4-2:

Summary
-------

Intensive multi-disciplinary home treatment (here via IHTT) can be an
effective intervention for most people suffering an acute episode of
psychotic illness, with the majority being successfully managed at home
and not requiring hospital admission. The minority that do go on to need
hospital admission tend to have higher initial severity of illness, as
measured by CGI, as well as being on no medication or being non-adherent
with medication according to their treating clinicians.

Polypharmacy appears to be standard medical practice for people with
schizophrenia, despite a lack of supportive evidence of added efficacy.
Drug and alcohol misuse are common in people with psychotic illness,
with higher rates than in the general population, arguably contributing
to the significant morbidity and mortality seen with this condition.19

We thank Dr Kader, Julie, Trish and all other IHTT staff, as well as
Nicoletta Adamo.

**Hannah Chu Han Huang** is a core trainee at the South London and
Maudsley Trust, UK; **Mark Taylor** is an honorary senior lecturer at
the University of Edinburgh, UK, University of Queensland, and an
associate professor and consultant psychiatrist at Metro South Health,
Brisbane, Australia; **Alasdair Carmichael** was a medical student at
the University of Edinburgh, UK.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2018.56.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. [1]
   FGA, first-generation antipsychotic; SGA, second generation
   antipsychotic.

.. [2]
   Number and percentages of referrals with a history of use of illegal
   drugs or legal highs declared within records, and number of referrals
   with significant alcohol-related history, e.g. consistently over
   weekly recommended allowance, often by a considerable margin.
