=======================================================================================================================================
General practitioner referral of older patients to Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT): an exploratory qualitative study
=======================================================================================================================================

Noel Collins
Laurie CornaCorrespondence to Noel Collins
(noel.collins@health.wa.gov.au)
:Date: 2018-6

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To understand general practitioner (GP) reticence to refer older
   patients to a local Improving Access to Psychological Therapies
   (IAPT) service providing mostly cognitive–behavioural therapy
   (CBT)-based interventions. Semi-structured, hour-long interviews were
   conducted with eight GPs and then analysed by modified grounded
   theory and thematic analysis.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   GP views regarding the treatability of older adults with CBT
   influenced their willingness to refer to a CBT-based IAPT service.
   Perceptions of local IAPT assessment processes being distressing and
   onerous to older patients also motivated referral inaction. GPs
   expressed a preference to treat depressed older patients themselves
   (with medication and psychological approaches such as watchful
   waiting).

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Any strategy to increase referral rates of older adults to CBT-based
   IAPT services should address local GP concerns regarding assessment
   processes and the effectiveness of offered treatments.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a4

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The National Health Service (NHS) England ‘Improved Access to
Psychological Therapies’ (IAPT) program was launched in 2009 to improve
access to evidence-based talking therapies for people with common
psychiatric conditions such as depression. It originally targeted
working-age adults but was opened to older adults in 2010, with most
interventions being based on cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT).(n.d.a)
Although IAPT is now a service for all ages, only 7% of people in
treatment are over 65, despite constituting 20% of the population. This
unequal distribution of treatment worsens with age. In particular, there
is a miniscule number of people over 90 years old enrolled in IAPT
nationally, despite this being the fastest growing demographic group
(see
https://www.england.nhs.uk/mental-health/adults/iapt/older-people/).(n.d.b)
Part of the problem is that people over the age of 65 are rarely
referred for psychotherapies.(n.d.c) It is important to understand
referral obstacles to IAPT services, as these are now the main providers
of talking therapies for adults of all ages.

.. _sec1-1:

Aim
===

The aim of this study was to understand why GPs did not routinely refer
their older patients to a local IAPT provider. This was done by
examining the referral decision from the perspective of referrers
themselves.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

This was an exploratory, qualitative study. An interpretive approach in
the grounded theory tradition was chosen for this research to understand
the nuances of the referrer experience and to meanings attached to
referral decisions.(n.d.d) Semi-structured, hour-long interviews were
conducted with eight GPs practicing in a home county of London. The
majority of therapy offered by the local IAPT provider was CBT in
nature. The interviewer (N.C.) was a local old-age psychiatrist,
previously CBT trained, who was also a member of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists Older Adult Faculty work stream aiming to improve access
to psychological therapies for older people. An indicative topic guide
was provided to all prospective participants in advance of scheduling an
interview. As interviews progressed, there was less reliance on
interviewer prompts as themes that arose inductively from the data were
explored.

Several approaches were employed to mitigate the effects of N.C.'s
existing beliefs and assumptions on the qualitative study, including
supervision and reflexivity. The latter is an explicit self-awareness of
how the interaction between researcher and participant can influence
data collection, analysis and subsequent theory
development.(n.d.e)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.f) The evolution of deductive ideas
from previous professional experience and the evolution of inductive
theory, as it emerged from the data, were both made explicit. Memo
writing was conducted and recorded to provide clear transparency in the
analysis.(n.d.g) Care was also taken to delineate worker and researcher
roles, and interviews were carried out either out of hours or in
non-clinical settings.

.. _sec2-1:

Participants
------------

Purposive sampling of GPs from a variety of backgrounds was carried out
to scrutinise deviant examples and increase the scope of subsequent
findings.(n.d.h) All eight GPs, who were initially contacted by email,
agreed to participate. Half of the GPs were male and half were female.
Age and seniority varied between a trainee and commissioner level.

.. _sec2-2:

Ethical considerations
----------------------

This study was conducted as part of a supervised Master's thesis in
Gerontology and was approved by the King's College London Research
Ethics Committee prior to the recruitment and interviewing of
participants.

.. _sec2-3:

Analysis
--------

Verbatim transcriptions of audio-recorded interviews were made and
uploaded to a qualitative software platform (MaxQDA) to assist coding
and analysis. Interviews were coded line and by line and analysed using
thematic analysis to explore referrer beliefs and their associated
meanings, as well as other factors related to referral decisions.(n.d.g)
Emergent codes and thematic categories were constantly re-checked
regarding their utility in understanding, developing and interpreting
emerging themes in the data.(n.d.i) Thematic saturation was observed by
the penultimate interview. Several emergent thematic categories, which
best captured reluctance to refer to IAPT, were chosen for further
examination: (1)deeming older patients ineligible for CBT;(2)concern
regarding appropriateness of IAPT assessment and
treatment;(3)preferential usage of alternatives to IAPT referral.

These were chosen as the main focus of analysis because these ideas
arose inductively from the data and were stable concepts across all
transcripts.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

.. _sec3-1:

Theme 1: deeming older people ineligible for CBT
------------------------------------------------

Participants conceptualised anxiety and depression in later life
differently to that which occurs in younger adults. This in turn
affected practitioner assessments of eligibility for referral, as older
adult depression was felt less amenable to CBT for a variety of reasons.
These reasons included the beliefs that older adult depression was an
inevitable consequence of ageing, loneliness and age-expected losses:
“‘Sometimes they have lost children. Work has disappeared. They can't
get out and do the things they want to do. Recognising the fact that
they are old. And I think people grieve over this almost.’ (GP 4)‘You're
isolated; you're not able to get out. You will get more anxious as you
get older.’ (GP 1)”

One GP, who had a senior commissioning role, framed his decision not to
refer older adults to IAPT using ‘maximising’ health-rationing
principles, namely distributing health resources to achieve maximum
benefit in a population:(n.d.j) “‘I think it's just an unconscious bias,
not because I think it becomes less useful as you get older but it's
more useful if you are younger. Because I believe that bit about
psychological maturity and I think if I took 100 65 year olds and 100 18
year olds, with say anxiety, I believe you would more likely to help
more of the 18 year olds rather than the 65s. Because the 65s have
probably reached psychological maturity and the 18 year olds haven't. So
whilst you might be able to help some of the 65 year olds, you've missed
the opportunity of consolidating over a lifetime those patterns of
behaviour.’ (GP 8)”

GP participants appeared to conflate normal ageing with the development
of frailty, sensory or cognitive impairment and the loss of mental
agility, which were viewed as obstacles to successful treatment with
CBT. This could also explain why non-referral of older patients for CBT
was magnified in the over-85 age group: “‘Maybe the older eighty plus
person with chronic depression, a bit of dementia, that sort of thing …
it's just their life. Is it part of their health, that sort of age? Are
we ever likely to make a significant improvement with talking therapy?’
(GP 6)”

.. _sec3-2:

Theme 2: concern regarding appropriateness of IAPT assessment and treatment
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some GP participants in this study stated that they did not refer to
IAPT due to their concerns that IAPT assessment processes were not
suitable for older patients. In particular, telephone assessment and the
use of repeated questionnaires were felt to be insensitive and
inflexible when assessing older patients, particularly those with
comorbid sensory or cognitive deficits. One participant described the
abandonment of referral as a ‘rescue’ from the traumatising process of
IAPT assessments: “‘I can think of one particular person with early
memory loss, you may remember, who was absolutely traumatised by the
process … and I said this isn't for you, let's stop all of these
appointments and phone calls and all of that … and they've done well,
having rescued them from the process they are doing absolutely fine.’
(GP 2)”

Other participant concerns regarding IAPT structural processes included
inflexible CBT delivery, the poor availability of face-to-face
counselling and the skills of IAPT workers in dealing with cognitive
impairment or medical comorbidity. The exclusion of nursing home
patients was also a particular concern: “‘If I suggested to the homes
that these patients be sent to IAPT, they are going to be asking how
will we get them there? How will the cognitively, hearing and vision
impaired cope? I think that's particularly true with psychologically
multi-morbid patients for example: a patient with dementia and anxiety.
I suspect you wouldn't refer to IAPT because they wouldn't be able to
handle it.’ (GP 8)”

A common concern among all GP participants was that IAPT interventions
were too short term and superficial to change entrenched maladaptive
behaviours in older patients: “‘I think again, most people probably feel
as I do in that if you think psychological therapy is going to be
helpful – a lot of these people have such strongly held, long term views
– that a short course of CBT is not going to do it.’ (GP 4)”

All GPs in this sample described feeling isolated from IAPT
practitioners. This meant that any concerns regarding the effects of
IAPT processes on older patients were never raised with IAPT providers.
Additionally, GPs described not receiving any guidance regarding which
older patients may benefit from CBT: “‘Obviously that big thing sitting
there … where the anxiety that comes in older age, I don't know if
that's whom the IAPT service wants to see.’ (GP 1)”

.. _sec3-3:

Theme 3: preferential use of alternatives to IAPT referral
----------------------------------------------------------

When responding to the needs of depressed older adults, GP participants
described a number of approaches that are preferentially used instead of
referring to IAPT for CBT. These approaches included addressing physical
issues and social needs, prescribing medication and GP-led psychological
approaches. Prioritising physical issues was viewed as a pragmatic
response to the competing demands present in a time-limited consultation
with an older patient. It was hoped that by improving physical issues,
mood would lift as a result: “‘You also get sidetracked by their UTIs
[urinary tract infections] and their arthritis is really bad. I tend to
focus on the physical problems as with a lot of the frail people, your
assumption is that because they can't get out, they're not mobile, they
don't feel well that they're feeling depressed. You therefore focus on
those issues – you try to improve those things to improve mood.’ (GP 5)”

Addressing social needs, like treating physical issues, was a highly
regarded strategy when treating an older adult with depression. Senior
GP participants, in particular, had strong convictions in this approach.
This was linked to beliefs that older adult depression was often fuelled
by social isolation and loneliness, and was therefore more responsive to
social interventions rather than psychotherapies: “‘In terms of social
interventions that may make a difference, if you were to ask me what
differences I've made to people's lives, I can remember a very depressed
Finnish lady and I knew close by there was another Finnish lady and I
put them in touch, this probably made more difference to her and she
didn't come and see me every week after that!’ (GP 7)”

Prescribing antidepressants, in contrast to IAPT referral for CBT, was
described by some GPs as a reflexive act. Perceived benefits of
antidepressants over referral to IAPT included relief of associated
insomnia and pain, and taking a tablet being ‘less work’ for patients.
Participants also felt that prescribing an antidepressant was more
acceptable to older patients and that it satisfied an expectation for a
rapid medical response. Some participants also believed that medication
was more appropriate than CBT referral when depression had a clear
organic cause, had significant somatic symptoms or was associated with
medical comorbidity. Concerns regarding side effects were notably absent
in all participant accounts. This may relate to the practice of using
lower dose antidepressants, described by one GP as ‘gentle pick me ups’:
“‘Again it comes down to expectation, if they leave with a prescription
in their hand, you've done something. Whereas, if I say to them I'll
refer you to a counselling service, it'll take 6–8 weeks before you see
somebody, then might have to wait for treatment and in 4 months time,
you might be engaged with the service and you might start to feel
better … you're not giving them a quick fix.’ (GP 5)”

In contrast to referral to IAPT, GPs reported that prescribing made them
feel less impotent and helpless: “‘With a depressed elderly, you worry
that they are going to wait so long [for CBT]. I must do something in
the interim. Doctors hate that hopeless feeling. You know what you need
to do, but you can't access that.’ (GP 5)”

GPs described using their own psychological skills with older patients
with depression rather than referring them to CBT. These approaches
included supportive counselling, exploratory brief therapy and problem
solving. Like prescribing medication, these strategies were deemed
within the GP's control: “‘You learn the older you get that some people
just want to acknowledge an issue and they have it within themselves,
and having acknowledged and having told someone like their GP about it,
that they're able then to go away … and … change their thinking about
it.’ (GP 2)”

Watchful waiting was frequently used as a tried-and-trusted approach to
treating elderly people with depression in primary care. This
intervention, centred on regular review but without active
pharmacotherapy or psychotherapy, was felt by participants to be a
tangible and containing approach compared with referral to IAPT for CBT:
“‘I think it's the personal support and contact, the commitment. Because
quite often people who I think need a lot of support, I will book the
next appointment whilst they are in the room and give them that piece of
paper. So again, it's that tangible thing. Even if I don't think they
need medication, I will say let's find an appointment. And they will go
out and come back.’ (GP 4)”

Some participants felt confident in delivering simpler CBT interventions
themselves, such as behavioural activation, activity scheduling and
challenging negative thinking. The willingness and desire to improve
these skills, even within the constraints of brief consultations, was
most clearly expressed by a GP registrar: “‘I think the more you learn
about CBT, the more you can do very basic interventions yourself with
some patients. We've been encouraged to do that and deliver very basic
CBT ourselves. In the 10 minute consultation!’ (GP 5)”

.. _sec3-4:

Study limitations
-----------------

The findings presented here must be interpreted in light of the study's
limitations. The IAPT service referred to in this study was reported by
local GPs to only offer only CBT-based therapies. Participants had
strong views regarding the use of CBT in older patients and this clearly
influenced willingness to refer to their local service. The findings of
this study cannot be generalised to the experiences of other GPs with
other IAPT providers. Additionally, the sample comprised GP participants
in only one semi-rural locality with little ethnic diversity. This meant
that the experiences of more urban-based GPs working with multicultural
populations were also absent. The scope of the project precluded a
larger sample size, but data saturation was achieved by the seventh
interview. Notwithstanding these caveats, this study does provide some
insight into the reasons for underutilisation of IAPT services by older
adults.

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

The GP respondents in this study gave a wide range of clear reasons for
their reluctance to refer their older patients to a local IAPT provider
offering mostly CBT. These include the belief that older adult
depression was an inevitable consequence of ageing and therefore more
difficult to treat with CBT. This is consistent with previous research
showing how depression in older adults can be viewed as a ‘justifiable’
consequence of ageing due to age-expected losses and social changes, and
therefore less in need of treatment.(n.d.k)\ :sup:`–`\ (n.d.l) This view
may in turn relate to historical comments by Freud, e.g. ‘above the age
of 50 the elasticity of mental processes on which treatment depends is,
as a rule lacking – old people are no longer educable’, still having an
enduring effect on medical practitioners.(n.d.c)

In general, GP participants in this study viewed IAPT assessment
processes as inflexible, insensitive and potentially traumatising for
older adults. This is compatible with existing concerns that CBT can be
too protocol driven, measurement focused and inflexible for older
patients.(n.d.m)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.n) There appeared to be some
‘frail-ist’ views where the older, more frail, depressed individuals in
particular were deemed the least likely to benefit from or access CBT
and therefore were ineligible for referral. The treatment preferences of
GPs in this study are consistent with existing research showing that
some GPs prefer simpler and more exploratory counselling rather than a
manualised approach like CBT,(n.d.o) and that they believe that
pharmacotherapy offers quicker relief to people with depression compared
with a talking therapy.(n.d.p)

The results of this study point to strategies that could achieve higher
referral rates for older patients to IAPT services. Increased
co-location of IAPT therapists into primary care would be a good
starting point in promoting CBT as an effective treatment for older
people, who often have higher rates of adherence and completion of
therapy than younger patients.(n.d.n)\ :sup:`,`\ (n.d.q) Some IAPT
providers could aim to offer a greater range of other modalities of
treatment to older patients and publicise these increased options to
referring GPs. IAPT providers could also revise assessment processes,
such as the use of simpler rating scales of improvement, to address
concerns regarding onerous outcome measurement. The use of tele-health
could also be trialled to improve access for those with mobility
impairments and those living in residential homes.(n.d.r) IAPT
supervisors could also take on an active role in training carers in
residential homes to deliver basic CBT techniques to depressed, older
and frail adults who are currently disenfranchised by poor access to
conventional face-to-face treatment.(n.d.s) It is hoped that this paper
helps raise the profile of unequal access to psychological therapies for
older adults and that some of the suggested strategies derived from this
study's findings can be trialled by some IAPT services to improve the
situation.

**Noel Collins** is a consultant psychiatrist at the Greater Southern
Mental Health Service, Albany, Australia. **Laurie Corna** is a senior
lecturer at the Institute of Gerontology, Department of Global Health &
Social Medicine, King's College London, UK.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.s.
