================================================
Alan Haworth, OBE (UK), GDCS (Zambia), FRCPsych.
================================================



Chris Haworth

:date: 2018-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Head, Psychiatry Service, University of Zambia, Zambia

.. image:: S205646941800027X_inline1.jpg

Alan Haworth, who died on 17 December 2017 at the age of 89 was a
pioneering psychiatrist who, over a long period from 1964 until he
retired in 2013, established psychiatric services in Zambia. Shortly
after his death, the Zambian Minister of Health issued a statement
describing him as ‘the father of mental health among the medical
fraternity of Zambia’. When he arrived in Zambia, first as a missionary
doctor and shortly afterwards as a psychiatrist in the government
medical service, the mental health services were extremely limited or,
in most parts of the country, non-existent. Haworth took up government
positions and had a pivotal role in setting up the mental health
services of newly independent Zambia. Following this, he became Head of
the Psychiatry Department at the University of Zambia. He set up the
National AIDS Counselling Services Unit (at the National Mental Health
Resource Centre (NMHRC)) and remained its head for 17 years. He was
elected National President of the Zambian Red Cross.

Most importantly, as Chairman of the paramedical committee of the
Medical Council of Zambia, he drafted a new Medical and Allied
Professions Bill. This enabled the registration of paramedics after
highly regulated training, and their substantial but controlled
contribution to general healthcare in a country which, at the time, had
only a fragmentary health service and hardly any higher educational
facilities. Under Haworth's leadership, Zambia established its own
medical school. This enabled a build-up of resources for supplying
suitable workers at all levels and the establishment of a healthcare
system modelled on the Alma Ata declaration on primary healthcare.

His second achievement was the development of a system for the provision
of countrywide mental healthcare, integrated into primary healthcare,
and ensuring that the training of various types of specialised workers
could take place in close liaison with generic health workers. In an
article published in 1988, he described the first 25 years of his
experience as a psychiatrist in Zambia.1 This initially involved
travelling around the country by air in an ageing Dakota for three weeks
out of four, visiting medical facilities to establish mental health
clinics. He developed a course for clinical officers in psychiatry who
worked in communities around the country.

In 1972, he applied to the World Health Organization (WHO) for funding
to enable him to visit universities in African countries. An invitation
from the WHO to participate in a multicentre study of community response
to alcohol-related problems seemed to be mapping a future area of
specialisation, but the advent of AIDS in Zambia forced a change and led
to what he considered his third most important achievement in the field
of health. He was asked to join an AIDS management group and became
Director of the Zambian Ministry of Health AIDS Counselling Services
Unit. Crash training programmes with some elements of counselling were
developed and were adopted by many organisations within and outside
Zambia, while Haworth himself became deeply involved in many HIV-related
projects, the most important concerning couples’ counselling, as well as
the long-term monitoring and testing of discordant couples drawn from
over 35 000 couples recruited. As a member of the board of an NGO he had
set up, in response to the AIDS epidemic and as National President of
the Zambia Red Cross Society, he was soon involved in the plight of
children (on the streets, as victims of abuse and at risk of acquiring
HIV). He took part in a series of studies and helped set up a ‘one stop’
specialist unit for victims of child sexual abuse at the teaching
hospital. He was one of the five founder members of the Family Health
Trust. He acted as Chair, ensuring that the organisation would meet the
needs of orphans and vulnerable children and women, and that people
living with HIV/AIDS were well looked after.

Alan had some special assignments requested of him, first in Zambia
where he advised on the approach to the members of a religious cult who
had engaged in bloody fighting against the new government. Then, in
Congo, he was asked to advise on the possibility of accepting as
refugees into Zambia ‘boy soldiers’ who, with a group of mercenaries,
had rebelled against Mobutu. Since they were currently under siege by
the Congolese National Army, Haworth found himself under fire, looking
after wounded rebels. He reported how he found this less stressful than
being caught up in subsequent diplomatic shenanigans. He remained in
close contact with ‘freedom fighters’ from South Africa and Zimbabwe and
did consultancies in Mozambique and Liberia on a WHO mission, where he
was briefly hijacked by a group of warlord Charles Taylor's soldiers.
Throughout his professional life, he seemed to be on the fringes of
violence, having once been within seconds of being lynched himself. This
experience gave him confidence to know when to intervene, and he
certainly prevented at least one other lynching. Called to see a close
friend with a serious gunshot wound to the head in a third assassination
attempt, he met the former President of Zambia, Kenneth Kaunda, who
showed him his own linear graze made by a bullet across his scalp
incurred in the same episode.

Haworth received public honours both in the UK and in Zambia. In the UK,
he was awarded the OBE for services to medicine. He was made a Grand
Commander of Distinguished Service by the President of Zambia in
recognition of his services to psychiatry.

Alan Haworth came from an extremely modest background. His parents had
both left school at the age of 13, his father to work as a cotton
spinner and his mother as a seamstress. Brought up on a council estate
in Blackburn, he won a place at the local grammar school. Then, after
National Service in the RAF, he studied medicine at Cambridge and the
London Hospital. While still a medical student, he had offered to become
a missionary and was sent to work in Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia).

Early in his career, while working on prison medical duties, he had
several conversations with Zambia's future first president (Kenneth
Kaunda), then under detention, and these had a significant influence on
his future career.

He never married. However, in 1979, following the tragic death of his
cook of 17 years, he took over the care of the widow and her seven
children. They became his adopted family. Almost 40 years later, the
grandchildren and great-grandchildren of this family claimed that even
if he looked different, as far as they were concerned, he was their real
grandparent.

Alan's activities began to be curtailed in 2013, owing to ill health,
and he returned to Blackburn, where he had been brought up. He had a
passion for classical music and spent many long hours in his final years
attending the Leeds Piano Competition.

Alan will be remembered as he wished, as a loving grandfather and uncle
by his English family, and as a kindly, caring and understanding doctor
by his patients. His many former students think of him with affection
and respect.
