=========================================================================
Community treatment orders in England: review of usage from national data
=========================================================================



Daniel M. Bennett
Andrew C. Bailey
Alasdair D. Forrest

:date: 2018-10


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We read with interest the paper by Gupta *et al* on community treatment
orders in England.1 This and other reports on the use of compulsory
mental health powers are particularly welcome now, as legislation is
being reviewed.2\ :sup:`–`\ 4 Scotland's distinct but comparable law and
practice may be more relevant than those of the other jurisdictions
mentioned. We are pleased to provide data from Scotland to broaden the
picture and consider unique Scottish community provisions for mentally
disordered offenders.

Community-based detention was made possible in Scotland by the Mental
Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, enacted in October
2005. It allows mental health officers (social workers) with two
supporting medical reports to apply for a compulsory treatment order
(CTO). The Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland can grant either a
hospital-based or a community CTO. The criteria are that: the patient
has a mental disorder; medical treatment is available which alleviates
the effects of the disorder or prevents it from worsening; without the
provision of medical treatment there would be a significant risk to the
health, safety or welfare of the patient, or the safety of any other
person; the patient's decision-making ability with respect to medical
treatment for mental disorder is significantly impaired; and the making
of the order is necessary. Only the Tribunal can vary the powers between
hospital-based and community provisions. Unlike in England and Wales, a
community-based CTO can therefore be sought without admitting the
patient to hospital and, when they are returned to hospital, it is by
varying the order not by revoking it.

Gupta *et al* note that new CTOs in England have been stable at around
4500 per year over the past 5 years.1 This is in contrast to Scotland,
where the use of CTOs (with community-only powers) has increased from
11.2 to 20.5 per 100 000 population between 2008 and 2017.5 The
proportion of CTOs with community-only powers was 44.9% in January
2017.5 If the legislation was similar in England (taking CTOs as a
proportion of the total long-term sections, i.e. new CTOs and Section
3s), this was only slightly lower at 37% in 2014/2015.1

Uniquely in the UK, Scotland also has a provision whereby a
community-only compulsion order can be made by a criminal court (which
is distinct from the equivalent of a probation order). Compulsion orders
with community-only powers operate similarly to their civil equivalent,
with breaches addressed by the mental health rather than the criminal
justice system. In the 10 years leading up to 2017, three orders with
community-only powers were made (where the patient was unfit or lacking
criminal responsibility), representing only 2% of compulsion orders made
in those circumstances.5 Over the same time scale, 14 community-only
compulsion orders were made as disposals, representing 2.6% of such
disposals.5 The role of community detention as a criminal disposal is
therefore much less prominent in Scotland than in civil mental health
legislation.

We hope this Scottish context adds to the review provided by Gupta *et
al*, and we agree, having considered these figures for community-based
detention, that it seems ‘sensible to take whatever steps possible to
see that it is used effectively’. We respectfully suggest that adopting
a broader range of data and jurisdictions for such a study would assist
in that regard.
