---
author:
- Julia Bland
date: 2018-8
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
title: "Profile: David O\\'Flynn"
---

**Julia Bland meets Dr David O\'Flynn**, the insider of 'outsider' art,
Chair of The Adamson Collection Trust and Consultant Rehabilitation
Psychiatrist in Lambeth.

![](S2056469418000268_inline1.jpg)

Dr O\'Flynn contains within himself some of the contradictions of
'outsider' art. On first meeting, I unthinkingly proffered my right hand
to shake his right hand, and then kicked myself as he offered his left
hand: he has a right-sided hemiplegia. I don\'t think he was remotely
bothered by the momentary awkwardness. From the beginning he exudes a
joyous, almost boyish, enthusiasm; both for the works of The Adamson
Collection and for his work on the Tony Hillis Unit, a 15-bed locked
ward in Lambeth Hospital for men with chronic psychosis, behavioural
problems and addictions. His sparky nature seems paradoxically linked to
a very unfunny situation. Living with a terminal illness for much of his
30s, he has developed a sense of proportion about what really matters:
'I shouldn\'t really be here ..... it\'s all extra'.

He enthuses about his work with intractable, sometimes violent, patients
with psychosis, many of which have substance misuse problems in the mix.
The atmosphere on the ward is calm and the patients are friendly, albeit
with intense psychopharmacological treatment. They have an inside gym,
an outside area and art sessions on the ward. 'It\'s really a
therapeutic community, exactly what I always wanted.' The mean length of
stay is 15 months. He remembers learning a slow, thoughtful approach to
crisis on the ward from a consultant when he was a trainee. There had
been a fight between five patients and 'he taught me to go slowly,
considering each patient, one by one.'

How did Dr O\'Flynn get involved with The Adamson Collection?

He continued working in the emerging field of rehabilitation psychiatry,
in spite of his poor health, and went to a psychiatric conference in
Delphi where -- by chance -- he met a trustee of The Adamson Collection.
O\'Flynn was subsequently co-opted onto the committee that was planning
Edward Adamson\'s legacy. Through this work, he became a personal friend
of Adamson\'s surviving partner, John Timlin.

What is The Adamson Collection?^1^

Edward Adamson (1911--1996) was an artist who was employed at Netherne
Hospital to run an art facility for the patients from 1946 until his
retirement in 1981. Before he started, some psychiatrists had set up the
art studio as a kind of experimental laboratory, for example to compare
a patient\'s work pre- and post-lobotomy.

Adamson had a very different approach. He created a calm place, with
classical music in the background, where patients could produce whatever
they liked and there was no interpretation. He believed that making
illustrations of any kind had a healing effect. As Anthony Stephens the
Jungian analyst wrote: 'Adamson enabled them to formulate the meaning of
their predicament; and by mobilising the creative resources latent
within their own personalities, he assisted them to heal themselves.'

He even managed to arrange separate spaces for patients who couldn\'t
tolerate the studio with other people. He also enacted respect for each
patient by providing a chair, an easel and a small table for paints and
brushes so that each person had a distinct individual space within the
room. This was in contrast to the uniformity of the institutional
regime: beds lined up in a ward with no privacy.

Adamson was a trained artist and not a therapist; although he was
influenced by Jungian ideas, regularly visiting the Jungian art therapy
community Withymead in Oxfordshire. He had been a conscientious objector
during the war and trained as a chiropodist. He established the British
Association of Art Therapists in 1964, as well as the first art therapy
training programme in 1969.

Particularly remarkable artists in The Adamson Collection (see below)
include J. J. Beegan, who poignantly drew on lavatory paper with burnt
matchsticks, and Mary Bishop, who expressed her utter despair and
frustration with psychiatrists in paintings such as *Cri du Couer* and
*Sadist in a White Coat*. Other notable workers in Adamson\'s studio
include William Kurelek, a Canadian of Ukrainian origin who went on to
be a successful, recognised artist later in his life. Rosanda Polonska
spent 35 years in Netherne, producing drawings, poetry and sculpture,
including the *Stations of the Cross* which were put up in the Netherne
Hospital chapel. In 1982 she left hospital to live with her sister in
Paris. Gwyneth Rowlands was completely original, making painted
sculptures out of flints and pebbles she found. Some of these are
permanently on display in Lambeth Hospital. Other Rowlands flints,
pottery and other sculptural works are kept in The Adamson Collection
Trust at the Bethlem Royal Hospital, and another 6 are in the Reading
Room of the Wellcome Collection. Fig. 1*Key Centres* by Martin Birch,
date currently unknown. Pencil on paper. Courtesy of the Adamson
Collection/Wellcome Library.

The thousands of works produced at Netherne underwent complicated
selection processes. Adamson himself organised a group exhibition as
early as 1947; and in 1956, 500 works were chosen by Adamson for the
gallery he had established at Netherne. After he retired this became a
physiotherapy room.

In 1981 Adamson and Rudolph Freudenberg selected several thousand works
for storage and display at the entomologist Miriam Rothschild\'s Ashton
Wold estate in Northamptonshire. When they later returned to Netherne,
the rest of the works had disappeared.

In 1997 the whole collection was moved to Lambeth Hospital, which
didn\'t have an adequate storage facility, and pieces were stored on
open shelves and even in a disused shower cubicle! Fig. 2*Graffiti on
Lavatory Paper 2: 3 Lions* (detail) by J. J. Beegan, c. 1946. Match char
on Izal medicated toilet paper. Courtesy of the Adamson
Collection/Wellcome Library.

Finally, the works on paper were accepted into the Wellcome Library in
2013, where they are now stored and curated.

In what ways does David O\'Flynn think art therapies help? Is it an
expression of distress and frustration without violence, respect for the
production process or do the boundaries of the therapeutic group make it
a safe place? Is it a validation of experience? Is it that the act of
concentrating on producing an external concrete object, e.g. a painting,
relieves the mind of tormenting internal preoccupations, allows
distancing and an objectification of thoughts and feelings and thus
provides a positive relief? Could engagement with the medium in a quiet
place, with a soothing but non-judgemental parental presence, perhaps
allow some reworking or reawakening of childhood playfulness?

In 1996 the Hayward Gallery exhibited 'psychotic art' from the German
Prinzhorn Collection; the art consisted of poignant pieces by long-term
institutionalised patients.^2^ Like The Adamson Collection, there are
recurrent themes of fear, disintegration, fragmentation, feeling
observed (multiple eyes), loss of control/being controlled (e.g. rays,
pursuing objects, etc.), magical creatures and variable and multiple
perspectives. The artworks feel like attempts at mastery of internal
chaos. Fig. 3*The Sadist in the White Coat* by Mary Bishop, date
currently unknown, probably late 1950s. Poster paint on paper. Courtesy
of the Adamson Collection/Wellcome Library.

The past decade has brought a newer phenomenon of 'community arts':
public arts associated with well-being that include drama as well as
painting. This phenomenon seems to be targeted at a different patient
group, i.e. people that are managing in the community, rather than the
long-stay asylum population that Adamson was catering for.

David O\'Flynn seems like an ideal fit for The Adamson Collection:
interested in art, he used to escape the claustrophobic suburb as a
child to look at pictures. When he was at school at Westminster, he
often dropped into the Institute of Contemporary Arts, where he spotted
his first punk. He lives with his husband in a not-yet-gentrified part
of West London in a house full of reggae. He describes the area as 'a
real mix ...  there are old ladies who still go to the shops in slippers
and a dressing gown ...'

He was brought up in respectable Blackheath, the son of a dedicated
surgeon at Guy\'s Hospital. His brother is also a psychiatrist and is
married with children. The young David was sent to Dulwich Preparatory
School and then went on to Westminster from 1974--1978, an institution
he appreciates for giving him 'confidence without arrogance'. And for a
final irony, long before he was aware of Adamson, he had a Jungian
analysis with someone who was also an art therapist. Fig. 4 and
5*Self-portrait: Skull Head* by Gwyneth Rowlands, date currently
unknown. Vault and underside. Indian ink, watercolour and varnish on
flint. Courtesy of the Adamson Collection Trust.

*Abandoned Goods* is a film that has been made about The Adamson
Collection. It powerfully illustrates how the meaning of the works is
radically altered by their location. Probably the most extreme example
of this is how the work of J. J. Beegan, on lavatory paper, came to be
the centre of an exhibition in Paris while on loan from the Wellcome
Collection.

Within the film there is a marvellous vignette of a conversation between
two (male) psychiatrists. First psychiatrist: 'We haven\'t got a clue
why they get ill, why they get better or what causes them to relapse.'
Second psychiatrist: 'So we don\'t know anything about ourselves?' First
psychiatrist: 'Yes that\'s probably true.'

I think that the works of The Adamson Collection challenge us as
contemporary psychiatrists. When Adamson was working at Netherne, many
patients were there for 30 years or more. They were subjected to
physical restraint, overcrowding and neglect in many cases. Adamson\'s
work was about respecting the individual as the author of the meaning of
their experience.

Modern psychiatrists try to respect each individual but we have created
the organisation of mental healthcare in such a fragmented fashion: the
patient moves from team to team and sees different mental health
professionals each time. We risk losing sight of the importance of the
long-term, one-to-one relationship where patients feel respected rather
than pushed from pillar to post.

Interestingly Dr O\'Flynn\'s approach in the Tony Hillis Unit does allow
time for each patient to be treated as an individual. So who better to
be Chair of The Adamson Collection?

**Julia Bland** is an honorary consultant psychiatrist for South London
and Maudsley National Health Service Foundation Trust and a consultant
medical psychotherapist at DocHealth, British Medical Association, UK.
Email: <julia.bland@hotmail.co.uk>

<http://www.adamsoncollectiontrust.org/resources/>.
