===================================================================================================================
Mentalising skills in generic mental healthcare settings: can we make our day-to-day interactions more therapeutic?
===================================================================================================================



H. J. Welstead
J. Patrick
T. C. Russ
G. Cooney
C. M. Mulvenna
C. Maclean
A. PolnayCorrespondence to Hannah Welstead (hannahwelstead@nhs.net)
:Date: 2018-6

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Caring for patients with personality disorder is one of the biggest
   challenges in psychiatric work. We investigated whether
   mentalisation-based treatment skills (MBT-S) teaching improves
   clinicians' understanding of mentalising and attitudes towards
   personality disorder. Self-report questionnaires (Knowledge and
   Application of MBT (KAMQ) and Attitudes to Personality Disorder
   (APDQ)) were completed at baseline and after a 2-day MBT-S workshop.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Ninety-two healthcare professionals completed questionnaires before
   and after training. The mean within-participant increase in scores
   from baseline to end-of-programme was 11.6 points (95% CI 10.0–13.3)
   for the KAMQ and 4.0 points (1.8–6.2) for the APDQ.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a4

   MBT-S is a short intervention that is effective in improving
   clinicians' knowledge of personality disorder and mentalisation. That
   attitudes to personality disorder improved overall is encouraging in
   relation to the possibility of deeper learning in staff and,
   ultimately, improved care for patients with personality disorder.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a5

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Personality disorder is of major clinical importance: a third of
psychiatric out-patients and over half of in-patients are estimated to
fulfil the criteria for personality disorder.1 Borderline personality
disorder (BPD) is the most prevalent personality disorder in the
non-forensic setting2\ :sup:`,`\ 3 and is associated with intensive use
of psychiatric services and frequent admissions.4\ :sup:`,`\ 5 Caring
for patients with BPD can be experienced as emotionally
challenging,6\ :sup:`,`\ 7 and these patients are perceived by some
clinicians to be manipulative, attention-seeking or threatening,8 making
it hard to maintain a therapeutic stance towards them. In turn, patients
may experience staff as prejudicial and unhelpful.1 Negative staff
attitudes towards personality disorder are associated with poorer
therapeutic relationships, reduced standards of care and overall poorer
outcomes.7\ :sup:`,`\ 9

.. _sec1-1:

Mentalisation-based treatment
=============================

A central component of BPD is that of a hypersensitive attachment
system.10 At times of stress, patients will more readily seek proximity
with a caregiver. Yet the behaviours that sometimes accompany this
proximity-seeking, such as self-harm or suicidal acts, can seem
irrational and frustrating to the caregiver, who might then lose their
own ability to mentalise, for example, through the development of a
judgemental attitude towards the patient or a belief that they are
undeserving of care.

.. _sec1-2:

Mentalising in the context of generic mental health services
============================================================

A mentalising stance involves having an inquisitive, empathic,
open-minded and ‘not-knowing’ approach to mental states, and an ability
to consider alternative perspectives. Mentalisation-based treatment
(MBT) provides a framework to help healthcare staff understand their
attitudes and feelings, and teaches ways to restore mentalising in both
the professional and the patient. Bateman suggests that effective MBT
skills can be gained through limited additional training and with
moderate levels of supervision.11

.. _sec1-3:

Teaching mentalising skills
===========================

There has been a recent governmental drive to improve systems for staff
support and supervision in managing these patients, and to develop
courses teaching staff to better address patients'
needs.1\ :sup:`,`\ 7\ :sup:`,`\ 12 In that spirit, a 2015 pilot study
found that a brief (4 h) teaching intervention in MBT skills improved
psychiatry core trainees' understanding of mentalising and their
attitudes to personality disorder.13 To test whether this finding is
replicated in a larger sample and whether it generalises to other
professional groups, we conducted a before-and-after comparison of
mental healthcare staff who underwent a 2-day course in MBT skills
(MBT-S). To our knowledge, this is the first published quantitative
evaluation of MBT-S. It addresses an important clinical question:
alongside MBT constituting a specialist treatment, does a mentalising
skills intervention provide an accessible theoretical framework for
staff working in generic mental health settings?

.. _sec2:

Method
======

.. _sec2-1:

Participants
------------

Participants in the MBT-S courses included doctors, nurses,
psychologists and allied healthcare professionals working in various
mental health services within NHS Lothian. Once a clinical team was
identified by the course leaders as potentially able to benefit from the
course, all staff members working in that service were invited to take
part in the training. In some cases, individuals and teams self-selected
to attend the training.

All participants attending the first day of training were eligible to be
included in the study. Participants who only attended the second day
were excluded.

.. _sec2-2:

Intervention
------------

MBT-S is aimed at generic mental health practitioners and is taught in
an accessible format to help staff in difficult day-to-day interactions,
with the aim of fostering more effective therapeutic relationships with
their patients. The teaching is based on a MBT skills package developed
by the Anna Freud Centre14 in conjunction with MBT Scotland. It was
adapted by two of the authors (J.P. and C.M.), and these adaptations
were authorised by the Anna Freud Centre.

The MBT-S training was delivered on two single days separated by a few
weeks to allow participants to practise their skills and complete
allotted tasks. The format was a combination of didactic teaching,
role-play and DVD clips. It included a theoretical framework that
explains attachment theory and how personality disorder and mentalising
difficulties develop, as well as specific MBT techniques designed to
strengthen both the patient's and the professional's ability to
mentalise in stressful situations. The training was delivered in the
Psychotherapy department at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital by Anna Freud
Centre-accredited trainers, including two of the authors (J.P. and
C.M.).

.. _sec2-3:

Aims
----

This study aimed to answer the following questions. (a)Is a 2-day course
in MBT-S effective in improving general mental health practitioners'
understanding of mentalising?(b)What effect, if any, does it have on
their attitudes to personality disorder?(c)How do different professional
groups compare in terms of outcomes?

.. _sec2-4:

Outcomes
--------

Anonymised self-report questionnaires were given to participants by the
study authors immediately prior to commencing the programme and again
directly after the programme ended. Data on the participants'
professional groups were collected from five of the six training
courses.

The main outcome measure was the Knowledge and Application of MBT
Questionnaire (KAMQ; see Appendix 1) (A. Williams, C Cahill, J Patrick,
personal communication, 2015). This 20-item questionnaire asks about
knowledge of MBT (e.g. ‘A key component of mentalising is thinking about
people's attachment relationships’) and how to apply MBT techniques,
using a five-point Likert scale from ‘strongly disagree’ to ‘strongly
agree’. A higher score indicated better knowledge of mentalising
concepts and MBT techniques, with a maximum total score of 100 points.
Work is currently in progress describing the development of this
questionnaire and evaluating its psychometric properties.15

The secondary measure was the Attitudes to Personality Disorder
Questionnaire (APDQ; see Appendix 2), which measures clinicians'
attitudes towards people with personality disorder. This questionnaire
has 37 items that ask about the intensity of a person's feelings (e.g.
‘I feel understanding towards people with personality disorder’) using a
six-point Likert scale, from ‘never’ to ‘always’. A higher score
indicated a more positive attitude, with a maximum score of 222 points.
The APDQ has good internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha = 0.94) and
test–retest reliability (*r* = 0.71).16

.. _sec2-5:

Statistical methods
-------------------

Data were entered into MS Excel by three authors (H.J.W., G.C. and
C.M.M.). They were analysed by author T.C.R. using R for Windows 3.2.3.
Linear regression was used to compute within-person change in score from
baseline to end-of-programme for the KAMQ and APDQ separately. We used
unadjusted models to explore the changes in scores over time and then
constructed models adjusting for job category (whether different groups
had differences in scores at baseline, i.e. had different intercepts)
and an interaction term between job category and time (whether different
professional groups were affected more than others over time, i.e. had
different slopes). Effect sizes (Cohen's D) were calculated in order to
examine the magnitude of difference between pre- and post-scores.

.. _sec2-6:

Missing data
------------

An intention-to-treat analysis was carried out. Missing items at
baseline were assumed to be missing at random, and the mean score among
all responders for that item was entered. For missing end-of-programme
items, baseline values were carried forward.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

Six training courses, with a median 16 participants each (range 12–19),
were carried out between June 2014 and March 2016. Across all six
courses, a total of 92 participants attended the first day of training
and so were eligible for the study. All 92 were enrolled and completed
the baseline questionnaires. Two participants attended the second day of
training only and were excluded from the study.

Across all baseline questionnaires, 77 individual items (1.46% of the
total baseline data) were left blank and imputed (mean) values inserted.

Across all completed end-of-programme questionnaires, 139 individual
items (2.65% of the total end-of-programme data) were left blank. Eight
end-of-programme questionnaires were not completed as the participant
did not attend; this accounted for 8.69% of the total end-of-programme
data. All end-of-programme missing data were treated in the same way,
with their baseline scores being carried forward.

A *post hoc* power calculation suggested that our sample size of 92 at
conventional levels of statistical significance (α = 0.05) would have
80% power to detect a small effect size (0.2).

.. _sec3-1:

Data on professional groups
---------------------------

Data on professional groups were not collected for the first of the
courses (June 2014) but were collected for all subsequent courses. The
74 participants whose job title was known were categorised according to
professional background. The biggest group was nursing, representing 46
(62%) participants. The second largest group was psychology with 12
participants (16%), and the third largest was medical, with eight
participants (11%). Other professional backgrounds included occupational
therapist (*N* = 3), art therapist (*N* = 3), social worker (*N* = 1)
and recreation assistant (*N* = 1).

For the regression analyses using professional groupings, we compared
participants with medical and psychology backgrounds with those with a
nursing background, to allow large enough samples for the analyses. The
justification for combining these two groups was that there are likely
to be parallels in the experience and training of participants with a
medical and psychological background in relation to personality
disorders. The comparison with participants from a nursing background
was thought to be of interest. We excluded the smaller groups.

.. _sec3-2:

Outcomes
--------

.. _sec3-2-1:

Knowledge and Application of MBT Questionnaire
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The mean KAMQ score at baseline was 74.7 points (s.d. = 7.6). There was
a mean within-person increase of 11.6 points (95% CI 10.0–13.3) from
baseline to end-of-programme. The effect size was 1.2, which was
considered a large effect.

.. _sec3-2-2:

Attitudes to Personality Disorder Questionnaire
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The mean APDQ score at baseline was 148.7 points (s.d. = 12.3). There
was a mean within-person increase in APDQ scores from baseline to
end-of-programme of 4.0 points (95% CI 1.8–6.2). The effect size was
0.2, which was considered a small effect. In 23 cases, there was no
change in APDQ scores from baseline to end-of-programme; in 42 cases,
the scores improved, and in 27 cases, APDQ scores worsened (`Fig.
1 <#fig01>`__). Fig. 1Jacobson plot of within-person change in KAMQ and
APDQ scores. Markings above the oblique line indicate an increase in
scores from baseline to end of programme.

Participants with a medical and psychological professional background
had better baseline KAMQ scores when compared jointly with those with a
nursing background, but their APDQ scores increased to a lesser degree
after the teaching compared with nurses (see `Table 1 <#tab01>`__).
Table 1Linear regression model including fixed effects for time and
professional group (doctors and psychologists *v.* nurses) and an
interaction term between job category and timeKAMQAPDQDifference in
baseline scores: doctors and psychologists *v.* nursesDifference in
score increase from baseline to end-of-programme: doctors and
psychologists *v.* nursesDifference in baseline scores: doctors and
psychologists *v.* nursesDifference in score increase from baseline to
end-of-programme: doctors and psychologists *v.* nurses12.1 (CI 6.0 to
18.4)−4.1 (CI −8.1 to −0.3)4.8 (CI −5.1 to 14.8)−4.8 (CI −9.5 to −0.1)

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec4-1:

Interpretation of results
-------------------------

The main finding of our study is that MBT-S training improved mental
healthcare professionals' KAMQ scores to a statistically significant
degree and with a large effect size, suggesting that it is an effective
way of teaching MBT concepts to staff working in generic mental health
settings. Furthermore, this finding is in keeping with recent
qualitative research that demonstrated that nursing staff who
participated in an MBT-S course felt that it provided a ‘straightforward
but empowering skill set’ in working with patients with personality
disorder.17

Attitudes to personality disorder improved overall to a lesser, albeit
still statistically significant, degree. By definition, attitudes are
somewhat engrained in someone's personality and professional way of
working, so they may, of course, be hard to shift. It is interesting
that in 27 cases, the APDQ scores worsened. Although we cannot rule out
the possibility that the intervention might have resulted in a genuine
worsening of a minority of participants' attitudes towards personality
disorder, we think it is plausible that this reflects participants'
increased awareness and acceptance (i.e. mentalisation) of negative
feelings towards patients (c.f. limitations of the study, below).
Alternatively, this may represent an artefact of test–retest
reliability.16

We note the finding that doctors' and psychologists' APDQ scores
improved less than those of nurses. Baseline APDQ scores were higher for
doctors and psychologists, so it may be that we are seeing a ‘ceiling
effect’ – there is less room to improve from a higher baseline. In the
context of previous research,13 we think the salient point is that this
intervention appeared to be effective for professional groups other than
doctors in training.

.. _sec4-2:

Comparison to other literature
------------------------------

The only other study to date to evaluate staff knowledge and application
of MBT following MBT skills training was a pilot study that also
demonstrated an improvement in KAMQ scores with large effect.13

A number of studies have assessed the effect of training on staff
attitudes to personality disorder. In a randomised controlled study,
Clarke *et al*\ 18 compared a psychoeducation programme with an
intervention designed to help mental healthcare staff deal with the
difficult feelings triggered by working with personality disorder
patients (acceptance and commitment training). Participants had
responded to an advertisement and volunteered for the free 2-day
training. Both forms of training were found to significantly improve
APDQ scores immediately post-training compared with baseline (based on
their data, we have calculated Cohen's D to be 0.28 and 0.22
respectively), with no statistical difference between the two. The
improvements were sustained at 6 months follow-up, although there was a
high rate of drop-out resulting in a loss of statistical power.

A study assessing the effects of a 2-h personality disorder awareness
workshop on prison staff (*N* = 26) found no significant difference in
APDQ scores before and 2 months after the training.19

In a systematic review of interventions aimed at improving mental health
nurses' skills, attitude and knowledge related to patients with BPD,
Dickens *et al*\ 20 reviewed eight studies whose interventions ranged
from a 90-min lecture to the complete 18-month intensive dialectical
behaviour therapy training. None of these studies used the APDQ as an
outcome measure. They found that changes in affective outcomes
(including attitudes to personality disorder) were usually associated
with small effect sizes, although changes in cognitive outcomes
(including knowledge) were associated with larger effect sizes.

The outcomes of these studies indicate that these different forms of
intervention have generally resulted in small improvements in
participants' attitudes and emotional responses to personality disorder,
but greater improvements in their knowledge relating to personality
disorder. The ability to compare these outcomes with the present paper
is limited owing to the use of different methodologies and the absence
of studies that directly compare MBT-S with other interventions. Within
this limitation, we note that the size of outcomes from the comparative
literature mirror the results of the present intervention, MBT-S. This
may confer preliminary support for the comparable efficacy of MBT-S.

.. _sec4-3:

Strengths and limitations of the study
--------------------------------------

To our knowledge, this is the largest quantitative study to evaluate the
effects of MBT-S on clinicians. Strengths of the study include the low
study drop-out rate (8.7%) and the intention-to-treat analysis.

One possible limitation is linked to the choice of questionnaire. The
APDQ has no formal validity data, which limits the interpretation of our
results. In addition, the APDQ relies on participants' reporting of
feelings: the reporting of positive feelings is linked to a ‘better’
attitude, while the reporting of negative feelings is linked to a
‘worse’ attitude. Yet for clinicians, being aware of negative feelings
towards patients is likely to be helpful, as it gives them a chance to
consider and reflect on their responses, and makes them less likely to
act on feelings in a counter-therapeutic way.21 A lower APDQ may not,
therefore, indicate a less helpful clinician stance, and *vice versa*.
Work is needed to establish benchmarks for the KAMQ – i.e. what
constitutes a ‘good’ level of knowledge about mentalising.

That the training was delivered by two of the study's authors introduces
the risk of bias. Data entry and analysis were performed by authors who
had no role in the delivery or running of the courses, limiting this
risk. Some individual participants and mental health teams self-selected
to attend the training, which introduces a potential confounding factor.
The internal validity would be improved by having a control group. This
would pose some practical problems, not least the challenge of providing
a convincing 2-day ‘placebo’ training. An alternative would be to have a
practice-as-usual control group, who only complete the outcome measures.

There has so far been no longitudinal follow-up of the study's
participants. Therefore, we cannot comment on whether the effects of
training persist.

.. _sec4-4:

Research and clinical practice implications
-------------------------------------------

Our study suggests that MBT skills teaching is a good way of improving
staff knowledge about mentalising skills and is accessible to different
professional groups. That attitudes to personality disorder improved
overall is also encouraging in relation to the possibility of deeper
learning in staff.

Our findings add weight to the need for a larger study of MBT-S that
uses both staff and patient outcomes and incorporates a control group.
We note the importance of follow-up beyond the intervention to
investigate whether effects persist; accordingly, follow-up is planned.
Future research should aim to establish the potential influence of
teaching mentalising skills on ‘real world’ clinical work, such as
better therapeutic relationships or reductions in self-harming
behaviour. A recent case study assessing the utility of MBT-informed
practice and reflection in the in-patient forensic mental health setting
suggested that it may be helpful.22

Drawing on guidelines on effective team approaches to working with
people with personality disorder,23 it would be prudent, in devising an
intervention to train a clinical team in MBT skills, to ensure that good
principles and structures are in place first. These include making time
for formulation,24 establishing a structured approach to clinical care
(consistency, clarity of staff roles),25 and ensuring that good systems
of staff support, supervision and reflective practice are in place.26

In summary, MBT-S is a short intervention that is effective in improving
clinicians' knowledge of personality disorder and mentalisation. Recent
UK health policies have urged mainstream mental health services to be
more responsive to the needs of individuals with personality
disorder.1\ :sup:`,`\ 7 Our findings suggest that MBT-S might be an
effective way to respond to this need, and one that is accessible to a
range of professional groups.

We thank Anthony Bateman, who kindly commented on the manuscript.

**H. J. Welstead** is an ST6 in Psychotherapy at Lansdowne Psychotherapy
Service, Glasgow, UK; **J. Patrick**, is a Consultant Psychiatrist in
Psychotherapy and Forensic Psychiatry at State Hospital, Carstairs, UK;
**T. C. Russ**, is a Consultant Old Age Psychiatrist, Royal Edinburgh
Hospital, Co-Director of the Alzheimer Scotland Dementia Research
Centre, University of Edinburgh, and an Intermediate Clinical Fellow at
the Centre for Dementia Prevention, University of Edinburgh, UK; **G.
Cooney** is an ST5 in General Adult Psychiatry at the Kershaw Unit,
Gartnavel Royal Hospital, Glasgow, UK; **C. M. Mulvenna** is a
Psychologist at the School of Psychology, University of Glasgow, UK;
**C. Maclean** is a Clinical Psychologist at the Royal Edinburgh
Hospital, UK; and **A. Polnay** is a Consultant Psychiatrist in
Psychotherapy at State Hospital, Carstairs, and an Honorary Fellow at
the Division of Psychiatry, University of Edinburgh, UK

.. _sec8:

Mentalising Skills Training Questionnaire
=========================================

**Thank you for your time. Please answer all of the questions.**

**Have you previously attended a course in Mentalising?** YESNOStrongly
DisagreeDisagreeNeutralAgreeStrongly Agree1. I believe mentalising is
simple to put into practice2. I think mentalising skills have a
theoretical basis3. I think mentalising skills help promote therapeutic
communication with people who have problems like Borderline and
Anti-Social Personality Disorder4. I think providing mentalising skills
requires a specialist psychotherapist5. I believe treating people using
psychological techniques is a poor use of resources6. I think childhood
experiences can have a profound impact on adult relationships7.
Mentalisation therapies do not allow patients to take medication8. A
person saying that a visit in the middle of the night from her partner
was the only way she was reassured he loved her is an example of a
teleological stance9. Breaks in therapy (or from relationships with
people) are not considered important by MBT10. A key component of
mentalising is thinking about people's attachment relationships11. A
therapist using mentalising skills will be expressionless12. Using
mentalising, you can ask questions to promote exploration13. Mentalising
avoids exploring the current therapeutic relationship with the person
you are working with14. In mentalising, professionals do not consider
their own feelings15. The professionals might use a ‘stop and stand’
technique if they get muddled in mentalising16. As mentalising is
straightforward, there is no need for supervision17. Strong
disagreements between professionals about a person's management may be
an indication of non-mentalising18. A partner being certain about what
people are thinking, without checking, is an example of psychic
equivalence19. I feel confident in applying MBT skills into working
practice20. I understand when to apply/use MBT skills

.. _sec7:

Attitudes to Personality Disorder Questionnaire
===============================================

For the purposes of this questionnaire we would like you to think about
your feelings towards patients with personality disorder (PD) overall.
We realise that you may have different mixtures of feelings about
different personality disordered patients you have cared for in the
past. For this questionnaire we would like to you try and average those
out and tell us what your responses are in general towards patients with
personality disorder as a whole.

For each response listed below please indicate the frequency of your
feelings towards people with a personality disorder. Please circle your
choice quickly, rather than spending a long time considering it. We want
to know your honest, gut feelings. NeverSeldomOccasionallyOftenVery
oftenAlways1I like PD people1234562I feel frustrated with PD
people1234563I feel drained by PD people1234564I respect PD
people1234565I feel fondness and affection for PD people1234566I feel
vulnerable in PD people company1234567I have a feeling of closeness with
PD people1234568I feel manipulated or used by PD people1234569I feel
uncomfortable or uneasy with PD people12345610I feel I am wasting my
time with PD people12345611I am excited to work with PD people12345612I
feel pessimistic about PD people12345613I feel resigned about PD
people12345614I admire PD people12345615I feel helpless in relation to
PD people12345616I feel frightened of PD people12345617I feel angry
towards PD people12345618I feel provoked by PD people behaviour12345619I
enjoy spending time with PD people12345620Interacting with PD people
makes me shudder12345621PD people make me feel irritated12345622I feel
warm and caring towards PD people12345623I feel protective towards PD
people12345624I feel oppressed or dominated by PD people12345625I feel
that PD people are alien, other, strange12345626I feel understanding
towards PD people12345627I feel powerless in the presence of PD
people12345628I feel happy and content in PD people company12345629I
feel cautious and careful in the presence of PD people12345630I feel
outmanoeuvered by PD people12345631Caring for PD people makes me feel
satisfied and fulfilled12345632I feel exploited by PD people12345633I
feel patient when caring for PD people12345634I feel able to help PD
people12345635I feel interested in PD people12345636I feel unable to
gain control of the situation with PD people12345637I feel intolerant. I
have difficulty tolerating PD people behaviour123456
