============================
Even more against the stream
============================

Lachlan Campbell
:Date: 2018-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

We all know the law is an ass, but when it comes to defining an age of
consent it is more like a badly assembled chimera. You can become
criminally responsible at the age of 8 or 10, liable to criminal
prosecution from the age of 12, legitimately have sex at the age of 14
while on holiday in Germany, join the Army at 16 and perhaps later die
for your country, vote and purchase alcohol or cigarettes at the age of
18, but not hire a car until the age of 25. What an Alice in Wonderland
world we live in! Logic would suggest a similar age for all of these
activities, perhaps with some allowance for variation justifiable by the
extent of risk involved.

The appropriate legal age of sexual consent is not immediately obvious.
However, as sexual intercourse with a child under the age of 13 amounts
to statutory rape, this might provide a logical starting point.
Incidentally, when I last checked, the lowest age of sexual consent in a
European country was actually 12 (in Vatican City, somewhat ironically).

Of course, in reality, the limited availability of parliamentary time
will make a logical alignment of the various ages for consent a complete
non-starter. So perhaps a better question is ‘Why have an age of consent
at all?’ This allegedly offers protection but in reality mainly just
criminalises a substantial proportion of the juvenile population and
potentially even criminalises an underage victim of a sexual assault.
Surely criminal responsibility should only rest with the perpetrator? In
this scenario, a perpetrator would commit a crime if, and only if, a
sexual act occurred in the absence of consent, and not simply by reason
of some arbitrary age. Can we not trust our children to reach their own
decisions and just make consent, or rather lack of consent, the sole
reason for engaging criminal law?
