---
author:
- Jennifer Smith
date: 2018-12
institute:
- "Consultant Liaison Psychiatrist, Mersey Care NHS Foundation Trust,
  UK; email: <Jennifer.Smith@merseycare.nhs.uk>"
references:
- id: ref1
title: "Against the Stream: lowering the age of sexual consent"
---

I read with unease the Special Article by Philip Graham in the August
2018 edition of the *BJPsych Bulletin*. His counter arguments seem
insufficient. He argues that existing law has had no effect on young
people\'s sexual behaviour over the previous 50 years, but doesn\'t take
into account changing social, cultural and religious attitudes over that
period. He references a survey of American school students who failed to
cite the law as a reason for abstinence. However, conservative beliefs
and promotion of abstinence before marriage are likely to be much more
significant factors in the USA than in the UK. With respect to arguments
about physical and physiological maturity, these seem largely irrelevant
either way as these attributes bear no firm relationship to cognitive
maturity.

Regarding cognitive and emotional maturity, while those aged 14 to 16
may be able to recognise the risks of sexual activity, as he points out
himself, their ability to evaluate the risks can be compromised by other
factors.^1^ Life experience and perspective are also imperative when
making potentially life-changing decisions; an extra two years in
adolescence is a significant amount of time. Graham\'s assertion that
the law is unlikely to be used as a reason to refuse consent seems
speculative, and even if only a small proportion feel empowered that is
surely important.

In my opinion, the most worrying aspect of lowering the age of consent
is the legalisation of adults of any age having sexual relationships
with children under 16. Consider a 50 year old with a 14 year old; it is
obvious that the power dynamic is unhealthy even if the person isn\'t in
a trusted position. Worse still is the risk of greater difficulties in
prosecuting cases of vulnerable children involved in prostitution, sex
abuse rings or forced marriage.

We also have to consider children below 14. It is currently an offence
for a person (A) aged 18 or over to intentionally engage in sexual
touching of a child under 16. Where the child is aged 13 to 15, the
prosecution must prove that A did not reasonably believe that he was 16
or over (Sexual Offences Act 2003). If the age of consent was 14,
presumably prosecutors would have to prove that A did not reasonably
believe that the child was 14 or over. Logically, that would likely lead
to claims that people thought children under 14 were at or above the age
of consent.

To address Graham\'s arguments in favour of lowering the age of consent,
he himself points out that where both parties are below the age of
consent there is little likelihood of prosecution. There is also no
current reason that 14- to 16-year-olds cannot access sexual health
services, as is made clear by the National Health Service
(<https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/sexual-health/>). Similarly, sex
education is already compulsory from the age of 11
(<https://www.gov.uk/national-curriculum/other-compulsory-subjects>).

In conclusion, I see no compelling argument to lower the age of consent;
we should instead be taking inspiration from other countries like France
that are strengthening their existing inadequate laws.
