---
abstract: |
  # Aims and method {#sec_a1}

  To systematically review the literature on barriers to the use of
  clozapine and identify any interventions for optimizing clozapine use
  in treatment-resistant schizophrenia. Journal databases were searched
  from 1972 to March 2018. The following search terms were used:
  treatment-resistant schizophrenia, clozapine, barriers, use,
  prescription rates, implementation, clozaril and prescribing
  practices. Following a review of the literature, 15 papers were
  included in the review.

  # Results {#sec_a2}

  The major barriers that were identified included mandatory blood
  testing, fear of serious side-effects and lack of adherence by the
  patients, difficulty in identifying suitable patients, service
  fragmentation, and inadequate training in or exposure to using
  clozapine.

  # Clinical implications {#sec_a3}

  In view of consistent evidence across the studies on inadequate
  knowledge and skills as a significant barrier, we suggest that a
  certification requiring competence in initiating and managing
  side-effects of clozapine becomes a mandatory requirement in training
  programmes.

  # Declarations of interest {#sec_a4}

  None.
author:
- Saeed Farooq
- Abid Choudry
- Dan Cohen
- Farooq Naeem
- Muhammad AyubCorrespondence to Saeed Farooq (<Sfarooqlrh@yahoo.com>)
date: 2019-2
institute:
- 1Keele University, UK
- 2Birmingham Women\'s and Children\'s NHS Foundation Trust, UK
- 3Mental Health Organization North-Holland North Heerhugowaard, The
  Netherlands
- 4Queen\'s University, Kingston, Canada
references:
- id: ref1
- id: ref2
- id: ref3
- id: ref4
- id: ref5
- id: ref6
- id: ref7
- id: ref8
- id: ref9
- id: ref10
- id: ref11
- id: ref12
- id: ref13
- id: ref14
- id: ref15
- id: ref16
- id: ref17
- id: ref18
- id: ref19
- id: ref20
- id: ref21
- id: ref22
- id: ref23
- id: ref24
- id: ref25
- id: ref26
- id: ref27
- id: ref28
- id: ref29
- id: ref30
- id: ref31
- id: ref32
- id: ref33
title: "Barriers to using clozapine in treatment-resistant
  schizophrenia: systematic review"
---

# Clozapine use in schizophrenia {#sec1}

Clozapine is the only medication licensed for treatment-resistant
schizophrenia (TRS), which affects about one-third of those suffering
from the disorder. Recently, there has been increased interest in
redefining the role of clozapine in the treatment of schizophrenia in
view of the evidence of superior efficacy and safety, despite serious
side-effects.^1^ Meta-analyses have demonstrated that clozapine is
significantly better at treating symptoms than first-generation
antipsychotics and some (but not all) second-generation
antipsychotics.^2^ This superior efficacy was also supported by two
large, independently funded studies.^3^^,^^4^ Clozapine also appears to
have broader effects, with evidence for efficacy in suicidality,
aggression and substance misuse.^1^ In the USA, clozapine is approved by
the Food and Drug Administration for the management of suicidality in
people with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. In addition,
clozapine has been shown to have anti-aggressive properties^5^ and may
also be effective in diminishing substance misuse.^6^^,^^7^ Tiihonen *et
al*^7^ found, using a large database, that that people regularly taking
clozapine had the lowest risk of premature mortality compared with both
those on other antipsychotics and those not taking regular medication,
despite the fact that the drug is associated with a number of serious
adverse side-effects.^7^

# Potential barriers and delays in clozapine use {#sec2}

Despite the evidence of superior efficacy and recommendations by
different treatment guidelines, the drug is grossly underutilised.^8^
Studies based on prescription patterns in routine practice almost
universally show lower prescriptions of clozapine in individuals with
Schizophrenia, even after taking into account potential barriers such as
inadequate service provision.^9^ There is also substantial evidence that
the use of clozapine is delayed for several years, which may result in
less than optimal efficacy for the drug. A study by Howes *et al*^10^
showed that the mean theoretical delay from meeting the National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) criteria for TRS and
starting clozapine was about 4 years. In New Zealand the theoretical
delay was almost 10 years.^11^ In the USA, only six states reported that
more than 10% of Medicaid-eligible patients with schizophrenia had
received a prescription of clozapine.^12^

The reasons for such suboptimal use of clozapine remain obscure, and may
include several factors related to patients, carers and clinicians.
These may include the perception of the drug as a dangerous medicine^1^
or difficulties associated with initiating and maintaining the
treatment. The life-threatening side-effects of clozapine and mandatory
requirement for white blood cell (WBC) counts may partly account for the
less than optimal use of the drug in clinical practice. Experience in
using clozapine may be an important factor. A study by Nielsen *et
al*^13^ of the attitudes and knowledge of 137 psychiatrists in Denmark,
including 100 consultant psychiatrists, revealed that some had never
prescribed clozapine despite having worked for over 5 years. The
barriers to effective use of clozapine have not been reviewed
systematically.

We therefore aimed to review the literature on barriers to the effective
use of clozapine in clinical practice for TRS. We also wanted to
identify any interventions that could potentially improve the use of
clozapine. This systematic review aimed to answer the following
questions. •What barriers or factors have been identified that prevent
the optimal use of clozapine in TRS, based on the current
literature?•What strategies have been explored to promote the effective
use of clozapine in TRS?•What is the methodological quality of the
evidence that is available exploring the barriers to optimal use of
clozapine?

# Method {#sec3}

We followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement guidelines.^14^ A protocol defining the
key methodological parameters was developed prior to the literature
search and was registered at the International Prospective Register of
Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO).^15^

## Search strategy {#sec3-1}

Electronic databases (PsycINFO, Medline, PubMed, AMED, CINHAL and
EMBASE) from 1972 onwards were searched, followed by a search of the
reference lists of the full texts of the retrieved articles for further
relevant articles. The following search terms were used:
treatment-resistant schizophrenia, clozapine, barriers, use,
prescription rates, implementation, clozaril and prescribing practices.
These keywords were searched for in the title, keywords, or abstract.
Truncations and related terms were used as appropriate based on
individual database procedures. The search was last updated in March
2018.

All study types (intervention, observational and descriptive) were
included in the review if the following inclusion criteria were met.
•Adult populations with a diagnosis of TRS for whatever indication.
Clozapine has been used for other diagnoses; however, we limited our
present review to TRS.•Included primary research information on the
outcome variables, i.e. barriers or factors associated with low use or
implementation strategies.•Published between 1972 and 2018.

Studies that examined the pattern of use of clozapine, the rate of
prescriptions, or its efficacy and effectiveness were excluded, unless
these provided data on the barriers or factors associated with low or
high use of clozapine.

There is no agreed definition of the 'optimal use' of clozapine.
However, a number of studies^9^^--^^11^^,^^16^ indicate that the optimal
use is determined on the basis of time since the start of the first
antipsychotics (considering that clozapine is used after failure to
respond to two antipsychotics) and the prevalence of clozapine
prescription relative to total antipsychotic prescriptions (based on
fact that about 30% of those suffering from schizophrenia develop TRS).
These provide useful guidance but do not take into practical factors
such as patient willingness to start clozapine or non-availability, or
the cost of clozapine in low- and middle-income country settings. We
used these parameters as a broad guideline for our review, but we will
also report clozapine use and how it is defined as adequate or optimal
by different studies.

## Data extraction {#sec3-2}

The screening for searches examining the relevant abstracts, examination
of full-text articles and data extraction were done by two reviewers
independently, as outlined in the protocol.^15^ Any disagreements were
resolved by consensus and, where appropriate, by consultation with the
third reviewer. A data extraction sheet was developed based on the
pre-specified outcomes and relevant data were extracted on to this
sheet. We planned a meta-analysis of primary and secondary outcomes, but
it was not possible to statistically summarise the data owing to the
heterogeneity of studies, lack of adequate data and low quality of
studies. We instead provide a descriptive summary of main findings.

# Results {#sec4}

The electronic searches returned 253 relevant abstracts and titles; no
further articles were identified from the other sources. We screened the
titles and abstracts, and excluded any studies that were not directly
relevant to the objectives of the review. After screening these titles
and abstracts and removal of duplicates, we further examined 47
full-text papers. Finally, we included 15 papers in the review. The
details of the search yield and reasons for excluding full-text articles
are provided in [Fig. 1](#fig01){ref-type="fig"}. Fig. 1Summary of the
abstracts reviewed to identify papers relevant for the review.

## Characteristics of included studies {#sec4-1}

The studies were conducted in a number of different populations,
settings and periods, and also used diverse methodologies. Owing to the
diverse methodologies and number of variables examined across studies,
it was inappropriate to pool the data to produce a statistical summary.
We therefore describe the main findings and produce a narrative summary
of results.

Fifteen studies met the inclusion criteria. Twelve of these studies
focused on barriers or factors associated with clozapine use. These
comprised surveys (*n* = 5), case note reviews (*n* = 4), and
semi/structured interviews and consultations with stakeholders
(*n* = 3). The majority of these studies (*n* = 8) involved eliciting
views from clinicians, particularly consultant psychiatrists. Three
studies described interventions or quality improvement initiatives to
facilitate the use of clozapine. These are described separately.

In survey-based studies, response rates varied from 8.8 to 76%. The mean
response rate from the papers which had figures available (*n* = 5) was
52.3%. The total number of males from the studies providing this
information (*n* = 6) was 608, and the number of females was 402. The
populations in these studies comprised 902 psychiatrists, 68 trainees,
49 pharmacy staff and 15 nursing staff or staff in mental health
leadership positions. One database study reviewed the Medicaid patients
on antipsychotic medication using records of 629 800 patients in the
analysis.

In the three intervention studies, 158 participants were involved. One
study did not provide details of sample size.

The characteristics of included studies are shown in [Table
1](#tab01){ref-type="table"}. Table 1Characteristic of included
studiesAuthor/yearPopulationMethod/designSample characteristics and
response rates (ReR)1. Gees *et al* (2013)All staff at South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation TrustSurvey*n* = 144  
Trainee doctors 42% *n* = 60  
Consultants 14% *n* = 20  
Pharmacy staff 16% *n* = 232. Cirulli (2005)^24^Consultant psychiatrists
working in child and adolescent mental health services in-patient
unitSurvey*n* = 83  
ReR 59 (71%)3. Najim *et al* (2013)^20^Out-patients on clozapine in UK
community populationRetrospective case note review*n* = 42  
ReR 100%  
  
4. Swinton & Ahmed (1999)^19^In-patients in high-secure hospital --
patients, consultants, nursesCase note review and survey of patients and
staff*n* = 95  
ReR 72 (76%)5. Grover *et al* (2015)^21^Patients initiated on clozapine
in North India tertiary hospital (Jan 2006--June 2014)Retrospective
record review*n* = 200 patients6. Tungaraza & Farooq
(2015)^22^PsychiatristsSurvey*n* = 2771  
ReR 243 (8.8%)7. Apiquian *et al*
(2004)^23^PsychiatristsSurvey*n* = 200  
ReR - 148 (74%)8. Goren *et al* (2016)^26^Key informants (Psychiatrists,
clinical pharmacists, advanced practice nurses) involved in the
clozapine process at US Department of Veteran Affairs with high and low
utilization of clozapineSemi structured telephone interviews*n* = 70
participants  
Psychiatrist 31.4%  
Pharmacy staff 37.1%  
Mental health leadership 15.7%  
Advanced practice nurse 5.7%  
Other 10%9. Kelly *et al* (2015)^18^Psychiatry residents, fellows, and
psychiatrists in the state of MarylandSurvey with each question rated
using Likert scale: 1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree*n* = 860  
ReR 277 (32%)10. Stroup *et al* (2014)^25^Patients with schizophrenia
spectrum disorder, using Medicaid data from 2001 to 2005, who used
clozapine or standard antipsychotic medication in one or more treatment
episodesComparison between standard antipsychotic and clozapine use,
using statistical analysis*n* = Patients on clozapine (*n* = 15 524)  
Patients on other antipsychotics (*n* = 614 285)11. Nielson *et al*
(2009)^13^Psychiatrists from six counties in Denmark; three highest and
three lowest prescription rates of clozapineStructured
interview*n* = 100  
72 Consultant psychiatrists  
20 psychiatrists  
8 trainee psychiatrists12. Kelly *et al* (2018)^27^Clinicians and
researchers identified by the National Association of State Mental
Health Program DirectorsExpert opinion, literature review and focus
group11 Psychiatrists and researchers; however, no specific details
givenIntervention studies13. Carruthers *et al* (2016)^28^Academics and
clinicians in clozapine prescribing and patients with
treatment-resistant schizophrenia in receipt of Medicaid in New
YorkEducational initiative utilizing web-based modules to educate
consumers and carers as well as clinicians regarding clozapine useNo
sample details provided14. Nielson *et al* (2012)^13^Psychiatric
out-patients on treatment with clozapine in DenmarkPoint-of-care (POC)
testing using capillary sampling *v.* venous sampling85 participants15.
Bogers *et al* (2015)^29^Patients established on clozapineRandomised
cross-over trial design for POC testing using capillary sampling *v.*
venous sampling73 patients were included in this study; three dropped
out before completion

### Barriers to the use of clozapine in TRS {#sec4-1-1}

It was possible to classify the barriers in three groups with some
overlap: •barriers related to patients and the drug;•clinician-related
barriers;•health system-related factors.

### Patient- and drug-related barriers {#sec4-1-2}

Five studies commented on patient-related factors affecting the use of
clozapine in TRS. The complete refusal of blood tests was considered a
major barrier, with patients delaying the initiating of clozapine (56%,
*n* = 72).^17^ This was replicated by Kelly *et al*,^18^ who surveyed
psychiatrists in Maryland, USA, and found that the main barrier, ranked
highest on the Likert scale (1--5), was patient non-adherence with blood
work (3.7 ± 1.1) and the burden of blood work on the patient
(3.6 ± 1.2).^18^ In a survey of patients, Swinton and Ahmed (1999)^19^
reported that almost two-thirds of participants did not want the burden
of regular blood tests. This was replicated in a survey of staff, with
65% (*n* = 83) reporting that patients did not want the burden of
regular blood tests and that frequent blood tests were considered a
major barrier to initiating clozapine.^17^

Concerns about tolerating clozapine were considered to be fairly or very
frequently related to delays in clozapine use by 46% (*n* = 59) of
clinical staff.^17^ Complications related to clozapine, such as
constipation, hypersalivation, myocarditis and neutropenia, can inhibit
clozapine use; a survey of clinical staff found that 37% (*n* = 76) felt
that these potential medical complications frequently restricted the use
of clozapine.^17^

Najim *et al*^20^ reviewed 42 case notes of patients on clozapine and
found that there were significant delays in commencing clozapine in
patients aged over 30.^20^ This was replicated by Grover *et al*,^21^
who carried out a case note review on 200 in-patients from a tertiary
care centre in North India. A greater delay in initiating clozapine was
noted in the older age group (over 20) compared with those under 20
(mean 0.91 *v.* 2.05; s.d. 1.05 *v.* 1.86).^21^ In addition, they found
a significant delay in patients prescribed polypharmacy compared with
non-polypharmacy (mean 2.58 *v.* 1.68; s.d. 2.06 *v.* 1.67), and delays
were also associated with being in an urban locality (mean 2.11 *v.*
1.37; s.d. 1.98 *v.* 1.11).^21^

### Clinician-related factors {#sec4-1-3}

Inadequate knowledge of or experience in clozapine use. Fifty-two per
cent (*n* = 75) of staff surveyed in South London Maudsley NHS
Foundation Trust^17^ reported not being familiar with initiation of
clozapine. In another large survey, 74% (*n* = 136 total 184) of
psychiatrists working in the UK also highlighted a lack of knowledge or
experience amongst consultants, leading to delays.^22^ A significant
number of consultants (42%; *n* = 96) had fewer than five patients on
clozapine, despite half of these consultants working in trusts with a
dedicated clozapine service and having been in-post for 7 years.^22^
This was replicated by Nielson *et al* (2009), who found that 48% of
psychiatrists surveyed had treatment responsibility for fewer than five
patients treated with clozapine.^13^ In Mexico, Apiquian *et al*^23^
reported that fewer than half of the 200 surveyed psychiatrists in
Mexico knew the recommended average dose of clozapine.^23^

The fear of side-effects or lack of knowledge in dealing with these were
considered to be serious hurdles in initiating clozapine. Sixty per cent
(*n* = 70) of practitioners surveyed in South London and Maudsley NHS
Foundation Trust raised concerns about tolerability and side-effects
that delayed the initiation of clozapine.^17^ Nielson *et al*^13^
reported that in terms of side-effects and knowledge, only 33%
(*n* = 33) knew that the risk of agranulocytosis was highest in the
first 6 months and 23% (*n* = 23) overestimated this risk of
agranulocytosis.^13^

The majority of the clinicians in a survey (78%; *n* = 105) said they
would support clozapine initiation after a trial of two
antipsychotics.^17^ However, Nielson *et al* (2009) found that only
44.9% (*n* = 44) would go to clozapine after two antipsychotics,^13^ and
about a third 30.6% (*n* = 30)^13^ of clinicians in one survey and 14%
(*n* = 19) in another would wait until three adequate trials of
antipsychotics prior to initiating clozapine, while 18.4% (*n* = 19)^13^
would wait until more than three failed adequate trials of
antipsychotics. In another survey, 28% (*n* = 51, total 184) of
consultants said they would trial at least another antipsychotic before
going to clozapine after a failed trial of two antipsychotics,^22^ and
40.5% (*n* = 92) preferred to use several other antipsychotics before
clozapine.^19^ Nielson *et al*^13^ found that 64.7% of psychiatrists
surveyed (*n* = 64) would rather combine two antipsychotics than
prescribe clozapine, and 15.2% (*n* = 15) would augment with a mood
stabiliser before using clozapine in a non-schizoaffective state.^13^

Difficulty in identifying suitable patients and unclear diagnosis were
highlighted by 12% of consultant psychiatrists (*n* = 22) in a survey
conducted by Tungaraza & Farooq.^22^ Although consultants felt they had
good exposure to clozapine as trainees, 36.2% (*n* = 83) felt it was not
easy to identify suitable patients for clozapine.^22^

#### Need for intense monitoring {#sec4-1-3-1}

Forty-two per cent (*n* = 77) of psychiatrists in a UK-wide survey felt
it was complex and cumbersome to initiate and mange clozapine, which led
to delays in starting the drug.^22^ In a survey of consultants based in
child and adolescent psychiatry, 29% (*n* = 17) reported that they did
not prescribe clozapine owing to the need for intense monitoring.^24^
Tungaraza & Farooq^22^ found that 74% (*n* = 136) of clinicians felt
there were delays owing to refusal of patients to have blood tests.^22^

#### Serious side-effects {#sec4-1-3-2}

In a survey of consultant psychiatrists, 105 out of 231 respondents
(45.5%) acknowledged that their patients experienced untoward
side-effects while on clozapine, which was considered to be major factor
in delaying clozapine use.^22^

Staff in child and adolescent services highlighted unfamiliarity with
clozapine (41%; *n* = 4) and side-effects (41%; *n* = 4)^24^ as major
factors in delaying clozapine initiation. Swinton & Ahmed^19^ reported
that 22% (*n* = 7) of the clinical staff in their study believed that
the risks associated with clozapine outweighed the benefits of starting
clozapine.^19^

#### Perception that patients may not adhere to treatment {#sec4-1-3-3}

Clinical staff surveyed at a high-secure hospital reported likely poor
adherence by the patients as a reason for not prescribing clozapine in
53% of cases (*n* = 17).^19^ Other clinical staff reported that patients
were likely to refuse blood tests 43% (*n* = 13).^19^ Tungaraza &
Farooq^22^ reported that 54% (*n* = 99) of practicing psychiatrists felt
that likely poor adherence to the drug was a reason for delays.^22^

## Health system-related barriers {#sec4-2}

Studies based on clinician surveys identified the following health
system-related barriers. (a)Difficulties in obtaining baseline bloods
and the time taken to register patients for blood monitoring were
considered as major factors in initiating clozapine by 22% (*n* = 26)
clinicians.^17^(b)Staff resources, including inadequate staff to monitor
clozapine initiation, were a major factor for 22% (*n* = 26) of
clinicians in delaying clozapine initiation.^17^(c)The need for
admission as required by some health providers to initiate clozapine and
a shortage of beds were highlighted by 20% (*n* = 23) of clinical
staff.^17^ In another survey, 32% (*n* = 40) of clinical staff felt that
a lack of resources in the home treatment team led to frequent delays in
commencing clozapine.^17^(d)Service fragmentation owing to separate
teams providing community and in-patient services and a lack of
community support were cited as major barriers (*n* = 39) by clinicians
in one study.^22^ A survey of staff at Ashworth high-secure hospital
also revealed that clinicians felt that a lack of resources was
responsible for delays or non-prescription of clozapine in 16% (*n* = 5)
of cases.^19^

Stroup *et al*^25^ conducted a retrospective study using Medicaid claims
data from 45 states in the USA. It was found that among 629 809 unique
antipsychotic treatment episodes, 79 934 showed service use patterns
consistent with treatment resistance. Clozapine accounted for 2.5% of
starts of antipsychotic medication among patients in the overall sample,
and 5.5% of starts among patients with treatment resistance. Clozapine
initiation was significantly associated with male sex, younger age,
White ethnicity, more frequent out-patient service use for
schizophrenia, and greater prior-year hospital use for mental
health.^25^ Patients residing in counties with historically high
clozapine usage were almost twice as likely to start clozapine as
patients residing in historically low-use counties (adjusted odds ratio
(AOR) 2.03; CI 1.75--2.30).^25^ A high concentration of psychiatrists
(\>15 per 100 000 residents) was also associated with a greater
likelihood of clozapine initiation (AOR 1.17; CI 1.03--1.33).^25^
However, there were no significant effects of population density or
measures of poverty or income on clozapine initiation.

Goren *et al*^26^ carried out 70 semi-structured interviews with
stakeholders such as psychiatrists, mental health nurses, and pharmacy
and laboratory staff at five sites with high clozapine use and five
low-utilization sites. Low utilization of clozapine was associated with
a lack of champions to support the clozapine process. Some of the
barriers highlighted included the complex and time-consuming
paperwork.^26^ Lack of transport, particularly for rural patients,
inability by disorganised patients to navigate public transport,
paranoia around travelling by public transport and the cost of
transportation^26^ were reported as major barriers. Patients living far
away from clinics were not considered suitable for clozapine owing to
their inability to attend for regular blood tests.^26^

Kelly *et al*^18^ elicited the views of psychiatrists using an anonymous
survey questionnaire. The questionnaire consisted of 56 questions to be
scored on a five-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly
agree) regarding the barriers related to clozapine, and the physician\'s
interest and willingness to use point-of-care (POC) devices. The survey
was sent to 860 psychiatrists, of whom 277 (32%) responded. Among the 28
listed barriers (clinical, nonclinical, and side-effects) to more
frequent use of clozapine, the two highest ranking barriers were: (a)
the likely non-adherence of patients to blood work (score 3.7 ± 1.1) and
(b) the burden of ongoing blood monitoring for the patient (score
3.6 ± 1.2). Among nine potential solutions for increasing the use of
clozapine, the use of POC devices was the highest ranked. The physicians
agreed that a POC device would improve care and that it would increase
their clozapine use with a mean score of 3.9 ± 1.0.^18^

The National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors
(NASMHPD) in in the USA formed a working group to identify barriers to
clozapine underutilization and interventions to overcome these at a
national level.^27^ The initial work group included 11 clinicians and
researchers and consulted a wide range of stakeholders and existing
literature on the subject. They identified 14 major barriers, which
included all the factors mentioned above, as well as benign ethnic
neutropenia (BEN), which occurs among people of African or Middle
Eastern ancestry. The lack of a definition for BEN in product labelling
and clear guidance on monitoring requirements may be responsible for the
low use of clozapine in this population. A lack of standardised
materials for shared decision-making, complex protocols for treatment
monitoring and management of side-effects, formulary issues and costs of
ancillary services such as transportation and service coordination were
also identified as barriers ([Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"}).^27^
Box 1Barriers to clozapine use and strategies to overcome theseBarriers
to clozapine usePatient/drug-related barriers •Refusal of blood
tests^17^^--^^19^•Tolerating clozapine and
side-effects^17^•Age \> 20^19^^,^^20^•Patients prescribed
polypharmacy^21^•Benign ethnic neutropenia^27^Clinician-related barriers
•Inadequate knowledge of or experience in clozapine
use^17^^,^^22^^--^^24^•Fear of side-effects for patient/lack of
knowledge about clozapine
side-effects^13^^,^^17^^,^^19^^,^^22^^,^^24^•Lack of adherence to
guidance^13^^,^^17^^,^^22^•Difficulty identifying suitable patients and
unclear diagnoses^22^•Need for intense monitoring^22^^,^^24^•Perception
that patients may not comply with treatment^19^^,^^22^Health
system-related barriers •Not enough resources, including not enough
staff resources to monitor clozapine inititation^17^•Shortage of
beds^17^•Service fragmentation^21^•Lack of champions to support the
clozapine process^26^•Complex and time-consuming paperwork^26^•Lack of
standardised shared decision-making^27^•Complex protocols for treatment
monitoring^27^•Formulary issues and costs of ancillary services such as
transport and service coordination^27^Strategies to overcome barriers to
clozapine use •Use of POC devices^29^•Support for prescribers and
decision-aid tool for consumers grounded in principles of shared
decision-making^27^•Internet-based educational programmes to provide
information for consumers, family members and clincians^27^

### Interventions to overcome the barriers {#sec4-2-1}

Three studies described interventions that could help to overcome the
barriers identified above. These included a training initiative^28^ and
two studies describing the use of POC devices.^28^^,^^29^ As these
studies employed different methodologies and interventions, the results
are briefly summarised here.

Bogers *et al*^29^ compared a POC device using capillary blood sampling
with a finger prick that provided WBC counts with conventional venous
sampling. An open-label randomised cross-over trial design was used to
compare the two procedures. The main outcome measure was the subjective
experience of various aspects of blood sampling, as measured by a visual
analogue scale (VAS). A consistent pattern in favour of capillary blood
sampling was found (total perceived burden blood sampling: capillary
5.79 *v.* venous 13.4 (*P* \< 0.001)). Both patients and practitioners
showed preferences for the capillary blood sampling.^29^

Similarly, Nielsen *et al*^30^ evaluated a POC using a randomised
cross-over trial design. Patients were randomised to one of two blood
monitoring sequences. The first group underwent venous sampling followed
by capillary sampling in a twice-repeated procedure
(venous--capillary--venous--capillary); in the other, the sequence was
reversed (capillary--venous--capillary--venous). Eighty-five patients
were included in the study using a VAS; patients indicated that they
found capillary blood monitoring less painful than venous sampling (VAS
ratings: 0.55 cm 25--75th percentiles: 0.1--1.4 cm *v.*. 1.75 cm
25--75th percentiles: 0.7--2.6, *P* \< 0.001). They also felt less
inconvenienced by the POC method than by traditional blood sampling.^30^

Carruthers *et al*^28^ described an educational intervention to promote
the evidence-based use of clozapine in New York,^28^ consisting of
support for the prescriber and a decision aid tool for consumers
grounded in the principle of shared decision-making. A manual for
clinicians was developed and academics presented a series of state-wide
grand rounds presentations to provide information on clozapine
prescribing. Internet-based educational programmes and a telephone
consultation service by experts to support the prescribers were also
provided. A key component of the programme was testimonials from
patients, who described personal benefits alongside the challenges.^28^
The programme was evaluated using Medicaid data on the pattern of new
antipsychotic start-ups. The number of new starts amongst all
antipsychotic trials increased from 1.5% in 2009 to 2.1% 2013.^28^ The
greatest change was seen in state-operated facilities, where the rate of
clozapine new starts per quarter increased compared with all new
antipsychotic starts. The change in the rate of clozapine new starts in
these facilities was three times higher than in other settings (3.77%
*v.* 1.13%).^28^

### Quality assessment of included studies {#sec4-2-2}

The published protocol outlined separate quality assessments for
qualitative and quantitative studies, using appropriate checklists for
different study designs.^15^ However, after examining the included
studies, it was felt that only two trials^29^^,^^30^ could be assessed
for quality using the risk of bias tool, as per protocol. These
randomised cross-over trials compared capillary blood sampling using a
POC device with traditional venous blood sampling. Patients were
randomised to two sequences, starting with either capillary or venous
blood sampling, followed by a repeated sequence. Neither of these trials
provided details of how participants were randomly allocated to the two
sequences, and the outcome assessments did not appear to have been done
by blind assessors. Both studies had high risk of bias.

Other studies did not use appropriate study designs, which could be
evaluated using the checklists we proposed in the protocol for
observational studies. These studies were mostly surveys and provided
little information on how the samples were selected and the validity or
reliability of the questionnaires/instruments used, or any information
on non-responders. All these studies were considered to be of low
quality.

# Discussion {#sec5}

This was the first systematic review aiming to examine the barriers to
effective use of clozapine. The following major barriers or factors
related were identified: the mandatory blood testing requirement; fear
of serious side-effects, lack of familiarity in use of clozapine; lack
of clarity in diagnosis and difficulty in identifying suitable patients;
service fragmentation; and lack of adequate training in or exposure to
using clozapine. Only one educational intervention was available that
showed some effect on clozapine prescription rate. POC testing using
capillary blood was more acceptable to patients than traditional blood
sampling, being less painful and less time consuming, but no studies
tested whether it increased the uptake of clozapine.

A conservative estimate suggests that TRS adds more than \$34 billion in
annual direct medical costs in the USA.^31^ In the UK, NICE has included
the extent and the degree of clozapine use in the quality criteria for
commissioners when commissioning services for mental health.^32^
However, initiatives to overcome this major service need are rare.

Almost all studies highlighted routine blood monitoring as the
top-ranking barrier to initiating and maintaining clozapine treatment.
Two randomised cross-over trials showed that blood testing using a
simple finger prick that was undertaken as part of routine assessment by
psychiatric staff, either in the patient\'s home or at a psychiatric
out-patient clinic, was feasible and convenient for patients. However,
none of these trials looked at the effect of POC testing on prescription
rates. The POC devices will also need to comply with regulatory
requirements for monitoring blood counts.

It appears that there is a common perception amongst clinicians that
clozapine is a dangerous drug, and that patients will not adhere to it
or would not like to consider it as a treatment option. The findings in
this review suggest that these negative beliefs about clozapine result
from a lack of experience and knowledge, owing to the current limited
use of clozapine. A self-perpetuating cycle can ensue, as practitioners
do not see the benefits of clozapine, and thus do not develop confidence
in its use.^1^ This is consistent with the study by Stroup *et al* which
showed that higher clozapine initiation was significantly associated
with patients residing in areas associated with historically high
clozapine usage and higher concentrations of psychiatrists (\>15 per
100 000 population).^25^

The NASMHPD published 36 recommendations on its website for expanding
the use of clozapine.^33^ One important recommendation included
improving residency trainee standards. Considering the disease burden
resulting from TRS and the central role of clozapine in its treatment,
we suggest that training in the use of clozapine becomes a mandatory
requirement for all psychiatry residence and continuing professional
development programmes. A certification requiring competence in
initiating, maintaining and managing side-effects of clozapine is
required, based on clinical experience, similar to the certification
that is now required for electroconvulsive therapy.

The use of clozapine is alarmingly low in many developing countries. In
Pakistan, for example, about 1300 patients were receiving clozapine as
recorded in the Clozaril Patient Monitoring System. Although generic
clozapine has become available recently, numbers are still very low,
considering that the country has a population of about 200 million (R.
U. Rahman, personal communication, 2016; data available from the authors
on request). To put this prescription rate into perspective, The
Netherlands, with a population of about 17 million, has over 12000
patients on clozapine, which is 0.07% of the population
(<https://www.gipdatabank.nl/>). This means that, at current rates of
use, there is a more than 100-fold difference between the two countries.
This situation requires a public health intervention to improve access
to clozapine in certain countries.

The major limitation of the review was the low quality of the included
studies. Studies were based on surveys, which are prone to a number of
biases, including selection bias of respondents, and lacked control
groups. The low numbers of studies from a few countries also limit the
generalisation of results. None of the studies defined the optimal use
of clozapine. The lack of patient perspectives is striking, considering
that a number of studies suggested patient-related factors as major
barriers.

Despite these limitations, this systematic review indicates that there
is broad agreement on the major barriers that hinder the effective use
of clozapine. There is certainly a need to improve the methodological
quality of studies and the way these are reported, but the present study
identifies gaps in clinical practice and health services that can be
addressed in intervention studies. Use of POC devices, educational
interventions targeting clinicians and shared decision-making involving
patients need to be evaluated using controlled study designs. Future
research should be guided by the implementation science methods and
behaviour change principles that have successfully been used in
implementing and evaluating evidence-based interventions in medicine.

# About the authors {#sec6}

**Saeed Farooq** is a clinical senior lecturer at the Research Institute
for Primary Care & Health Sciences, Keele University, a visiting
professor at the University of Chester and Honorary Consultant
Psychiatrist, Midlands Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Abid
Choudry** is an ST6 at Forward Thinking Birmingham, Birmingham Women\'s
and Children\'s NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Dan Cohen** is a
psychiatrist at the Department of Community Mental Health, Mental Health
Organization North-Holland NorthHeerhugowaard, The Netherlands. **Farooq
Naeem** is a professor at the University of Toronto and a staff
psychiatrist at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Canada. **Muhammad Ayub** is a professor and Chair of the Division of
Developmental Disabilities at the Department of Psychiatry, Queen\'s
University, Kingston, Canada.
