==================================
Reforming care without bureaucracy
==================================
----------------------------------------
: Commentary on… Care Programme Approach
----------------------------------------



Peter Tyrer

:Correspondence: Peter Tyrer (p.tyrer@imperial.ac.uk) [1]_

:date: 2019-6

:Abstract:
   The Care Programme Approach was a valiant attempt to improve the
   aftercare of people with severe mental illness after discharge from
   hospital. It was introduced as a response to a scandal, not an
   advance in knowledge, and has always suffered by being a reaction to
   events rather than a trailblazer for the future. It may have dragged
   the worst of care upwards, but at the expense of creating a
   bureaucratic monstrosity that has hindered good practice by excessive
   attention to risk, and vastly increased paperwork with intangible
   benefit. It needs to be simplified to allow practitioners greater
   scope for collaborative solutions, less minatory oversight and better
   use of strained resources.

   .. rubric:: Declaration of interest
      :name: sec_a1

   None.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The article by David Kingdon,1 who is over-modest about his own role in
creating the Care Programme Approach (CPA) for mental health services,
is a welcome suggestion to a system that needs changing. To understand
the CPA it is necessary to understand the full history behind it. As
David Kingdon indicates, it came about not following new research
evidence but – like most reforms in the National Health Service (NHS) –
through scandal, and all should be sceptical about its benefits under
these circumstances until independent evidence becomes available.

So picture the situation in 1988, when the Spokes Inquiry2 made
recommendations following the murder of a social worker by an ex-patient
in her offices in Bexley. The patient, Sharon Campbell, had apparently
been discharged without adequate supervision and the report sent a
shudder through the corridors of the NHS hierarchy and the Royal College
of Psychiatrists. How many other potentially dangerous patients were
similarly being treated, or even untreated, as a consequence of the
decision to close hospitals and move towards community care?

.. _sec1:

The Spokes Inquiry
==================

The Spokes Inquiry2 made appropriate and reasonable recommendations that
could be summarised as ‘when psychiatric patients, particularly those
with severe mental illness, are discharged from hospital there needs to
be an after-care plan in place for both health and social services’. The
implementation of these plans was not specified exactly and the Royal
College of Psychiatrists was asked to create such an aftercare policy.
There already was a system called case management, which had devotees,
but most of the evidence was imported unwisely from the USA where the
notion of universal care was anathema to the land of the free market.

So the CPA was introduced as a diluted form of case management
appropriate for the NHS. Note the wording. It was not a mandatory
requirement for practitioners to do this or that, but a gentle nudge to
ensure a coordinated system of care, an approach rather than a
directive. It certainly worked to a point; consultants could no longer
discharge patients to follow-up by the general practitioner without some
sort of care plan in place. The CPA was introduced so gently that its
implementation was almost imperceptible, allowing a randomised trial to
take place using the old system of care as the comparator. The results
showed that many fewer patients were lost to follow-up, but readmissions
were much more common once good follow-up was in place.3

.. _sec2:

Early years of the CPA
======================

The notion of care plans – and the need for a single person, the care
coordinator, to synthesise care with the parties involved – is a
sensible one and many health professionals felt they were doing it
already. It was held together successfully at first through the
efficiency and cooperation of community psychiatric teams, whose
contribution and value, including a reduction in deaths,4 has been
somewhat underestimated as these teams have never had the glamour of
assertive outreach and crisis resolution teams. Where it began to fail
was not a fault of the approach but a lack of resources to implement it
properly, so it was never applied universally. It is very odd that no
organisation within the healthcare system made any attempt to cost the
full implementation of the CPA. What may also not have been anticipated
was the rapid growth of managers once cost pressures increased,5 and
whose attempts to improve integration of care were often resented by
practitioners as undue interference.6

Thus, 15 years after its introduction, Simpson *et al*\ 7 concluded
after a careful review in 2003: “‘The CPA was a flawed policy introduced
insensitively into an inhospitable environment. It was destined to fail
and after more than a decade remains ineffectively implemented. Changes
introduced recently may have contradictory influences on the ability of
services to provide effective case management but remain to be
evaluated.’7”

.. _sec3:

Standard and Enhanced CPA
=========================

In 2008 the Enhanced CPA was subsequently introduced for people ‘who
need: multi-agency support; active engagement; intense intervention;
support with dual diagnoses; and who are at higher risk’.8 It was also
emphasised that acceptance for enhanced care ‘should *not* be used as a
“gateway” to social services or as a “badge” of entitlement’8 to other
services. But of course it was used that way, as it was bound to be;
thus it merely added another layer of bureaucracy to an over-burdened
system.

The consequence has been an increasing transfer of face-to-face clinical
care to a paperchase cynical affair that does no credit to anybody,
least of all the patients, who all too frequently see a technocrat
facing a desk instead of a sympathetic carer across the room. The tick
box has now become the kick box, an exercise to get a patient off one
team's case load and on to another, promoting discontinuity and
disruption of care.

.. _sec4:

What is the solution?
=====================

There are many lessons to be learned about the CPA. First, it has to be
accepted by all health professionals, politicians and society at large
that suicides and violent deaths in the community perpetrated by
psychiatric patients can never be prevented altogether. Putting this
another way: extreme statistical outliers should not determine policy.
Second, and probably most importantly, good psychiatric and social care
is flexible and collaborative and can never be prescribed by statute. I
recently discharged myself from hospital prematurely against medical
advice. But I insisted the record was not recorded as ‘against advice’
by writing in detail in the hospital notes why it was better for me to
leave hospital as my aftercare was well arranged and would lead to cost
savings. (They accepted this and were probably pleased to see me go.)

Third, allow practitioners and patients, working together, to do what is
best and not to be too risk averse. Kingdon recommends that we should
develop ‘more individualised and sophisticated pathway-based systems’.1
This is in itself a telling criticism of the CPA. Once we have such
individualised systems, we leave the directives behind; we use a
combination of skills and resources to produce a plan that is, more
often than not, unique and cannot be classified. Such plans can never be
truly evidence based.

So, in summary, the CPA needs reform by becoming simpler rather than
more complicated. It is there to prevent poor care, not to interfere
with care that is already competent or good. Its wording should be
chosen with care to allow good clinicians to be reinforced and praised
in their tasks, for nervous ones to be encouraged and for those who are
under par to receive a gentle rap on the knuckles to improve their game.
It can also be a great deal shorter.

**Peter Tyrer** is Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry at Imperial College,
London, UK.

.. [1]
   See this issue.
