====================================================================================
Virtual psychiatric care fast-tracked: reflections inspired by the COVID-19 pandemic
====================================================================================



Tea Rosic
Sandra Lubert
Zainab SamaanCorrespondence to Zainab Samaan (samaanz@mcmaster.ca)
:Date: 2020-8-17

:Abstract:
   For many patients and healthcare providers, the move to virtual
   psychiatric care has been fast-tracked by the COVID-19 pandemic. In
   this article, we consider a patient perspective and a provider
   perspective on the transition to virtual psychiatric care and its
   strengths and limitations, as well as a call for much-needed future
   research.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

The COVID-19 pandemic has rapidly transformed service delivery,
including the delivery of medical care, around the world. As
jurisdictions worldwide enacted measures to slow the spread of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus, service providers quickly adapted. What was previously
a slow expansion of telemedicine and virtual care over the past two
decades, with the primary goal of overcoming geographical
barriers,\ :sup:`1` became suddenly fast-tracked in a matter of weeks. A
rapid transition to virtual psychiatric care, care provided by telephone
or video, is one such transformation resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic and the measures implemented to contain it.

Leaders and advocates in the field of telepsychiatry are expecting, and
in fact encouraging, these changes to persist post-pandemic.\ :sup:`2–4`
The aim of this article is to reflect on the transition to virtual
psychiatric care through three lenses: a patient perspective, a provider
perspective and a scholarly perspective, including a call for future
research. The patient and provider perspectives obtained for this
article reflect individual experiences with the transition to virtual
psychiatric care and are not intended to capture the diversity of
perspectives and experiences that may exist. The patient and providers
have experienced both models of care pre- and post-pandemic onset.

.. _sec1:

A patient perspective, by Ms Sandra Lubert
==========================================

“‘I am a mental health patient with a diagnosis of depression, PTSD and
chronic sleep disruption. I have been either ill or in remission for
many years and have experienced extensive clinical intervention both
before and during the COVID-19 pandemic; that is, both actual, in-person
care and virtual, online care.Clearly, a physical meeting between
patient and practitioner in a clinical environment is often warranted.
Face-to-actual-face is sometimes best, and I am not advocating the
replacement of such visits with online care. Further, some of our most
vulnerable populations lack access to telehealth and/or virtual
technology and for these individuals, it is imperative that we either
provide them with the tools required to access proposed alternative care
or continue to provide traditional, in-person interventions. Barriers to
online care can be significant, salient features and these need to be
considered. When a physical appointment is required or even simply
preferred, this must be accommodated. I believe that an ideal system of
mental health care features a robust, multi-faceted approach which meets
the needs of all patients and practitioners.My own mental illness
includes severe insomnia and related suicidality. Six weeks ago – right
around the onset of the pandemic – I had a psychiatric crisis requiring
an ER visit and overnight hospitalization. This urgent, on-site care was
life-saving. But I believe that my follow-up care, which has been
entirely virtual, has been just as critical. This recent experience
leads me to believe that the rapid changes necessitated by COVID-19 have
a great deal to teach us about psychiatric care delivery.For me, as a
recipient, ‘pandemic-period psychiatry’ (via eVisits) has not only been
adequate and helpful, it has in many ways been far more effective than
its in-person counterpart. There are three main aspects of online care
that have enhanced the overall experience for me: reduced cost, ease of
access, and increased flexibility/comfort. From a very practical
standpoint, I can state that eVisits have saved me money. I have not had
to pay for gas to get to and from appointments, and I have not had to
pay for parking. Many patients travel a significant distance in order to
see clinicians, and this can be very expensive. Some rely on caregivers,
taxis, or public transit. Again, while this may seem insignificant, the
cost of transportation can be a major deterrent in seeking treatment,
particularly for those on a limited income.Ease of access around virtual
care is a huge factor. My mental illness is often incapacitating; when I
am in crisis, it is difficult for me to get out of bed, let alone leave
my house. Things like getting dressed, planning for travel time, being
presentable may seem trivial, but for those struggling with severe
mental illness, these obstacles can be insurmountable. The anxiety
induced by having to leave the house and get to one's doctor is
sometimes crippling and prevents us from seeking care. When I am in
distress, the idea of sitting in a waiting room (often in tears, usually
in psychic pain) is intolerable. For those dealing with a physical
disability in addition to mental illness, barriers are even more
debilitating. When access is restricted, the situation with mental
health can become dire. Indeed, it can even become deadly. eVisits have
saved me; I have been better able to access consistent, necessary
psychiatric care because I can do so virtually from my home.Increased
flexibility is perhaps the most beneficial aspect of virtual care. Since
the variables of transportation and location are removed, both patient
and practitioner are better able to schedule meetings. Modifying
appointments has also been far easier to accomplish online, with
recipient and caregiver both having immediate access to electronic
calendars and other tools. Involving my partner in an eVisit is merely a
matter of inviting her to sit next to me at my computer. Both my doctor
and I have information at our fingertips if needed.Finally, I feel more
comfortable with eVisits. Meeting with my practitioner from my own
environment puts me more at ease. Ultimately, this has to do with a
levelling effect – it makes me feel like I am more of an equal in the
patient–practitioner exchange. Traditional appointments take place in
the doctor's realm – their office, clinic, the hospital… in some ways,
this gives them the ‘home field advantage’, as it were. I am in their
space. They know where everything is, who everyone is, but it is largely
unfamiliar to me. I am a guest. I don't have my own mug, for tea.’”

.. _sec2:

A provider perspective, by Dr Tea Rosic, psychiatry resident, and Dr Zainab Samaan, staff psychiatrist
======================================================================================================

“‘Suddenly, going to the clinic to see patients is a health risk to both
my patients and me. I am faced with a precarious balancing act as I find
ways to provide adequate psychiatric care to patients who face
increasing anxiety, depression, social isolation, and changes in mental
status during the pandemic. The novelty of COVID-19, the ever-dynamic
guidelines, processes, and instructions, issues of shortage and
conservation of PPE, and new risk–benefit equilibria as we consider each
clinical decision are all present in ways we have not encountered
before.Virtual care has alleviated the risk carried by face-to-face
contact but has raised many new challenges. Do I have a printer, fax
machine, dedicated telephone line, secure email, and contact information
for community pharmacies? Do I know how to schedule appointments without
administrative staff support? New medicolegal challenges arise: what if
a patient has an urgent psychiatric need, should I be available online
24 h/day? Can we send patients to hospital or are we contributing to
risk of transmission and placing patients at greater risk? Not unlike
before the pandemic, my patients in greatest need of care often face the
greatest barriers in accessing it: limited mobile phone minutes,
barriers in access to internet and virtual technologies, lack of
privacy.Nevertheless, virtual care has been transformative. Being able
to provide much needed care despite the pandemic restrictions is
satisfying. Seeing patients through telemedicine modalities has opened
the door to better assessments of their environment and allows for
easier involvement of other family members when invited. I see patients’
pets and other important aspects of their lives. How often does it
occur, in the clinic, that we have no access to updated medication
lists, and how much time is spent trying to gain this information before
making further treatment recommendations? With virtual visits and
medications accessible to the patient in their home, this problem is
averted.Virtual care during this pandemic has so quickly transformed how
(and from where) we do our jobs. I have greater control over my
schedule, working hours are more flexible and I am more available
outside of structured clinical time. How these changes will evolve
following the pandemic is unknown, but there is much to be learned and
gained from this experience.’”

.. _sec3:

A scholarly perspective: the evidence base
==========================================

Virtual psychiatric care has an established evidence base and has shown
effectiveness in a variety of areas, including within different patient
populations and in different clinical settings.\ :sup:`5` Previous
research suggests that building therapeutic rapport is just as effective
virtually as it is in person.\ :sup:`5` For clinicians thrust into
providing virtual psychiatric care, the strengths and limitations of
this model of service delivery are becoming clearer. Recognising and
reflecting on these is just as important now as it will be
post-pandemic, when organisations and providers decide on the models of
care they will offer. In the post-pandemic era, in-person healthcare may
indeed become ‘option B’ for many patients.\ :sup:`6` We are working
through the technical issues, concerns about confidentiality and
provider payment obstacles that each slowed the advance of virtual care
in the past. For many patients, as described above, virtual care
provides the easier access, flexibility and comfort that is lacking from
in-person, hospital- or clinic-based care. Some patients may be greatly
benefited by ongoing virtual appointments.

For all of the potential benefits of virtual psychiatric care, there are
shortcomings that must be considered. Physical examination cannot be
conducted as usual and there may be challenges in comprehensively
assessing physical appearance and functioning in virtual psychiatric
assessments. Virtual care may impose additional barriers to assessment
for patients presenting with certain symptoms, such as paranoid
ideation,\ :sup:`7,8` although a recent study on the use of
telepsychiatry for first-episode psychosis suggests that 50% of patients
reported telepsychiatry as a favourable modality for
follow-up.\ :sup:`9,10` Patients experience differential access to
virtual platforms and technology, based on socioeconomic and other
factors.\ :sup:`11` In particular, patients with severe and persistent
mental illness may face even greater barriers to accessing care
virtually than the general patient population.\ :sup:`8` Individuals
living in close quarters with multiple family members may have
insufficient space to talk while maintaining privacy and
confidentiality.\ :sup:`11,12` Older adults and individuals with
disabilities may face challenges with access to technology, visual
impairment or hearing impairment, creating barriers and gaps in care.
Cultural factors in virtual care must be carefully considered and
addressed. Patients who require language interpreters may be
disadvantaged by virtual psychiatric care.\ :sup:`13` With the expansion
of virtual psychiatric care, we must be particularly mindful of the risk
of widening the gap in access to care for patients who are marginalised
or otherwise vulnerable. The broader issue of global healthcare access
inequities in telepsychiatry is being raised.\ :sup:`14`

.. _sec4:

Research and practice implications
==================================

In this article, we aimed to provide both patient and provider
perspectives on the rapid and monumental shift to virtual psychiatric
care that occurred, seemingly overnight, in many jurisdictions. However,
the perspectives shared may be limited in their generalisability for
settings outside of a well-funded public healthcare system or in places
with limited existing capacity for the provision of telemedicine. We
stress that the experiences of unique patients and unique providers,
working in diverse clinical settings, managing different clinical
presentations and operating in distinct healthcare systems worldwide
might be critically different. The global healthcare community will
benefit from hearing and learning from diverse experiences and
perspectives.

As we rapidly usher in this new era of virtual psychiatric care,
concerted efforts must be made to study and learn from our experiences.
Research must be undertaken to examine the impact of these changes in
psychiatric service delivery for different patient groups and different
providers. Ensuring identification of individuals and groups whose needs
are not met will be critical. Qualitative research that can capture the
depth and detail of our human experiences with virtual psychiatric care
will be necessary. Economic analyses of the costs and savings of this
model will also be integral. There is some pre-pandemic evidence to
suggest great potential cost savings with widespread use of telemedicine
– including savings accrued from shorter time spent travelling and
waiting, for both patients and providers.\ :sup:`15,16`

Clinical and research groups worldwide have begun to publish and share
their experiences in implementing telepsychiatry during the COVID-19
pandemic for patient populations in various settings, including child
and adolescent psychiatry,\ :sup:`17` general out-patient
psychiatry\ :sup:`11,13` and in-patient psychiatry.\ :sup:`18` Surveys
of psychiatrists using telepsychiatry during the pandemic indicate
benefits such as convenience and flexibility, as well as challenges in
relation to the use of technology, impact on confidence in diagnosis and
impact on therapeutic alliance.\ :sup:`13` Authors are giving
consideration to the experience of trainees and educators using
telepsychiatry.\ :sup:`19`

The COVID-19 pandemic propelled us into a new era of virtual psychiatric
care, and opened the door to a re-evaluation of how, and why, we provide
mental healthcare in the ways we do. This door will remain open,
post-pandemic, allowing us to rigorously evaluate, shape and refine our
models of care to meet the needs of our patients as best as possible.

**Tea Rosic**, MD, is a Resident Physician in the Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences and a PhD student in the
Department of Health, Evidence and Impact at McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. **Sandra Lubert**, BA, BEd, is a
writer/author and educational consultant in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
**Zainab Samaan**, MBChB, MSc, DMMD, MRCPsych, PhD, is Associate
Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences in the Department
of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact at McMaster University,
and Director of the Clinician Investigator Program within the Mood
Disorders Program, St Joseph's Healthcare, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

All three authors are responsible for the article concept and design.
T.R. conducted the literature search. All three authors contributed to
writing the first draft of the manuscript and critically revising the
final manuscript; all three reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

Z.S's research is supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR).

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.97.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
