=====================================================================================================================
The contagiousness of memes: containing the spread of COVID-19 conspiracy theories in a forensic psychiatric hospital
=====================================================================================================================



Reena Panchal
Alexander Jack
:Correspondence: Reena Panchal (reena.panchal@nhs.net)

:date: 2020-11-13

:Abstract:
   COVID-19 has transformed healthcare service provision. In addition to
   the spread of a virus, there has been an equally concerning emergence
   and spread of conspiracy theories. Such theories can threaten
   societal cohesion and adherence to the necessary public health
   guidance. In a forensic in-patient setting, such difficulties can be
   amplified. In this paper, we outline the key theory in relation to
   the development and spread of conspiracy theory memes. We propose
   primary, secondary and tertiary level responses to tackle the
   possible generation and spread of harmful conspiracies in the
   forensic in-patient setting. We consider this to be important, as
   there is a risk that such beliefs could affect patients’ mental
   health and, in extremis, undermine physical health efforts to reduce
   the spread of COVID-19.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

Forty-four cases of pneumonia of unknown microbial origin were reported
to the World Health Organization (WHO) on 31 December 2019.\ :sup:`1`
Investigations revealed that the culprit organism was a novel
coronavirus, dubbed COVID-19. COVID-19 has spread quicker than experts
anticipated; the WHO declared an international state of emergency – a
true pandemic – in early March 2020, as the virus spread rapidly between
continents. The human cost has been, and continues to be, vast.

.. _sec1:

The public health response
==========================

The global response to COVID-19 has emphasised the necessity for reduced
close contact; hence, the intervention termed ‘social distancing’. To
achieve this aim, many governments implemented ‘lockdown’ strategies to
limit the free movement of the public, although the precise restrictions
and severity of the measures have differed from country to country. The
UK government urged people to ‘Stay Home, Save Lives, Protect the NHS’,
with only essential travel permitted, restricted mixing of households
and citizens at one point limited to a single exercise outing per day.
There was a national drive to ‘flatten the curve’, with the stated
intention to avoid overwhelming the National Health Service (NHS). A
further patriotic message resonated with the public; that is, to protect
the most vulnerable in society. Ultimately, the effectiveness of
government and society's efforts to maintain this unconventional and
rather antisocial injunction will be measured by the number of
casualties.

.. _sec2:

A forensic mental health hospital facing the pandemic
=====================================================

We are based in a psychiatric medium secure unit (MSU) in the West
Midlands, UK. The MSU has capacity for 90 male patients across multiple
wards and provides care to men who present with complex risk behaviours
and experience psychopathology that warrants treatment under the Mental
Health Act 1983 (amended 2007). The reality of COVID-19 within the MSU
community parallels the changes seen in wider society. Initially, the
virus was an abstract threat. However, measures were quickly implemented
to increase hand-washing, social distancing and isolation of symptomatic
patients.

At the time of writing, there have been 24 COVID-19 cases confirmed by
positive swab in our MSU. Many patients experienced mild to moderate
symptoms. However, three individuals required transfer to an intensive
care unit for intubation and ventilation. Fortunately, they made a good
recovery and returned to the MSU. Those with milder symptoms have been
encouraged to self-isolate in their bedrooms. In anticipation of an
increase in infections, one ward was designated to be the ‘COVID ward’,
to contain the infection within a specific area and minimise further
spread.

Clinical practice has changed significantly and it is hoped that, by
mimicking national restrictions, the spread of COVID-19 will be
contained. However, it is acknowledged that true ‘lockdown’ cannot be
instated owing to the necessary travel between wards to maintain
essential care.

.. _sec3:

The Trojan horse: a split between staff and patients?
=====================================================

Patients in the MSU have been required to adjust to novel protocols (use
of personal protective equipment (PPE), social distancing, etc.) while
also processing the increased limitations on their movements at all
times. Such dramatic changes, in the context of access to 24 h news
coverage, have understandably heightened anxiety, fear and uncertainty.
Of course, this is in addition to the usual physical and relational
security provisions, such as air locks, keys and high fences that can be
a source of angst for patients.

In these unprecedented conditions, we consider that there is a risk of
an ‘us versus them’ dynamic developing, particularly as situational
threat is high.\ :sup:`2` On closed wards, it is plausible that staff
are the vehicles of virus transmission, transporting the contagion onto
the ward asymptomatically, given the incubation period of COVID-19. It
is possible that some patients may view the movement of staff as
contamination. The usual psychological containment that high staffing
levels can provide may now be perceived as hostile, dangerous and
unpredictable – when the danger cannot be seen, who is infected and
imposing threat to the community? As the staff group fulfil the role of
caregivers, a complicated role reversal ensues, as the caregiver is
viewed as the source of danger: the Trojan horse entering the fortress.

.. _sec4:

The emergence of conspiracy theories
====================================

We have noticed that conspiracy theories have emerged in tandem with the
COVID-19 spread. Conspiracy theories have been defined as ‘attempts to
explain the ultimate causes of significant social and political events
and circumstances with claims of secret plots by two or more powerful
actors’.\ :sup:`3` Notably, conspiracy theories are similar to, though
distinct from, misinformation and/or ‘conspiracy hypotheses’.
Misinformation – false or inaccurate information, often intended to
deceive (e.g. ‘fake news’) – can underpin conspiracy theories as it
undermines mainstream narratives; conspiracy hypotheses are legitimate
counter-narratives that can occur when there is uncertainty about the
official story. Again, these can increase uncertainty and trust in a
centralised message. The relationship between these phenomena is likely
to be fluid.

Research has shown that conspiracy beliefs are common. For example, 60%
of Americans believe that the CIA killed JFK\ :sup:`4` and 46% of leave
voters in the EU referendum believed that the vote would be
rigged.\ :sup:`5` There are many other types of theory that gather large
follower groups.\ :sup:`3` COVID-19 conspiracy theories have included
fear of 5G broadband networks and persistent notions that the virus is
man-made.\ :sup:`6`

Interestingly, individuals who hold one conspiracy theory are more
likely to believe others,\ :sup:`7` thus suggesting a possible
underlying tendency to seek counter-narrative explanations and prefer
them to information presented by institutions. Individuals who hold
conspiracy beliefs are predominantly male, unmarried and of lower
socioeconomic status. They are more likely to have weak social networks
and belong to ethnic minority groups. Notably, they are likely to have
had adverse childhoods and experience psychiatric problems as
adults.\ :sup:`8` Such demographics are highly consistent with a typical
in-patient forensic population.\ :sup:`9,10`

Particular environmental conditions and psychological processes have
been mooted to underpin such beliefs. In a review, Douglas et
al\ :sup:`11` identified three psychological motivations that led to a
preference for conspiracy explanations: epistemic, existential and
social. Each has particular relevance to the patient group in an MSU.

The epistemic motivation relates to an individual's or group's
understanding and knowledge of a phenomenon; conspiracy theories can
allow individuals to preserve a sense of understanding in the face of
uncertainty and contradiction. These beliefs are noted to become
stronger when events are widespread and/or significant,\ :sup:`12` and
when simplistic, mundane explanations are perceived as
unsatisfactory.\ :sup:`13` Conspiracy beliefs can foster a sense of
cognitive closure when the situation lacks a clear, consistent and
understandable official message.\ :sup:`14`

When individuals feel anxious, threatened and powerless in the face of
danger, they may gravitate towards conspiracy theories to achieve a
sense of comfort.\ :sup:`11,15,16` These are viewed as existential
motivations.\ :sup:`11` Such powerlessness can be exaggerated by a
perception of alienation from decision makers and a breakdown in
containment and social order.\ :sup:`7,15`

Douglas et al\ :sup:`11` note that social motivations also contribute to
the formation of conspiracy beliefs. Groups that have experienced
persecution, for example victims of police harassment\ :sup:`17` or
racial discrimination,\ :sup:`18` are more likely to perceive dominant
groups as conspiring against them. Research has shown that members of
low-status groups are more likely to endorse conspiracy theories than
those of higher status.\ :sup:`15,19` In-group attachments can
strengthen in the face of group threat, and ‘collective narcissism’ (an
emotional investment in an unrealistic belief about the in-group's
greatness)\ :sup:`20` can develop, particularly when underprivileged,
undervalued and under threat.\ :sup:`19` This may function to protect
the in-group by forming a shared ‘us versus them’ narrative.\ :sup:`21`
Similarly, individual narcissism is understood to emerge as a defence in
response to perceived powerlessness; a conspiracy theory is powerful as
it ascribes ‘special knowledge’ to the believer, imbuing a safe sense of
superiority.\ :sup:`22`

Such motivations and psychosocial characteristics are relevant and, in
some circumstances, exaggerated in the MSU population. For example,
research has linked subclinical delusional thinking\ :sup:`23` and
schizotypy\ :sup:`24,25` to conspiracy thinking. Individuals diagnosed
with paranoid personality disorder demonstrate similar conspiratorial
thinking.\ :sup:`26,27` Cognitive/affective mechanisms at play in such
samples are also relevant to those at the distressing/impairing end of
the psychosis continuum, i.e. those diagnosed with
schizophrenia.\ :sup:`28` For example, the omission of true cognitive
information\ :sup:`29` could precipitate a jumping to conclusions (JTC)
bias that is associated with the rapid appraisal of ambiguous or
anomalous stimuli to form a conclusion without a sound evaluation of
evidence.\ :sup:`30` Such a bias is evident in subclinical\ :sup:`31`
and clinical populations.\ :sup:`32` Moulding et al\ :sup:`33` have
identified that holders of conspiracy beliefs are more likely to view
the world as threatening. Such schematic views of the world as
dangerous\ :sup:`34` can underpin the process whereby delusional beliefs
– in an attempt to secure cognitive closure – form from misappraisals of
anomalous stimuli.\ :sup:`30` Of note, a high proportion of our
in-patient population hold – or have held – delusional beliefs.

Disproportionately, MSU in-patients have been exposed to early life
danger\ :sup:`35` and hold negative schematic beliefs about self, others
and the world.\ :sup:`36` Psychotic delusions, conspiracy theory beliefs
and self-protective distortions have a propensity to surface when
conditions are dangerous and uncertain.\ :sup:`15,16`

.. _sec5:

The impact of the pandemic within the clinic
============================================

Meme theory can help to explain how such ideas spread, particularly in
contained environments. Dawkins\ :sup:`37` considered memes to be
cultural phenomena that pass from one mind to another, and survive (or
die) through a process analogous to genetic selection.
Goertzel\ :sup:`38` noted ‘conspiracy theorizing [*sic*] is a rhetorical
meme that transforms scientific controversies into human dramas with
villains who can be exposed’.

In the general population, COVID-19 conspiracy theory memes (e.g. 5G
phone masts, man-made virus) have gone viral, with some harmful and
persistent consequences. More broadly, memes that run as
counter-narratives to the government's explanations and advice affect
some people, who may then spread their ideas to others. This may lead to
a failure to act according to government guidelines and in the best
interest of public health.\ :sup:`6`

We have observed conspiracy theory memes to develop in two distinct ways
within the MSU. First, ‘organic memes’ have developed on one ward. These
have taken the form of a belief that the pandemic is orchestrated by the
hospital staff to restrict leave and delay discharge. Such a belief is
likely to have formed with no outside influence and is perhaps good
evidence that humans will seek conspiracy theory explanations in
isolation to allay epistemic, existential and social
concerns.\ :sup:`11,19` It is our view that, despite several men
endorsing this meme to a greater or lesser degree, it will likely wither
and fail to spread owing to its fallibility in the face of simple
counter-evidence and the physical health restrictions that prohibit
mixing of wards (this meme is unlikely to be shared by staff members).

The type of second conspiracy meme is more problematic and harder to
contain. These are externally generated conspiracy theories. Such memes
may find traction among the internal population by direct or indirect
conversations, through telephone contact, media consumption and where
there are exchanges of perspectives. It is not possible – or ethical –
to stop the introduction of conspiracy theory memes via telephone
contact with relatives. However, staff members may be prone to
conspiracy beliefs because of their own sense of powerlessness, threat
and existential anxiety. As staff members move around the MSU, there is
a risk of them spreading conspiracy beliefs to others. Additionally,
misinformation might be introduced into the hospital. This new
discrepant information may destabilise an already vulnerable in-patient
population and prime conspiratorial thinking.

.. _sec6:

The impact of a COVID-19 conspiracy theory meme outbreak
========================================================

Healthy secure wards are able to maintain a negotiated homeostasis,
whereby clear boundaries and good clinical practice maintain order,
safety and containment, while also promoting mental health
rehabilitation. Conspiracy theory memes present a threat to this
architecture. A possible consequence is a breakdown in trust and
cohesion, which would undermine physical and psychological safety, and
challenge measures to contain the virus.\ :sup:`6`

Uncertainty and unpredictable danger can be precipitants of anxious
threat states. Changes in routine or the introduction of new conditions
can trigger a loss of perceived environmental control and subsequent
attempts to regain safety. As such, periods of stress and threat require
the use of automatic self-protective behaviours and implicit information
processing strategies.\ :sup:`29` Harmful conspiracy theories or
hypotheses can increase uncertainty and decrease trust in authority
figures. For many men in forensic in-patient settings, violence or
self-harming behaviour has been – or is – an adaptive part of their
self-protective behavioural repertoire. When in conditions of threat,
such behavioural expressions might manifest to gain control, discharge
arousal, communicate distress or elicit care.

Similarly, splitting is a possibility, with competing memes generating
an ‘us versus them’ dynamic. As described previously, this is an
evidenced component of conspiracy theory motivation, and staff members
can become targeted if inequality is perceived (e.g. locked down versus
transient, exposed versus PPE). Systemically, these processes can
heighten the sense of danger for other residents and group anxiety can
escalate. Of course, staff members are not immune to such effects and
negative consequences are possible (e.g. burnout, increased
punitiveness).

.. _sec7:

The response
============

Memes are hypothesised to spread in a manner analogous to a
virus.\ :sup:`37,38` Hence, we propose that a fast, stringent and
proactive strategy is required to curb the sharing of unhelpful and
false memes. We suggest that the response to ‘prevent’ and ‘treat’
conspiracy theories can be pitched according to the public health
approach to diseases: primary, secondary and tertiary prevention.

Importantly, some degree of uncertainty is unavoidable owing to a global
lack of clarity regarding COVID-19. It has to be acknowledged that there
are few unambiguously *true* known facts about the virus. We do not
advocate the suppression of questioning or critical challenge of
official narratives. A host of different memes, differing in strength,
transmissibility and potential harmfulness, will spread among staff and
patients. We recommend that professionals demonstrate clinical judgement
to determine if and when intervention is required and listen to
alternative perspectives, discussing them in context.

.. _sec7-1:

Primary prevention
------------------

Primary prevention aims to prevent disease or injury before it occurs.
To prevent the development of conspiracy theories within an MSU, we
recommend addressing the conditions that lead to such thinking.

We consider the first line of response to be education. Conspiracy
theory memes are hypothesised to breed from indecision and uncertainty;
gaps in knowledge allow room for a counter-narrative to develop to
fulfil a need for cognitive closure\ :sup:`14` and a perception of
control.\ :sup:`11,15,16` We view the regular and consistent
dissemination of clear and transparent information about the pandemic,
the ‘outer world’ situation and MSU policy to be essential to maximise
patients’ knowledge. Information can be adapted to account for complex
communication needs, and care plans developed accordingly. Ideally,
patients who are vulnerable to being affected by conspiracy beliefs
should be identified and bespoke assessments and management plans
completed.

The staff group are not immune from conspiratorial thinking. Helping
staff members to feel informed requires the consistent dissemination of
information in a manner that is accessible to all. Changes in practice
should be quickly communicated. Information should be transparent, with
an open forum approach to address queries and signpost to relevant
resources. In addition, an honest acknowledgement of challenges that
individuals and teams will face is necessary to ensure preparedness. To
prevent splitting and/or ‘suffering in silence’, regular reflective
practice, peer group supervision and *ad hoc* ‘check ins’ can give space
for the processing of anxiety and an opportunity to work through
uncertainties and questions. Greater use of virtual connectivity has
allowed sick or shielded colleagues to sustain communication with core
teams, thus maintaining a collective ‘togetherness’.

Research has suggested that it is important that education provided for
staff and patients is presented in an ‘even-handed’ manner (i.e. do not
dismiss counter-narratives offhand) to prevent the perception of
indoctrination or bullying.\ :sup:`39,40` Failure to do this
successfully could lead to the educator being absorbed into the
conspiracy belief.\ :sup:`41` Information sharing might take the form of
standardised and accessible information boards, regular ward ‘community
meetings’ and individual conversations with patients and staff to ensure
that they feel informed about events.

In our NHS trust, daily staff briefings have been provided by the chief
executive officer. There are daily meetings held by senior management
within the MSU to strategise, coordinate a unified response and ensure
that information is shared – and then cascaded – evenly throughout the
site. In addition, members of different clinical disciplines have
adapted their roles. For example, individual psychologists have
‘cohorted’ to provide intensive support for single wards, occupational
therapists have provided opportunities for activity and release from the
claustrophobic ward spaces and the psychiatric team have employed a
‘shadow rota’ to ensure that sickness does not reduce the provision of
emergency care. Collectively, these additions and adaptations to
practice can be understood as ‘inoculation’ of the community.\ :sup:`42`
Many of these organisational strategies are likely to be in place to
serve other, important needs. However, it is our view that such good
practice is also relevant to the aims of this paper.

.. _sec7-2:

Secondary prevention
--------------------

The aim of secondary prevention is to reduce the impact of a disease or
injury that has already occurred. We recommend that conspiracy theories
already in circulation should be identified at the earliest possible
point and the conveyance slowed. The ultimate aim is to challenge
unhelpful or disruptive memes that threaten to break down cohesion in
the MSU community. Strategies need to prevent re-emergence and reconnect
those affected to a less detached position. However, if this is not
possible, the focus shifts to containment and reduction of the spread to
others.

The infection control response to COVID-19 (i.e. ‘lockdown’ of wards)
will inadvertently prevent the cross-contamination of conspiracy theory
memes across the MSU site. However, conspiracy theories can infiltrate
the community via telephone calls, media and/or staff acting as vectors.
It is clearly counterintuitive, unethical and disproportionate to
restrict or monitor private phone calls. Secondary prevention should
therefore be targeted at the management of memes that are conspiratorial
in nature or undermining of national or local COVID-19 policies.

We recommend that changes in anxiety, mood and behaviour associated with
conspiracy thinking – or exposure to such ideas – should be observed as
part of the usual monitoring of mental state. In the MSU, all patients
are regularly reviewed by the nursing staff and forensic psychiatrists,
who examine their mental states and the extent of psychopathology.
Patients can be given space to explore their thoughts and feelings about
such theories; the clinician can then establish whether intervention is
required. A ‘COVID-19 formulation-led’ approach to addressing concerns
as they arise is recommended.

When discussing conspiracy theories – or related memes – information
should be presented in a consistent, clear and accessible manner so that
further doubt, ambiguity or reinforcement of the conspiracy does not
result.\ :sup:`41` The patient will require adequate knowledge to close
the ‘uncertainty gap’. This work may also be achieved through group or
individual therapy sessions. In our MSU, we have found that acceptance
and commitment therapy (ACT) principles have been beneficial,
particularly as these can address issues relating to control and
uncertainty.\ :sup:`43` In addition, mindfulness practice can help to
calm heightened arousal states, release troubling thoughts and teach
self-awareness.\ :sup:`44` As uncertainty is largely inescapable, such
therapeutic approaches are preferable to the suppression of all but the
most harmful memes. Cognitive remediation strategies can improve
reasoning ability\ :sup:`45` and various non-verbal therapies can help
to up- or down-regulate arousal.

Considering the ward as a whole, the maintenance of a ‘safe’ and
‘cohesive’ environment is vital to prevent the harmful effects of
conspiracy theory memes. The basis for this is already provided via the
implementation of the ‘Safewards’ approach\ :sup:`46` and positive
behavioural support planning.\ :sup:`47` Indeed, an approach not
dissimilar to trauma-informed care could be adopted: ‘pandemic-informed
care’ would incorporate the necessary physical health precautions, while
also proactively identifying and addressing the emergence of conspiracy
theory memes and promoting a clinical awareness of the vulnerabilities
of patients who are prone to engage in conspiracy thinking.
Pandemic-informed care would also include the provision of staff support
and reflective practice.

Some patients who have been exposed to conspiracy theories may become
paranoid, anxious or distressed in response to this exposure. If there
is a resultant significant decline in symptoms and functioning in which
the expression of delusional ideas and other psychotic features is
identified, there are a range of pharmacological, psychological and
risk-management techniques that may need to be considered.

.. _sec7-3:

Tertiary prevention
-------------------

Tertiary prevention is a strategy to reduce the impact of an ongoing
illness or injury that has lasting effects. By definition, many
individuals who are resident in an MSU experience complex
psychopathology and are vulnerable to anxiety, paranoia and
conspiratorial beliefs. Clinicians involved in their care are well
advised to consider the impact of ‘lockdown’, uncertainty and competing
narratives, and the destabilising effect that each might have.

A multidisciplinary approach is required to incorporate such
formulations into care planning and intervention, as has been undertaken
across our MSU. In acutely psychotic patients – and those susceptible to
relapse – there is a risk that COVID-19-related fears could become
enmeshed with pre-existing delusional belief systems. In a patient who
becomes absolutely engrossed by conspiracy beliefs to the point that it
manifests as a delusion and/or other features of a psychosis and
significantly affects their function, an individual, tailored approach
must be adopted. The priority would be the containment of severe
pathological symptoms, with consideration given to pharmacological and
risk management interventions. In addition, the reinforcement of a
consistent and safe environment is necessary to allow the individual to
feel secure and grounded. Access to regular, trusted and familiar
nursing staff is likely to be important. Arousal-regulating therapy
might also be considered. Deterioration in mental state may prompt a
review of the patient's current setting. A decision may need to be taken
as to whether an acute ward may be more appropriate or higher levels of
observations needed. In each case, the acute symptomatology needs to be
addressed and, in time, once stable, measures taken to challenge the
conspiracy thinking via psychological intervention.

As regards measures introduced to support staff, it is recommended that
these are maintained beyond the acute phase of the response. Conspiracy
theory memes might retract while the various levels of intervention are
in place. However, if support is withdrawn too quickly, a breakdown in
communication, increased isolation and potential feelings of abandonment
(that accompany burnout) might prompt disharmony and a failure to adhere
to the previously outlined necessary actions. This may lead to a second
wave of conspiracy beliefs emerging.

.. _sec8:

Conclusions
===========

These are extraordinary times in society and clinical practice; there is
a heavy emphasis on how to identify and manage the physical health
manifestations of COVID-19 among the general population, existing
patients and the workforce. However, COVID-19-associated conspiracy
theory memes also present a societal challenge, which is perhaps
exaggerated in a forensic in-patient setting. There is nuance as to what
memes should be challenged and the degree to which challenge is made.
This is a clinical decision on a case-by-case basis. However, a failure
to intervene in an appropriate, effective and ethical manner when memes
are potentially harmful could precipitate a breakdown in therapeutic
relationships, ward cohesion and the successful implementation of
physical health procedures. The consequences of such breakdown relate to
mental health deterioration, increased risk behaviours and the failure
to curtail the spread of COVID-19. Below, we make suggestions that are
consistent with the conspiracy theory literature, which may be helpful
to manage the development and spread of conspiracy theory memes (we also
consider this guidance to be applicable to other custodial settings,
such as prisons): provide clear, consistent and up-to-date information
to patients and staffclearly explain the rationale for change (e.g. new
practices/restrictions)empower staff and patients to make informed
decisions in relation to caredevelop bespoke multidisciplinary COVID-19
formulations for each patientregularly review patients with reference to
their experience of COVID-19ensure that all clinical environments are
‘safe spaces’ and that interactions are therapeutically informed
(pandemic-informed wards)provide psychological intervention to address
uncertainty, change and anxiety, and consider the use of cognitive
remediation strategies to enhance reasoningbe prepared to utilise short-
and long-term pharmacological and risk-management strategies as required
if mental state deteriorates significantlymaintain team cohesion through
regular reflective practice, peer supervision and *ad hoc* individual
‘check ins’provide appropriate challenge to conspiracy theory memes,
with an awareness of the theory outlined in this paper.

We thank Stephanie Wilson, Sarah Shanahan and Fiona Hynes for reading –
and commenting on – draft versions of this paper. Their contributions
have improved our work significantly.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _nts3-a:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.120.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

**Reena Panchal** is a Specialty Trainee Year 5 (ST5) in forensic
psychiatry in the Department of Psychiatry, Reaside Clinic, Birmingham
and Solihull Mental Health Foundation Trust, UK. **Alexander Jack** is a
senior forensic psychologist in the Department of Psychology, Reaside
Clinic, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health Foundation Trust, UK.

R.P. and A.J. contributed equally to the conceptualisation and writing
of this paper.
