==============
Author's reply
==============

Norman Poole
:Date: 2022-02


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
I thank Dr Margaret White for the letter in response to my recent
editorial ‘Publishing controversy’. It raised important challenges. Why
have the trans health papers been published online and in print even
though written by non-specialists in gender identity, and should
opposing views be relegated to the Correspondence section? First,
all papers published online also appear in the paper journal eventually.
To do otherwise would have marked these papers out as somehow different.
Dr White does not wish to silence debate, but not publishing in print
form as usual would be a form of censure even if not censor. Although
this is a controversial and contested area, the papers did not express
extreme views. In fact, Marci Bowers, president-elect of the World
Professional Association for Transgender Health, recently raised
concerns similar to those expressed in the *Bulletin* papers. However,
we remain keen to present all opinions so have commissioned papers from
gender identity experts, which are making their way through the
editorial process. When the papers by Griffin et al and Evans were
published on First View, they quickly attracted several complaints with
demands for their retraction, which as explained in the editorial was
not appropriate. Those authors were invited to write opposing articles
but unfortunately, for their own reasons, none took up the offer. Hence
our decision to publish all the available letters alongside the original
papers so readers can evaluate the arguments for themselves. I hope this
and the forthcoming papers assures Dr White that no one's voice is
relegated to the correspondence section in the *BJPsych Bulletin*, but
letters, such as Dr White's, are also an invaluable element of
discourse.
