====================================================
Improving attitudes toward electroconvulsive therapy
====================================================

Oakley Cheung
Marc Baker
Paul TabrahamCorrespondence to Marc Baker (marc.baker@port.ac.uk)
:Date: 2022-02

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) often causes fear in the general
   public because of media representation and negative reported
   side-effects. This study evaluates a new video focusing on
   experiences of ECT and how this can aid communicating medical
   information to the public. Knowledge and attitudes toward ECT after
   watching the video were compared with a group that received no
   information and a group that read the current NHS leaflet on ECT. The
   role of empathy was also considered as a covariate.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   The video was the only condition found to positively affect knowledge
   and attitudes toward ECT. The video was especially beneficial to
   those that possessed low perspective-taking trait empathy.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   These findings demonstrate the video improved knowledge and attitudes
   toward ECT compared with current material or no information. We
   suggest that the addition of personal experiences to public
   information adds perspective, improving overall attitudes toward
   health treatments.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a mental health treatment involving
the use of electric currents to induce a seizure,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` and is
used to treat life-threatening depression, catatonia and severe,
long-lasting mania that is resistant to
medication.\ :sup:`(n.d.a),(n.d.b)` However, ECT raises fear among the
general public,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)–(n.d.d)` largely because of its
dramatization in the mainstream media.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.d)–(n.d.e)`
Concerns are, however, not entirely based on fiction, as some patients
have reported adverse psychological side-effects as a result of ECT
treatment, implying possible signs of trauma response.\ :sup:`(n.d.f)`
The National Health Service (NHS) information for patients undergoing
ECT consists of a science-based leaflet from the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE),\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` despite research
suggesting that healthcare education may be better received alongside
contextual and emotive evidence.\ :sup:`(n.d.f),(n.d.g)` Gold Coast
Health in Australia implemented these principles, focusing on adding
contextual evidence for the benefits of ECT,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` but there
is no empirical evidence as to whether this approach improved
perceptions of ECT.

From a psychological perspective, trait empathy is one factor which may
affect someone's ability to relate to the personal accounts of those
receiving ECT. Both cognitive and affective empathy have a positive
relationship with the ability to perceive emotional
content.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` Specifically, cognitive empathy can facilitate
‘perspective-taking’ capabilities.\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` Following the use of
the video produced by Gold Coast Health,\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` the Southern
Health NHS Foundation Trust developed a similar tool to foster more
accurate perceptions of ECT. This study is the first to empirically test
whether the use of the emotion-based information improves perception of
ECT compared with the current leaflet. We aimed to test whether the new
video fulfils its purpose to promote a more positive attitude and better
knowledge of ECT in the UK public, and whether trait empathy plays a
role in any effects.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Ethics
------

Ethical approval was given by the University of Portsmouth Undergraduate
and Taught Postgraduate Psychology Department Research Ethics Board
(clearance number 2019-036).

.. _sec1-2:

Design
------

The experiment used an independent groups design. Participants were
randomly allocated to one of three conditions based on type of ECT
information (no information, science-based leaflet or emotional video).
The dependent variables were mean scores on the ECT knowledge and
attitude questionnaire. Two subscales of the Interpersonal Relativity
Index (IRI), perspective-taking and empathic concern, were used to
control for differing levels of trait empathy in the participant sample.

.. _sec1-3:

Participants
------------

Participants were recruited by volunteer sampling. Posters were
advertised around the University of Portsmouth, asking for volunteers to
complete an online survey about ECT; these were not aimed at psychology
students, but they were not excluded from taking part. Participants that
were not students were recruited by sending a request for participation
to local community facilities. The survey link was further sent by the
non-student participants to their own colleagues, to increase the number
of non-student participants. Participant ages ranged from 18 to 67 years
(*N* = 146, mean age 31.94 years, s.d. 13.49). The sample comprised 51
men and 95 women, and both students (*n* = 39) and non-students
(*n* = 107). `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ shows the mean age and gender and
student ratios for each condition. Table 1Participant demographic
informationConditionMean age in years (s.d.)Female:male
participantsStudents:non-studentsNo information34.40
(14.37)29:2310:42NHS leaflet30.98 (12.74)36:2417:34New video29.98
(13.24)29:1311:31

Participants were asked to disclose any experience with ECT, and any
mental illness that might qualify an individual for ECT. Some
participants disclosed previous experience with ECT (*n* = 64), with a
significant proportion (*n* = 21) receiving their knowledge from film or
television. Some participants disclosed previous experience of mental
health problems (*n* = 84), with the majority (*n* = 63) having
experience with severe clinical depression.

.. _sec1-4:

Materials
---------

The survey consisted of a revised version of the IRI,\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` an
ECT attitude and knowledge questionnaire\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` and two types
of information on ECT use as treatment for mental illness.

.. _sec1-4-1:

IRI
~~~

Two subscales from the revised version of the Basic Empathy
Scale\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` were used to measure trait empathy: empathetic
concern and perspective-taking. The scales were rated using five-point
Likert scales, with a high score representing higher trait empathy
scores.

.. _sec1-4-2:

ECT attitude and knowledge questionnaire
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ECT scale consisted of both an attitude and knowledge subscale. Each
statement was scored on a six-point scale, with high scores indicating a
more positive attitude or correct knowledge of ECT.

.. _sec1-4-3:

Information on ECT use in mental health treatment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A public information leaflet was taken from the NICE guidance for the
prescription and administration of ECT in depression, mania and
catatonia.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` This leaflet contains mainly scientific
evidence of the efficacy and use of ECT. For this study, the sections
‘What is NICE?’ and ‘What are depressive illness, mania, schizophrenia
and catatonia?’ were omitted. A video intervention was developed by the
lead author and Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust based on a
successful educational video created by Gold Coast Health,
Australia.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` The video focuses on the experiences of
patients, nurses and caregivers with ECT. The video is available to the
public at: https://vimeo.com/369525494.

.. _sec1-5:

Procedure
---------

All participants completed the survey online and provided written
informed consent before taking part. Participants were first asked about
any experience with ECT and any mental health conditions, and then
completed the IRI. They were then randomly allocated to one of three
information conditions: no information, the current NHS leaflet or the
newly developed video. Participants in the leaflet and video condition
were presented with the educational material and asked to watch/read
carefully before completing the knowledge and attitudes to ECT
questionnaire. Participants in the no information condition only
completed the knowledge and attitudes to ECT questionnaire.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

.. _sec2-1:

Descriptive statistics
----------------------

`Figures 1 <#fig01>`__ and `2 <#fig02>`__ show the distribution of the
knowledge and attitude scores in each of the three information
conditions. The median scores indicate participants in the video
condition had more correct knowledge and a more positive attitude.
Importantly, in the attitudes to ECT factor only the video condition
showed a median score above the mid-point, indicating a positive
attitude. Receiving no intervention or the ECT leaflet had distributions
that sat mostly below the mid-point for both knowledge and attitudes,
thus meaning the video condition was the only form of intervention
likely to encourage accurate knowledge and facilitate a more positive
attitude toward ECT when compared with receiving no information or the
current leaflet. These findings suggest that video information is the
most positive tool of the three studied. Fig. 1Distribution of
electroconvulsive therapy knowledge scores across each information
condition (points represent individual participant ratings). Fig.
2Distribution of electroconvulsive therapy attitude scores across each
information condition (points represent individual participant ratings).

.. _sec2-2:

The role of empathy in the success of the ECT educational material
------------------------------------------------------------------

To analyse the data further, a one-way multivariate analysis of
covariance (MANCOVA) was conducted on ECT attitude and knowledge data
comparing data from each information condition. Empathetic concern and
empathic perspective-taking used as covariates. A significant
multivariate effect of information type was found (Wilks’ λ = 0.84,
*F*\ (4, 280) = 6.36, *P* < 0.001, ), with a small effect size. Empathic
perspective-taking was a significant covariate in the multivariate model
(Wilks’ λ = 0.95, *F*\ (2, 140) = 3.44, *P* = 0.035, ), with a small
effect size. No significant effect of empathetic concern was found on
perception of ECT.

The significant omnibus MANCOVA justified separate univariate ANOVA on
the dependent variables. There was a significant effect of information
type on knowledge scores (*F*\ (2, 141) = 11.68, *P* < 0.001, ), with a
small effect size. *Post hoc* pairwise comparisons with a Bonferroni
adjustment revealed that knowledge scores were significantly higher in
the video condition compared with the leaflet condition (*P* = 0.01) and
receiving no intervention (*P* < 0.001). There was also a significant
effect of information type on attitudes to ECT scores (*F*\ (2,
141) = 11.45, *P* < 0.001, ), with a small effect size. *Post hoc*
pairwise comparisons with a Bonferroni adjustment showed attitude scores
to be highest in the video condition when compared with the leaflet
condition (*P* = 0.003) and receiving no intervention (*P* < 0.001).
There was no significant difference observed between the leaflet and
receiving no information for either knowledge or attitudes to ECT.

Perspective-taking was found to be a significant covariate for attitudes
to ECT only (*F*\ (1, 141) = 5.06, *P* = 0.026, ), with a small effect
size. This suggests the increase in positive attitude to ECT after
watching the video exists after controlling for the underlying trait
empathy. It also suggests empathic perspective-taking accounts for a
very small but significant portion of the variance in attitudes to ECT.
`Figure 3 <#fig03>`__ shows the relationship between emotional
perspective-taking on ECT attitudes in each of the three conditions.
Although the regression line for the video was similar across the range
of perspective-taking scores (β = −0.06, s.e. 0.25), there was a small
positive relationship for the NHS leaflet group (β = 0.29, s.e. 0.16)
and the no information group (β = 0.30, s.e. 0.21). When perspective
trait empathy was high, attitudes toward ECT in the three information
conditions were similar; when perspective trait empathy was low,
attitudes toward ECT scores in the new video condition were higher than
the NHS leaflet and no information conditions. From this, we can infer
that the style of intervention had little effect on those already high
in trait empathy; however, for those with low trait empathy, the video
proved beneficial for improving perceptions of ECT. Fig. 3Relationship
between perspective-taking and attitudes toward electroconvulsive
therapy in each of the information conditions.

.. _sec2-3:

The role of gender and student status on the effect of ECT educational material
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To check the data for potential biases arising from gender and student
status, an independent group MANCOVA was conducted on ECT attitude and
knowledge scores comparing data from each information condition. Gender
(male/female) and student status (student/non-student) were used as
covariates. A significant multivariate effect of information type was
found (Wilks’ λ = 0.87, *F*\ (4, 280) = 5.10, *P* = 0.001, ), with a
small effect size. Gender was a significant covariate (Wilks’ λ = 0.92,
*F*\ (2, 140) = 6.19, *P* = 0.003, ), with a small effect size. No
significant effect of student status was found on perceptions of ECT.
The significant omnibus MANCOVA justified separate univariate analysis
of variance on the dependent variables. There was a significant effect
of information type on knowledge scores (*F*\ (2, 141) = 2.88,
*P* < 0.001, ), with a small effect size. *Post hoc* pairwise
comparisons with a Bonferroni adjustment revealed that knowledge scores
were significantly higher in the video condition compared with the
leaflet condition (*P* = 0.01) and receiving no intervention
(*P* < 0.001). There was also significant effect of information type on
attitudes to ECT scores (*F*\ (2, 141) = 8.87, *P* < 0.001, ), with a
small effect size. *Post hoc* pairwise comparisons with a Bonferroni
adjustment showed attitude scores to be highest in the video condition
when compared with the leaflet condition (*P* = 0.005) and receiving no
intervention (*P* < 0.001). There was no significant difference observed
between the leaflet and receiving no information for either knowledge or
attitudes to ECT. Gender was found to be a significant covariate for
knowledge of ECT (*F*\ (1, 141) = 12.38, *P* = 0.001, ), with a small
effect size, and attitudes to ECT (*F*\ (1, 141) = 6.35, *P* = 0.013, ).
This suggests that the increase in knowledge and a more positive
attitude to ECT after watching the video exists after controlling for
gender. It also suggests gender accounts for a small but significant
portion of the variance in knowledge and attitudes toward ECT.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec3-1:

ECT knowledge and attitudes
---------------------------

Our findings suggest that both knowledge and attitudes to ECT can be
significantly improved using contextual and emotive information. Only
the video condition improved knowledge and attitudes to ECT, whereas the
leaflet currently used by the NHS did not improve either knowledge or
attitudes compared with no information. For both the no intervention
condition and the leaflet condition, participants sat below the
mid-point for attitudes and on or below the mid-point for knowledge,
suggesting that they were still inclined to perceive ECT negatively.
These findings suggest that, compared with other styles of intervention,
the video would work best to educate patients and carers on the use of
ECT to treat mental health illnesses. These results support current
literature which suggests that interventions focusing on more emotional,
real-life experience may be more effective for perception improvement
than using factual information alone.\ :sup:`(n.d.j),(n.d.l),(n.d.m)` It
should be noted that all the main and covariate effects were small, and
the distributions in all three experimental conditions had participants
that perceived ECT both positively and negatively. This suggests that
although the video may help to improve perceptions of ECT, it is not a
‘silver bullet’, and might best used alongside other informational
material. Future research should assess whether combining the leaflet
and the video improved the perceptions above and beyond the video alone.

An alternate explanation for our results may be the modal differences
between video and written information; the introduction of a dynamic
stimulus may have been enough to demand more attention from participants
than reading a leaflet. Some research has suggested showing patients a
video can reduce anxiety around healthcare treatments more than written
information.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` To address this, it would be important to
examine whether a similar improvement in knowledge and attitudes is
found irrespective of how the content was delivered. It should also be
noted that although the efficacy of ECT is outside of the scope of this
research, there is still large debate as to whether there are any
noticeable and long-lasting benefits to undergoing
ECT.\ :sup:`(n.d.b),(n.d.c),(n.d.o),(n.d.p)` Additionally, meta-analyses
report high relapse rates among many patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` There are
some ethical considerations on whether improving attitudes toward ECT is
acceptable if the benefit of the treatment is, in some cases, limited
and relapse is likely.

.. _sec3-2:

The role of trait empathy
-------------------------

We hypothesised that trait empathy would offer some explanation as to
why emotional content was more effective compared with scientific
information. We found that perspective-taking influenced attitudes to
ECT, but this was only the case for participants who received no
information or the NHS leaflet; those with higher perspective-taking
trait empathy had a more positive attitude to ECT. Perspective-taking
had no effect on attitudes to ECT in the video condition. Therefore,
participants with high perspective-taking scores had similar attitudes
to ECT in all three conditions, whereas participants with lower
perspective-taking empathy had a more negative perception of ECT in the
leaflet and no information groups compared with the video group. The
video, therefore, seemed to directly improve the attitude of
participants who had lower perspective-taking abilities. The proposed
reason for this is that the video directly adds context to ECT as a
treatment. This allowed participants with lower perspective-taking
empathy to relate to the treatment or participants in a similar way to
those participants with high perspective-taking empathy.

This explanation seems to be consistent with evidence from neuroimaging
studies, which has demonstrated a link between perspective-taking
ability and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex,\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` a brain
area that is also critical for perception and reaction to the suffering
of others.\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` Thus, scoring higher in perspective-taking
may make an individual more likely to be able to imagine the suffering
of those experiencing severe mental health problems, which explains why
they may react more positively to ECT even with limited information
around the treatment. Furthermore, adding context in the form of another
person's account can elicit a more empathetic response from participants
when making decisions,\ :sup:`(n.d.s)`\ and that the empathy elicited is
generally more appropriate when context is present;\ :sup:`(n.d.t)` this
suggests that the context in the video may have encouraged a more
empathetic response to the content, even for those who do not naturally
empathise with another's situation

Alongside the significant covariate effect of trait empathy, gender was
found to be a separate significant covariate for both knowledge and
attitudes. We suspect that the known gender variation in
empathy\ :sup:`(n.d.u)` can partly explain why gender was a significant
covariate. This information provides grounds to suggest further research
is conducted into the effect of an emotional, video-based stimulus, and
whether any specific gender effects exist in relation to the efficacy of
these training materials.

.. _sec3-3:

Clinical implications
---------------------

These findings provide a deeper insight into the use of education to
improve perception of ECT, with emotional stimuli proving to be the best
method for information delivery, especially for people with low
perspective-taking empathy. Overall, better knowledge of people's
experiences with ECT may ultimately mean less fear and apprehension
among the public.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` The results of our findings can be
used as a recommendation for both the NHS and the wider health sector on
how to structure and deliver their informational material. A critical
point seems to be that personal accounts and context are important in
the effective delivery of health information.

.. _sec3-4:

Limitations and suggestions for future research
-----------------------------------------------

This study focuses on ECT, which carries a large amount of
stigma.\ :sup:`(n.d.w),(n.d.e)` Going forward, it could be interesting
to explore whether the effect exists with other health treatments with
potential negative public perceptions. Some alternative treatments still
have stigma attached,\ :sup:`(n.d.x)` and contextual evidence may be the
key to improving perceptions of these treatments for mental health
illnesses. The results provide grounds to recommend that more emotive
content should be introduced when educating the public about mental
health. Suffering from a mental health disorder can still affect your
ability to find work and maintain relationships.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)`
Further, certain disorders, such as schizophrenia and psychosis, are
still hugely feared by the general public.\ :sup:`(n.d.z)` Introducing a
context and personal experiences to these illnesses helps to distinguish
between mental health in the real world and the overdramatization of
disorders fed to the public by the media.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` Making the
distinction between individual and symptom could help integration in
society, improve quality of life and aid recovery for those with a
mental illness.

The authors would like to acknowledge Karen Osala, Hannah Watts and Mark
Pointer from Southern Health NHS Foundation, for help in producing the
video; and Dr Tade Thompson from Solent NHS Trust, for his guidance
during the conceptualisation stage of this research.

**Oakley Cheung** is a psychology student at the Department of
Psychology, University of Portsmouth, UK; **Marc Baker** is a lecturer
at the Department of Psychology, University of Portsmouth, UK; **Paul
Tabraham** is Consultant Clinical Psychologist and Divisional Lead for
Psychological Therapies at the Portsmouth and South East Hampshire
Division, Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

This study was preregistered on 6 November 2019 on the Open Science
Framework. Data and details of the preregistration are available at the
following link: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/SY6AP.

O.C. was responsible for initial conceptualisation of the study and its
hypotheses, direction of the ECT video and oversight of its production,
designing and conducting the study, analysis of results and end write-up
of the study. M.B. provided general guidance through all experimental
processes and edited the final manuscript. P.T. provided a critical
clinical perspective and comments.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref24

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref26

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref27

      n.d.aa.
