==================================================================
Magical thinking and moral injury: exclusion culture in psychiatry
==================================================================



Chloe Beale
:Correspondence: Dr Chloe Beale (chloebeale@nhs.net)

:date: 2022-02

:Abstract:
   This is an article about exclusion. We might not like to admit it –
   even fail to realise it – but National Health Service (NHS) mental
   health service structures have become increasingly focused on how to
   deny people care instead of help them to access it. Clinicians learn
   the art of self-delusion, convincing ourselves we are not letting
   patients down but, instead, doing the clinically appropriate thing.
   Well-meant initiatives become misappropriated to justify neglect. Are
   we trying to protect ourselves against the knowledge that we're
   failing our patients, or is collusion simply the easiest option?
   Problematic language endemic in psychiatry reveals a deeper issue: a
   culture of fear and falsehood, leading to iatrogenic harm. An
   excessively risk-averse and under-resourced system may drain its
   clinicians of compassion, losing sight of the human being behind each
   ‘protected’ bed and rejected referral.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _sec1:

The language of exclusion
=========================

Choice of words in clinical work and documentation can betray troubling
attitudes, personal values and fears. Given that psychoanalytic theory
remains a core component of psychiatric training, we could do better at
recognising our own defences. We have developed an entire lexicon of
weasel words and magical thinking that we pass between generations and
disciplines. It would be hard to come up with an exhaustive list of lies
we tell ourselves in psychiatric practice; this does not claim to be
one. Neither is this the first time anyone has pointed out the
problematic language used in psychiatry.\ :sup:`1` Patients are, of
course, acutely aware of the absurdity.\ :sup:`2`,\ :sup:`3` There are
many which should be easily recognisable to anyone working in National
Health Service (NHS) mental health services in 2021 and whose origins
demand scrutiny. Perhaps the most widespread example is the language of
suicide risk.

Despite all evidence against checklists and risk
stratification,\ :sup:`4` we continue to behave as if risk is both
predictable and quantifiable, persuading ourselves that certain stock
phrases convey a protective coating. ‘Fleeting thoughts of suicide’, for
example, sometimes seen as the precursor to an ‘impulsive’ suicide
attempt or act of self-harm. Although it is not without value to record
these things in the course of trying to understand someone's state of
mind, it is important to question the attached meaning. In writing ‘no
plans or intent’ we make ourselves feel better about the unpredictable
nature of suicide, hanging false hope on thoughts that come and go.
Rather than admit that someone might end their life but we don't know
when or how, we purport to know it is unlikely to occur. This inevitably
leads us to seek reassurance from patients, framing questions about
suicide for a negative answer.\ :sup:`5` Rarely is this more clear than
when documenting that someone can (or cannot) ‘guarantee their safety’.
It should not be for patients to ‘guarantee’ anything to clinicians – it
is our responsibility to hold hope, not for them to promise us a future
in which we are not standing before a coroner. It can be painfully
obvious when a clinician has alighted on their ‘aha’ moment, the thing
that (they believe) proves low risk. Any suggestion that a person has
ambivalence towards suicide or actually wants to live (such as
voluntarily seeking medical help) risks this interpretation. It is
almost as if we take the worst-case scenario and work backwards from
there, starting at ‘this person might kill themselves’, followed by ‘how
can I prove it wasn't my fault?’ Our starting point should be the simple
recognition of distress and a desire to help. It is that connection on a
human level which so often makes the difference to people in crisis.
Nobody ever says they were saved by a thorough risk assessment, and
certainly not one treated as a stand-alone list of questions delivered
without empathy. One wonders if there is another medical specialty in
which there is such dogged devotion to a non-evidence-based practice. We
seem to pay heed to neither scientific evidence nor personal testimony,
available in abundance: ‘When the focus is purely on risk, professionals
are often left with the frustration and anxiety of holding the risk,
service users are left invalidated and abandoned’.\ :sup:`6` Bad
experiences reinforce learning; inquests and internal investigations can
feel adversarial and sometimes ask the wrong questions. Clinicians may
feel pressured to say (with the benefit of hindsight) that they would
have done things differently; perhaps the only acceptable excuse for
having ‘got it wrong’, so to speak, is because we thought the risk was
not there. Miles argues that many such problems have their basis in
shame, which means that doctors (and other health professionals) ‘become
morally neutral, unquestioning automatons, at the mercy of
organisational edicts, and fail to advocate for the needs of their
patients’.\ :sup:`7`

Further speculation seeks not only to see the future but to determine a
person's motivation. Someone who frequently harms themselves in a way
that may or may not have suicidal intentions may be pronounced at risk
of ‘death by misadventure’. The implication here is that the patient may
die without really meaning to. It is impossible to forecast the drivers
and intentions behind a theoretical final act; attempting to do so is
designed to alleviate our anxiety about the opacity of the future and
introduce a seed of blame on the part of the patient. Similarly,
patients may find themselves told they ‘have capacity’ to end their
lives, in a perverse justification of medical inaction.\ :sup:`8` Mental
capacity – a concept enshrined in legislation intended to enhance the
autonomy and decision-making of vulnerable people – is used to
legitimise neglect.\ :sup:`9` The tendency to stray from objectivity
into value judgement is an unfortunate but familiar feature of
psychiatric notes, from the truly offensive ‘manipulative’ to the
frankly bizarre ‘behavioural’, used to infer that a patient is doing
something in a conscious and deliberate manner rather than because they
can't help it. Such terminology does not stand up to scrutiny: not only
does it arrogantly assume the ability to precisely determine patients’
motivations and intentions, but it is also nonsensical. All behaviour is
‘behavioural’; one might as well describe breathing as respiratory.

Moral judgement and focus on self-preservation are both ways in which we
make the case for denying people care. We do a further massive
disservice to patients by assuming they do not see through us,
perpetuating the sense of alienation which characterises too many
encounters with mental health services.\ :sup:`2,10`

.. _sec2:

Systems designed to exclude
===========================

We cannot blame individuals for mindless practice without acknowledging
the system that has created them. Ours is a culture of senseless
fragmentation: separation of addiction and illness, of mental and
physical, of mind and brain, of deserving and undeserving. At their very
worst, modern mental health services seem to operate on two polarised
(but related) values: coercion and exclusion. The former is probably
most familiar as a critique of psychiatry as per the recent government
White Paper.\ :sup:`10` Time will tell whether statutory reform will
lead to the desired aim of reduced coercion. Less talked about, perhaps,
than the coercive aspect of psychiatry is the troubling drive to exclude
people from services. We exclude based on postcode, diagnosis,
complexity, comorbidity. Too much need, not enough need. Risk, lack of
motivation, readiness for change, any possible reason to keep people
out. We have apparently accepted, without question, the term
‘gatekeeping’ to refer to admission to psychiatric beds, a process that
generally involves the agreement of a crisis resolution and home
treatment team. While accepting the almost perpetual state of bed crisis
in NHS psychiatric services, we should consider what this terminology
says about the systemic attitude towards our patients. Our services are
fortresses; patients are intruders to be prevented from breaching our
defences. There is a rot in a system that views beds as needing
protection from patients. Mental health services have developed an ethos
of exclusion at an organisational level which naturally drives and
perpetuates poor practice at an individual level.

One form of exclusion from care arises out of the false distinction
between mind and body. Referrals to secondary care mental health
services may be refused if there is a perception that the problem is
‘organic’ unless it fits neatly into a memory clinic remit. René
Descartes died in 1650 yet still we subscribe to the dualistic fantasy
that mental and physical can be clearly delineated, with health services
persistently commissioned in a way that keeps them separated. This has
resulted in baseless and ill-defined concepts which dominate practice:
take ‘medical clearance’, for example – a requirement that any patient
attending an emergency department be reliably pronounced to have no
medical condition before having a psychiatric assessment.\ :sup:`11`
Although nobody would argue that an acute medical condition should not
be promptly identified and treated, problems arise when we refuse to
assess and manage in parallel. As is now recognised, this leads to
inadequate patient care and should not be routine practice\ :sup:`12`
(though its grip is tenacious). We ask medical colleagues to ‘exclude
organic causes’ of a disturbed mental state, as if it is always possible
to do this acutely or to precisely isolate which symptom arises from
which condition; as if conditions cannot coexist. In their detailed
analysis of the incoherent distinction between ‘organic’ and
‘functional’, Bell et al\ :sup:`13` conclude that ‘the
functional–organic distinction often seems like a tool that helps
determine treatment priority dressed up in the language of causation’.
Neurologists and other specialists may be as guilty of this as
psychiatrists,\ :sup:`14` but we should surely have a greater interest
in challenging what is essentially another form of stigma. As long as we
rely on outdated pseudo-medical concepts, mental health workers will
view ‘physical health’ as a kind of unpredictable bogeyman to be feared
and avoided.

.. _sec3:

A convenient pandemic
=====================

Stigma towards people with mental illness in medical settings is
well-documented and tackling it a slow process; it was only in January
2020 that the Side by Side consensus statement was published\ :sup:`13`
but the COVID-19 pandemic that hit us just a month later jeopardises its
intentions. Driven by the pandemic, there is a vogue for developing
acute psychiatric assessment sites away from emergency
departments.\ :sup:`15` Across the UK are hastily created diversions for
people in mental health crises and it remains to be seen whether these
will prove either safe or cost-effective. While acknowledging a genuine
need for infection control, the more cynical among us may see certain
organisations leaping on the opportunity to do what they have been
wanting to for years, which is to exclude psychiatric patients from
emergency departments. The party line is that this is a compassionate
move: an emergency department isn't the place for someone in mental
health crisis.\ :sup:`16` Arguably, it's not the most relaxing place for
someone with sepsis or a fractured neck of femur either but it's where
most of us would want to be in that situation. When Samuel Shem, in his
cult novel about North American internal medicine,\ :sup:`17` coined the
term ‘GOMER’ (Get Out of My Emergency Room) he was describing a group of
elderly patients with dementia, perceived to use time and resources but
never improve or die. ‘GOMER’ refers to the doctors’ reaction when these
unfortunate people arrive in their department. However, it seems as if
this attitude is even more applicable to people with mental illness,
certainly in the 21st-century NHS. Treating psychiatric patients as
‘GOMERs’ is systemically endorsed. A separation of mental and physical
emergency locations reinforces the dangerous notion that we can reliably
ascertain (even pre-hospital) whether someone needs ‘physical’ care or
not.

The pandemic has also focused attention on the concept of moral injury –
‘perpetrating, failing to prevent, or bearing witness to acts that
transgress deeply held moral beliefs and expectations’\ :sup:`18` – in
medicine.\ :sup:`19` There is a psychological toll that comes with
having to ration resources, transfer patients out of area owing to bed
pressures, suspend vital services and see waiting lists grow longer.
These have been headline news over the past year,\ :sup:`20` yet all are
challenges that have faced psychiatry for far longer. Perhaps we have
already grown used to excusing exclusion and senseless divisions in
order to avoid the reality that services have been systematically cut
and we cannot give patients what they need.\ :sup:`21` The mental health
profession has had its compassion eroded by moral injury for longer than
we can remember, rationing care for so long that we have come to believe
that exclusion is clinically indicated. We claim to be encouraging
personal responsibility and autonomy, preventing dependence, avoiding
institutionalisation, reducing unnecessary referrals, all of which
allows systemic failings to continue. Some of our processes seem almost
designed to harm; the ways in which institutional factors have an impact
on specific aspects of people's illnesses Kafkaesque. For example,
people with eating disorders, among whom the belief that one is ‘not
sick enough’ is common, are literally denied help until they are ‘sick
enough’.\ :sup:`22` People with personality disorder diagnoses who have
experienced trauma, rejection and interpersonal discord throughout their
lives are rejected by professionals within a system that tells them they
should not have time and resources wasted on them.\ :sup:`23` These are
not cognitive distortions but grim reality. This culture of exclusion,
coupled with the expectation that patients take responsibility to quell
clinician anxiety, is a toxic mix.

.. _sec4:

Rehumanising psychiatry
=======================

One consultant psychiatrist pontificating about culture in a journal is
not going to drive the kind of genuine change that needs to filter
through every layer of our system. Decades of damage requires time to
repair, not to mention the buy-in of all parties. Training has a role,
from undergraduate level upwards across all professional groups, but
organisations must have the guts to implement culture shift rather than
a series of slightly altered tick boxes. The more clinicians work side
by side with the people who use mental health services (and those who
have been excluded from them), the more effective the message.
Meaningful training and service development should be truly co-produced;
a fundamental problem is the focus on beds and breaches and targets
instead of the human story behind each number. Arguably, senior managers
who would willingly allow an unwell patient to wait in an emergency
department for more than 24 h for the purposes of ‘gatekeeping’ might
take a different view if it were them or a loved one, so should not be
permitted to distance themselves from clinical realities. This is not to
say that all those working on the front line are faultless patient
advocates. Lack of compassionate care for people in mental health crisis
pervades emergency services and, although burnout and
‘compassion-fatigue’ play a role, there are deep-seated negative
attitudes towards certain patients. Although co-production is vital, the
responsibility for recognising and calling out harmful culture and
practices should not fall entirely on the shoulders of those who have
suffered it. In short, our profession must open its eyes. Regulatory
bodies such as the General Medical Council tell us to ‘make the care of
the patient your first concern’\ :sup:`24` yet we stray from this to
prioritise the needs of clinicians and organisations. In a culture of
self-protection, exclusion will inevitably become a central aim because,
of course, the best way to prevent ourselves from harm is to prevent the
‘danger’ from getting near us. How have we so comprehensively forgotten
to put patients first?

Realism and honesty should be embedded in training, rather than teaching
perfect medicine in an imperfect world. Our patients will have more
trust in us if we are open about scarcity of resources and restrictions
on referrals; if we acknowledge that we cannot provide all we would like
to. Instead of pretending that exclusion is clinically appropriate we
must name it. However, clinical staff can only safely preach honesty if
senior leaders support this endeavour. Although the Royal College of
Psychiatrists has produced some welcome position statements and
guidelines, this must translate to institutional and organisational
change. Senior consultants, managers and academics who do not recognise
anything in this article may need to reacquaint themselves with the
front line; it will surely resonate with junior doctors, nurses, allied
health professionals, students and – most importantly – patients and
carers: ‘Educating the next generations of clinicians and social workers
is vital, but they won't survive immersion in toxic cultures. We need
honesty from organisations where poor care and neglect have become
systemic and endemic’.\ :sup:`25`

Patients and carers have been speaking out about exclusion and
iatrogenic harm for too long; psychiatrists complaining about blame
culture similarly. It is time this was translated into action by those
with most power to effect change. Consider this a call to arms: if the
content resonates then ensure you do more than shout into your echo
chamber.

With thanks to Dr David Foreman for inviting this contribution and for
his editorial advice.

**Chloe Beale**, MBBS, MRCPsych, LLM, is a consultant liaison
psychiatrist at Homerton University Hospital, London, trust lead for
suicide prevention for East London NHS Foundation Trust and an honorary
clinical senior lecturer at Queen Mary, University of London, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were
created or analysed in its writing.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
