===========================================================================================================================================
Transference-focused psychotherapy as an aid to learning psychodynamic psychotherapy: qualitative analysis of UK psychiatry trainees’ views
===========================================================================================================================================



Orestis Kanter Bax
Georgios Nerantzis
Tennyson Lee

:Correspondence: Orestis Kanter Bax
(orestis.kanter-bax@nhs.net)

:date: 2022-02

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims & method
      :name: sec_a1

   Learning psychotherapy can be difficult and stressful. We explore
   core trainees’ (*n* = 5) views on undertaking a psychodynamic
   psychotherapy training case using transference-focused psychotherapy
   (TFP), in an East London NHS Foundation Trust supervision group. We
   used framework analysis of focus group interviews to examine
   trainees’ concerns, their views about this experience and its impact
   on general psychiatric practice.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Trainees described various concerns on starting: providing an
   effective intervention, insufficient experience and training-related
   pressures. However, they found that TFP addressed some of them and
   was helpful for learning psychodynamic psychotherapy. Difficulties
   around the countertransference remained at end-point. Trainees
   suggested that introductory teaching and learning through observation
   might be worthwhile.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Trainees’ experience suggests that an evidence-based operationalised
   approach such as TFP can be integrated into the core psychiatry
   curriculum as a psychodynamic psychotherapy learning method. Trainees
   report benefits extending to other areas of their practice.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Transference-focused psychotherapy (TFP) is an evidence-based,
manualised\ :sup:`1` treatment for borderline personality
disorder,\ :sup:`2–4` with modifications for narcissistic personality
disorder.\ :sup:`5,6` Developed from Otto Kernberg's contributions on
borderline personality organisation,\ :sup:`7,8` it offers a structured
approach to the treatment of severe personality disorders.

TFP offers operationalised technical guidance based on modified
psychoanalytic principles that are helpful for the general
psychiatrist.\ :sup:`9` We hypothesised that there are specific TFP
characteristics (`Box 1 <#box1>`__) that may be facilitators for a
meaningful training experience in the UK, especially in the context of
training in the National Health Service (NHS) and the drive for
developing suitable skills for a patient population with severe
personality pathology. TFP has been used in psychiatric residency
training in Australia and the USA with positive learning outcomes for
residents.\ :sup:`10–12` It has recently been introduced in the UK as a
modality for the supervised experience of trainees and this is the first
reported study describing trainees’ views. Box 1About
transference-focused psychotherapyTransference-focused psychotherapy
(TFP) is a psychodynamic treatment grounded in contemporary object
relations theory and supported by randomised controlled trials. Its main
premise is the central importance of transference analysis, as
manifested in the ‘here and now’ of the therapeutic relationship, in
relation to the integration of fragmented psychological structures
(borderline personality organisation).The treatment is operationalised
in a treatment ‘manual’\ :sup:`1` that provides the technical framework
(strategies, tactics and techniques) to be used by the therapist. Key
modifications from traditional psychoanalysis include an emphasis on a
diagnostic ‘structural assessment’, lesser frequency (1–2
sessions/week), more active participation by the therapist, and focus on
the treatment frame and treatment objectives as negotiated in the
treatment contract (with limit setting when self-destructive behaviours
occur).In line with its psychoanalytic origin, TFP examines various
communications at different levels (verbal, non-verbal,
countertransference) and aims to help the patient understand and resolve
unconscious conflicts and work towards greater personality integration.

.. _sec1-1:

Background
==========

The role of psychodynamics in medical education and psychiatric training
curricula dates from the beginning of psychoanalysis.\ :sup:`13`
Tensions between the medical model in psychiatry and the psychoanalytic
paradigm remain.\ :sup:`14` The Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych)
places importance on psychotherapy learning in core and higher
psychiatry training in the UK.\ :sup:`15` Core trainees need to meet
psychotherapy-specific curriculum competencies: participation in
Balint-type or case-based discussion groups and supervised psychotherapy
experience. Completion of core training and examinations lead to RCPsych
membership and eligibility for progression to higher specialty training.
The aim is not for all trainees to progress to medical psychotherapy
specialism, but for psychiatrists to be psychotherapeutically
informed.\ :sup:`16`

Trainees’ views on case-based discussion groups\ :sup:`17` and
cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT)\ :sup:`18` indicate that these are
valued as part of their training development. Psychodynamic
psychotherapy has been used for learning psychodynamic principles and
for the long-case requirement.\ :sup:`19` Reports indicate that starting
out in psychodynamic psychotherapy is daunting\ :sup:`20` and related
ideas are challenging but valuable.\ :sup:`21,22` The General Medical
Council's Medical Psychotherapy Report (2013) has triggered further
research on psychotherapy training needs. There is accumulating evidence
about specific specialist approaches and their usefulness for the
trainee psychiatrist.\ :sup:`23,24`

.. _sec1-2:

Aims
====

This study was set up to identify the baseline and end-of-therapy views
of core trainee psychiatrists in East London NHS Foundation Trust (ELFT)
regarding a TFP approach to their psychodynamic long case. We
investigated (a) concerns about starting out, (b) recommendations
regarding training needs, (c) the perceived advantages and disadvantages
of using TFP and (d) its impact on current and future psychiatric
practice.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

Five core trainees in the same supervision group were identified and
invited to participate in the study. They were informed that
participation was voluntary, that the interviewer of the focus group
discussions would be independent from their supervisory structure and
that transcripts would be anonymised before analysis.

We conducted two focus group interviews with the participants, one at
the start and one at the end-point of their training case. We employed a
framework approach\ :sup:`25–27` owing to its suitability for analysis
of textual data, particularly semi-structed interview transcripts. The
focus group interviews were facilitated by a clinical psychologist with
no background in TFP. The interviewer asked five questions designed to
investigate the study's initial aims. Two were asked a baseline: What
are your main concerns about starting a psychodynamic long case?What
would you find most helpful in starting a psychodynamic long case?and
the remaining three at end-point: What are the advantages of using TFP
for your first psychodynamic long case?What are the disadvantages of
using TFP for your first psychodynamic long case?How has the experience
of having used TFP on a psychodynamic long case affected your current
and ongoing psychiatric practice?Open, non-suggestive prompts repeating
the question and inviting further elaboration or participant dialogue,
and a prompt at end-point inviting trainees to think back to their
baseline concerns, were permitted. Discussions were audio recorded,
lasting 75 and 60 min each. We transcribed recordings verbatim and
anonymised transcripts ahead of independent familiarisation with the
data by the interviewer and the lead author. Line-by-line open coding
was conducted independently by the two, who subsequently compared
labels, resolved differences through discussion, homogenised themes and
jointly produced the resulting indexes and charts. Additional deductive
review of the transcripts, mapping of themes, analysis and
interpretation were completed jointly in a final stage by two of the
authors and the interviewer.

| All participants (in year 2 and year 3 of training at baseline), two
  males and three females, provided consent to the study. All had
  already completed the academic and basic clinical part of their
  training for their level (psychotherapy lectures, case-based
  discussion groups) and all but one had completed their CBT short case.
  None had formal psychodynamic psychotherapy experience or had worked
  in a personality disorder service and all were expected to undertake
  preparation for the training method (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). All joined
  the baseline focus group interview and one did not take part in the
  end-point interview. All met their training expectations, and all
  except one (the patient discontinued psychotherapy early) completed
  their case after 1 year. Table 1Characteristics of the
  transference-focused psychotherapy (TFP) training
  methodCharacteristicsDetailsFormat of clinical experienceIndividual
  TFP once a weekDuration1 yearAllocated patients’
  characteristicsPersonality disorder diagnosis: borderline personality
  disorder or narcissistic personality disorder (as assessed on SCID-II
  DSM-IV).\ :sup:`28`
| Moderate to severe pathology.
| Informed consent for session audio-recording of all sessions for
  training purposes.Patient preparation requirementsAssessment,
  preliminary contract setting\ :sup:`29` and goal setting completed by
  the specialist service.
| Trainee-led contract finalisation takes place in a preliminary meeting
  after allocation.Trainee preparation requirementsFamiliarisation with
  the TFP ‘manual’.\ :sup:`1`
| Orientation to the supervision process and regular preliminary
  attendance of the group.Supervision characteristicsFacilitated by a
  consultant psychiatrist in medical psychotherapy and accredited TFP
  teacher.
| Format: group. Frequency: once weekly.
| Duration: 1 h.
| 1:1 preparation and progress review meetings with the supervisor at
  start, midpoint and end of case.
| Review and supervision of audio-recorded sessions.
| Review of end-of-case formulation report

Cases related to this study were assessed prior to allocation and
consideration was given to reducing the risk of patient drop-out.
Patients allocated had borderline personality disorder or narcissistic
personality disorder diagnoses and scored in the lower range of the
Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) (scores of 51–10), indicating
serious impairment.

The study was registered as a service development project and was
granted approval by the East London NHS Foundation Trust Ethics
Committee.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

Major themes from our analysis matched the questions asked. The
subthemes derived from the data, and we present findings in two
sections, each following analysis of the respective interviews. The
first section (Trainees’ concerns) addresses the first two aims of our
study using baseline data (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__) and the second
(Trainees’ views) the last two, with end-point data (`Table
3 <#tab03>`__). Table 2Thematic analysis: focus group (5 participants)
views at baselineThemesSubthemes(1) Concerns about taking on a long case
Providing an effective interventionInsufficient experience and
trainingTraining-related and other pressures(2) Recommendations about
taking on a long case Practical training skillsImprovement in
supervisionIntroductory teachingCommon scenarios and basic tipsAccess to
personal psychotherapy Table 3Thematic analysis: focus group (4
participants) views at end-pointThemesSubthemes(1) Advantages of using
TFP Clarity about the nature of psychotherapyImproved ability to manage
the therapeutic encounterFacilitates long-case supervisionFacilitates
long-case preparationFacilitates learning psychodynamics(2)
Disadvantages of using TFP General/unspecified limitationsLimitations
related to countertransference managementDifference from the psychiatric
model(3) Impact on initial concerns about taking on a long case Reduces
anxiety about doing it wrongReduces anxiety about doing it rightReduces
anxiety about the patient discontinuing psychotherapy earlyReduces
anxiety about making interventionsFacilitates formulating/planning
treatmentNo effect on concern about lack of effectivenessPositive effect
on concern about lack of effectivenessNo effect on concern about
training commitments(4) Effects on psychiatric practice Positive effect
on the clinical encounterPositive effect on understanding of personality
disorderPositive effect on working in teamPositive effect on education
and training skills [1]_

.. _sec3-1:

Trainees’ concerns about starting a psychotherapy long case and their recommendations
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

“**‘**\ I have never even seen any kind of talking therapy happen […]
normally in medicine you sort of at least see something, like someone
put in a cannula or someone take a history’ (participant 1).”
“**‘**\ […] that's probably quite difficult for us to swallow, being
medical, ’cause I think you always think there needs to be some sort of
result, whereas maybe there isn't always some big result that you want,
but in our heads we probably think that every time there should be, so
this puts more pressure on you’ (participant 3).”Trainees expressed
concerns at baseline about treatment effectiveness and lack of
competency: ‘the intervention I am doing, how therapeutic is it?’
(participant 5); ‘is it a waste of time?’ (participant 1). They said
they had no previous training and experience, no direct observation of
treatment delivery, a limited theoretical and conceptual map and limited
familiarity with the field: ‘you don't even know how you are supposed to
sit’ (participant 1); ‘I don't have that deep knowledge of
psychoanalysis to really understand what I'm doing’ (participant 2).
This left them with uncertainty, a sense of lack of purpose, inadequacy
and unpreparedness. They were concerned about the quality of care they
delivered, potential errors in treatment delivery, negative treatment
effects and causing harm to the patient: ‘I am a bit worried about
saying the wrong thing and sort of causing damage, I guess people who
have actually trained in therapy would be less likely to’ (participant
3); ‘the feel of failure is quite strong: is it gonna be your fault?’
(participant 5).

Additional pressures originated from their wish to complete their long
case in a timely manner for training progression: ‘one of the big
concerns is about the [patient] dropping out before doing enough work to
complete the case’ (participant 2). They discussed the emotional and
personal commitments to the patient and the task in hand, and reported
pressures relating to the continuity and intensity of contact and a
sense of isolation. Some trainees mentioned having had no personal
psychotherapy as an added concern.

Given perceived limitations in the current format for preparation for
the long case and the limited duration of supervision sessions, trainees
recommended introductory teaching (theory and technique) and suggested
focusing on practical skills and observational learning (audio, video,
simulation and expert demonstration methods): ‘seeing someone having
psychodynamic work in practice’ (participant 2); ‘a few key [tips]: tell
me in three sentences what am I supposed to be doing when I start’
(participant 1). They also noted that anxiety management skills would be
useful.

.. _sec3-2:

Trainees views on learning psychodynamic psychotherapy using TFP and its impact on psychiatric practice
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

“**‘**\ I think I was really worried that I was going to do it
[psychotherapy] wrong or not be able to do it or not know what I was
doing […] I think the more you do it you realise there isn't really a
right and wrong […] I think you have a lot more anxiety about it before
you start’ (participant 3).” “**‘**\ at the beginning [I didn't] see the
point of a trainee doing a long case if you have no interest in going
into doing psychotherapy training as an SpR [specialist registrar], but
I think it has changed my clinical practice […] I would hope it's not
something I would forget or lose as I go through the career’
(participant 4).” “‘you get a sort of more rounded view of how they
[patients with personality disorder] feel, I think that they suffer more
[…] and I understand what it's like for them a bit more’ (participant
1).”At the point of completion of the long case, trainees discussed the
positives and negatives of using TFP, its impact on their initial
concerns and day-to-day psychiatric practice.

They reported an overall positive effect on their initial concerns: TFP
reduced anxiety about competence, harming the patient, the patient
discontinuing psychotherapy early and making therapeutic interventions.
They remained worried about the effectiveness of psychotherapy. There
was no impact on their concerns about competing training pressures.

Trainees said that TFP provided clarity about the nature and purpose of
psychotherapy and it made the theory more accessible and less obscure.
They also spoke about TFP enabling a focus on the patient–therapist
relationship ‘in the here and now’, and their increased ability to focus
on affect, challenge engagement on a cognitive level, address recurrent
transference and countertransference patterns and manage the negative
transference: ‘I think it is clearer what you are supposed to be doing
with TFP’ (participant 4); ‘It helps you mentalise yourself a bit more
in the session’ (participant 3); ‘with TFP alone I guess you are quite
protected in some way, because however [the patients] respond even if it
is quite negative, this could be a positive thing, ’cause there was a
lot of affect in the room, there is a lot of material’ (participant 3).

They reported that the treatment contract and frame provided a shared
sense of purpose for themselves and the patient, reduced their anxiety
about interventions and activity in the session, and enabled them to
manage risk, address acting out and better understand the patient's
expectations: ‘I think the TFP frame was useful in […] thinking about
why that happened without it feeling really personal’ (participant 2);
‘in TFP you are more allowed to bring up breaks to the contract – with
my patient I felt much more comfortable to do this’ (participant 4).

Finally, they shared a view that TFP enables preparation at baseline and
ahead of each session, allowing them to recall sessions and report them
in supervision in a structured way. They said it facilitated the use of
supervision within time constraints by offering a shared language and
reference framework, which allowed them to track affectively important
material, understand and feedback in supervision the challenges to the
frame and the patient–therapist relationship: ‘[TFP] framed how I would
relate the session back to the group’ (participant 2).

In terms of the shortcomings of TFP, they felt that its focus on the
transference neglected other important relationships in the patient's
life and limited the variety of potential directions for the therapy.
They reported that the expectation of therapist activity and the
manualised model produced performance and adherence anxiety: ‘I was
quite anxious at least for the first 10 sessions to make sure I was on
model’ (participant 2). Some trainees said that TFP theory and practice
was difficult to link and that the marked difference from the
psychiatric model, in combination with their limited exposure to
psychoanalytic theory, was a limitation for using the model. They said
that the challenges in managing countertransference-related difficulties
were not fully overcome by using TFP. They described negative therapist
feelings produced by the focus on the transference, and difficulties
with maintaining therapeutic neutrality. They also mentioned
experiencing uncertainty in the face of patients developing positive
feelings, attachment to the therapist, genuine affective contact and
psychological progress: ‘I feel like my patient has made progress and
that he is being genuine and the more he is like that, the more
difficult it is for me to know what to do’ (participant 3).

Trainees noted that TFP experience improved their daily psychiatric
practice and working with patients in various general adult psychiatric
settings: ‘I find it easier to be clear about the point of us meeting
and to maintain the boundaries around that, whereas before when I first
started I always found it hard to keep my clinic sessions down to the
right length [and to] be clear with them and myself about why we are
meeting’ (participant 2). They felt it improved awareness and management
of transference/countertransference ‘in the room’ in such settings, made
interactions with patients (especially those with a personality
disorder) less stressful and improved their ability to manage
boundaries, set therapeutic goals and contracts, promote openness,
instil hope, manage time, risk and acting-out, and liaise with
specialist services. They felt that TFP improved their understanding of
the nature of personality disorder and the patients’ subjective
experience: ‘It gives you a better hope’ (participant 1); ‘I think you
just have […] more understanding of it [personality disorder]’
(participant 3); ‘I think I am more confident […] managing assessments
or interactions […] being boundaried and also commenting on things that
I might not know how to comment on before and being quite open with the
patient in a professional way’ (participant 3).

They said that working in teams was positively affected through an
improved ability to supervise teams, and to recognise and address
colleagues’ and teams’ strong affective reactions to interactions with
patients with personality disorders: ‘you are able to have that
discussion [about frustration and acting out] with your colleagues, like
PLNs [psychiatric liaison nurses]’ (participant 2); ‘using the TFP sort
of structure [to think] about actually why is this anxiety being raised,
why is the team acting in such a way’ (participant 4). They reported
that their experience provided transferable skills for tutoring and
education and improved their understanding of the role of psychotherapy
in the curriculum.

Two participants said this experience motivated them to seek further
experience in psychotherapy.

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

Trainees with no previous experience in psychodynamic psychotherapy
expressed intense anxieties related to the prospect of providing this
intervention for the first time. They described ambivalence about the
value of psychodynamic psychotherapy at baseline, professional
self-doubt and training-related pressures. The interview after
completion of their long cases indicated that some of these anxieties
are alleviated and that TFP has overall positive effects for trainees,
extending into their general psychiatric practice, though with some
limitations.

Describing therapist difficulties is a core area of the psychotherapy
literature but there are few publications specifically identifying what
psychiatry trainees find difficult.\ :sup:`20,30,31` Our study group's
anxieties partly match the available taxonomy for psychotherapists’
(both novice and seasoned) struggles.\ :sup:`32` This pattern of
self-doubt, recognised for the novice therapist,\ :sup:`33` is to be
expected also for the trainee psychiatrist in the early stages of
development but may improve with professional progression.\ :sup:`34`
This trajectory of change is supported by our findings of some improved
anxieties at end-point. Trainees report increased confidence about doing
psychotherapy and working with patients with personality disorders in
the general psychiatric setting.

Manualisation in psychodynamic psychotherapy is an emerging
trend.\ :sup:`35` Trainees hold contrasting views about this aspect of
TFP. On the one hand, they reported that the specific treatment
framework promoted learning psychodynamic principles in a structured
manner and facilitated supervision. On the other hand, they said it
produced performance anxieties. Importantly though, trainees reported
that it helped with management of risk and acting out. There are
limitations relating to persistent scepticism about the effectiveness of
psychotherapy, ongoing difficulties in managing the countertransference,
TFP's psychoanalytic origin, which trainees feel unfamiliar with and
consider at odds with the established medical model, and
training-related pressures. It is noteworthy that trainees felt helped
in managing their countertransferential feelings in psychiatric settings
rather than in their psychotherapy work. This both indicates the
complexity of use of the countertransference in psychotherapy and
suggests the potential contribution of a psychoanalytically informed
training such as TFP for psychiatrists in their daily work.

Evidence indicates a high rate of early dropout in patients receiving
psychotherapy.\ :sup:`36` This is less prevalent in psychiatric
training\ :sup:`37` but important to consider, given the impact on
training progression. TFP was reported to affect concerns about doing
psychotherapy, but it did not affect the experience of training-related
pressures.

Given the increasing complexity of the population seen in secondary
care, finding suitable training cases may be difficult. Cases treated in
this study had moderate to severe personality disorder. TFP may
facilitate a pragmatic approach to training within the current NHS
service limitations. Four of the five trainees were able to complete
their cases and described making good use of the intervention.
Supervisors may wish to consider trainees’ competence when allocating
cases\ :sup:`38` and be aware of the difficulties relating to the focus
on the transference, trainees’ performance anxieties, pressures about
‘being on model’ and the lack of access to personal
therapy.\ :sup:`39,40` Trainees reported that using a TFP approach
partially reduced levels of anxiety about doing psychotherapy with a
subgroup of patients with complex problems.

Supplementing supervision with other modes of preparation and learning,
with a focus on direct observation, audio-visual material\ :sup:`41,42`
and simulated learning should be considered for incorporation into
standard supervision groups.

.. _sec4-1:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

This is the first study in the UK to examine the views of core trainees
about doing a long psychotherapy case using TFP as the modality of
choice. TFP has been recently introduced in the country and its use for
training purposes in the NHS only recently started. We provide an early
description of trainees’ views about this evidence-based treatment,
linking it with training-specific needs.

Limitations in this study are inherent to the study design and the small
number of participants, typical of the size of supervision groups in
core training. Theoretical saturation in the analysis may be suboptimal
because of the small sample size,\ :sup:`43` but limited use of TFP in
the UK for training purposes did not allow the inclusion of further
focus groups at this time. We studied the views of trainees in a single
supervision group, in one locality within one NHS trust. The preparation
and supervision were specific to this locality and the generalisability
of findings is limited by this. We anticipate that as use of the model
grows in the UK, opportunities will arise for further studies of
trainees’ views that may in addition explore patients’ experience of
TFP.

We safeguarded against positive bias by explicitly separating the
training evaluation process from participation in the study from the
outset. Participation in the study was optional. The long-case
supervisor did not facilitate the focus group discussions, and the
transcripts were anonymised to limit the supervisor's ability to
identify a specific trainee's comments and views and to limit
self-censorship and selective reporting. The participants were
explicitly invited to report their views about the negatives of using
TFP to further mitigate this risk and they indeed shared a range of
opinions. The risk that the focus group responses may have been biased
by the participants’ perceived expectations of their supervisor is
nevertheless present. Attrition at end-point (one trainee did not
participate in the end-point focus group) also reinforces the risk of
positive bias in the results presented.

.. _sec4-2:

Recommendations
---------------

Findings from our study of trainees’ views about using TFP support the
use of this model for core training purposes. Learning psychodynamic
psychotherapy can be difficult and stressful, and this model of training
delivery addresses some of the concerns of the starting trainees. We
recommend that the use of TFP can help improve their confidence about
the effectiveness of psychodynamic psychotherapy and their capacity to
treat patients and manage clinical encounters, and can facilitate their
use of supervision. There are additional reported collateral benefits
for the developing psychiatrist, in terms of working with patients with
personality disorders, understanding of psychodynamic aspects in
psychiatry, working in teams, and improving education and training
skills.

Learning psychodynamic psychotherapy remains a fundamentally challenging
endeavour that requires working with and tolerating uncertainty. The
problem of some trainees experiencing a dissonance between established
psychiatric training and the psychoanalytic principles used by TFP
remains, and further integration between disciplines is still
required.\ :sup:`44` TFP does not offer a magic bullet for the
intrinsically complex nature of learning psychodynamic psychotherapy.
However, our study suggests that it addresses some of the trainees’
anxieties about taking this task on.

On the basis of these findings, we recommend that the RCPsych considers
using TFP in its core training curriculum for meeting the psychotherapy
long-case requirement. Our findings are in keeping with evidence from
the international paradigm about the usefulness of TFP for psychiatry
training purposes.

We thank the five participant trainees, Dr Patrick Grove for his
contribution to the study, and Drs Matthew Roughley and Iain McDougall
for their helpful comments on the final manuscript.

**Orestis Kanter Bax** is a Senior Trainee in Adult Psychiatry and
Medical Psychotherapy with Deancross Personality Disorder Service (East
London NHS Foundation Trust) and Essex Partnership University NHS
Foundation Trust. He is also a research associate at the Centre for the
Understanding of Personality Disorder (CUSP), London, UK. **Georgios
Nerantzis** is a Senior Trainee in Adult Psychiatry currently training
at East London NHS Foundation Trust and a reasearch associate at CUSP,
London, UK. **Tennyson Lee** is a consultant psychiatrist in medical
psychotherapy, clinical lead at Deancross Personality Disorder Service
(East London NHS Foundation Trust) and co-director of CUSP, London, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are not available to
share due to ethical considerations about the privacy of the
participants.

T.L. conceptualised and designed the study. O.K.B., G.N. and T.L.
contributed equally to drafting the manuscript.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts6:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.129.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. [1]
   TFP, transference-focused psychotherapy.
