====================================================================================
Self-harm and suicide in adults: will safety plans keep people safe after self-harm?
====================================================================================

Allan HouseCorrespondence to Allan House (a.o.house@leeds.ac.uk)
:Date: 2022-02

:Abstract:
   Safety planning is recommended as a part of the response to everybody
   who presents after self-harm, although there is surprisingly little
   evidence for its effectiveness. There is potential for such plans to
   be experienced as unhelpful if patients are not genuinely involved in
   their production and if the plan does not include information about
   meaningful sources of support. Staff training is needed to ensure
   that plans are delivered in a collaborative way and self-harm
   services need to be improved nationally if such plans are to be
   effective.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
It has been known for a long time that the risk of suicide is greatly
increased after hospital presentation due to self-harm.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`
England's National Suicide Prevention Strategy recognises this risk and
its 2017 report ‘expanded the scope of the National Strategy to include
self-harm as a new key area for action’.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` This welcome
policy change brings with it a dilemma – how to respond to self-harm as
a suicide risk while at the same time responding to its many other
meanings. Suicide is perhaps the worst outcome in psychiatry and
inevitably captures our attention – can we develop our services to
respond to the risk without at the same time allowing the
‘risk-reduction’ aspect of service provision to overshadow the rest of
the process of care? The recent Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych)
report *Self-harm and Suicide in Adults* (CR229)\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` can be
read as an attempt to answer this question.

.. _sec1:

What is safety planning?
========================

The RCPsych's report is forthright in stating that there is more to
assessment after self-harm than judging suicide risk and that management
should involve a ‘holistic psychosocial approach’ at the core of which,
at least in the short term, is making a safety plan. According to the
report, such a plan comprises: individual strategies or activities to
instil hope; calming or distracting activities; restriction of access to
common means of suicide; and contacts for social and crisis
support.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` It has to be said that some of the illustrative
activities seem a bit weak for the work they have to do – looking at a
photo of a great view or doing Sudoku for example – but if the plan is
genuinely co-produced then its elements might be expected to make sense
to the person to whom it applies.

There are a number of similar approaches to that proposed by the
RCPsych, and something very similar forms a part of the risk management
plan endorsed by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE) as an essential component of the response to self-harm.(n.d.d) On
the face of it, it seems like an uncontroversial recommendation that
everybody should indeed have something like a safety plan: does that
initial impression hold up to closer scrutiny, especially in relation to
the dilemma under discussion here?

.. _sec2:

How effective is safety planning after self-harm?
=================================================

The first thing to say is that, given how roundly they are endorsed by
the RCPsych, there is surprisingly little evidence to support the use of
safety plans as a means of reducing repetition of self-harm. In fact,
CR229 cites only one supportive study,\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` a retrospective
case-note review of 48 cases from the USA. Elsewhere, a small randomised
controlled trial (*n* = 97) of active-duty US Army
soldiers\ :sup:`(n.d.f)` reported, in a comparison of a crisis response
plan versus a ‘contract for safety’, an effect on self-reported
attempted suicide at 6 months (3/64 *v.* 5/33 participants). A recent
review of suicide prevention interventions\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` reported a
positive effect on subsequent self-harm rates but the positive outcome
for that part of the review is accounted for by only two studies:
one\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` is a study of men in active military service which
used multiple outcomes and reported a reduction in self-reported
attempted suicide but not in emergency department attendances for
self-harm. The other\ :sup:`(n.d.i)` is a non-randomised comparison of
Veterans Affairs hospitals; 90% of participants were men with
‘suicide-related concerns’ and the primary outcome (a composite measure
of ‘suicidal behaviour') was found in 3–5% at 6 months. The results of
these studies are not only unconvincing but they are not generalisable
to the UK self-harm population.

Of closer relevance to the position of UK clinicians seeing people after
an episode of self-harm is the non-randomised Emergency Department
Safety Assessment and Follow-up Evaluation (ED-SAFE)
study,\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` which reported self-reported suicide attempts but
not all self-harm episodes, citing a 12-month difference of 20.9%
(treatment as usual) *v*. 18.3% (intervention) – a result that is by no
means definitive given the study design. The only UK randomised
controlled trial of a comparable intervention\ :sup:`(n.d.k)` – called a
volitional help sheet, with many of the features of a suicide prevention
plan – found no difference in 6-month self-harm repetition rates between
usual care and the new intervention.

.. _sec3:

Could safety planning have detrimental effects?
===============================================

Does the lack of evidence of effectiveness matter? Isn't such a
common-sense action worth implementing regardless of limited evidence of
its effectiveness? The reason to be cautious is that there are
non-trivial possibilities of unwanted outcomes from a misapplication of
the approach – misapplication, that is, in the way the plan is
introduced, how it is negotiated and what are its specific components.
If adverse consequences are to be avoided then they need to be
considered by the service during the planning and delivery of suicide
prevention plans after self-harm.

One possible problem arises from the degree to which the implementation
of the suicide prevention plan is left to the person who has
self-harmed. The first four of the six suggestions under the heading
‘sources of support’ in the RCPsych report relate to marshalling social
or informal supports,\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` yet we know that people who
self-harm find it difficult to confide in others\ :sup:`(n.d.l),(n.d.m)`
and may be struggling with mood disorder and difficulties with
problem-solving – problems that can exacerbate difficulties in calling
on the assistance of others. The social network can be a positive
resource or, on the other hand, a source of the adversity underlying
self-harm, and it is not easy to get a clear picture during a single
brief encounter: the result is that it can be neglected or
misunderstood, especially during an assessment oriented towards the
identification of individual pathology. Personal accounts, especially
given by those with a history of repeated self-harm, indicate that
conversations with staff can emphasise strongly this assumption of
individual responsibility, for example by referring pointedly to the
person's mental capacity.

The second substantial problem arises from the organisational context
within which planning usually takes place. In truth, service provision
for many people after self-harm is poor. Typically, self-harm, despite
its associated suicide risk, is not seen as falling within the remit of
community mental health teams or Improving Access to Psychological
Therapies (IAPT) services and yet there are very few specialist clinics.
Again, from accounts of people with personal experience, this general
lack of provision is exacerbated by the prevalence of the unhelpful
concept of non-suicidal self-injury\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` – a diagnosis that
suggests (misleadingly) that the individual is at low risk of suicide
and that can therefore make accessing services difficult because the
problem is not seen as sufficiently severe.

The worst case, then, is that a clumsily negotiated or unilaterally
developed safety plan, coupled with inaccessible professional aftercare,
leads to a sense of being left alone in managing the impulse to
self-harm and its attendant dangers. We do not know the frequency with
which these negative outcomes occur, because the relevant research has
not been undertaken.

.. _sec4:

Can we mitigate the potential harms of poorly managed safety planning?
======================================================================

One of the recurring complaints about self-harm services is that risk
assessment is so often delivered as a thoughtless box-ticking exercise.
To avoid safety planning going the same way it has to be delivered as a
genuinely collaborative effort. A pre-printed form with little space for
personalisation will not convey the right message or serve the purpose.
Staff who are going to be undertaking safety planning should therefore
be trained in techniques for joint planning – which may be drawn from
those with expertise in techniques such as shared
decision-making.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)`

Quality improvement projects should be aimed not just at monitoring
comprehensiveness of coverage; they could usefully explore the
experience of safety planning from the perspective of people who have
attended hospital after self-harm – including their level of personal
involvement in the content and their sense of the usefulness of the
plans. A starter might be the measure developed by NICE.\ :sup:`(n.d.p)`

Making safety planning meaningful depends on the accuracy and usefulness
of nominated sources of support, and yet informal sources can be
difficult to identify and engage in a single session after an episode of
self-harm, while professional sources (such as specialist services) are
not available in most places, even at the level of telephone follow-up.
If we are to be serious about making self-harm ‘a key area for action’
then we must press for proper professional services for those seen after
self-harm – to allow immediate follow-up for help responding to current
circumstances and in the longer-term to offer therapeutic support for
change. It is these services that will allow resolution of the dilemma
of care – making risk reduction meaningful without allowing risk
management to define the healthcare response to self-harm.

Research is needed to determine the effectiveness and safety of safety
planning, as an adjunct or alternative to standard assessments and
follow-up planning. Research in other areas has usefully shown that an
important moderator of outcomes is the degree to which there is genuine
collaborative engagement of patients with planning,\ :sup:`(n.d.q)` and
such process evaluation would be an important component of any future
evaluation.

**Allan House** is Emeritus Professor of Liaison Psychiatry in the Leeds
Institute of Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Leeds,
UK. His research interests include the overlap between physical and
mental disorder, medically unexplained symptoms, suicide and self-harm.

This article received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.
