========================
Brice Pitt, MD, FRCPsych
========================

Claire Hilton
:Date: 2021-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Formerly Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry of Old Age, Imperial College,
London, UK

Brice Pitt, who died aged 89 on 16 January 2021, was a highly
significant pioneer of old age psychiatry, as well as a colourful
personality. In 1971, he was a founder member of the informal ‘coffee
house’ group of psychogeriatricians, which preceded the RCPsych's
Special Interest Group (now a Faculty) for Old Age Psychiatry. He was
the group's first secretary (1973–1978). As the chair of the subsequent
Section (1986–1990), he led old age psychiatry through turbulent debate
to achieve government recognition as a distinct medical specialty in
1989. He also chaired the College's Public Education Committee and,
associated with this role, wrote *Down with Gloom! or How to Defeat
Depression* (illustrated by Mel Calman). In it, as elsewhere in his
writing, he was open about his personal experience of depression.

Brice's passion for his subject was evident in *Psychogeriatrics: An
Introduction to Psychiatry of Old Age* (1974). About this book, he said:
‘I wrote down everything I knew off the top of my head. It was a
doddle’. His turn of phrase was often vivid and insightful:
psychogeriatricians were ‘a happy band of pilgrims’ who needed
‘occasional militancy […] to gain a fair share of scant resources, to
put them to best use, to make do with too little while wheeling,
dealing, and fighting for more’. *Psychogeriatrics* was followed by
other books, including *Feelings about Childbirth* (1978), which was
based on his MD thesis on post-partum depression (a life-long interest:
he was President of the Association for Postnatal Illness at the time of
his death) and *Mid-Life Crisis: Its Cause and How to Overcome It*
(1980), and they all received international acclaim. These volumes were
variously translated into Japanese, Spanish, Polish, Finnish, French,
Croatian, Afrikaans and other languages.

Brice was born on 19 December 1931, the son of Norman Pitt, a surgeon,
and Emily (née Crawford), a nurse. Brought up in Surrey, he attended
Epsom College. In the immediate post-war years, children perhaps
conformed more to parental direction than they do today. Brice wanted to
be an actor, but his father told him he would have to study medicine. He
was unsure how to reconcile this direction with his wishes, but when
watching Alfred Hitchcock's psychiatric melodrama *Spellbound* (1945),
he decided that if medicine was to be his destiny, he would be a
psychiatrist.

Like his father, Brice went to Guy's Hospital Medical School in London.
David Stafford-Clark, psychiatrist, television personality and author of
books on psychiatry for a lay readership, was his teacher. After house
jobs came National Service in the Army, first at The Royal Victoria
Military Hospital at Netley, then Singapore and Hong Kong. In 1960,
Major Brice Pitt moved back into civilian medicine. He opted for
psychiatry training at Springfield Hospital in south-west London. There,
he treated his ‘first proper old person’. He was ‘perplexed by the
richness of the symptomatology’ and perturbed by the attitude that the
hospital was ‘like a castle, a good registrar would fend off the
elderly, as those who got in were bound to stay […] dumped by their
family’. He objected to excluding people on account of age. Perhaps a
childhood memory haunted him: ‘My sainted grandmother had a stroke and
threw a knife at me in a tantrum: this affected me profoundly and left
me wondering why’.

As a senior registrar, Brice worked with Ford Robinson, who had a ward
and day hospital for functionally ill older people at St Clements
Hospital, Mile End, London. It was rare in those days to have any
dedicated psychogeriatric training. Brice also trained at Claybury, a
large psychiatric hospital also in London. It had a ‘tremendous
atmosphere emanating from the therapeutic community approach’ nurtured
by the ‘superb’ physician superintendent Denis Martin. Brice called
Claybury ‘Camelot’, after the mythical fellowship of King Arthur, with
all participants equal at the Round Table.

Appointed consultant psychogeriatrician at Claybury in 1966, Brice
inherited 400 occupied beds, a catchment area of about 65 000 over-65s,
a social worker, a senior house officer and some general practitioner
sessions. Local geriatrician Malcolm Hodkinson said to him: ‘You don't
want a waiting list, you never admit for continuing care, and you don't
want to run a sleepy service’, and he thought: ‘My God, the one thing I
do not want ever to be accused of by Malcolm is running a sleepy
service’. And he never did. He started by establishing a mixed-sex ward
at Claybury, risqué in a gender-segregated hospital. He also introduced
routine home assessments for older people, a practice that became
widespread. Camelot fell when Martin died. New-style district general
hospital psychiatry beckoned, and a prize post at the brand-new Princess
Alexandra Hospital, Harlow, lured Brice back to general psychiatry. But
in 1971 he returned to psychogeriatrics in Tower Hamlets, where
innovation included a collaborative psychiatric–geriatric unit with
geriatrician Chris Silver.

In the early 1980s, Brice moved to Barts (City and Hackney), to join
psychogeriatrician Alan Gardner, ‘a very obsessional serious fellow,
while there is something a bit flighty about me some of the time’, he
said. In 1986, he moved again, to St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, as the
UK's fourth professor of old age psychiatry. While there, he established
the Hammersmith Hospital memory clinic, one of the first in the country.
This led to him being dubbed ‘Memory Man’ in a local newspaper, for his
pioneering work.

Brice also fulfilled his dream to be an actor. With the Tower Theatre
Company, he played royalty, noblemen, judges, bishops and Badger in *The
Wind in the Willows*. He directed plays and wrote some, including
*Anatomy of Melancholy* and *The Memory Clinic*. In 2005, under the
pseudonym Beric Norman, he wrote a novel, *Mordred's Version*, rooted in
the original Camelot.

Chaucer would have appreciated his words and humour at the RCPsych's Old
Age Faculty meeting in 2013, when he was presented with its lifetime
achievement award:In March, when Spring is nigh, but strong winds
blowThe Faculty of Old Age Shrinken blithely goOn Pilgrimage, to venues
academicAnd each and every one a well trained medicTo discourse on
derangements of the mindOf older persons, troubled with all kindStates
of confusion, madness, melancholy –Yet to my mind the meeting was full
jolly […]His presence at the gathering, to receive meantHis peers’ award
for his Lifetime Achievement! […]Brice was delighted to be offered this
awardWhich he never knew existed: Thank you, Lord!\ :sup:`(n.d.)`

Brice had a large family. Married three times, he was father of Gareth,
Caroline, Tristram and Rosalind, grandfather of Shem, Fiona, Helen and
Joshua, and stepfather to children from the marriage of his third wife,
Judy. They all survive him.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.
