==============
Author's reply
==============

:Author: Lucy Johnstone
:Date: 2022-02

pmc
I do indeed agree with the statements in Professor House's final
paragraph and with several of his other points, for example, that there
are many vested interests in the debate about public mental health, and
that we can see the term ‘mental health’ itself as both effect and cause
of the individualisation of societal problems. Indeed, it is that
individualisation – not, as he seems to assume, the psychiatric
profession itself – that my critique is aimed at. I have always argued
that all professions, including my own, need to be aware of the
limitations and potential harms of their theories and practices. That is
why I raised concerns not just about over prescribing, but about ‘formal
psychological interventions [which may be] unnecessary for most and can
actually be harmful if implemented too early.’

I find Professor House's final phrase ‘…a muddled polemic animated as
much as anything else by anti-psychiatry sentiment’ the most worrying
part of his response. This kind of language suggests that he has moved
beyond rational and evidence-based argument, into *ad hominem*
dismissal. It invites a fight rather than a debate, and since I do not
identify as ‘anti-psychiatry’ (whatever that means) I have no desire to
take up such a challenge. I will simply observe that the areas in which
I take a different position from him are fundamental, legitimate and
increasingly common. For example, clinical psychologists’ professional
guidelines on formulation state that it is ‘not premised on a functional
psychiatric diagnosis’.\ :sup:`1` Professor House is free to use the
term differently but not to simply rule other definitions out of court.
Yes, we need to offer immediate help to individuals as well as
addressing adversities, but that help does not have to be based on
unproven medical assumptions about the nature and origins of their
distress. Yes, there are social causal factors and unclear boundaries in
some physical health conditions, but no one is arguing that diabetes is
a mental health problem; common sense tells us that this analogy doesn't
work, despite the claims of anti-stigma campaigns and some
professionals. And so on.

In 2017, a United Nations report noted ‘The urgent need to…target social
determinants and abandon the predominant medical model that seeks to
cure individuals by targeting “disorders”’ and recommended that ‘Mental
health policies should address the “power imbalance” rather than
“chemical imbalance”’.\ :sup:`2` Rather than allowing ourselves to be
distracted by attempts to defend a failed paradigm, we all urgently need
to work towards this future.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

L.J. is an independent trainer and offers training in formulation and
the Power Threat Meaning Framework (PTMF). She has published books and
articles on formulation and is one of the lead authors of the PTMF.
