===========================
Lack of respect and balance
===========================



Margaret White

:date: 2022-02


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
This editorial and current issue of BJPsych Bulletin do nothing to be
‘respectful and balanced’ about issues of trans health. Reprinting the
article which caused the controversy in the first place means that it is
exposed to a wider audience, and instead of having a counterbalancing
view in another article, it has the article by Griffin et al which
contains a number of anti-trans talking points. Anything which is
supportive of trans people or current best practice standards for trans
health is relegated to the letter pages. None of the authors of the two
articles are gender identity specialists; they have instead mobilised
their credentials in other areas to claim expertise in an area where
they have none. The voices of trans people are either absent or
denigrated as some kind of online-based groupthink.

Trans health is its own research field, and there are plenty of
researchers that the *Bulletin* could have reached out to for a
counterbalancing view. Instead, they have amplified anti-trans voices
once more, with a sop that those with opposing views could write a
letter or propose an article.

I am not seeking to silence debate, and acknowledge that this is a
controversial area. However, issues around trans health are treated
particularly poorly in the *Bulletin*. Would the *Bulletin* accept
having two papers on women's mental health written solely by men who had
no expertise in women's mental health, or two papers on ethnic minority
mental health written solely by white people who had no expertise in
ethnic minority mental health? If not, why is it acceptable for this to
happen for trans people?
