=============================================================================================================
Response to: Does COVID-19 pose a challenge to the diagnoses of anxiety and depression? A psychologist's view
=============================================================================================================

:Author: Allan House
:Date: 2022-02

pmc
In her recent article, Johnstone (Bulletin, September 2021) writes
critically about how we have responded professionally to the effects of
the COVID-19 pandemic. While it is easy to agree with some of what she
has to say, much of her argument consists of a series of assertions that
are neither entirely accurate nor logically connected to each other or
to her main contention.

.. _sec1-1:

What is the problem?
====================

Johnstone's central claim is that by using psychiatric diagnosis we
label things as abnormal that are in fact normal. The opening example of
handwashing and cleaning is unfortunate because it is unconvincing –
hardly anybody spends ‘most of the day’ doing it and there is more to
the diagnosis of OCD than cleaning: resistance, ritualising, other
compulsions and so on. Certainly, the use of florid metaphors about
tsunamis and pandemics of mental disorder is unhelpful, and research
does show that much unhappiness and anxiety during the pandemic has
proved to be transient. But then many illnesses, including those caused
by the COVID-19 virus, can be transient and non-disabling – it doesn't
mean they aren't illnesses. Every doctor, including every psychiatrist,
knows the value of watchful waiting: the question is how we respond when
symptoms are not transient or non-disabling. When Johnstone talks about
‘people with a psychiatric history’, I take it to mean people who most
psychiatrists would regard as having a long-term mental disorder. We can
agree that ‘It is untrue and even patronising to assume that everyone in
this group will fail to cope’, but does any psychiatrist actually assume
that? More fundamentally, Johnstone is opposed to the idea of
psychiatric diagnosis (and not just of anxiety and depression) because
it rests upon defining mental illness in relation to social norms while
(as she and her colleagues have argued elsewhere) masquerading as being
analogous to the more legitimate processes of medical diagnosis. It is
an error to assume that medical diagnosis is radically different in all
respects: it does for example recognise social causes (cigarette
smoking, hazardous drinking, unhealthy eating, physical inactivity) and
defines some of its most prevalent disorders such as hypertension,
hyperlipidaemia and diabetes mellitus according to deviation from norms.
More important is the question of whether the states so diagnosed are
harmful and, if so, whether intervening is beneficial.

.. _sec1-2:

Who is responsible?
===================

I found it difficult to suppress a smile at Johnstone's jibe about the
self-serving nature of articles promoting the importance of research in
the areas of expertise of the authors. But it is too narrow to name only
academics and Public Health England as the actors in a debate about the
nature of public mental health – professional bodies, the pharmaceutical
industry, politicians and journalists are among others who set the
agenda and the tone. The emergence of the phrase ‘mental health’ is an
interesting topic in its own right, and one way to view its effects is
to see it as a vehicle for medicalisation of distress. It might,
however, be as useful to think of it as effect rather than cause of the
individualisation of societal problems – a phenomenon that has deep
cultural roots and consequences that go beyond psychiatry into penal
policy, welfare provision and education.

.. _sec1-3:

What are the alternatives?
==========================

It is a category error to propose formulation as an alternative to
diagnosis – the latter is a descriptive statement, whereas the former
provides an explanatory framework, a point illustrated by the training
requirement that psychiatrists are expected to be able to make a
biopsychosocial formulation and management plan as well as coming to a
diagnosis. It is not news that the onset of many mental disorders is
preceded by adverse life events and difficulties – research in this area
goes back half a century – or that the content of some people's
illnesses reflects these experiences. However, bundling together all
mental disorders as ‘various forms of distress…that are understandable
responses to adversities’ does not do justice to the issues. Not
everybody reports life adversities before onset; the nature of adversity
may be reflected in the content of some but not all conditions; life
adversity does not explain the differences in form of the various mental
disorders; there is a strong genetic risk for some disorders. It is
difficult to know what it means to say that mental disorder is ‘what we
do’ in response to threats, but in my reading it is hard to see it as
other than dismissive of the reality of mental illness.

.. _sec1-4:

Collective trauma and a collective response
===========================================

There is a disconcerting *volte face* at the end of Johnstone's piece.
Having presented the argument that what we are seeing in the pandemic is
essentially normal, part of a meaningful response to stress and not to
be pathologised, we are finally offered the idea of collective trauma –
defined as an experience that overwhelms our usual ways of coping. If
states like anxiety and depression are to be thought of as arising
because of this overwhelming of usual ways of coping, how is that
different from the way that psychiatrists think about what they are
likely to call mental disorders? Only, it seems, in the reluctance to
use a descriptive vocabulary that distinguishes between different
conditions – as if it is a trivial matter whether somebody is hearing
voices, embarked upon life-threatening self-starvation or unable to
touch a newspaper for fear it will give them a fatal infection. How are
we supposed to use this way of thinking to help people now, while they
and we wait for a fairer society? Local peer networks may indeed help
some, but they won't suffice for the severity and diversity of problems
we face. One of the central tensions of healthcare is that we can
recognise that health and illness have social determinants, but as
clinicians it is individuals that we see. It isn't a question of picking
one or the other – both are important, and I think most psychiatrists
understand that.

.. _sec2:

A conclusion
============

Surely we can all agree about some things: it is important not to
medicalise distress that does not merit such an approach; social
adversities are important risks to our mental well-being, and government
policies in recent years have both exacerbated these risks and done much
damage to society's ability to help those most in need as a result of
them; professionals in healthcare have a responsibility to speak out
both for individuals in need and also about the social conditions that
contribute to their difficulties. These simple and powerful messages are
obscured by wrapping them, as here, in a muddled polemic animated as
much as anything else by anti-psychiatry sentiment.
