=================================================
Brian M. Davies, MD, DPM, FRCP, FRCPsych, FRANZCP
=================================================



Roger Glass

:date: 2021-12


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Formerly Cato Professor of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia

Professor Brian Davies, Victoria's first Professor of Psychiatry, died
on 15 November 2020 at the age of 92. As a pioneer of academic
psychiatry, he was regarded as a trail-blazer for Australian academic
psychiatry who facilitated the training and career development of many
successful colleagues. He was appointed to the foundation chair of the
University of Melbourne's first academic Department of Psychiatry,
taking up the Cato Chair in 1964. He rapidly established the department
in the forefront of the specialty. The department that he led quickly
gained an enviable reputation for wide-ranging quality research,
excellent teaching, and state of the art treatment and caring for
patients. To the end of his tenure 26 years later, he steadfastly
focused his energies in three main areas: teaching students and
postgraduates, service provision and facilitating quality research.

In his typically modest way, Brian attributed the fact that he was able
to attract excellent people to accept positions in his department to
‘good fortune’ rather than the fast-developing reputation of his
department as a centre of excellence. The Cato Chair became, arguably,
the most prestigious Chair of Psychiatry in Australia, with staff
receiving many Australian and New Zealand Commonwealth honours. Many
leading psychiatrists, including George Szmukler, Edmond Chiu, David
Ames, Graham Mellsop, Sidney Bloch and Graham Burrows, either received
their early training or worked as psychiatrists and researchers in his
department. His quiet, diffident and, at times, enigmatic nature
resulted in a leadership style that enabled department staff to feel
free to pursue their research passions while also being gently guided
and supported yet nudged when necessary. He led not by acting as a loud
front man, forever talking up the achievements of his ‘empire’, but more
as an avuncular encourager and facilitator, open to good ideas but
willing to guide and advise when required. The postgraduate psychiatry
trainees in Brian's unit learned much from observing him assess
patients, quickly and efficiently focusing in on the most salient
aspects of their presentation and demonstrating his renowned clinical
acumen. To many he became a mentor as well as a teacher. He expected
much but also returned loyalty and support.

Brian played a leading role in the group of psychiatrists and business
entrepreneurs who conceived the idea of building a modern private
psychiatric hospital in Melbourne in 1975. He characteristically played
down his pivotal role in setting up and conducting meetings that
culminated in the opening of The Melbourne Clinic in 1978. The clinic
became Australia's largest private psychiatric hospital. After retiring
from the Cato Chair of Psychiatry in 1990, Brian continued to work in
private practice, both at The Melbourne Clinic and elsewhere, finally
retiring in 2009, aged 81.

Born on 8 June 1928 in Llanelli, South Wales, the son of a miner, Tom
Davies, and Lilian (née Drake), a primary school teacher who was
passionate about English literature, Brian followed his 6-years-older
brother to Cardiff University Medical School. He graduated in 1950, his
medical training having included just one lecture in psychiatry. He
said: ‘I wasn't interested – in those days psychiatry was the last
chapter in the medical textbooks – I just wanted to be a physician like
my brother’. Having completed training as a physician, Brian asked
senior colleagues for advice regarding what should be his next career
step. ‘Do psychiatry training – psychiatry will be big in 4 years’ was
the advice. He was able to secure a training position at the Maudsley
Hospital in London, where he worked in the unit of Professor Sir Aubrey
Lewis, an Australian psychiatrist who had become a towering figure in UK
psychiatry. From 1956 to 1964 at the Maudsley and Bethlem Royal
Hospital, Brian immersed himself in the newly emerging and exciting
field of research into antidepressants. He published world-leading
research on tricyclic and monoamine oxidase inhibitor
antidepressants.\ :sup:`1`

Looking beyond the possibilities of a psychiatric career in Britain, he
decided to apply instead for a more interesting academic post, just then
advertised – that of Cato Professor of Psychiatry at the University of
Melbourne. He, his wife and two children arrived in Melbourne in April
1964, after a 4-week sea journey. His outstanding ability was rapidly
recognised and in 1968 he delivered the Beattie-Smith lecture, the
highest honour that Melbourne psychiatry bestows on its leaders. His
topic was: ‘Recent Studies of Severe Mental Depressive Illnesses’. He
authored a classic student textbook, *An Introduction to Clinical
Psychiatry*, which went through four editions from 1966 and remains
well-known to a generation of Australian medical students and
psychiatrists.

Brian had a quiet manner. He had very little ‘small talk’ and colleagues
could sometimes feel that he kept them at a distance. This was more to
do with his shy nature than any personal dislike. Persistence in
pursuing issues with Brian was often rewarded with knowledgeable and
helpful suggestions, advice and encouragement. In recent years he had
delighted in reconnecting, at regular lunches, with many former work
colleagues from his time as Cato Professor. He remained modest,
continuing to be somewhat uncomfortable when publicly praised and never
seeking special recognition or honours for himself.

Reading was a lifelong passion for Brian, his taste extending over many
genres. He had a love for, and a deep knowledge of, Shakespeare. He also
developed an enduring love of golf. He became a skilled and well-known
player at Royal Melbourne Golf Club, actively participating until his
last year.

In 1951, Brian married Rona (née Waters), a nurse, the start of over 67
years of loving marriage, sadly ended in 2019 with Rona's death. They
had a daughter, Debra, and son, Gareth, together with three admiring
grandchildren.
