=========================================================================================================================================
No wrong door: addressing injustices and achieving better mental healthcare provision for under-18s in acute physical healthcare settings
=========================================================================================================================================

:Author: Virginia DaviesCorrespondence to Virginia Davies
         (v.davies3@nhs.net)
:Date: 2022-02
:Abstract:
   The distressing reality that mental healthcare for children and young
   people in acute trust settings in the UK is woefully underprovided is
   not news. But with acute trust debts being written off, hospital
   trusts and commissioners of services have a timely opportunity to
   address this age- and condition-based discrimination.

   Delivering a just service for under-18s depends on attitude,
   resources and adequate knowledge of the tasks involved. This article
   aims to describe the current landscape, summarise the arguments for
   better integrating mental healthcare into physical healthcare
   settings, articulate the tasks involved and the challenges for
   commissioning and providing, and finally share examples of current
   service models across the country.

   Ultimately, commissioning and provider choices will be constrained by
   resource pressures, but this article aims to underscore why
   commissioning and providing a portmanteau ‘no wrong door’ hospital
   service for children, young people and families is worth the headache
   of thinking outside old commissioning and provider boxes.


pmc
In 2019, the National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and
Death (NCEPOD) report into the mental healthcare of young people in the
UK\ :sup:`1` concluded that: mental healthcare was not given the same
level of importance as physical healthcare in general hospitalsgeneral
hospital staff were not receiving enough support from mental health
professionals in the general hospital setting, particularly with regard
to risk management.

Despite these damning findings, the report did not advise commissioners
how they could use their purchasing power to exact a more equitable
provision of mental healthcare for young people in hospital settings.
Unhelpfully, in terms of systems change, many of NCEPOD's
recommendations can be implemented at a ‘tick box’ level, through
superficial changes to job definitions and training plans.

And, having stated in 2015 that ‘What is particularly worrying is that
children with physical, learning or mental health needs are telling us
they have poorer experiences [in hospitals]’,\ :sup:`2` Ted Baker, the
Care Quality Commission's chief inspector of hospitals, noted in the
2020 Assessment of Mental Health Services in Acute Trusts (AMSAT)
report\ :sup:`3` that: “‘Physical and mental health care have
traditionally been delivered separately. While investment and
improvements in mental health services are welcome, physical and mental
health services will only truly be equal when we stop viewing physical
and mental health as distinct. Services need to be built around all of
people's needs and not determined by professional or interest groups.’”

He continues: “‘Many of the people attending acute hospital emergency
departments with physical health needs may also have mental health
needs. These people are in a vulnerable position and need to be treated
with compassion and dignity. This must be in a way that makes them feel
safe and upholds their human rights. In our report, we raise concerns
that people with mental health needs are not always receiving this level
of care. How well they are treated in an emergency department, or
elsewhere in an acute hospital, is often linked to the importance that
mental healthcare is given by the trust board. Acute trusts must do
more, but they also need support from mental health trusts to develop
better and more integrated approaches to care.’”

AMSAT makes some welcome recommendations for integrated care systems and
acute trusts; however, with no absolute commissioning directives
regarding ‘whole person’ hospital care, most trusts will choose to
overlook this central aspect of patients’ – and especially children's –
care.

The tendency for adult and physical health priorities to set the agenda
within acute trusts means that children and young people with mental
health needs seem always to be last in the queue. This is despite the
well-known rates of comorbidity between long-term physical and mental
health conditions in children (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__)\ :sup:`4–7` and the
immediate, let alone long-term, resource implications of failing to
address these psychiatric comorbidities.\ :sup:`8` Fig. 1Prevalence of
mental disorders in children with specific physical complaints. From
Meltzer et al, p. 74.\ :sup:`4` © Crown copyright 2000, see
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/.

.. _S001:

The levers of integration
=========================

As AMSAT points out, if integrated treatment of mind and body is to be
achieved, it must be underpinned by effective service-level agreements
between stakeholders. The principles that guide such contracts were well
articulated in *Side by Side*,\ :sup:`9` published in February 2020.
This UK-wide consensus statement, agreed by the Royal Colleges of
Psychiatrists, Nursing, Emergency Medicine and Physicians, calls on all
parties to work together to better care for patients with mental health
needs in acute hospitals.

‘Best care’ is characterised by: reciprocal competencies in each staff
group, physical and mentaljoint ownership of the care of children and
young people while in the hospitalco-location of physical and mental
health staff.

Addressing the second and third aspects, reciprocal competencies and
joint ownership of care, can be relatively easy, but as Ted Baker
observed in AMSAT: ‘Where high-quality leadership for better mental
health in acute trusts was lacking, we saw how there was more likely
also to be a lack of appropriate training to support staff and poor
working relationships between acute and mental health trusts.’\ :sup:`3`

.. _S001-S2001:

Reciprocal competencies
-----------------------

Exchange programmes for junior doctors and nurses are already in place
in some areas. Likewise, many health practitioner training programmes
now contain modules offering reciprocal competency qualification, and
frameworks such as the UCL competency framework\ :sup:`10` allow staff
to register as having reached various competencies in relation to mental
health training. This model could be used to determine levels of mental
health competency and capacity within the acute trust workforce. Those
aiming to improve capacity in this area should be aware that the ‘We Can
Talk’ training\ :sup:`11` used by many trusts to help staff to feel
better equipped to talk about mental health problems with children and
young people, detect safeguarding issues and provide signposting is not
a child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) competency
framework. Consequently, adoption of this training across a trust should
not be used to distract from inadequate mental health staffing. Both are
needed: upskilling of physical health staff, as well as direct
employment of specialist mental health staff.

.. _S001-S2002:

Joint ownership
---------------

Joint ownership of patient care can be interrogated by examining a
trust's pathways and protocols. These agreements can usefully confirm
which team will take lead responsibility for a young person's care.
Children and young people who have used hospital emergency departments
during mental health crisis describe how the experience of feeling
unwanted at a time of particular vulnerability puts them off
returning.\ :sup:`12` Given increasing rates of self-harm and suicide in
young people,\ :sup:`13,14` this is not a desirable outcome.

.. _S001-S2003:

Co-location of staff
--------------------

The biggest challenge to achieving genuine side-by-side working is
co-location of physical and mental health staff. This is not simply a
problem of estate management and a lack of space – it is because
co-location of mental and physical healthcare provision presents a
challenge to the very notion of what an acute hospital is about. Acute
trust functioning and the commissioning of services within hospitals
remains mired in an outdated notion of physical healthcare. Within this
conceptualisation, physical health is divorced from the unconscious and
from emotional and irrational reactions to physical ill health and
disease, let alone family psychological factors, and care packages are
linear processes.

.. _S002:

Key considerations in commissioning integrated care for children and young people
=================================================================================

Four main areas need to be considered when negotiating contracts for
integrated acute trust care for under-18s: the range and complexity of
mental health tasks to be addressedcommissioning discontinuities and
fragmentation between adult and child, mental and physical, local and
regional/national/international servicesfunding sources for
non-patient-facing activities, including staff support and professional
developmentensuring a single ‘front door’ for children and young people
and their families.

.. _S002-S2001:

Tasks to be addressed
---------------------

Broadly speaking, three mental health tasks need to be managed in the
acute trust setting: crisis/emergency mental health presentations;
non-urgent psychiatric or psychological problems; systems issues
regarding complex cases. `Box 1 <#box1>`__ gives more detail. Box
1Mental health tasks relating to under-18s to be managed in the acute
trust setting\ *Crisis/emergency mental health presentations*. These
presentations involve under-18s in the emergency department or on the
ward who need urgent joint assessment, alongside physical monitoring
with or without treatment. Some individuals may need an emergency place
of safety within the hospital. They might include children and young
people with self-harm and attempted suicide, psychosis, acute
confusional states (delirium), eating disorders and sudden deterioration
in behaviour in the context of autism spectrum disorders or intellectual
disability. A significant proportion will have safeguarding needs. Some
children and young people will have psychiatric needs related to
physical health medicines (e.g. intensive care medicines) or their
physical condition (e.g. brain injury).\ *Non-urgent psychiatric or
psychological problems in in-patients, day patients or out-patients*.
This group might include children and young people with medically
unexplained physical symptoms such as pain or paralysis, those
experiencing major emotional reactions following a newly diagnosed
long-term condition, for example non-adherence with medication in asthma
or insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, those with a psychiatric
condition in the context of a long-term physical condition, such as
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in the context of epilepsy, and
those subject to medical child abuse/fabricated and induced
illness.\ *Systems issues regarding complex cases*. Physical health
staff dealing with cases involving complicated systems dynamics or
complex child or parent psychopathology need access to support, training
and consultation from expert mental health colleagues to effectively
manage the staff effects that can ensue. These can include conflict
within teams (splitting), accidental medical harm of children and young
people, inadvertent collusion with abusive parents and staff burnout.
Mental health staff embedded with their physical health colleagues can
run reflective groups, facilitating psychological processing and
providing in-context staff support. Such reflective groups have been
shown to reduce staff sickness and burnout in physical healthcare
staff.\ :sup:`12,13`

.. _S002-S2002:

Commissioning discontinuities and fragmentation
-----------------------------------------------

Commissioning discontinuities and fragmentation are rife for under-18s
in hospital, with 16- and 17-year-olds most disadvantaged despite having
the highest rates of psychological morbidity (`Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__).\ :sup:`15` Fig. 2Under-18s requiring emergency mental
health assessment in the emergency department of one London teaching
hospital over the period 2013–2019.

The age discontinuity between paediatric commissioning and CAMHS
commissioning, especially given the former's non-alignment with
educational transition points, is surely an area for urgent attention by
integrated care systems (ICSs) (`Box 2 <#box2>`__). ICSs are tasked with
breaking down barriers to care as part of delivering the National Health
Service's long-term plan,\ :sup:`16` but with the COVID-19 pandemic
having changed the commissioning landscape, how will the new block
contracts affect this? Box 2Ensuring that 16- and 17-year-olds are not
forgottenPaediatric commissioning finishes at 16, but CAMHS
commissioning finishes at 18. The physical arrangement of acute trusts,
with most paediatric emergency departments and wards having an age
cut-off of the 16th birthday, means that the over-16s end up in
environments that are far from young-person friendly. Having no in-house
under-18s mental health staff to visit them in these ‘inappropriate’
settings doubly disadvantages the under-18s; their adult equivalents are
far more likely to have access to in-house liaison psychiatry teams,
since commissioning for adult mental healthcare in hospitals is more
advanced than that for under-18s.

How does the commissioning arrangement work when a hospital functions
not only as a local ‘district general’, but also as a regional, national
and possibly international specialist referral centre? Most acute trusts
have arrangements in place for costing physical healthcare packages
involving national and international patients, but these rarely take
into account potential mental health needs. Greater recognition needs to
be given to this side of the ‘business’ and financial packages developed
accordingly.

.. _S002-S2003:

Funding for non-patient-facing activities
-----------------------------------------

Funding sources for non-patient-facing activities, including staff
support, are vital for the sustainability of any integrated service.
Significant amounts of non-patient-facing activity are involved in the
first two tasks listed in (`Box 1 <#box1>`__): dealing with
crisis/emergency mental health presentations and non-urgent psychiatric
or psychological problems. A 75-min crisis consultation will often
require as much time again, often more, liaising not only with other
hospital and primary care staff, but also other agencies, especially
social care and education, as well as adult mental health if parental
mental illness is a factor. Emergency tariffs rarely cover the hours of
work involved or the numbers of mental health staff who may need to be
involved. Tariffs need to contain adequate funding for staff with
sufficient knowledge of child and adolescent mental health to complete
this important liaison work, and payment by results has often meant that
provider trusts end up running these services at a loss.

Mental health staff are also important for delivering staff support,
something that has become very obvious during the current COVID-19
pandemic. Plenty of evidence exists for the benefits on staff well-being
of reflective practice,\ :sup:`17,18` but this is rarely factored into
commissioning agreements between acute providers and commissioners.

.. _S002-S2004:

Ensuring a single ‘front door’
------------------------------

Finally, how does the commissioning arrangement ensure that children and
young people and their families are not having to visit multiple ‘front
doors’ and tell their story multiple times? Having on-site, integrated
mental health staff ensures not only that under-18s and their families
have an experience of one extended team caring for them, meaning that
any mental health professional coming to see them has a good sense of
their physical context and is already well-briefed on their possible
mental health difficulties, but, perhaps more importantly, that they can
access mental healthcare even if they come from a family or culture
where attending CAMHS or having mental health problems is difficult to
accept or act upon, and where a separate visit to a mental health clinic
simply will not happen.\ :sup:`19` Equally, if the young person's family
of origin is chaotic and/or their emotional and behavioural
presentations stem from neglect or abuse, the hospital provides a
one-stop shop. This offer is unlikely to be the case if commissioning
relies on in-reach from local CAMHS.

.. _S003:

Developing a just and best-fit model
====================================

Having reflected on how a local hospital service might deliver or not on
good care as articulated above, commissioners and providers planning to
establish or enhance integrated hospital care for under-18s within the
next commissioning cycle might want to consider the following. Is/will
the team be multidisciplinary (more common in paediatric
liaison/children's psychological medicine teams) or unidisciplinary (as
in crisis teams or paediatric psychology services)?Are/will the team
members be employed by the acute trust or by the mental health trust,
with honorary contracts with the acute trust? There are pros and cons to
each.Does/will the funding come via block contracts or activity-based,
condition-specific funding streams? The mental health needs of children
and young people are often inchoate and less amenable to being fitted
into diagnostic boxes or care bundles. Embedded staff, able to respond
to the queries of paediatric staff or the sudden call for help with a
child's behaviour or family's emotional response, are invariably more
useful than staff tied to specific conditions or workstreams.Who
does/will do the commissioning? Local children's mental health
commissioners are responsible for ensuring adequate 24/7 emergency
provision, but who will take on responsibility for in-patient,
day-patient and out-patient provision? Will this be agreed on a
cost-per-case basis with local children's mental health commissioners or
will the acute trust agree tariffs with local, regional and national
commissioners that include mental health activity? The latter is
certainly more sustainable in terms of paediatric mental health service
financial viability.Does/will the mental health service involve one team
or a multitude of different units within the hospital? In some
hospitals, the paediatric psychology service functions separately from
the paediatric mental health team (which may be called a paediatric
liaison team or children's psychological medicine team), and in some
hospitals, the paediatric psychologists are not joined in one service,
but are simply members of their condition-specific paediatric teams.

.. _S004:

Examples of some current models for under-18s mental health provision
=====================================================================

With these considerations in mind, commissioners and providers can
examine which of the following models is best for their acute trust/s.
Services at these example trusts are further outlined in the Appendix.
An acute trust-employed under-18s mental health service covering the
emergency department, wards and out-patients. The team delivers in-house
training, staff support and reflective practice. This model is followed
at the Whittington Hospital, London.A mental health trust-employed
emergency department psychiatric service (adult practitioners) and CAMHS
crisis team which sees under-18s emergency department presentations and
those admitted for less than 24 h. An acute trust-employed paediatric
(i.e. under-16s) mental health team sees all other cases, including
crisis admissions of more than 24 h. A paediatric mental health team
delivers in-house training, staff support and reflective practice. This
is the model at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford.A mental health
trust-employed emergency department service, with an on-site under-18s
mental health team during normal working hours. An on-site mental health
team sees certain groups of in-patients and out-patients as part of
acute trust-funded, condition-specific service level agreements (e.g.
for Tourette syndrome), as well as ‘generic’ in-patients and
out-patients if funding is agreed on a cost-per-case basis by local
commissioners. There is a large acute trust-employed, condition-specific
paediatric psychology service, separate from the mental health team. A
paediatric psychology service delivers in-house training, staff support
and reflective practice. This model is followed at the Evelina
Children's Hospital and St Thomas’ Hospital, London.An acute
trust-employed under-25s out-of-hours mental health emergency team as
well as CAMHS in-reach during normal working hours. An acute
trust-employed community counselling service providing in-reach or
outpatient services for children on wards or out-patients, as well as
paediatric staff support. This model is followed at the Blackpool
Victoria Hospital, Blackpool.

.. _S005:

A binary choice?
================

In effect, commissioners and providers working within integrated care
systems have two broad choices when they consider mental health
provision for children, young people and families in acute trust
settings: an embedded, multidisciplinary children's psychological
medicine team, staffed by practitioners such as paediatric
psychologists, child and adolescent psychiatrists, child mental health
nurses, child psychotherapists, physical therapists and social workers,
all directly employed by the acute trust and working across all
settings;two separate mental health teams, one employed by the mental
health trust and seeing crisis/emergencies (uni- or multidisciplinary,
with nurses usually providing the unidisciplinary input) and one
employed by the acute trust seeing all other patients (uni- or
multidisciplinary, with psychologists usually providing the
unidisciplinary input).

In an ideal world, where team boundaries are minimised, the first model
is preferable. Such embedded services allow children, young people and
families access to timely mental healthcare, when and where they need
it, with staff versed in their physical health needs and without the
long waits that currently plague access to CAMHS. Clinical scenarios
involving acute behavioural disturbance on paediatric wards or the need
for urgent and ongoing psychiatric care for children and young people in
intensive/high-dependency care cannot wait around for funding requests
that take weeks to agree. Equally, children and young people with
disabling unexplained physical symptoms may not appear to mental health
commissioners to be ‘mental’ and legitimate recipients for funding (not
fitting usual CAMHS eligibility criteria), so then fall between posts.

It is hoped that this article gives commissioners and providers the
questions and framework to query current arrangements and to ask
themselves: Can children, young people and families in my integrated
care system expect a unified care offer when they walk through the front
door of our local acute trust/s?Will acute trust care costs be contained
by having timely mental, as well as physical, healthcare available to
the large cohort of under-18 in-patients and out-patients with long-term
conditions for whom we are responsible?Will under-18s under our care
genuinely find that there is no wrong door when they find themselves
requiring hospital care?

I thank both my reviewers for their helpful comments, as well as all
those who commented informally in the production of this document, in
particular Dr Peter Hindley, who prompted me to get on and write about
this area, and Dr Sebastian Kraemer for support with the early drafts.

**Virginia Davies**, MRCP, FRCPsych, MRCGP, is a consultant in
paediatric liaison in the paediatric mental health team at the
Whittington Hospital, London, UK, and chair of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists’ Paediatric Liaison Network.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec7-1-1:

Detailed service descriptions
=============================

.. _sec7-1-1-1:

Blackpool Victoria Hospital, Blackpool
--------------------------------------

The Child & Adolescent Support & Help Enhanced Response (CASHER) service
offers emergency assessment to young people under 25 from 5 pm–10 pm on
weekdays and from 10 am–10 pm on weekends and bank holidays. CASHER
provides support for young people 365 days a year. CASHER also provide
an on-call night time service via their dedicated number (07810 696565)
and will come into the hospital to see young people outside of their
usual working hours. Each shift is staffed by two mental health staff,
one CAMHS-trained and one not. Staff from local CAMHS opt into the
staffing rota, which is run by the hospital bank. This avoids any issues
with rota absence due to annual leave or sickness. CASHER also offer
weekend clinics and drop in sessions for those in crisis. Over 16s are
admitted to the adolescent unit or adult medical wards whenever
necessary.

CASHER also run an ‘Intensive Home Support’ service (CASHER RAIS) which
provides immediate support to young people who may have presented at
accident and emergency or are currently on waiting lists for other
services. CASHER RAIS ensures that young people are not left unsupported
at any stage during their care. CASHER has also adapted their face to
face REACH-OUT Groups that are held in the more deprived areas of
Blackpool, Fylde & Wyre by supporting online sessions via Zoom with
colleagues from Lancashire Children's Services as well as Attend
Anywhere for Blackpool Teaching Hospitals online sessions.

CASHER close links to local services including CAMHS and YoutherapY,
which are both run by the acute trust. YoutherapY, to which in- and
outpatients can be referred or can self-refer, has counsellors working
with paediatric staff and children, young people and families in the
hospital, as well as working in community sites.

.. _sec7-1-1-2:

Evelina Children's Hospital and St Thomas’ Hospital, London
-----------------------------------------------------------

South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust's National and Specialist
Paediatric Liaison Service is a multidisciplinary team focusing on young
patients with comorbid medical and psychological conditions
(https://www.slam.nhs.uk/national-services/child-and-adolescent-services/paediatric-liaison/).

The team receives referrals from across the UK and internationally for
certain conditions and also provides assessment and treatment of
in-patients at the Evelina Children's Hospital and St Thomas’ Hospital.
The service comprises four consultant psychiatrists, a clinical nurse
specialist, a family therapist, a counselling psychologist and
specialist training doctors.

Staff are employed by the local mental health trust, with funding coming
from a mixture of sources, including portions of the local CAMHS block
contract, cost-per-case funding for in- and out-patient work from mental
health commissioners and acute hospital funding via service level
agreements related to particular conditions, such as tics and Tourette
syndrome.

.. _sec7-1-1-3:

Oxford University Hospitals Children’s Psychological Medicine (CPM) service
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Oxford University Hospitals Children's Psychological Medicine (CPM)
service is primarily staffed by paediatric psychologists, with 2.2
whole-time equivalent child and adolescent psychiatrists. All staff are
employed by Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (OUH). OUH
has a large adult psychological medicine service, and the child and
adolescent psychiatrists are managed within this larger group of adult
psychiatrists. OUH's John Radcliffe Hospital is a trauma centre and it
receives children who have sustained complex trauma following suicide
attempts.

All CAMHS emergencies presenting to the emergency department are seen by
the emergency department psychiatry service, which is provided by the
local mental health trust. Any children needing in-patient care beyond
24 h, e.g. for medical treatment of an overdose, are then managed by
CPM. The adult psychological medicine consultants provide out-of-hours
Responsible Clinician cover for all children and young people detained
at OUH. The child and adolescent psychiatrists do not undertake any
out-of-hours work.

CPM and psychological medicine are funded by out-patient and in-patient
tariffs. Some work is funded using best practice tariffs, some by
service level agreements with specific teams and some is paid for by
monies coming in for medical student teaching. Oxford's Children's
Hospital also purchases generic CPM child and adolescent psychiatrist
input using money from their overall budget, charged by OUH to
commissioners. Any new service development has a small amount
immediately factored into the costings to cover CPM or psychological
medicine costs.

.. _sec7-1-1-4:

Whittington Hospital, London
----------------------------

Whittington Health NHS Trust's paediatric mental health team (PMHT) at
the Whittington Hospital, London, is staffed by psychiatry, nursing,
family therapy and psychotherapy (see
https://www.whittington.nhs.uk/default.asp?c=25315).

The service offers liaison input to the paediatric team, in-patients and
out-patients, and crisis assessments and management in Whittington
Hospital's emergency department and the paediatric ward. The service
also supports staff on neonatal intensive care.

The PMHT is part of acute paediatrics. The latter is commissioned within
the context of the national contract for acute hospital services. Since
the PMHT is not a commissioned service, it has to be funded out of the
paediatric budget. Whittington paediatrics have been commissioned under
Payment by Results for a number of years, with income generated from
attendances / admissions. However, this has changed as part of the Covid
finance / contracting arrangements and services are now paid for as a
block contract. The contract amount is fixed and based on historic
expenditure and demand trends.
