====================================
Vivienne Cohen, MRCS, LRCP, FRCPsych
====================================



Kate Lockwood Jefford
:Date: 2022-02


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Formerly Senior Lecturer and Consultant Medical Psychotherapist, St
Bartholomew's Hospital and Medical College, London, UK

Vivienne Cohen, who has died at the age of 94, was a visionary,
award-winning psychiatrist at the forefront of the developing fields of
National Health Service (NHS) psychotherapy and group analytic
treatments. A talented protégé of the pioneering psychoanalyst and
military psychiatrist S.H. Foulkes, and the first female doctor to train
in group therapy, she was a founder member of the Institute of Group
Analysis (IGA) and developed one of the earliest out-patient
psychotherapy departments, establishing creative links between the NHS
and IGA that remain today. Her passion for training doctors and allied
professionals earned her an international reputation as a teacher and
supervisor.

Born Vivienne Wolfson on 1 November 1926 in London, she attended the
first Jewish primary school in north-west London – co-founded by her
father in 1932 – but, as war forced the family to move between London
and grandparents in Hove and Ayrshire, her secondary education was
fragmented across eight different schools. Vivienne studied determinedly
to catch up, alongside looking after her younger sister and baby
brother, early evidence of her indefatigable commitment to education and
caring for others.

Her parents – and the entrenched patriarchy of the time – expected her
to leave school at 14 and train as a secretary, but Vivienne had other
ideas: she wanted to be a doctor. She recruited her strong-minded
paternal grandmother, who argued that Vivienne was ‘too clever’ to leave
school. Her parents listened.

In 1945, Vivienne won a state scholarship to University College – one of
three London medical schools that accepted women – entering a
pre-clinical year where one in five students were female, and completed
clinical training at West London Hospital Medical School, founded to
prioritise access to women. A fellow student described her as
‘principled, steady with purpose, full of ideals, brilliant and
insightful, but always with a spirit of fun and humour’. In 1950 she won
the Rudolf Konstan prize for medicine and she qualified in 1951.

Entering the Maudsley Hospital in 1957 as a trainee, Vivienne met
Foulkes, renowned for developing innovative group treatments at the
Military Neurosis Centre at Northfield. ‘Michael’, as he was known to
family and close friends, became her lifelong supervisor, mentor and
friend. In 1962, after working for Professor Linford Rees – a
‘marvellous’ experience where she taught and supervised psychiatric
social workers – she was appointed chief assistant psychotherapist to
Foulkes in his service at St Bartholomew's Hospital. After Foulkes
retired in 1963 she led the service single-handedly at consultant level,
expanding and improving provision to growing numbers of referrals by
providing treatment both directly and from medical students and trainee
psychiatrists and non-medical psychotherapists under her supervision.

In 1978 Vivienne was formally appointed consultant medical
psychotherapist and senior lecturer – a rare academic post in
psychotherapy – at St Bartholomew's Hospital and Medical College, and
continued to build and organise the service to become one of the most
reputable in the UK. In 1983 she won a national award – the first prize
of this kind for psychotherapy – for her ‘imaginative’ audio-visual
study of group therapy technique and practice for training purposes. In
1985 she received a Levenhulme Teaching Fellowship to support her
programme of supervised clinical placements for non-medical IGA
trainees. These ‘internships’ were highly competitive, as they provided
a wealth of clinical experience and expert supervision, as well as
enhancing the service's group treatment capacity alongside individual,
couple and family therapies. In 1987 this model won her a Barnett Prize
for efficient use of NHS resources.

Vivienne was a senior member of staff at the IGA and served on many
local, national and international committees with an emphasis on service
provision and training. She was invited frequently to teach abroad,
including Denmark, Italy and Australia, and ran an intensive group
therapy course in Israel. She published extensively on groups in major
journals\ :sup:`1` and textbooks\ :sup:`2,3`, covering many aspects,
including supervision, training, NHS provision, cultural factors, large
groups and organisational dynamics. Her vision and commercial and
organisational skills played a key part in securing the building in
Daleham Gardens, NW3 that is still home to the internationally renowned
IGA today.

In 1955 Vivienne married Sam Cohen, a liaison psychiatrist and former
professor of psychiatry at the Royal London Hospital. It was a
supportive relationship with mutual regard for their respective
specialties: Sam's ward milieu drew on therapeutic community principles
and Vivienne published on psychological aspects of medical conditions.
Sam died in London in 2004.

Vivienne eschewed private practice, preferring to work in the NHS
providing what people needed, not what they could afford. Following
retirement she set up a charitable foundation to fund a group
psychotherapist post in the City & Hackney Psychotherapy service. When
the service relocated to premises near Homerton Hospital, staff wanted a
new, distinct name and, in August 2014, Vivienne Cohen House was opened
at an event she attended with family, describing herself as ‘bowled
over’. The chair of East London NHS Foundation Trust thanked Vivienne
for her contribution to psychotherapy for residents of the City of
London and Hackney over half a century, nurturing the service from its
origins, sharing her skills and knowledge with patients, colleagues and
trainees. Many of her trainees working today will remember their first
experiences of psychotherapy supervision for her astute recall of
clinical detail and her tactful creation of both personal and clinical
insights in the warm ambience of her office.

Charming, vivacious and sharp, Vivienne Cohen was an independent thinker
and courageous doer, a dedicated clinician and inspiring teacher. Always
direct and honest, she saw herself not as a pioneer or ‘anything
special’,\ :sup:`4` but as someone who did what needed to be done.

Loved and admired by her children Michael and Elisheva, five
grandchildren and many great-grandchildren, Vivienne was excited by the
next generation, encouraging them to pursue their dreams and celebrating
their achievements.

Since retirement, she divided her time between Israel and London and
enjoyed opera, museums and ballet.

In January 2021, Dr Vivienne Cohen passed away at home in Israel with
her family around her.

With thanks to Dr Cohen's family, Mark Salter, John Schlapobersky and
Gyles Glover.
