===============================================================================================
Transforming MRCPsych theory examinations: digitisation and very short answer questions (VSAQs)
===============================================================================================

Karl Scheeres
Niruj Agrawal
Stephanie Ewen
Ian HallCorrespondence to Ian Hall (ian.hall4@nhs.net)
:Date: 2022-02

:Abstract:
   Many examinations are now delivered online using digital formats, the
   migration to which has been accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. The
   MRCPsych theory examinations have been delivered in this way since
   Autumn 2020. The multiple choice question formats currently in use
   are highly reliable, but other formats enabled by the digital
   platform, such as very short answer questions (VSAQs), may promote
   deeper learning. Trainees often ask for a focus on core knowledge,
   and the absence of cueing with VSAQs could help achieve this. This
   paper describes the background and evidence base for VSAQs, and how
   they might be introduced. Any new question formats would be
   thoroughly piloted before appearing in the examinations and are
   likely to have a phased introduction alongside existing formats.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Examinations are now being delivered on online platforms in many
undergraduate and postgraduate contexts. The COVID-19 pandemic has
accelerated this, as digital platforms have the potential to enable
examination delivery during lockdowns, or if trainees are isolating or
in quarantine, without social distancing concerns. Education is also
becoming increasingly international, and the MRCPsych examination is
both sought after and has been delivered in international centres for
many years. However, travel to examination centres for both staff and
candidates is expensive, and significantly increases its overall carbon
footprint.

The Royal College of Psychiatrists has therefore decided to deliver its
theory examinations via digital platforms as from Autumn 2020, using a
combination of artificial intelligence and in-person online proctoring
(equivalent to traditional invigilators) to ensure that high standards
of probity are maintained. The examinations will initially be delivered
using the two existing question formats, multiple choice questions
(MCQs) and extended matching questions (EMQs). However, digital
platforms enable the use of new question formats that may allow more
comprehensive coverage of the syllabus (the syllabus can be found at:
https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/training/exams/preparing-for-exams). We know
that assessment has a powerful effect in driving
learning,\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` and multiple choice question formats may
encourage rote learning from question banks. We will thoroughly evaluate
any new question formats before we introduce them into the MRCPsych
examination, but we would hope that they would encourage deeper and more
holistic learning strategies that would better equip our future
psychiatrists to have the biggest impact on the mental health of their
patients.

.. _sec1:

Choosing examination formats for the MRCPsych
=============================================

When setting an examination, some of the key factors\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`
that need to be considered when assessing its utility are shown in
`Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Each of these factors have to be weighed up
against each other, with differing weightings according to the purpose
and type of assessment. Table 1Key factors to be considered when
assessing the utility of an assessment (adapted with permission from
reference\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`)FactorQuestions askedValidityDoes the
examination test what we want it to test?ReliabilityAre the results
repeatable and accurate? Are external sources of error other than
candidate ability accounted for and reduced?Educational impactWhat is
the impact of the examination upon trainees’ learning? Does it lead to
deeper learning and long-term retention?AcceptabilityIs the examination
acceptable to those sitting it and other stakeholders?CostAre costs
reasonable?

MCQs are a format that lends itself to reliability through
standardisation of answers and ease of evaluation of large numbers of
candidates via machine marking. Although MCQs have been used since the
inception of the MRCPsych in 1972, historically, short answer questions
(SAQs) and essays were also utilised; these were phased out as
individual marking of SAQs with increasing numbers of candidates was
taxing, and there were questions about the reliability of essay
marking.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)` The format of MCQs evolved from initial
true/false answers to the single best answer or ‘best of five’ in use
today, as well as the use of the EMQs, in which there is a theme,
several stems and a greater number of options, more easily assessing the
application of knowledge.\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` The MRCPsych is a high-stakes
examination, with important consequences for candidates, our patients
and society in general. In common with all high-stakes postgraduate
medical assessments based in the UK, it is regulated closely by the
General Medical Council, and all changes to format and structure must
undergo prospective approval by them.

Given these concerns, the reliability of the MRCPsych must be extremely
high, so that no trainee passes without the requisite ability.
Fortunately, the written papers have excellent reliability (with
Cronbach's alpha, a measure of reliability, consistently >0.85), but
some have questioned whether this has happened at the expense of
validity.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)` Has the depth of clinical context and
its application been lost? Perhaps we fail to reward those trainees who
undertake in-depth study of complex issues, such as aetiology, ethics
and the history of psychiatry.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` The main criticism of
MCQs is a ‘cueing’ effect, whereby candidates are cued by the correct
answer, rather than actively recalling it.\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` There is
evidence that requiring candidates to *construct* an answer, such as in
SAQs, produces better memory than tests that require
recognition.\ :sup:`(n.d.h)` Additional issues with MCQs may include
various ‘test-taking’ behaviours, such as eliminating wrong answers to
arrive at the correct one, guessing from the options available and
seeking clues from the language used to deduce the correct answer
independently from the knowledge required.\ :sup:`(n.d.i)`

MCQs end up testing recognition memory, and recall is significantly
affected by this cueing effect. Creating a good MCQ with valid and
meaningful distractors (incorrect options) can be extremely hard.
Poor-quality distractors can make guessing more rewarding. There are a
number of areas of the syllabus where it is impossible to write valid
distractors, and as a consequence, clinically meaningful knowledge may
not be examined and more obscure areas, where MCQs may be easier to
write, are more likely to be tested.

As mentioned above, it is intuitive and commonly recognised that the
assessment drives learning.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Areas of the syllabus that
are more commonly examined are therefore more likely to be studied by
trainees. Assessment factors contribute to strategies used to
study,\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` which could influence the trainees’ overall
learning and the extent of knowledge achieved. Developments in
technology have allowed easy access to online MCQ ‘question banks’. Many
trainees therefore focus their effort on practicing these questions,
rather than focusing on core learning and developing deeper
understanding.

The costs of taking the MRCPsych for candidates are high\ :sup:`(n.d.k)`
because of the high cost of the infrastructure behind the examination,
e.g. the professional examinations team, detailed psychometric analysis,
and supporting the psychiatrists who volunteer their time freely to
create and quality-assure questions, and analyse the results. For
several years now, the examination is budgeted not to make excessive
surpluses, but if this inadvertently happens, the surplus is directed to
the trainees’ fund, which has previously funded the creation of the
Trainees Online learning resource, among other projects. Moving to
digital platforms may reduce costs to trainees as they no longer need
travel or accommodation, and potentially could reduce overall costs as
no physical venues are required; however, this is uncertain, and the
costs of commercial contracts for software, training and ongoing IT
support may counteract this.

.. _sec2:

Digitisation of examinations
============================

The COVID-19 pandemic led to a rapid and unpredicted introduction of
online examinations for the MRCPsych, although the College had plans to
begin moving toward digitisation before the pandemic. Although there is
a relative paucity of literature on online examinations,\ :sup:`(n.d.l)`
one small study, in which a direct comparison of online examinations
versus paper examinations was made, showed equivalent reliability and
validity.\ :sup:`(n.d.m)` In terms of candidate performance in online
versus paper examinations, the few studies directly testing this have
shown no significant differences.\ :sup:`(n.d.m),(n.d.n)` Candidates’
perception of online examinations are often favourable, and one study
found reduced anxiety when taking online compared with traditional
paper-based examinations.\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` Possibly, the fact that
candidates are not able to see their peers might account for this.
However, it is clear that the rapid introduction of digitisation for the
MRCPsych caused considerable anxiety in trainees; the same
study\ :sup:`(n.d.n)` recognised that the first sitting of online
examinations can cause anxiety, which later subsides with familiarity
upon repeated testing.

.. _sec3:

Very short answer questions
===========================

Very short answer questions (VSAQs) are a novel format of written
questions.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)–(n.d.p)` A VSAQ consists of a short question
for which an answer is required to be manually entered on computer
screen from free recall, as open text. There are no options provided to
choose from as in MCQs/EMQs. Generally, the answer would be only a few
words. `Box 1 <#box1>`__ shows some examples of how VSAQs may look. Any
correct response will attract one mark and any incorrect response will
attract zero marks. Examination software would be programmed to
recognise multiple versions of correct answers, using smart algorithms.
These would allow different versions of a correct response to be
recognised. For example, the first question in `Box 1 <#box1>`__
provides an example of several possible correct answers for that
question; all of these answers would attract a full mark, and centre
around the idea of a reduction or suppression of the default mode
network. The software would additionally be programmed to highlight any
answer that is a non-exact match (approximate) to any possible correct
answers, and these will be manually reviewed by a designated and trained
examiner to ascertain whether that represents a correct response. This
will ensure that any unforeseen versions of correct responses will not
go unrecognised and unrewarded. That response will then be saved in the
list of correct answers for that question for any future examinations.
Examiners will also review all other marking done by the computer, to
ensure accuracy. Minor spelling errors or typos (e.g. ‘inihbited’ rather
than ‘inhibited’) will not be penalised and will be picked up during the
review process. VSAQs also allow for two entirely different but correct
answers, as illustrated in the second example in `Box 1 <#box1>`__. In
this example, again, either of the responses will attract a full mark.
Box 1Very short answer question examples.Example 1: A very short answer
question with different versions of the correct answer:How does the
‘default mode network’ react in a healthy brain when one performs a
goal-directed task?Correct answers may include, but are not limited to:
Decreased activityReduced activityInhibitedSuppressedSwitched offExample
2: A very short answer question with different correct answers:Name the
neurotransmitter mechanism thought to be responsible for
clozapine-induced hypersalivation.Correct answers would include: Alpha 2
receptor antagonismMuscarinic M4 agonismAgain, differing versions of
these correct answers would be accepted, e.g. a2 adrenergic antagonism.

The free recall tested by the VSAQs can be more easily focused on
clinically relevant topics, and allow freedom to assess a wider spectrum
of the syllabus where MCQs may be impossible to write. This should
encourage trainees to refocus on core learning through textbooks and
primary papers, and make their knowledge base more clinically relevant
in the long term.

In the studies to date, VSAQs have been shown to have higher reliability
than MCQs, and reduce the cueing effect.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)–(n.d.q)` They
may improve validity by testing nascent knowledge and clinical skills,
rather than the ability to pass examinations.\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` In one
study of 300 medical students,\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` 69% of students
undertaking VSAQs felt that they were more representative of how they
would be expected to answer questions in actual clinical practice, and
about half felt that they would change their learning strategies in
response. However, these studies were conducted on undergraduate medical
students and may not be generalisable to postgraduate psychiatry
trainees. Additionally, as far as we are aware, there has not been any
published data that uses VSAQs from a high-stakes examination such as
the MRCPsych, although at least one other College are considering their
introduction for UK medical trainees.\ :sup:`(n.d.r)` Finally, as VSAQs
require recall rather than recognition, candidates appear to universally
score lower in them when compared with MCQs;\ :sup:`(n.d.o)–(n.d.p)`
this must be carefully accounted for in the standard setting process
that sets the pass mark, so that standard setting judges are aware of
likely lower scores in comparison with MCQs, particularly in first
iterations of the test when they are lacking comparative past data. To
account for this, there would be pilot questions tested and a full
analysis undertaken to inform future standard setting.

.. _sec4:

Trainees’ views on digitisation and VSAQs
=========================================

The opinion of psychiatry trainees was obtained via a presentation by
the Chief Examiner, Dr Ian Hall, to the Psychiatric Trainees’ Committee.
The Examinations Sub-Committee's Trainee Representative also sought
feedback on the Psychiatric Trainees’ Committee collaborative platform,
‘Workplace’. The questions submitted to the College's webinar, ‘MRCPsych
Exam – Changes to exam delivery this Autumn’, attended by over a
thousand psychiatry trainees and supervisors, were also reviewed in
summarising concerns with regards to the digitisation of the theory
examinations.

Psychiatry trainees raised several concerns with regards to the
digitisation of the theory examinations (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). In the
context of sitting the examinations from home, a common theme was how
technical issues, such as insufficient internet connectivity, would be
resolved, what support would be available to assist with this, and how
the College would ensure candidates were not disadvantaged as a result
of technical issues. Trainees also expressed concerns as to how cheating
would be identified, particularly the potential to ‘trick’ proctoring
technology, to prevent inflated examination marks disadvantaging other
trainees. Similarly, they expressed concerns that trainees may be
falsely accused of cheating if they write notes or look away from the
screen. The concerns regarding cheating are in keeping with the
published literature of both candidates’ and examination setters’
perceptions of online examinations.\ :sup:`(n.d.l)` Trainees also noted
that some trainees’ home environments may be unsuitable for sitting
examinations, because of caring commitments or house-sharing
arrangements. Trainees were also keen to understand how candidates with
dyslexia and other specific learning needs would be accommodated.
Furthermore, trainees expressed an expectation that examination fees
would be reduced in the context of digital examinations. Table 2Common
themes of trainees’ concerns and responsesConcernReponsesTechnical
issues, e.g. internet connectivityThe College partners with third-party
software providers who have both expertise and a track record in
high-stakes online examination delivery. Trainees are encouraged to test
the resilience of their internet and device in advance, using provided
software. Software developers design software to account for brief
interruptions, and protocols exist for more significant technical
issues.Cheating, proctoring and false accusationsAll alerts from the
artificial intelligence software proctoring are reviewed by a live
proctor. Final decisions about cheating are made following rigorous
review by the Examinations Sub-committee, and subject to the normal
appeals process.Unsuitable home environmentCandidates can choose any
suitable workstation with reliable internet to take the examination,
e.g. a family member's or friend's house, a work or university
computer.Examination should not be reduced to a ‘spelling test’ in very
short answer questionsVariations in answers and spelling mistakes will
be accounted for, and examiners would review incorrect answers,
including typos and spelling errors.

Despite the concerns raised, trainees generally appeared to agree with
the prospect of the digitisation of the theory examinations, even
outside the current context of COVID-19. However, many expressed a
strong preference for these to be conducted in test centres to prevent
technical issues or cheating, and to ensure candidates with home
settings unsuitable for sitting examinations were not disadvantaged.

With regards to the introduction of VSAQs, the trainee response was
generally positive. Trainees felt it addressed their request for a
greater emphasis on the testing of core knowledge and that VSAQs were
better at testing the application of knowledge than the current format.
However strong concerns were raised with regards to the examinations not
becoming a ‘spelling test’, and particularly that this may disadvantage
candidates with dyslexia, other specific learning needs and
international medical graduates. They noted that not all spelling errors
are of equal clinical significance and where it is clear that a
candidate's intended meaning is correct, that this should be accepted as
a correct answer.

.. _sec5:

Conclusions and future directions
=================================

The digitisation of examinations is inevitable, and the pace of change
has been rapid as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. For the MRCPsych
theory papers, this could bring several improvements in terms of
examination delivery, such as improved convenience and access to the
examination, and faster processing of results. However, it also brings
opportunities for improving assessment. We hope that a careful, phased
introduction of alternative question formats such as VSAQs will enable a
more comprehensive sampling of the examination syllabus, a greater focus
on core knowledge and promote deeper, more holistic and integrated
learning strategies. We know that these issues are of importance to
trainees and clinical educators alike.

Any change like this requires comprehensive evaluation and testing, and
because this is a high-stakes postgraduate medical qualification, the UK
General Medical Council will need to prospectively approve any
changes.\ :sup:`(n.d.s)` As mentioned above, before any partial
introduction, we plan to pilot questions on trainees and conduct an
extensive psychometric analysis of the results. This would include an
equality analysis to assess the impact on differential attainment in
protected groups. The successful delivery of such a change requires
comprehensive stakeholder engagement, and none are more important that
the doctors training in psychiatry who take the examination; we plan
ongoing consultation with trainees. We must also ensure that our
training programmes prepare candidates thoroughly, with supervisors and
tutors being up to date with new assessment methodologies and the
reasons for their introduction. There would be the potential for online
learning platforms to assist trainees with the new style questions.
Stakeholder feedback has been largely positive on the face validity of
VSAQs, in promoting the acquisition of knowledge that will be useful in
clinical practice, and so help deliver better healthcare for people with
mental health problems.

We thank the trainees who contributed their views to this paper, both
from the Psychiatric Trainees’ Committee and those who attended the
webinar.

**Karl Scheeres** is a lecturerat the Centre for Health Sciences
Education at the University of Bristol, UK, and Chair of Standard
Setting for MRCPsych theory papers at the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, UK. **Niruj Agrawal** is Lead Consultant
Neuropsychiatrist at St George's Hospital, UK, and an honorary senior
lecturer at St George's, University of London, UK. He is also Lead for
VSAQs for MRCPsych examinations at the Royal College of Psychiatrists,
UK. **Stephanie Ewen** is a specialist registrar in psychiatry of
intellectual disability at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust, UK, and the Trainee Representative on the Royal College of
Psychiatrists Examinations Sub-Committee, UK. **Ian Hall** is a
consultant psychiatrist for people with intellectual disabilities at
East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK, and Chief Examiner at the Royal
College of Psychiatrists, UK.

We confirm that all authors meet all four ICMJE criteria for authorship.
K.S., N.A. and I.H. conceived the article, K.S, N.A, S.E. and I.H. all
contributed to the draft and final versions. K.S. reviewed and revised
the article.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

All authors are members of the Examinations Sub-Committee at the Royal
College of Psychiatrists, which sets the MRCPsych theory papers. This
article represents their views rather than the view of the committee as
a whole.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref21

      n.d.s.
